 Screening for Ovarian Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement
US Preventive Services Task Force
T
heUSPreventiveServicesTaskForce(USPSTF)makesrec-
ommendationsabouttheeffectivenessofspecificpreven-
tivecareservicesforpatientswithoutobviousrelatedsigns
or symptoms.
Itbasesitsrecommendationsontheevidenceofboththeben-
efits and harms of the service and an assessment of the balance.
The USPSTF does not consider the costs of providing a service in
this assessment.
TheUSPSTFrecognizesthatclinicaldecisionsinvolvemorecon-
siderations than evidence alone. Clinicians should understand the
evidence but individualize decision making to the specific patient
or situation. Similarly, the USPSTF notes that policy and coverage
decisionsinvolveconsiderationsinadditiontotheevidenceofclini-
cal benefits and harms.
Summary of Recommendation and Evidence
The USPSTF recommends against screening for ovarian cancer in
asymptomatic women (D recommendation) (Figure 1).
Thisrecommendationappliestoasymptomaticwomenwhoare
not known to have a high-risk hereditary cancer syndrome.
Rationale
Importance
Theage-adjustedincidenceofovariancancerfrom2010to2014was
11.4 cases per 100 000 women per year.1 Ovarian cancer is the fifth
IMPORTANCE With approximately 14 000 deaths per year, ovarian cancer is the fifth most
common cause of cancer death among US women and the leading cause of death from
gynecologic cancer. More than 95% of ovarian cancer deaths occur among women 45 years
and older.
OBJECTIVE To update the 2012 US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommendation
on screening for ovarian cancer.
EVIDENCE REVIEW The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on the benefits and harms of
screening for ovarian cancer in asymptomatic women not known to be at high risk for ovarian
cancer (ie, high risk includes women with certain hereditary cancer syndromes that increase
their risk for ovarian cancer). Outcomes of interest included ovarian cancer mortality,
quality of life, false-positive rate, surgery and surgical complication rates, and psychological
effects of screening.
FINDINGS The USPSTF found adequate evidence that screening for ovarian cancer
does not reduce ovarian cancer mortality. The USPSTF found adequate evidence that
the harms from screening for ovarian cancer are at least moderate and may be substantial
in some cases, and include unnecessary surgery for women who do not have cancer.
Given the lack of mortality benefit of screening, and the moderate to substantial
harms that could result from false-positive screening test results and subsequent surgery,
the USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that the harms of screening for ovarian
cancer outweigh the benefit, and the net balance of the benefit and harms of screening
is negative.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATION The USPSTF recommends against screening for
ovarian cancer in asymptomatic women. (D recommendation) This recommendation
applies to asymptomatic women who are not known to have a high-risk hereditary
cancer syndrome.
JAMA. 2018;319(6):588-594. doi:10.1001/jama.2017.21926
Editorial page 557
Author Audio Interview
Related article page 595 and
JAMA Patient Page page 624
CME Quiz at
jamanetwork.com/learning
Related articles at
jamaoncology.com,
jamainternalmedicine.com
Author/Group Information: The US
Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) members are listed at the
end of this article.
Corresponding Author: David C.
Grossman, MD, MPH (chair@uspstf
.net)
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA | US Preventive Services Task Force | RECOMMENDATION STATEMENT
588
JAMA
February 13, 2018
Volume 319, Number 6
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 mostcommoncauseofcancerdeathamongUSwomenandthelead-
ing cause of death from gynecologic cancer, despite its low
incidence.1Approximately14 000womendieofovariancancereach
year in the United States. More than 95% of ovarian cancer deaths
occur among women 45 years and older.2
Detection
The positive predictive value of screening tests for ovarian cancer
is low, and most women with a positive screening test result do not
have ovarian cancer (ie, many women without ovarian cancer will
have a false-positive result on screening tests).
Benefits of Screening
The USPSTF found adequate evidence that screening with trans-
vaginal ultrasound, testing for the serum tumor marker cancer an-
tigen 125 (CA-125), or a combination of both does not reduce ovar-
ian cancer mortality.
Harms of Screening
TheUSPSTFfoundadequateevidencethatscreeningforovariancan-
cer can result in important harms, including many false-positive re-
sults,whichcanleadtounnecessarysurgicalinterventionsinwomen
who do not have cancer. Depending on the type of screening test
Figure 1. US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) Grades and Levels of Certainty
What the USPSTF Grades Mean and Suggestions for Practice
Grade
Definition
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
Suggestions for Practice
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate, or
there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients
based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty
that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service for selected
patients depending on individual
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the service
has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits
and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of
benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section
of the USPSTF Recommendation
Statement. If the service is offered,
patients should understand the
uncertainty about the balance of benefits
and harms.
USPSTF Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary care
populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be
strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the estimate
is constrained by such factors as 
the number, size, or quality of individual studies.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice.
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be large
enough to alter the conclusion.
The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as
benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature
of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of
the limited number or size of studies.
important flaws in study design or methods.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
gaps in the chain of evidence.
findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice.
lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
USPSTF indicates US Preventive Services Task Force.
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Ovarian Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
February 13, 2018
Volume 319, Number 6
589
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 used, the magnitude of harm ranges from moderate to substantial
andreflectstheriskforunnecessarydiagnosticsurgery.TheUSPSTF
found inadequate evidence on the psychological harms of screen-
ing for ovarian cancer.
USPSTF Assessment
TheUSPSTFconcludesthatthereisatleastmoderatecertaintythat
the harms of screening for ovarian cancer outweigh the benefits.
Clinical Considerations
Patient Population Under Consideration
Thisrecommendationappliestoasymptomaticwomenwhoarenot
known to have a high-risk hereditary cancer syndrome (Figure 2).
A hereditary cancer syndrome occurs when a genetic mutation is
passed from parent to child that increases risk for developing can-
cers or can cause earlier onset of cancers. Women who have a he-
reditarycancersyndromethatputsthemathighriskforovariancan-
cer are excluded from this recommendation.
Risk Assessment
Women with certain hereditary cancer syndromes are at high risk
for ovarian cancer. For example, women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 ge-
netic mutations associated with hereditary breast and ovarian can-
cer syndrome are at high risk for ovarian cancer. Numerous genetic
mutationsandhereditarycancersyndromesmaybeassociatedwith
ovariancancer,eachwithadifferentconstellationofassociatedcan-
cers and family history pattern.3-5 Women with a family history of
ovarian or breast cancer may be at risk for a hereditary cancer syn-
dromeandshoulddiscusstheirfamilyhistorywiththeirhealthcare
professional. Management of a diagnosed hereditary cancer syn-
drome and prevention of ovarian cancer in these women is beyond
the scope of this recommendation statement.
Theclinicalsymptomsofovariancancer(eg,abdominalpainor
pressure,bloating,constipation,urinarysymptoms,backpain,orfa-
tigue) are nonspecific and may be present in both healthy women
and women with late-stage ovarian cancer; therefore, use of clini-
cal symptoms for risk stratification for the early detection of dis-
ease is difficult.
Screening Tests
TheUSPSTFdoesnotrecommendroutinescreeningforovariancan-
cer using any method. Transvaginal ultrasound and serum CA-125
testing are readily available procedures that are commonly used to
evaluatewomenwithsignsorsymptomsofovariancancer,andboth
havebeenevaluatedinscreeningstudies.Pelvicexaminationisalso
commonly performed to evaluate women with lower abdominal
symptoms, and although many clinicians perceive that pelvic ex-
aminationwithbimanualpalpationoftheovariesisusefulforscreen-
ing for ovarian cancer,6 there is a lack of evidence to support this.7
Furthermore, the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO)
Cancer Screening Trial included bimanual palpation of the ovaries
in its initial screening protocol, but this screening component was
Figure 2. Clinical Summary: Screening for Ovarian Cancer
Population
Recommendation 
Asymptomatic women without a known high-risk hereditary cancer syndrome
Do not screen for ovarian cancer in asymptomatic women.
Grade: D
Risk Assessment
Screening Tests
Treatments
Other Relevant
USPSTF
Recommendations
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting documents, please
go to https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.   
Women with certain hereditary cancer syndromes are at high risk for ovarian cancer. Women with a family history of ovarian or
breast cancer may be at risk for a hereditary cancer syndrome and should discuss their family history with their health care
professional. The clinical symptoms of ovarian cancer (eg, abdominal pain or pressure, bloating, constipation, urinary symptoms,
back pain, or fatigue) are nonspecific and may be present in both healthy women and women with late-stage ovarian cancer;
therefore, use of clinical symptoms for risk stratification for the early detection of disease is difficult.
The USPSTF does not recommend routine screening for ovarian cancer using any method. Transvaginal ultrasound and serum cancer
antigen 125 testing are readily available procedures that are commonly used to evaluate women with signs or symptoms of ovarian
cancer and have been evaluated in screening studies. Pelvic examination is also commonly performed to evaluate women with
lower abdominal symptoms.
Treatment of ovarian cancer typically includes surgical treatment (staging or debulking) and intraperitoneal, intravenous, or
combined chemotherapy.
The USPSTF recommends that women with a family history indicating they are at risk for a deleterious gene mutation (BRCA1 or 
BRCA2) be referred for genetic counseling and, if indicated, genetic testing. The USPSTF concluded that the current evidence is
insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of screening with pelvic examination to detect a range of gynecologic
conditions in asymptomatic, nonpregnant women.
USPSTF indicates US Preventive Services Task Force.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Ovarian Cancer
590
JAMA
February 13, 2018
Volume 319, Number 6
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 discontinued5yearsintothestudybecausenocasesofovariancan-
cer were detected solely with bimanual palpation of the ovaries.8,9
The evaluation of abnormal test results consists of repeat test-
ing with the same or a different test and often surgical removal (by
laparoscopy or laparotomy) of 1 or both of the ovaries and fallopian
tubes to determine whether a woman has ovarian cancer. Diagnos-
tic guidelines recommend surgical removal of the complete ovary
or ovaries, rather than tissue biopsy, to determine whether ovarian
cancer is present.
Treatment
Treatment of ovarian cancer typically includes surgical treatment
(staging or debulking) and intraperitoneal, intravenous, or com-
bined chemotherapy.
Useful Resources
In a separate recommendation statement, the USPSTF recom-
mends that women with a family history indicating they are at risk
for a deleterious gene mutation (BRCA1 or BRCA2) be referred for
genetic counseling and, if indicated, genetic testing.10 The Na-
tional Cancer Institute provides additional information on ovarian
cancerriskandhereditarycancersyndromes.11TheUSPSTFalsocon-
cluded in a separate recommendation statement that the current
evidencewasinsufficienttoassessthebalanceofbenefitsandharms
of screening with pelvic examination to detect a range of gyneco-
logic conditions in asymptomatic, nonpregnant women.7
Other Considerations
Research Needs and Gaps
Giventhatmostcasesofovariancancerarediagnosedatlaterstages,
whenassociatedmortalityishigh,furtherresearchisneededtoiden-
tify new screening strategies that could accurately detect ovarian
cancer early, at a point when outcomes could be improved. There
is a need for more sensitive and specific serologic tests, as well as
betterimagingtechniques.Becauseofthepotentialforseriousharms
fromdiagnosticworkupofpositivescreeningresults(ie,surgicalre-
moval of the ovary to determine whether ovarian cancer is
present), new screening strategies should minimize false-positive
resultsandbehighlyspecific.Inaddition,studiesevaluatingtheben-
efits and harms of these screening strategies in asymptomatic
women not at high risk for ovarian cancer are needed. Study out-
comes should include ovarian cancer mortality, quality of life, false-
positive rate, surgery rate, surgical complication rate, and psycho-
logicalharms.Furtherresearchisalsoneededonprimaryprevention
of ovarian cancer.
Discussion
Burden of Disease
BasedonUnitedStatesCancerStatisticsdataoninvasivecancerrates
from 2010 to 2014, the average annual age-adjusted incidence of
ovarian cancer was 11.4 cases per 100 000 women per year, with a
mortality rate of 7.4 deaths per 100 000 women.1 In 2017, it is es-
timated that 22 440 new cases of ovarian cancer will have been di-
agnosedintheUnitedStatesand14 080deathswillhaveoccurred.12
Early stages of the disease are often asymptomatic. Symptoms are
usually nonspecific and can include abdominal pain or pressure,
bloating,constipation,urinarysymptoms,backpain,orfatigue.13The
majorityofwomen(88%)diagnosedwithovariancancerare45years
andolder,withamedianageatdiagnosisof63years.2Mostwomen
with ovarian cancer are diagnosed at later stages; approximately
60% of women have distant spread of disease at the time of
diagnosis.2 From 2010 to 2014, white women had the highest age-
adjusted incidence rate (11.8 cases per 100 000 women), followed
byHispanicwomen(10.3casesper100 000women),blackwomen
(9.2casesper100 000women),Asian/PacificIslanderwomen(9.1
cases per 100 000 women), and American Indian/Alaska Native
women (8.3 cases per 100 000 women). White women are most
likely to die of ovarian cancer, followed by black, Hispanic, Ameri-
canIndian/AlaskaNativewomen,andAsian/PacificIslanderwomen.1
Mortality rates from ovarian cancer vary by stage at diagnosis;
5-yearsurvivalratesrangefrom92.5%forlocalizedcancerto28.9%
for cancer with distant spread.14
Scope of Review
The USPSTF commissioned a review of the evidence on screening
for ovarian cancer to update its 2012 recommendation. The evi-
dencereviewevaluatedthebenefitsandharmsofscreeningforovar-
ian cancer in asymptomatic women not known to be at high risk for
ovarian cancer. Outcomes of interest included ovarian cancer mor-
tality,qualityoflife,false-positiverate,surgeryandsurgicalcompli-
cationrates,andpsychologicaleffectsofscreening.TheUSPSTFin-
cluded primary peritoneal cancer in its ascertainment of ovarian
cancer outcomes, even if it was not the primary end point of the
study, because clinically, both types of cancer are diagnosed and
treated as 1 disease. The USPSTF also considered ascertainment of
ovarian cancer outcomes that included both incident and preva-
lent cases of cancer, since screening programs would detect both.
The review included any screening approach evaluated by clinical
trial design. The USPSTF considered the initial screening test (eg,
transvaginal ultrasound or CA-125 testing interpreted using a single
cutoff or the risk of ovarian cancer algorithm [ROCA; Abcodia Inc])
asthescreeningintervention.Furthertestingthatsubsequentlyoc-
curred based on initial screening test results was considered fol-
low-up testing and evaluation, rather than part of screening.
Effectiveness of Screening
The USPSTF reviewed direct evidence evaluating the benefits of
screening for ovarian cancer on mortality.3 The USPSTF identified
3 good-quality studies evaluating the effect of annual screening in
asymptomatic women not known to be at high risk for ovarian can-
cer. None of the studies found that screening significantly reduced
ovarian cancer mortality. The largest and most recent trial, the UK
Collaborative Trial of Ovarian Cancer Screening (UKCTOCS), was a
randomized clinical trial of 202 638 postmenopausal women aged
50to74yearsnotknowntobeathighriskforovariancancer.15More
than 95% of trial participants were white, and 1.6% reported a ma-
ternal history of ovarian cancer and 6.4% reported a maternal his-
tory of breast cancer; however, women with a family history con-
sidered “high risk” for familial ovarian cancer were explicitly
excluded.16 The UKCTOCS trial had 2 intervention groups and a no-
screeningcontrolgroup.Womenwererandomizedtoscreeningwith
CA-125serumtesting,withtriageandfollow-updeterminedbyROCA,
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Ovarian Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
February 13, 2018
Volume 319, Number 6
591
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 ortoyearlytransvaginalultrasound.TheCA-125ROCAscreeningin-
terventiongroupwasdescribedasmultimodalscreeninginthetrial
publicationsandincludedastandardprotocolforalladditionalevalu-
ation. ROCA evaluates changes in CA-125 values over time, follow-
ing a baseline age-adjusted measurement. Women randomized to
the control group received no screening. After a median follow-up
of11.1years,ovariancancermortality(whichincludesmortalityfrom
primary peritoneal and fallopian tube cancer) was not significantly
differentamongthecontrolgroupand2interventiongroups(0.35%
inthecontrolgroup,0.32%inthetransvaginalultrasoundgroup,and
0.32%intheCA-125ROCAgroup).Therewasalsonosignificantdif-
ference in mortality risk in the transvaginal ultrasound and CA-125
ROCAgroups(hazardratio,0.91[95%CI,0.76-1.09]and0.89[95%
CI, 0.74-1.08], respectively).3,15 Exploratory analyses of UKCTOCS
trial data suggest the potential for emergence of a delayed mortal-
ity benefit of screening appearing beyond 10 years from random-
ization. However, this finding was not statistically significant un-
less cases of primary peritoneal cancer were excluded. Extended
follow-up data may help clarify this potential finding in the future;
however, given the aggressive nature (ie, low 5-year survival rate)
of ovarian cancer, the mechanism behind a delayed benefit from
screeningandearlydetectionwouldbeunclear,especiallybecause
the trial discontinued screening after 7 to 11 years.
ThepilottrialfortheUKCTOCStrial,UKPilot,wasmuchsmaller
(n = 21 955randomized).Itevaluatedtheuseofasinglecutoffvalue
forCA-125testingandfoundnosignificantdifferenceinovariancan-
cer mortality (excluding cases of primary peritoneal cancer, which
were not reported) between women who were screened vs not
screened(0.08%vs0.16%;relativerisk,0.50[95%CI,0.22-1.11]).3,17
TheonlytrialconductedintheUnitedStateswasthePLCOtrial.
Inthattrial,68 557womenwhohadatleast1ovaryatbaselinewere
randomized to either annual screening (both CA-125 testing and
transvaginal ultrasound for the first 4 rounds of screening, then 2
rounds of CA-125 testing only) or usual care; median follow-up was
12.4years.Eligibleparticipantswerewomenaged55to74yearswith-
out a previous diagnosis of lung, colorectal, or ovarian cancer. Trial
recruitment targeted women from the general population; the trial
did not actively exclude women based on risk for hereditary ovar-
iancancersyndromes(basedonreportedfamilyhistory),and17.4%
of participants reported a family history of ovarian or breast can-
cer. Nearly 90% of participants were white. Abnormal test results
were managed by the participant’
s personal health care practi-
tioner. No difference was found in ovarian cancer mortality, which
includes primary peritoneal cancer mortality, with 0.34% in the
screeninggroupand0.29%intheusualcaregroup(relativerisk,1.18
[95% CI, 0.82-1.71]).3,8 Recent analyses of PLCO trial data that add
up to 6 more years of posttrial mortality data also did not find evi-
dence of a longer-term benefit of screening.18
Potential Harms of Screening
The USPSTF reviewed evidence on harms of screening for ovarian
cancerfromthe3studiesdescribedabove,aswellasafourthstudy
offairqualityreportingonqualityoflifeandpsychologicalharmsof
screening (Quality of life, Education, and Screening Trial [QUEST])
(n = 549 analyzed).19 Based on data from the 3 studies, the calcu-
lated false-positive rates (ie, the number of women without cancer
who had a positive screening test result) were 11.9% in the first
screeningroundintheUKCTOCStransvaginalultrasoundgroupand
9.0% in the first screening round in the UKCTOCS CA-125 ROCA
group.3 These rates exclude cases of primary peritoneal cancer be-
cause this information was not reported. Cumulatively, in all subse-
quent screening rounds (ie, rounds 2 to 11) in the UKCTOCS CA-125
ROCAgroup,44.2%ofwomenwhodidnothaveovariancancer(in-
cluding primary peritoneal cancer) had a positive CA-125 ROCA re-
sult at some point during the trial screening period.3 The false-
positive rate for subsequent screening rounds in the UKCTOCS
transvaginalultrasoundgroupwasnotreported.IntheUKPilottrial,
the calculated false-positive rate (excluding cases of primary peri-
toneal cancer, which were not reported) of CA-125 testing using a
singlecutoffvaluewas4.2%across3screeningrounds.InthePLCO
trial,thecalculatedfalse-positiverate(includingcasesofprimaryperi-
toneal cancer) of transvaginal ultrasound and CA-125 testing was
9.6% across all 6 screening rounds.3 Surgery to investigate posi-
tivescreeningtestresultsamongwomenwhoultimatelydidnothave
ovariancanceroccurredin0.2%ofparticipantsintheUKPilotCA-125
group, 0.97% of participants in the UKCTOCS CA-125 ROCA group,
3.25%ofparticipantsintheUKCTOCSultrasoundgroup,and3.17%
ofparticipantsinthePLCOCA-125plusultrasoundgroup.3Upto15%
of these women had major surgical complications.3
The USPSTF identified limited evidence on the psychological
harmsofscreeningforovariancancerfromtheUKCTOCSandQUEST
trials.3,19,20 The UKCTOCS trial measured anxiety in a subgroup of
participants. Although no significant differences were found be-
tweentheinterventionandcontrolgroups,therewasagreaterodds
of psychological morbidity among women who were referred to
higher levels of screening.20 The QUEST trial evaluated the effect
of screening for ovarian cancer on cancer worry and quality of life
among average-risk US women 30 years and older. Cancer screen-
ing consisted of alternating CA-125 testing and transvaginal ultra-
sound every 6 months, for a maximum of 4 screening rounds. Al-
though no statistically significant difference in cancer worry was
found between study groups, the trial found that women with ab-
normaltestresultsweremorelikelytoreportcancerworryat2years
of follow-up (odds ratio, 2.8 [95% CI, 1.1-7.2]) than women without
abnormal results.19
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
TheUSPSTFfoundadequateevidencethatscreeningforovariancan-
cer does not reduce ovarian cancer mortality. Three large good-
quality studies all found no benefit in ovarian cancer mortality from
annual screening in asymptomatic women not known to be at high
riskforovariancancer.TheUSPSTFalsofoundadequateevidencefrom
these 3 studies that the harms from screening for ovarian cancer are
atleastmoderateandmaybesubstantialinsomecases.Harmsfrom
screeningforovariancancerincludefalse-positiveresults,whichmay
lead to unnecessary diagnostic surgery to determine whether ovar-
iancancerispresent,oftenresultinginremovalof1orbothoftheova-
ries and fallopian tubes. Serious surgical complications can also re-
sult. The USPSTF found the evidence on psychological harms of
screening to be inadequate and could not draw any definitive con-
clusion on whether ovarian cancer screening causes psychological
harms.Giventhelackofmortalitybenefitofscreening,andthemod-
eratetosubstantialharmsthatcouldresultfromfalse-positivescreen-
ing test results and subsequent surgery, the USPSTF concludes with
moderatecertaintythattheharmsofscreeningforovariancancerwith
CA-125testing(usingasinglecutoffvalueortheROCA),transvaginal
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Ovarian Cancer
592
JAMA
February 13, 2018
Volume 319, Number 6
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 ultrasound,orbothoutweighthebenefit,andthenetbalanceofthe
benefit and harms of screening is negative.
Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted for
public comment on the USPSTF website from July 18, 2017, to Au-
gust 14, 2017. Many comments voiced concern that given the ag-
gressivenatureofovariancancerandthatsymptomsoftenonlyap-
pearatlaterstages,anyscreeningtestthatcandetectovariancancer
early should be recommended. The USPSTF agrees that screening
tests are needed that can accurately detect ovarian cancer earlier
topreventdeathsfromovariancancer;however,theevidenceshows
that currently available tests are not able to do so and can lead to
harmbycausinghealthywomentoundergosurgicalremovaloftheir
ovaries when no cancer is present. The USPSTF issued its recom-
mendationagainstscreeningbasedonthisevidence,notonthecosts
of screening. Additional comments sought clarification on which
women are at high risk for ovarian cancer and to whom the recom-
mendationapplies.TheUSPSTFrevisedtherecommendationstate-
ment to clarify the role of family history in ovarian cancer risk and
to describe symptoms of ovarian cancer. Women with a family his-
toryofovarianorbreastcancerorsymptomsshoulddiscussthiswith
their health care provider. The USPSTF also provided more infor-
mation on how it considered evidence from specific studies. The
USPSTFconsideredstudyresultsthatincludedcasesofprimaryperi-
toneal cancer in the ascertainment of ovarian cancer because clini-
cally, both types of cancer are diagnosed and treated as 1 disease.
Similarly,theUSPSTFconsideredstudyresultsthatincludedreport-
ing of both prevalent and incident cases of ovarian cancer, because
screening would detect both.
Update of Previous USPSTF Recommendation
Thisrecommendationstatementisconsistentwiththe2012USPSTF
recommendation.21 Since 2012, the large UKCTOCS trial was pub-
lished, and much like the PLCO trial, it did not find that screening
for ovarian cancer reduces ovarian cancer mortality in asymptom-
atic women not known to be at high risk for ovarian cancer.
Recommendations of Others
There is consensus among major medical and public health organi-
zations that screening for ovarian cancer in the general population
isnotrecommended.TheAmericanCollegeofObstetriciansandGy-
necologistsdoesnotrecommendscreeningforovariancancerinlow-
risk, asymptomatic women; evaluation of high-risk women may in-
clude transvaginal ultrasound and CA-125 testing, in addition to
physical examination.22 The American Cancer Society states that
thereisnoscreeningtestproventobeeffectiveandsufficientlyac-
curate in the early detection of ovarian cancer and does not recom-
mend screening for ovarian cancer in average-risk women.23 The
American College of Radiology does not recommend screening for
ovariancancerinaverage-riskwomen.24ConsistentwiththeUSPSTF,
the American Academy of Family Physicians recommends against
screening for ovarian cancer in asymptomatic women.25 Although
it is beyond the scope of the USPSTF recommendation, other orga-
nizations,suchastheNationalComprehensiveCancerNetwork,have
issuedguidelinesforthepreventionofovariancancerinwomenwith
hereditary cancer syndromes.26
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: January 3, 2018.
The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
members: David C. Grossman, MD, MPH; Susan J.
Curry, PhD; Douglas K. Owens, MD, MS; Michael J.
Barry, MD; Karina W. Davidson, PhD, MASc; Chyke
A. Doubeni, MD, MPH; John W. Epling Jr, MD,
MSEd; Alex R. Kemper, MD, MPH, MS; Alex H. Krist,
MD, MPH; Ann E. Kurth, PhD, RN, MSN, MPH; C.
Seth Landefeld, MD; Carol M. Mangione, MD,
MSPH; Maureen G. Phipps, MD, MPH; Michael
Silverstein, MD, MPH; Melissa A. Simon, MD, MPH;
Chien-Wen Tseng, MD, MPH, MSEE.
Affiliations of The US Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) members: Kaiser Permanente
Washington Health Research Institute, Seattle
(Grossman); University of Iowa, Iowa City (Curry);
Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo
Alto, California (Owens); Stanford University,
Stanford, California (Owens); Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts (Barry); Columbia
University, New York, New York (Davidson);
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (Doubeni);
Virginia Tech Carilion School of Medicine, Roanoke
(Epling); Nationwide Children’
s Hospital, Columbus,
Ohio (Kemper); Fairfax Family Practice Residency,
Fairfax, Virginia (Krist); Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond (Krist); Yale University, New
Haven, Connecticut (Kurth); University of Alabama
at Birmingham (Landefeld); University of California,
Los Angeles (Mangione); Brown University,
Providence, Rhode Island (Phipps); Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts (Silverstein);
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois (Simon);
University of Hawaii, Honolulu (Tseng); Pacific
Health Research and Education Institute, Honolulu,
Hawaii (Tseng).
Author Contributions: Dr Grossman had full access
to all of the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis. The USPSTF
members contributed equally to the
recommendation statement.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have
completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest and
none were reported. Authors followed the policy
regarding conflicts of interest described at https:
//www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page
/Name/conflict-of-interest-disclosures. All
members of the USPSTF receive travel
reimbursement and an honorarium for participating
in USPSTF meetings.
Funding/Support: The USPSTF is an independent,
voluntary body. The US Congress mandates that
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) support the operations of the USPSTF.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: AHRQ staff assisted
in the following: development and review of the
research plan, commission of the systematic
evidence review from an Evidence-based Practice
Center, coordination of expert review and public
comment of the draft evidence report and draft
recommendation statement, and the writing and
preparation of the final recommendation statement
and its submission for publication. AHRQ staff had
no role in the approval of the final recommendation
statement or the decision to submit for publication.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the
USPSTF are independent of the US government.
They should not be construed as an official position
of AHRQ or the US Department of Health and
Human Services.
Additional Contributions: We thank Tina Fan, MD,
MPH (AHRQ), who contributed to the writing of the
manuscript, and Lisa Nicolella, MA (AHRQ), who
assisted with coordination and editing.
REFERENCES
1. US Cancer Statistics Working Group. United
States Cancer Statistics (USCS): 1999-2014 cancer
incidence and mortality data. https://nccd.cdc.gov
/uscs/. 2017. Accessed December 19, 2017.
2. National Cancer Institute. Cancer Stat Facts:
ovarian cancer. https://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts
/html/ovary.html. 2017. Accessed December 19,
2017.
3. Henderson JT, Webber EM, Sawaya GF.
Screening for Ovarian Cancer: An Evidence Review
for the US Preventive Services Task Force: Evidence
Synthesis No. 157. Rockville, MD: Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality; 2018. AHRQ
publication 17-05231-EF-1.
4. Henderson JT, Webber EM, Sawaya GF.
Screening for ovarian cancer: an evidence review
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Ovarian Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
February 13, 2018
Volume 319, Number 6
593
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 for the US Preventive Services Task Force. JAMA.
doi:10.1001/jama.2017.21421
5. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering,
and Medicine. Ovarian Cancers: Evolving Paradigms
in Research and Care. Washington, DC: National
Academies Press; 2016.
6. Stormo AR, Cooper CP, Hawkins NA, Saraiya M.
Physician characteristics and beliefs associated with
use of pelvic examinations in asymptomatic
women. Prev Med. 2012;54(6):415-421.
7. Bibbins-Domingo K, Grossman DC, Curry SJ,
et al; US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening
for gynecologic conditions with pelvic examination:
US Preventive Services Task Force
recommendation statement. JAMA. 2017;317(9):
947-953.
8. Buys SS, Partridge E, Black A, et al; PLCO Project
Team. Effect of screening on ovarian cancer
mortality: the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and
Ovarian (PLCO) cancer screening randomized
controlled trial. JAMA. 2011;305(22):2295-2303.
9. Doroudi M, Kramer BS, Pinsky PF. The bimanual
ovarian palpation examination in the Prostate,
Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian cancer screening trial:
Performance and complications. J Med Screen.
2017;24(4):220-222.
10. Moyer VA; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Risk assessment, genetic counseling, and genetic
testing for BRCA-related cancer in women: U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation
statement. Ann Intern Med. 2014;160(4):271-281.
11. National Cancer Institute. Genetics of Breast
and Gynecologic Cancers (PDQ®)—health
professional version. https://www.cancer.gov/types
/breast/hp/breast-ovarian-genetics-pdq. 2017.
Accessed December 20, 2017.
12. American Cancer Society. Cancer facts & figures
2017. https://www.cancer.org/research/cancer
-facts-statistics/all-cancer-facts-figures/cancer
-facts-figures-2017.html. 2017. Accessed December
19, 2017.
13. Goff BA, Mandel LS, Melancon CH, Muntz HG.
Frequency of symptoms of ovarian cancer in
women presenting to primary care clinics. JAMA.
2004;291(22):2705-2712.
14. Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al. SEER
Cancer Statistics Review (CSR) 1975-2014.
https://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2014/. 2017.
Accessed December 19, 2017.
15. Jacobs IJ, Menon U, Ryan A, et al. Ovarian
cancer screening and mortality in the UK
Collaborative Trial of Ovarian Cancer Screening
(UKCTOCS): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet.
2016;387(10022):945-956.
16. Protocol for the United Kingdom Collaborative
Trial of Ovarian Cancer Screening (UKCTOCS).
Version 7.1. https://www.ucl.ac.uk/womens-health
/research/womens-cancer/gynaecological-cancer
-research-centre/ukctocs/files/ukctocs_protocol71.
2015. Accessed December 19, 2017.
17. Jacobs IJ, Skates SJ, MacDonald N, et al.
Screening for ovarian cancer: a pilot randomised
controlled trial. Lancet. 1999;353(9160):1207-1210.
18. Pinsky PF, Yu K, Kramer BS, et al. Extended
mortality results for ovarian cancer screening in the
PLCO trial with median 15 years follow-up. Gynecol
Oncol. 2016;143(2):270-275.
19. Andersen MR, Drescher CW, Zheng Y, et al.
Changes in cancer worry associated with
participation in ovarian cancer screening.
Psychooncology. 2007;16(9):814-820.
20. Barrett J, Jenkins V, Farewell V, et al; UKCTOCS
Trialists. Psychological morbidity associated with
ovarian cancer screening: results from more than
23,000 women in the randomised trial of ovarian
cancer screening (UKCTOCS). BJOG. 2014;121(9):
1071-1079.
21. Moyer VA; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for ovarian cancer: U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force reaffirmation recommendation
statement. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157(12):900-904.
22. Committee on Gynecologic Practice, Society of
Gynecologic Oncology. Committee Opinion No. 716:
the role of the obstetrician-gynecologist in the early
detection of epithelial ovarian cancer in women at
average risk. Obstet Gynecol. 2017;130(3):e146-e149.
23. Smith RA, Andrews KS, Brooks D, et al. Cancer
screening in the United States, 2017: a review of
current American Cancer Society guidelines and
current issues in cancer screening. CA Cancer J Clin.
2017;67(2):100-121.
24. Brown DL, Andreotti RF, Lee SI, et al. ACR
appropriateness criteria© ovarian cancer screening.
Ultrasound Q. 2010;26(4):219-223.
25. American Academy of Family Physicians.
Clinical Preventive Service Recommendation:
ovarian cancer. https://www.aafp.org/patient-care
/clinical-recommendations/all/ovarian-cancer.html.
2017. Accessed December 19, 2017.
26. National Comprehensive Cancer Network
(NCCN). Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology:
Genetic/Familial High-Risk Assessment: Breast and
Ovarian. Version I. Fort Washington, PA: NCCN; 2017.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Ovarian Cancer
594
JAMA
February 13, 2018
Volume 319, Number 6
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
