 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Screening for Gynecologic Conditions
With Pelvic Examination
US Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement
US Preventive Services Task Force
T
heUSPreventiveServicesTaskForce(USPSTF)makesrec-
ommendationsabouttheeffectivenessofspecificpreven-
tivecareservicesforpatientswithoutobviousrelatedsigns
or symptoms.
It bases its recommendations on the evidence of both the
benefits and harms of the service and an assessment of the bal-
ance. The USPSTF does not consider the costs of providing a ser-
vice in this assessment.
TheUSPSTFrecognizesthatclinicaldecisionsinvolvemorecon-
siderations than evidence alone. Clinicians should understand the
evidence but individualize decision making to the specific patient
or situation. Similarly, the USPSTF notes that policy and coverage
decisionsinvolveconsiderationsinadditiontotheevidenceofclini-
cal benefits and harms.
Summary of Recommendation and Evidence
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to
assess the balance of benefits and harms of performing screening
pelvic examinations in asymptomatic, nonpregnant adult women
(I statement) (Figure 1).
This statement does not apply to specific disorders for which
the USPSTF already recommends screening (ie, screening for cer-
vical cancer with a Papanicolaou [“Pap”] smear, screening for gon-
orrhea and chlamydia). See the eTable in the Supplement.
Rationale
Importance
Many conditions that can affect women’
s health are often evalu-
ated through pelvic examination. These conditions include but
are not limited to malignant diseases, such as ovarian, uterine,
vaginal, and cervical cancer; infectious diseases, such as bacterial
vaginosis, candidiasis, genital warts, genital herpes, trichomonia-
sis, and pelvic inflammatory disease; and other benign conditions,
such as cervical polyps, endometriosis, ovarian cysts, dysfunction
of the pelvic wall and floor, and uterine fibroids. Pelvic examina-
tion is a common part of the physical examination; in 2012, an
IMPORTANCE Many conditions that can affect women’
s health are often evaluated through
pelvic examination. Although the pelvic examination is a common part of the physical
examination, it is unclear whether performing screening pelvic examinations in asymptomatic
women has a significant effect on disease morbidity and mortality.
OBJECTIVE ToissueanewUSPreventiveServicesTaskForce(USPSTF)recommendationonscreening
forgynecologicconditionswithpelvicexaminationforconditionsotherthancervicalcancer,gonorrhea,
andchlamydia,forwhichtheUSPSTFhasalreadymadespecificrecommendations.
EVIDENCE REVIEW The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on the accuracy, benefits, and potential
harms of performing screening pelvic examinations in asymptomatic, nonpregnant adult
women 18 years and older who are not at increased risk for any specific gynecologic condition.
FINDINGS Overall, the USPSTF found inadequate evidence on screening pelvic examinations
for the early detection and treatment of a range of gynecologic conditions in asymptomatic,
nonpregnant adult women.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATION TheUSPSTFconcludesthatthecurrentevidenceis
insufficienttoassessthebalanceofbenefitsandharmsofperformingscreeningpelvicexaminations
inasymptomatic,nonpregnantadultwomen.(Istatement)Thisstatementdoesnotapplyto
specificdisordersforwhichtheUSPSTFalreadyrecommendsscreening(ie,screeningforcervical
cancerwithaPapanicolaousmear,screeningforgonorrheaandchlamydia).
JAMA. 2017;317(9):947-953. doi:10.1001/jama.2017.0807
Editorial page 910
Author Audio Interview
Related article page 954 and
JAMA Patient Page page 984
Supplemental content
CME Quiz at
jamanetworkcme.com and
CME Questions page 969
Related article at
jamainternalmedicine.com
Author/Group Information: The US
Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) members are listed at the
end of this article.
Corresponding Author: Kirsten
Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD, MAS
(chair@uspstf.net).
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA | US Preventive Services Task Force | RECOMMENDATION STATEMENT
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
March 7, 2017
Volume 317, Number 9
947
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
estimated 44.2 million pelvic examinations were performed in the
United States.1 Although the pelvic examination is a common part
of the physical examination, it is unclear whether performing
screening pelvic examinations in asymptomatic women reduces
morbidity and mortality.
The USPSTF has made separate recommendations on screen-
ingforcervicalcancer,2gonorrhea,3andchlamydia3usingteststhat
areoftenperformedduringapelvicexamination(eg,Papsmear,hu-
manpapillomavirustest,andnucleicacidamplificationtests);inthis
recommendation statement, the USPSTF seeks to understand the
utility of performing screening pelvic examinations for other gyne-
cologicconditions.AlthoughtheUSPSTFsoughtevidenceontheef-
fectivenessofusingpelvicexaminationtoscreenforallasymptom-
atic gynecologic conditions other than cervical cancer, chlamydia,
and gonorrhea, it was only able to identify limited evidence on its
accuracy to detect ovarian cancer, bacterial vaginosis, genital her-
pes, and trichomoniasis.
Detection
The pelvic examination may include any of the following compo-
nents, alone or in combination: assessment of the external genita-
lia, internal speculum examination, bimanual palpation, and recto-
vaginalexamination.TheUSPSTFfoundinadequateevidenceonthe
accuracyofpelvicexaminationtodetectarangeofgynecologiccon-
ditions.Limitedevidencefromstudiesevaluatingtheuseofscreen-
ingpelvicexaminationaloneforovariancancerdetectiongenerally
Figure 1. US Preventive Services Task Force Grades and Levels of Certainty
What the USPSTF Grades Mean and Suggestions for Practice
Grade
Definition
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
Suggestions for Practice
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate, or
there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients
based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty
that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service for selected
patients depending on individual
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the service
has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits
and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of
benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section
of the USPSTF Recommendation
Statement. If the service is offered,
patients should understand the
uncertainty about the balance of benefits
and harms.
USPSTF Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary care
populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be
strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the estimate
is constrained by such factors as 
the number, size, or quality of individual studies.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice.
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be large
enough to alter the conclusion.
The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as
benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature
of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of
the limited number or size of studies.
important flaws in study design or methods.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
gaps in the chain of evidence.
findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice.
lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: The Screening Pelvic Examination
948
JAMA
March 7, 2017
Volume 317, Number 9
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
reportedlowpositivepredictivevalues(0%to3.6%).4Veryfewstud-
iesonscreeningforothergynecologicconditionswithpelvicexami-
nation alone have been conducted,4,5 and the USPSTF found that
these studies have limited generalizability to the current popula-
tion of asymptomatic women seen in primary care settings in the
United States.
Benefits of Screening
The USPSTF found inadequate evidence on the benefits of screen-
ing for a range of gynecologic conditions with pelvic examination.
No studies were identified that evaluated the benefit of screening
withpelvicexaminationonall-causemortality,disease-specificmor-
bidity or mortality, or quality of life.4
Harms of Screening
The USPSTF found inadequate evidence on the harms of screening
forarangeofgynecologicconditionswithpelvicexamination.Afew
studies reported on false-positive rates for ovarian cancer, ranging
from 1.2% to 8.6%, and false-negative rates, ranging from 0% to
100%.Amongwomenwhohadabnormalfindingsonpelvicexami-
nation, 5% to 36% went on to have surgery.4 Very few studies re-
ported false-positive and false-negative rates for other gyneco-
logic conditions.4 No studies quantified the amount of anxiety
associated with screening pelvic examinations.4
USPSTF Assessment
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to
assess the balance of benefits and harms of performing screening
pelvic examinations in asymptomatic women for the early detec-
tion and treatment of a range of gynecologic conditions. Evidence
islackingandofpoorquality,andthebalanceofbenefitsandharms
cannot be determined.
Clinical Considerations
Patient Population Under Consideration
Thisrecommendationappliestoasymptomaticwomen18yearsand
older (Figure 2) who are not at increased risk for any specific gyne-
cologic conditions, such as ovarian or cervical cancer. The recom-
mendation does not apply to pregnant women or adolescents.
Suggestions for Practice Regarding the I Statement
Potential Preventable Burden
Numerousgynecologicconditionsmaybedetectedduringascreen-
ing pelvic examination. These include malignant diseases, such as
ovarian, uterine, vaginal, and cervical cancer; infectious diseases,
such as bacterial vaginosis, candidiasis, genital warts, genital her-
pes,trichomoniasis,andpelvicinflammatorydisease;andotherbe-
nignconditions,suchascervicalpolyps,endometriosis,ovariancysts,
dysfunction of the pelvic wall and floor, and uterine fibroids.
The accuracy of detecting and the benefit of treating some
of these conditions early, while women are asymptomatic, is
unknown. No studies evaluated the effectiveness of early diagnosis
and treatment of screen-detected, asymptomatic gynecologic con-
ditions compared with the diagnosis and treatment of sympto-
matic gynecologic conditions.4 It is also unknown whether per-
forming screening pelvic examinations more frequently than every
3 to 5 years (the recommended screening interval for cervical can-
cer) is beneficial. Although it is common practice to perform a pel-
vic examination as part of an annual physical examination, the ben-
efit of performing screening pelvic examinations at this interval is
unclear. The benefit of using pelvic examination alone to screen for
gynecologic conditions other than cervical cancer, gonorrhea, and
chlamydia is also unknown.
Figure 2. Screening for Gynecologic Conditions With Pelvic Examination: Clinical Summary
Population
Recommendation 
Asymptomatic, nonpregnant adult women who are not at increased risk for any specific gynecologic condition
No recommendation.
Grade: I (insufficient evidence)
Note: This statement does not apply to specific disorders for which the USPSTF already recommends screening
(ie, screening for cervical cancer with a Pap smear, screening for gonorrhea and chlamydia).
Screening Tests
Balance of Benefits
and Harms 
Other Relevant
USPSTF
Recommendations
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting documents, please
go to https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.   
The pelvic examination may include any of the following components, alone or in combination: assessment of the external genitalia,
internal speculum examination, bimanual palpation, and rectovaginal examination.
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of performing screening
pelvic examinations in asymptomatic women for the early detection and treatment of a range of gynecologic conditions.
The USPSTF has made recommendations on screening for cervical cancer, ovarian cancer, gonorrhea, and chlamydia,
as well as counseling to prevent sexually transmitted infections. These recommendations are available on the USPSTF
website (https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org). 
Pap indicates Papanicolaou.
USPSTF Recommendation: The Screening Pelvic Examination
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
March 7, 2017
Volume 317, Number 9
949
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Potential Harms
TheUSPSTFfoundlimitedevidenceontheharmsofscreeningwith
pelvic examination. Harms reported in studies included false-
positiveandfalse-negativeresults.Availableevidencereportsfalse-
positiveratesforovariancancerof1.2%to8.6%andfalse-negative
rates of 0% to 100%.4 Pelvic examination screening also could re-
sult in unnecessary diagnostic workup and treatment. In particular,
there is a concern for potential invasive diagnostic procedures and
treatmentofovariancancer(suchassurgery)thatcouldresultfrom
evaluating abnormal findings on pelvic examination. In the re-
viewed studies, approximately 5% to 36% of women who had ab-
normal pelvic examination findings went on to have surgery.4 The
potentialassociationbetweenurinarytractinfectionsandpelvicex-
aminationswasexploredinasinglestudy,withinconclusiveresults.6
Additionaltheoreticalharmsofpelvicexaminationincludepsycho-
logical harms (anxiety), pain and discomfort from the examination,
and the potential for these harms to serve as a barrier for women
to receive medical care.
In the absence of clear evidence on the balance of benefits
and harms of using pelvic examination to screen for asymptom-
atic gynecologic conditions, clinicians are encouraged to consider
the patient’
s risk factors for various gynecologic conditions and
the patient’
s values and preferences, and engage in shared deci-
sion making with the patient to determine whether to perform a
pelvic examination.
Current Practice
According to the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey,
an estimated 44.2 million pelvic examinations were performed
in 2012.1 In a 2010-2011 nationally representative survey of ob-
stetricians and gynecologists, almost all surveyed clinicians
indicated that they would perform a bimanual examination on
asymptomatic patients during routine visits.7 According to another
survey performed in 2009, 78% of surveyed clinicians (including
obstetricians/gynecologists, family or general practitioners, and
internists) believed that pelvic examination is useful for screening
for gynecologic cancer in asymptomatic women; approximately
50% to 60% reported believing that pelvic examination is useful
for cervical cancer screening, 49% to 70% for ovarian cancer
(70% of obstetrician/gynecologists vs 49% to 50% of internists
and family practitioners), 39% to 45% for uterine cancer,
57% to 62% for vaginal cancer, and 53% to 62% for vulvar cancer
(estimates are based on graphic display of data; exact numbers
were not provided).8 Nearly all surveyed clinicians (97%) believed
that the pelvic examination included bimanual examination, while
most (69%) believed that the pelvic examination included recto-
vaginal examination.8
Other Considerations
Research Needs and Gaps
The USPSTF recognizes that research on the effectiveness of the
screening pelvic examination is difficult, given that multiple condi-
tions could potentially be detected with this single preventive ser-
vice. However, in reviewing the currently available evidence on the
benefits and harms of performing screening pelvic examinations in
asymptomatic adult women, the USPSTF identified the following
critical evidence gaps. Studies evaluating the accuracy and effec-
tivenessofscreeningpelvicexaminationtodetectconditionsother
than ovarian cancer, bacterial vaginosis, genital herpes, and tricho-
moniasis are lacking. Studies reporting on the harms of screening
withpelvicexamination(includingquantifiedpsychologicalharms)
in asymptomatic women in primary care are also lacking.
Studies reporting the effects of performing routine screening
pelvic examinations on health outcomes such as all-cause mortal-
ity,disease-specificmorbidityandmortality,qualityoflife,andpsy-
chologicalbenefitsandharmscouldhelpfillthegapsintheexisting
evidence and inform future USPSTF recommendations. Studies
evaluating and quantifying harms are needed, as well as studies
evaluating the potential effectiveness of risk assessment tools to
determine which women might benefit from a pelvic examination.
Research is needed to clarify which indications primary care clini-
cians are currently using the screening pelvic examination for in
asymptomaticpatientsandwhichcomponentsofthepelvicexami-
nation are performed most frequently. Studies exploring women’
s
attitudes toward pelvic examinations, the outcomes women value
fromtheseexaminations,andhowpelvicexaminationsaffectwom-
en’
s decisions to seek and obtain care are also needed to clarify the
potential benefits and harms of providing this preventive service.
Screening Tests
For the purposes of this recommendation, the term “pelvic exami-
nation”includes any of the following components, alone or in com-
bination:assessmentoftheexternalgenitalia,internalspeculumex-
amination, bimanual palpation, and rectovaginal examination.
Useful Resources
Screening for cervical cancer, gonorrhea, and chlamydia are not in-
cluded in this recommendation statement on screening pelvic ex-
aminations because they are already addressed in separate USP-
STF recommendations.2,3 Screening for ovarian cancer with
preventive services other than pelvic examination is addressed in
theUSPSTF’
srecommendationonscreeningforovariancancer9;the
USPSTF also has recommendations on counseling to prevent sexu-
ally transmitted infections.10 The Women’
s Preventive Services
Guidelines, supported by the Health Resources & Services Admin-
istration, is another resource.11
Discussion
Burden of Disease
Given the range of gynecologic conditions that could be detected
withpelvicexamination,theburdenofdiseasevariesdependingon
the specific condition. Some conditions, such as vaginal cancer, are
rare,withanincidencerateof0.7casesper100 000women.4Other
conditions, such as candidiasis, are relatively common, with nearly
75% of adult women reporting at least 1 occurrence.4 Associated
morbidityandmortalitycanalsovary.Someconditions,suchasovar-
ian cancer, are associated with a high mortality rate (5-year survival
rate of 46.2%),12 while other conditions, such as candidiasis, have
noknownassociatedmortality.Moreinformationontheburdenand
epidemiology of the numerous gynecologic conditions potentially
detected by pelvic examination is available in Table 1 of the accom-
panying systematic evidence review.4
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: The Screening Pelvic Examination
950
JAMA
March 7, 2017
Volume 317, Number 9
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Scope of Review
The USPSTF commissioned a systematic review to evaluate the
evidence on the accuracy, benefits, and potential harms of per-
forming screening pelvic examinations in asymptomatic, non-
pregnant adult women 18 years and older. The review focused on
asymptomatic gynecologic conditions commonly identified by cli-
nicians as a reason for performing the screening pelvic examina-
tion, conditions for which detection of early-stage disease in
asymptomatic patients is biologically and clinically plausible, and
conditions for which another method of screening is not already
addressed by a current USPSTF recommendation (ie, cervical can-
cer, gonorrhea, and chlamydia). The review excluded sympto-
matic conditions. The review included the following components
of the pelvic examination: inspection of the external genitalia,
urethral meatus, vaginal introitus, and perianal region; speculum
examination of the vagina and cervix; bimanual palpation of the
uterus, cervix, and adnexa; and rectovaginal examination of the
posterior wall of the vagina.
Accuracy of Screening Tests
The USPSTF found little evidence on the accuracy of screening pel-
vicexaminationstodetectvariousconditions;4studies(n = 26 432)
reported on ovarian cancer, 2 studies (n = 930) on bacterial vagi-
nosis, 1 study (n = 779) on genital herpes, and 1 study (n = 779) on
trichomoniasis.
Of the 4 studies reporting on detection of ovarian cancer, the
largest was the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO)
Cancer Screening Trial,13 conducted in the United States. The
PLCO trial, a good-quality population-based, randomized trial,
recruited women aged 55 to 74 years (mean age, 62.9 years) with-
out a history of cancer. It evaluated screening for ovarian cancer
with ultrasonography and blood testing for the tumor marker can-
cer antigen 125 but originally included palpation of the ovaries in
its screening protocol. The ovarian palpation component was dis-
continued 5 years into the study because no cases of ovarian can-
cer were detected solely with bimanual palpation of the ovaries.13
In a subanalysis that evaluated 20 872 participants who under-
went ovarian palpation at least once, the yield of screening was
23 cancer cases (0.1%) detected over 1 year of follow-up and 72
cancer cases (0.3%) detected over 1 to 5 years of follow-up
(Paul Pinsky, PhD, National Cancer Institute, written communica-
tion, May 2, 2016).14 Over multiple rounds of screening (mean
number, 2.4 [range, 1-4]), 96.7% of the ovarian cancer cases iden-
tified during the trial were not detected by palpation. The
reported sensitivity and specificity for detection of ovarian cancer
over 1 to 5 years of follow-up in the PLCO trial was 2.8% (95% CI,
0.6%-8.6%) and 98.8% (95% CI, 98.7%-99.0%), respectively.
The other 3 fair-quality studies were conducted in Greece, Austra-
lia, and the United Kingdom and were generally much smaller
(n = 1010 to 2550).4,15-17 Outcomes were reported at 1 year of
follow-up, and the range of sensitivity and specificity was 0% to
100% and 91.4% to 98.4%, respectively.4
The 4 studies that reported on the accuracy of pelvic ex-
amination to detect various infectious diseases (bacterial vaginosis,
genital herpes, and trichomoniasis) were all fair-quality and con-
ducted in the United States.4 One study was conducted in a hos-
pital setting,18 while the other 3 were conducted in sexually trans-
mitted infection clinics.19-21 It is important to note that given the
settings of these studies, participants were more likely to represent
higher-risk, symptomatic populations compared with women gen-
erally seen in primary care. The reported yield of screening was
38.7% to 47.0% of bacterial vaginosis cases, 47.8% of genital her-
pes cases, and 15.2% of trichomoniasis cases.4 Depending on the
specific clinical sign used in screening, reported sensitivity ranged
from 2.3% to 78.8% for bacterial vaginosis,4,18,19 from 14.2% to
19.6% for genital herpes,20 and from 1.7% to 59.2% for
trichomoniasis.21 Specificity ranged from 48.4% to 100% for bacte-
rial vaginosis,4,18,19 from 97.1% to 97.5% for genital herpes,20 and
from 72.0% to 100% for trichomoniasis.21
Effectiveness of Early Detection
No good- or fair-quality studies directly evaluated the effective-
ness of screening pelvic examinations in asymptomatic, nonpreg-
nant adult women to improve quality of life, reduce disease-
specificmorbidity,orreducedisease-specificorall-causemortality.
Potential Harms of Screening
The USPSTF found little evidence on the potential harms of
screening pelvic examination. Studies reporting on the accuracy
of screening pelvic examination to detect various gynecologic
conditions also reported on false-positive and false-negative
rates, which could lead to important harms due to missed di-
agnoses or unnecessary and potentially harmful procedures and
treatment. The false-positive and false-negative rates at 1 year
of follow-up in the PLCO trial subanalyses were 1.2% (95% CI,
1.0%-1.3%) and 95.7% (95% CI, 81.4%-99.5%), respectively.4
False-positive and false-negative rates in the other 3 ovarian
cancer studies ranged from 1.6% to 8.6% and 0% to 100%,
respectively.4 The 4 studies reporting on the accuracy of screen-
ing with pelvic examination for ovarian cancer also reported the
percentage of patients with positive results who subsequently
underwent surgery, which overall ranged from 5% to 36%. Based
on the PLCO trial subanalyses, 11.2% of women who had a posi-
tive finding on palpation examination over up to 4 rounds of
annual screening but did not ultimately receive an ovarian cancer
diagnosis underwent surgery (Paul Pinsky, PhD, National Cancer
Institute, written communication, May 2, 2016). Depending on
the specific clinical sign used to detect various infectious dis-
eases, the false-positive rate ranged from 0% to 46.1% for bacte-
rial vaginosis, from 2.5% to 2.9% for genital herpes, and from 0%
to 28.0% for trichomoniasis. The false-negative rate ranged from
21.2% to 97.7% for bacterial vaginosis, from 80.4% to 85.8% for
genital herpes, and from 40.8% to 98.3% for trichomoniasis.
Given the uncertainty regarding the accuracy of performing
screening pelvic examinations to detect a range of gynecologic
conditions, there is the potential for false-positive findings to
cause harms by leading to unnecessary and invasive evaluations,
including surgery; there is also the potential for false-negative
findings to cause harms by providing false reassurance when clini-
cally important conditions are actually present. One exploratory
study (n = 150) reported on urinary tract infections in patients
undergoing pelvic examination; however, the study was under-
powered to detect any significant difference.6 The USPSTF
searched for but did not find any studies that quantified harms of
anxiety or other psychological harms associated with screening
pelvic examination.4
USPSTF Recommendation: The Screening Pelvic Examination
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
March 7, 2017
Volume 317, Number 9
951
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
Overall, the USPSTF found inadequate evidence on screening pel-
vic examinations for the early detection and treatment of a range of
gynecologic conditions in asymptomatic, nonpregnant adult
women. No studies directly evaluated the effectiveness of screen-
ing pelvic examinations to improve health outcomes such as quality
of life, morbidity, or mortality. Few studies reported on the accu-
racy of screening pelvic examination; among the range of possible
gynecologic conditions that could be detected with pelvic exami-
nation, only 4 were evaluated in published studies, often in only a
single study. Although studies on detection of ovarian cancer often
recruited participants from the community, participants in studies
evaluating detection of infectious diseases came from sexually
transmitted infection clinics, whose populations are likely more
symptomatic and at higher risk for disease than the typical primary
care population, thus making the applicability of this evidence to
primary care populations unclear. Overall, the current available evi-
dence is insufficient for the USPSTF to determine the net balance
of benefits and harms of screening pelvic examinations, and the
USPSTF cannot recommend for or against performing screening
pelvic examinations in asymptomatic, nonpregnant adult women.
Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted for
public comment on the USPSTF website from June 28, 2016, to
July 25, 2016. One concern expressed in the comments was the
perception that the USPSTF was recommending against perform-
ing screening pelvic examinations and therefore against screening
for cervical cancer. The USPSTF has clarified that it is recommend-
ing neither for nor against screening with pelvic examination for
gynecologic conditions other than cervical cancer, gonorrhea, or
chlamydia. The evidence on performing pelvic examinations to
screen for conditions other than cervical cancer, gonorrhea, or chla-
mydia is currently lacking, and the USPSTF is unable to determine
the overall balance of benefits and harms. However, as it has previ-
ously, the USPSTF continues to recommend screening for cervical
cancer, gonorrhea, and chlamydia in separate recommendation
statements. Some comments also expressed concern that the USP-
STF based its recommendation on costs. The USPSTF has clarified
that it does not consider the costs of a preventive service when
determining a recommendation grade; it bases its recommenda-
tions on the quality and strength of the available evidence about
the potential benefit and harms of a preventive service. Comments
also expressed concern that the USPSTF did not sufficiently con-
sider the harms of performing pelvic examinations and that
the USPSTF should have recommended against performing them.
The USPSTF reviewed all available relevant studies that reported
on harms of pelvic examinations. Too few studies were available for
the USPSTF to determine the net benefit or harm of performing
screening pelvic examinations.
Recommendations of Others
Across various organizations, guidelines range from recommending
against performing screening pelvic examinations to recommend-
ing that they be performed annually. The American College of Phy-
sicians recommends against performing screening pelvic examina-
tions in asymptomatic, nonpregnant adult women.22 Based on the
American College of Physicians’review and recommendation, the
American Academy of Family Physicians also concluded that per-
forming screening pelvic examinations in asymptomatic, nonpreg-
nant adult women is not recommended.23 The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommends performing pelvic
examinations annually in all patients 21 years and older.24 While it
found no evidence to support or refute the benefit of annual pelvic
examination or speculum and bimanual examination in asymptom-
atic, low-risk patients, it concluded that the decision to perform a
complete examination at the time of the periodic health examina-
tion should be a shared decision between the patient and clinician.
The Well-Woman Task Force, convened by the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists in 2013, recommends that for
women 21 years and older, external examination may be performed
annually and that inclusion of speculum examination, bimanual
examination, or both in otherwise healthy women should be a
shared, informed decision between patient and clinician. The
Well-Woman Task Force also recommends speculum examination,
bimanual examination, or both for asymptomatic patients with
specific indications (eg, intrauterine device placement or cervical
cancer screening).25
ARTICLE INFORMATION
The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
members: Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD,
MAS; David C. Grossman, MD, MPH; Susan J.
Curry, PhD; Michael J. Barry, MD; Karina W.
Davidson, PhD, MASc; Chyke A. Doubeni, MD,
MPH; John W. Epling Jr, MD, MSEd;
Francisco A. R. García, MD, MPH; Alex R.
Kemper, MD, MPH, MS; Alex H. Krist, MD, MPH;
Ann E. Kurth, PhD, RN, MSN, MPH; C. Seth
Landefeld, MD; Carol M. Mangione, MD, MSPH;
William R. Phillips, MD, MPH; Maureen G.
Phipps, MD, MPH; Michael Silverstein, MD, MPH;
Melissa Simon, MD, MPH; Albert L. Siu, MD, MSPH;
Chien-Wen Tseng, MD, MPH, MSEE.
Affiliations of The US Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) members: University of California,
San Francisco (Bibbins-Domingo); Group Health
Research Institute, Seattle, Washington
(Grossman); University of Iowa, Iowa City (Curry);
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
(Barry); Columbia University, New York, New York
(Davidson); University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia (Doubeni); State University of New
York Upstate Medical University, Syracuse (Epling);
Pima County Department of Health, Tucson,
Arizona (García); Duke University, Durham, North
Carolina (Kemper); Fairfax Family Practice
Residency, Fairfax, Virginia (Krist); Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond (Krist); Yale
University, New Haven, Connecticut (Kurth);
University of Alabama at Birmingham (Landefeld);
University of California, Los Angeles (Mangione);
University of Washington, Seattle (Phillips); Brown
University, Providence, Rhode Island (Phipps);
Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts
(Silverstein); Northwestern University, Evanston,
Illinois (Simon); Mount Sinai Hospital, New York,
New York (Siu); James J. Peters Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, Bronx, New York (Siu); University of
Hawaii, Manoa (Tseng).
Author Contributions: Dr Bibbins-Domingo had
full access to all of the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis. The USPSTF
members contributed equally to the
recommendation statement.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors
have completed and submitted the ICMJE Form
for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest.
Dr Barry reported receiving grants and
personal fees from Healthwise, a nonprofit,
outside the submitted work. No other authors
reported disclosures. Authors followed the
policy regarding conflicts of interest described at
https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org
/Page/Name/conflict-of-interest-disclosures.
All members of the USPSTF receive travel
reimbursement and an honorarium for participating
in USPSTF meetings.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: The Screening Pelvic Examination
952
JAMA
March 7, 2017
Volume 317, Number 9
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Funding/Support: The USPSTF is an independent,
voluntary body. The US Congress mandates that
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) support the operations of the USPSTF.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: AHRQ staff assisted
in the following: development and review of the
research plan, commission of the systematic
evidence review from an Evidence-based Practice
Center, coordination of expert review and public
comment of the draft evidence report and draft
recommendation statement, and the writing and
preparation of the final recommendation statement
and its submission for publication. AHRQ staff had
no role in the approval of the final recommendation
statement or the decision to submit for publication.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the
USPSTF are independent of the US government.
They should not be construed as an official position
of AHRQ or the US Department of Health and
Human Services.
Additional Contributions: We thank Tina Fan, MD,
MPH (AHRQ), who contributed to the writing of the
manuscript, and Lisa Nicolella, MA (AHRQ), who
assisted with coordination and editing.
REFERENCES
1. National Center for Health Statistics, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention. National
Ambulatory Medical Care Survey: 2012 state and
national summary tables. https://www.cdc.gov
/nchs/data/ahcd/namcs_summary/2012_namcs
_web_tables.pdf. Accessed January 17, 2017.
2. Moyer VA; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for cervical cancer: U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force recommendation statement
[published correction appears in Ann Intern Med.
2013;158(11):852]. Ann Intern Med.
2012;156(12):880-891, W312.
3. LeFevre ML; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for Chlamydia and gonorrhea: U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation
statement. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161(12):902-910.
4. Guirguis-Blake JM, Henderson JT, Perdue LA,
Whitlock EP. Screening for Gynecologic Conditions
With Pelvic Examination: A Systematic Review for
the US Preventive Services Task Force. Evidence
Synthesis No. 147. Rockville, MD: Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality; 2017. AHRQ
publication 15-05220-EF-1.
5. Guirguis-Blake JM, Henderson JT, Perdue LA.
Periodic screening pelvic examination: evidence
report and systematic review for the US Preventive
Services Task Force. JAMA. doi:10.1001/jama.2016
.12819
6. Tiemstra JD, Pela E. Urinary symptoms after a
routine pelvic exam. J Am Board Fam Med. 2011;24
(3):290-295.
7. Henderson JT, Harper CC, Gutin S, Saraiya M,
Chapman J, Sawaya GF. Routine bimanual pelvic
examinations: practices and beliefs of US
obstetrician-gynecologists. Am J Obstet Gynecol.
2013;208(2):109.
8. Stormo AR, Cooper CP, Hawkins NA, Saraiya M.
Physician characteristics and beliefs associated with
use of pelvic examinations in asymptomatic
women. Prev Med. 2012;54(6):415-421.
9. Moyer VA; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for ovarian cancer: U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force reaffirmation recommendation
statement. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157(12):900-904.
10. LeFevre ML; U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force. Behavioral counseling interventions to
prevent sexually transmitted infections: U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation
statement. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161(12):894-901.
11. Health Resources & Services Administration.
Women’
s preventive services guidelines. https:
//www.hrsa.gov/womensguidelines2016/index
.html. Accessed January 17, 2017.
12. National Cancer Institute. Cancer stat facts:
ovarian cancer. https://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts
/html/ovary.html. Accessed January 17, 2017.
13. Buys SS, Partridge E, Greene MH, et al; PLCO
Project Team. Ovarian cancer screening in the
Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian (PLCO)
Cancer Screening Trial: findings from the initial
screen of a randomized trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol.
2005;193(5):1630-1639.
14. Doroudi M, Kramer BS, Pinsky PF. The bimanual
ovarian palpation examination in the Prostate,
Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian Cancer Screening
Trial: performance and complications [published
online on November 30, 2016]. J Med Screen.
doi:10.1177/0969141316680381
15. Jacobs I, Stabile I, Bridges J, et al. Multimodal
approach to screening for ovarian cancer. Lancet.
1988;1(8580):268-271.
16. Adonakis GL, Paraskevaidis E, Tsiga S, Seferiadis
K, Lolis DE. A combined approach for the early
detection of ovarian cancer in asymptomatic
women. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 1996;65
(2):221-225.
17. Grover S, Quinn MA, Weideman P, et al.
Screening for ovarian cancer using serum CA125
and vaginal examination: report on 2550 females.
Int J Gynecol Cancer. 1995;5(4):291-295.
18. Gutman RE, Peipert JF, Weitzen S, Blume J.
Evaluation of clinical methods for diagnosing
bacterial vaginosis. Obstet Gynecol. 2005;105(3):
551-556.
19. Eschenbach DA, Hillier S, Critchlow C, Stevens
C, DeRouen T, Holmes KK. Diagnosis and clinical
manifestations of bacterial vaginosis. Am J Obstet
Gynecol. 1988;158(4):819-828.
20. Koutsky LA, Stevens CE, Holmes KK, et al.
Underdiagnosis of genital herpes by current clinical
and viral-isolation procedures. N Engl J Med. 1992;
326(23):1533-1539.
21. Wølner-Hanssen P, Krieger JN, Stevens CE, et al.
Clinical manifestations of vaginal trichomoniasis.
JAMA. 1989;261(4):571-576.
22. Qaseem A, Humphrey LL, Harris R, Starkey M,
Denberg TD; Clinical Guidelines Committee of the
American College of Physicians. Screening pelvic
examination in adult women: a clinical practice
guideline from the American College of Physicians.
Ann Intern Med. 2014;161(1):67-72.
23. American Academy of Family Physicians.
Clinical practice guideline: screening pelvic
examination in adult women. http://www.aafp
.org/patient-care/browse/type.tag-clinical
-preventive-services-recommendations.html.
Accessed January 17, 2017.
24. Committee on Gynecologic Practice.
Committee opinion No. 534: well-woman visit.
Obstet Gynecol. 2012;120(2, pt 1):421-424.
25. Conry JA, Brown H. Well-Woman Task Force:
components of the well-woman visit. Obstet Gynecol.
2015;126(4):697-701.
USPSTF Recommendation: The Screening Pelvic Examination
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
March 7, 2017
Volume 317, Number 9
953
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
