 Screening for Cervical Cancer
USPreventiveServicesTaskForceRecommendationStatement
US Preventive Services Task Force
IMPORTANCE The number of deaths from cervical cancer in the United States has decreased
substantially since the implementation of widespread cervical cancer screening and has
declined from 2.8 to 2.3 deaths per 100 000 women from 2000 to 2015.
OBJECTIVE To update the US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) 2012 recommendation
on screening for cervical cancer.
EVIDENCE REVIEW The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on screening for cervical cancer, with
a focus on clinical trials and cohort studies that evaluated screening with high-risk human
papillomavirus (hrHPV) testing alone or hrHPV and cytology together (cotesting) compared
with cervical cytology alone. The USPSTF also commissioned a decision analysis model to
evaluate the age at which to begin and end screening, the optimal interval for screening, the
effectiveness of different screening strategies, and related benefits and harms of different
screening strategies.
FINDINGS Screening with cervical cytology alone, primary hrHPV testing alone, or cotesting
can detect high-grade precancerous cervical lesions and cervical cancer. Screening women
aged 21 to 65 years substantially reduces cervical cancer incidence and mortality. The harms
of screening for cervical cancer in women aged 30 to 65 years are moderate. The USPSTF
concludes with high certainty that the benefits of screening every 3 years with cytology alone
in women aged 21 to 29 years substantially outweigh the harms. The USPSTF concludes with
high certainty that the benefits of screening every 3 years with cytology alone, every 5 years
with hrHPV testing alone, or every 5 years with both tests (cotesting) in women aged 30 to
65 years outweigh the harms. Screening women older than 65 years who have had adequate
prior screening and women younger than 21 years does not provide significant benefit.
Screening women who have had a hysterectomy with removal of the cervix for indications
other than a high-grade precancerous lesion or cervical cancer provides no benefit.
The USPSTF concludes with moderate to high certainty that screening women older than 65
years who have had adequate prior screening and are not otherwise at high risk for cervical
cancer, screening women younger than 21 years, and screening women who have had a
hysterectomy with removal of the cervix for indications other than a high-grade precancerous
lesion or cervical cancer does not result in a positive net benefit.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATION The USPSTF recommends screening for cervical cancer
every 3 years with cervical cytology alone in women aged 21 to 29 years. (A recommendation)
The USPSTF recommends screening every 3 years with cervical cytology alone, every 5 years
with hrHPV testing alone, or every 5 years with hrHPV testing in combination with cytology
(cotesting) in women aged 30 to 65 years. (A recommendation) The USPSTF recommends
against screening for cervical cancer in women younger than 21 years. (D recommendation)
The USPSTF recommends against screening for cervical cancer in women older than 65 years
who have had adequate prior screening and are not otherwise at high risk for cervical cancer.
(D recommendation) The USPSTF recommends against screening for cervical cancer in women
who have had a hysterectomy with removal of the cervix and do not have a history of
a high-grade precancerous lesion or cervical cancer. (D recommendation)
JAMA. 2018;320(7):674-686. doi:10.1001/jama.2018.10897
Editorial page 647
Author Audio Interview
Related articles pages 687,
706 and JAMA Patient Page
page 732
CME Quiz at
jamanetwork.com/learning
and CME Questions page 715
Related article at
jamainternalmedicine.com
Author/Group Information: The US
Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) members are listed at the
end of this article.
Corresponding Author: Susan J.
Curry, PhD, University of Iowa, 111
Jessup Hall, Iowa City, IA 52242
(chair@uspstf.net).
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA | US Preventive Services Task Force | RECOMMENDATION STATEMENT
674
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 T
heUSPreventiveServicesTaskForce(USPSTF)makesrec-
ommendationsabouttheeffectivenessofspecificpreven-
tivecareservicesforpatientswithoutobviousrelatedsigns
or symptoms.
It bases its recommendations on the evidence of both the
benefits and harms of the service and an assessment of the bal-
ance. The USPSTF does not consider the costs of providing a ser-
vice in this assessment.
TheUSPSTFrecognizesthatclinicaldecisionsinvolvemorecon-
siderations than evidence alone. Clinicians should understand the
evidence but individualize decision making to the specific patient
or situation. Similarly, the USPSTF notes that policy and coverage
decisionsinvolveconsiderationsinadditiontotheevidenceofclini-
cal benefits and harms.
Summary of Recommendations and Evidence
The USPSTF recommends screening for cervical cancer every 3
years with cervical cytology alone in women aged 21 to 29 years.
For women aged 30 to 65 years, the USPSTF recommends screen-
ing every 3 years with cervical cytology alone, every 5 years with
high-risk human papillomavirus (hrHPV) testing alone, or every 5
years with hrHPV testing in combination with cytology (cotesting)
(A recommendation) (Figure 1).
See the Clinical Considerations section for the relative ben-
efits and harms of alternative screening strategies for women 21
years or older.
The USPSTF recommends against screening for cervical can-
cer in women older than 65 years who have had adequate prior
screening and are not otherwise at high risk for cervical cancer.
(D recommendation)
See the Clinical Considerations section for discussion of ad-
equatepriorscreeningandriskfactorsthatsupportscreeningafter
age 65 years.
The USPSTF recommends against screening for cervical can-
cer in women younger than 21 years. (D recommendation)
The USPSTF recommends against screening for cervical
cancer in women who have had a hysterectomy with removal of
the cervix and do not have a history of a high-grade precancerous
lesion (ie, cervical intraepithelial neoplasia [CIN] grade 2 or 3) or
cervical cancer. (D recommendation)
The first 3 recommendations apply to individuals who have a
cervix, regardless of their sexual history or HPV vaccination status.
Theserecommendationsdonotapplytoindividualswhohavebeen
diagnosed with a high-grade precancerous cervical lesion or cervi-
cal cancer. These recommendations also do not apply to individu-
als with in utero exposure to diethylstilbestrol or those who have a
compromised immune system (eg, women living with HIV).
Rationale
Importance
ThenumberofdeathsfromcervicalcancerintheUnitedStateshave
decreasedsubstantiallysincetheimplementationofwidespreadcer-
vicalcancerscreeningandcontinuetodecline,from2.8per100 000
women in 2000 to 2.3 deaths per 100 000 women in 2015.1 Most
casesofcervicalcanceroccuramongwomenwhohavenotbeenad-
equatelyscreened.2Strategiesthataimtoensurethatallwomenare
appropriately screened and receive adequate follow-up are most
likely to succeed in further reducing cervical cancer incidence and
mortality in the United States.
Detection
The USPSTF found convincing evidence that screening with cervical
cytology alone, primary testing for high-risk HPV types (hrHPV test-
ing)alone,orincombinationatthesametime(cotesting)candetect
high-grade precancerous cervical lesions and cervical cancer.
USPSTF Assessment
The USPSTF concludes with high certainty that the benefits of
screeningevery3yearswithcytologyaloneinwomenaged21to29
yearssubstantiallyoutweightheharms.TheUSPSTFconcludeswith
high certainty that the benefits of screening every 3 years with cy-
tology alone, every 5 years with hrHPV testing alone, or in combi-
nation in women aged 30 to 65 years outweigh the harms.
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that the ben-
efits of screening in women older than 65 years who have had ad-
equate prior screening and are not otherwise at high risk for cervi-
cal cancer do not outweigh the potential harms.
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that the harms
ofscreeninginwomenyoungerthan21yearsoutweighthebenefits.
The USPSTF concludes with high certainty that the harms of
screening in women who have had a hysterectomy with removal of
the cervix for indications other than a high-grade precancerous le-
sion or cervical cancer outweigh the benefits.
Clinical Considerations
Patient Population Under Consideration
This recommendation statement applies to all asymptomatic indi-
viduals with a cervix, regardless of their sexual history (Figure 2).
This recommendation statement does not apply to women who
have been diagnosed with a high-grade precancerous cervical
lesion or cervical cancer, women with in utero exposure to diethyl-
stilbestrol, or women who have a compromised immune system
(eg, women living with HIV).
Assessment of Risk
High-risk HPV infection is associated with nearly all cases of cervi-
cal cancer, and women are exposed to hrHPV through sexual
intercourse. Although a large proportion of HPV infections
resolve spontaneously, the high likelihood of exposure to hrHPV
means that women are at risk for precancerous lesions and cervi-
cal cancer.
Certain risk factors increase risk for cervical cancer, including
HIV infection, a compromised immune system, in utero exposure
to diethylstilbestrol, and previous treatment of a high-grade pre-
cancerous lesion or cervical cancer. Women with these risk factors
are not included in this recommendation and should receive indi-
vidualized follow-up. Women who have had a hysterectomy with
removal of the cervix and do not have a history of a high-grade pre-
cancerous lesion or cervical cancer are not at risk for cervical cancer
and should not be screened. As part of the clinical evaluation,
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Cervical Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
August 21, 2018
Volume 320, Number 7
675
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 clinicians should confirm through review of surgical records or
direct examination that the cervix was removed.
Screening Tests
Currentevidenceindicatesthattherearenoclinicallyimportantdif-
ferences between liquid-based cytology and conventional cytol-
ogy.AvarietyofplatformsareusedtodetecthrHPV;mostuseeither
signalornucleicacidamplificationmethods.PublishedtrialsofhrHPV
testingusedinsituhybridization,polymerasechainreaction,andhy-
bridcapturetechnologytotestforHPVstrainsassociatedwithcer-
vical cancer. hrHPV testing has been used for primary screening,
cotesting with cytology, and follow-up testing of positive cytology
results (reflex hrHPV).2
Screening with cytology alone, hrHPV testing alone, and both
in combination offer a reasonable balance between benefits and
harms for women aged 30 to 65 years; women in this age group
shoulddiscusswiththeirhealthcareprofessionalwhichtestingstrat-
egyisbestforthem.Evidencefromrandomizedclinicaltrials(RCTs)
and decision modeling studies suggest that screening with cytol-
ogyaloneisslightlylesssensitivefordetectingCIN2andCIN3than
screeningwithhrHPVtestingalone.AlthoughscreeningwithhrHPV
testing alone or in combination with cytology detects more cases
Figure 1. USPSTF Grades and Levels of Evidence
What the USPSTF Grades Mean and Suggestions for Practice
Grade
Definition
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
Suggestions for Practice
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate, or
there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients
based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty
that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service for selected
patients depending on individual
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the service
has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits
and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of
benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section
of the USPSTF Recommendation
Statement. If the service is offered,
patients should understand the
uncertainty about the balance of benefits
and harms.
USPSTF Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary care
populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be
strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the estimate
is constrained by such factors as 
the number, size, or quality of individual studies.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice.
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be large
enough to alter the conclusion.
The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as
benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature
of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of
the limited number or size of studies.
important flaws in study design or methods.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
gaps in the chain of evidence.
findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice.
lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
USPSTF indicates US Preventive Services Task Force.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Cervical Cancer
676
JAMA
August 21, 2018
Volume 320, Number 7
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 of CIN 2 and CIN 3, this method results in more diagnostic colpos-
copies for each case detected.2-5
There are a number of different protocols for triage of abnor-
mal results from screening with cytology, hrHPV testing, or cotest-
ing. Clinical trial evidence and modeling suggest that different tri-
age protocols have generally similar detection rates for CIN 2 and
CIN3;however,proceedingdirectlytodiagnosticcolposcopywith-
out additional triage leads to a much greater number of colposco-
pies compared with using other triage protocols. Maintaining com-
parable benefits and harms of screening with cytology alone or
hrHPVtestingalonerequiresthatpatients,clinicians,andhealthcare
organizations adhere to currently recommended protocols for re-
peat testing, diagnostic colposcopy, and treatment.6,7
Timing of Screening
Women Younger Than 21 Years
Cervicalcancerisrarebeforeage21years.8Exposureofcervicalcells
to hrHPV during vaginal intercourse may lead to cervical carcino-
genesis,buttheprocesshasmultiplesteps,involvesregression,and
isgenerallynotrapid.Becauseoftheslowprogressionofdiseaseand
the high likelihood of regression in this age group, evidence sug-
gests that screening earlier than age 21 years, regardless of sexual
history, would lead to more harm than benefit. Treatment of CIN 2
or CIN 3 among women younger than 21 years may increase risk for
adverse pregnancy outcomes.2,8
Women Older Than 65 Years
Joint guidelines from the American Cancer Society, American
Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology, and American
Society for Clinical Pathology (ACS/ASCCP/ASCP) define adequate
prior screening as 3 consecutive negative cytology results or 2
consecutive negative cotesting results within 10 years before
stopping screening, with the most recent test occurring within 5
years.6 The guidelines further state that routine screening should
continue for at least 20 years after spontaneous regression or
appropriate management of a precancerous lesion, even if this
extends screening past age 65 years. Once screening has
stopped, it should not resume in women older than 65 years,
even if they report having a new sexual partner.
Women Older Than 65 Years
Who Have Not Been Adequately Screened
Screening may be clinically indicated in older women with an
inadequate or unknown screening history. Recent data suggest
that one-fourth of women aged 45 to 64 years have not been
screened for cervical cancer in the preceding 3 years.9 In particu-
lar, women with limited access to care, women from racial/ethnic
minority groups, and women from countries where screening
is not available may be less likely to meet criteria for adequate
prior screening. Certain considerations may also support screen-
ing in women older than 65 years who are otherwise at high risk
Figure 2. Clinical Summary: Screening for Cervical Cancer
Population
Recommendation 
Women aged 21 to 29 years
Women aged 30 to 65 years
Screen for cervical cancer every 3 years
with cytology alone.
Do not screen for cervical cancer.
Screen for cervical cancer every 3 years
with cytology alone, every 5 years with
hrHPV testing alone, or every 5 years
with cotesting. 
Grade: A
Grade: A
Grade: D
Risk Assessment
Screening Tests
Treatments and
Interventions
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting documents, please
go to https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.   
All women aged 21 to 65 years are at risk for cervical cancer because of potential exposure to high-risk HPV types (hrHPV) through
sexual intercourse and should be screened. Certain risk factors further increase risk for cervical cancer, including HIV infection,
a compromised immune system, in utero exposure to diethylstilbestrol, and previous treatment of a high-grade precancerous lesion
or cervical cancer. Women with these risk factors should receive individualized follow-up.
Screening with cervical cytology alone, primary testing for hrHPV alone, or both at the same time (cotesting) can detect high-grade
precancerous cervical lesions and cervical cancer. Clinicians should focus on ensuring that women receive adequate screening,
appropriate evaluation of abnormal results, and indicated treatment, regardless of which screening strategy is used.
High-grade cervical lesions may be treated with excisional and ablative therapies. Early-stage cervical cancer may be treated
with surgery (hysterectomy) or chemotherapy.
Women younger than 21 years, women
older than 65 years with adequate prior
screening, and women who have had
a hysterectomy
These recommendations apply to individuals who have a cervix, regardless of
their sexual history or HPV vaccination status. These recommendations do not
apply to individuals who have been diagnosed with a high-grade precancerous
cervical lesion or cervical cancer, those with in utero exposure to
diethylstilbestrol, or those who have a compromised immune system
(eg, individuals living with HIV). HPV indicates human papillomavirus.
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Cervical Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
August 21, 2018
Volume 320, Number 7
677
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 (ie, women with a history of high-grade precancerous lesions or
cervical cancer, in utero exposure to diethylstilbestrol, or a com-
promised immune system).2
Screening Interval
Screening more frequently than every 3 years with cytology alone
confers little additional benefit, with a large increase in harms,
including additional procedures and assessment and treatment of
transient lesions. Treatment of lesions that would otherwise
resolve on their own is harmful because it can lead to procedures
with unwanted adverse effects, including the potential for cervi-
cal incompetence and preterm labor during pregnancy. Evidence
from RCTs, observational studies, and modeling studies sug-
gest that a 5-year screening interval for primary hrHPV testing
alone or cotesting offers the best balance of benefits and harms.
Screening more frequently than every 5 years with primary
hrHPV testing alone or cotesting does not substantially improve
benefit but significantly increases the number of screening tests
and colposcopies.
Treatment
Screening aims to identify high-grade precancerous cervical le-
sionstopreventprogressiontocervicalcancer.High-gradecervical
lesionsmaybetreatedwithexcisionalandablativetherapies.Early-
stage cervical cancer may be treated with surgery (hysterectomy)
or chemotherapy. Treatment of precancerous lesions is less inva-
sive than treatment of cancer.2
Race/Ethnicity, Geography, and Cervical Cancer
The incidence of and mortality from cervical cancer remain rela-
tively high among certain populations. The overall mortality rate
from cervical cancer among African American women is 10.1
deaths per 100 000 women,10 which is more than twice the rate
among white women (when adjusted for hysterectomy rate),
although the gap has narrowed over time. Mortality is higher
among older African American women. Several studies have
found that African American women are screened for cervical
cancer at rates similar to those for white women and that inad-
equate follow-up after screening and differences in treatment
may be important contributing factors. The higher mortality rate
in African American women may also be attributable, in part, to
the higher than average rate of adenocarcinoma, which carries a
worse prognosis than the most common type of cervical cancer
(squamous cell carcinoma).10-12
American Indian/Alaska Native women also have higher rates
of cervical cancer mortality (3.2 deaths per 100 000 women)
than the US average.10 Factors driving this higher rate may
include lower screening rates (16.5% of American Indian/Alaska
Native women in the 2012 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance
System reported not receiving a Papanicolaou [Pap] test in the
past 5 years)13 and inadequate follow-up.2 Hispanic women
have a significantly higher incidence rate of cervical cancer and
slightly higher mortality rate (2.6 deaths per 100 000 women
[unadjusted for hysterectomy rate]), with especially high rates
occurring along the Texas-Mexico border. Although white women
overall have the lowest mortality rate from cervical cancer,
white women living in geographically isolated and medically
underserved areas (particularly Appalachia) have much higher
mortality rates than the US average. Asian women also have
lower screening rates, especially those who have recently immi-
grated to the United States and may have language or cultural
barriers to screening.10
In addition to race/ethnicity and geography, insurance cover-
age plays an important role in access to cervical cancer screening;
23.1%ofwomenwithouthealthinsuranceand25.5%ofwomenwith
no regular health care clinician reported not receiving a Pap test in
thepast5years,comparedwith11.4%ofthegeneralpopulation.In-
surance status may interact with other demographic factors, such
asrace/ethnicityandage,toincreasedisparities.13Inaddition,there
are no screening data for women with disabilities and those who
identify as lesbian or transgender.14-16
Progress in reducing cervical cancer incidence and mortality
has been uneven. The most important factors contributing to
higher incidence and mortality rates include financial, geographic,
and language or cultural barriers to screening; barriers to follow-up;
unequal treatment; and difference in cancer types, all of which vary
across subpopulations.
Additional Approaches to Prevention
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’
s Advisory Council
on Immunization Practice recommends routine HPV vaccination.
A 2-dose schedule is recommended for girls and boys who initiate
the vaccination series at ages 9 to 14 years. Three doses are recom-
mended for girls and boys who initiate the vaccination series at
ages 15 to 26 years and for those who have a compromised
immune system.17 The overall effect of HPV vaccination on high-
grade precancerous cervical lesions and cervical cancer is not yet
known. Current trials have not yet provided data on long-term effi-
cacy; therefore, the possibility that vaccination might reduce the
need for screening with cytology or hrHPV testing is not estab-
lished. Given these uncertainties, women who have been vacci-
nated should continue to be screened as recommended until fur-
ther evidence accrues.
Useful Resources
The 2012 ACS/ASCCP/ASCP guidelines6 and 2015 interim guidance
from the ASCCP and the Society of Gynecologic Oncology (SGO)7
provide algorithms for follow-up of abnormal screening results.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the National
Institutes of Health, and the HIV Medicine Association of the Infec-
tiousDiseasesSocietyofAmericahaveissuedrecommendationson
screening for and management of cervical cancer in patients living
with HIV.18
TheNationalCancerInstituteprovidesstrategiesforreducingcer-
vical cancer mortality in its report “Excess Cervical Cancer Mortality:
A Marker for Low Access to Health Care in Poor Communities.”
19
Other Considerations
Implementation
Participation in regular screening has a far greater effect on cervical
cancer morbidity and mortality than which of the 3 recommended
screening strategies is chosen for women ages 30 to 65 years.
Implementation should therefore focus on ensuring that women
receive adequate screening, regardless of which strategy is used.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Cervical Cancer
678
JAMA
August 21, 2018
Volume 320, Number 7
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Althoughlowscreeningratescontributetohighmortalityrates
in certain underserved populations, screening alone is not suffi-
cient to reduce cervical cancer morbidity and mortality and related
disparities. Loss to follow-up and disparities in treatment are also
contributing factors. Therefore, having systems in place to ensure
follow-upofabnormalresults,appropriatetreatmentofanypathol-
ogy, and support to retain patients throughout the entirety of can-
cer treatment are important.
Research Needs and Gaps
Regular screening for prevention of cervical cancer is highly effec-
tive,whetheritiswithcervicalcytologyalone,hrHPVtestingalone,
or both in combination. To further reduce the incidence and mor-
talityofcervicalcancer,itisnecessarytofindeffectivestrategiesto
reach inadequately screened and unscreened women and to ad-
dress follow-up and treatment issues.
Research is needed to evaluate whether different screening
strategies could play a part in reducing mortality rates, as well as
ways to improve follow-up for current screening strategies and to
ensure equitable access to treatment across populations. In addi-
tion, research is needed to determine whether screening after
age 65 years has a different balance of benefits and harms in dif-
ferent subpopulations.
Unlike cytology, samples for hrHPV testing have the potential
to be collected by the patient and mailed to health programs for
analysis, meaning self-collection may be one strategy for increas-
ingscreeningratesamongpopulationswheretheyarecurrentlylow.
Rigorous comparative studies are needed to verify this hypothesis
and to identify effective strategies for implementation.
AnotherimportantareaforfutureresearchistheeffectofHPV
vaccination, because an increasing number of women and men of
screeningagearebeingvaccinated.DecreasesinhrHPVtypepreva-
lence due to vaccination could reduce the positive predictive value
of hrHPV testing, which, along with potential reductions in cancer
incidence, may increase the number of false-positive results and,
therefore,thebalanceofbenefitsandharms.Ineithercase,screen-
ing strategies may need to be adjusted.
Discussion
Burden of Disease
Cervical cancer incidence and mortality have decreased signifi-
cantly since the 1960s because of widespread screening.2
In 2018, an estimated 13 240 new cases and 4170 deaths will
occur, making cervical cancer the 18th most common cause of
cancer death in the United States.20 Most cases of cervical cancer
and related deaths occur among women who have not been
adequately screened, followed up, or treated.2 In 2013, 81.7%
of women aged 21 to 44 years and 79.2% of women aged 45
to 64 years reported receiving a Pap test in the past 3 years, as
recommended.9 While this is a much higher coverage rate than
that of many other cancer screening programs, it still falls short of
the Healthy People 2020 goal of screening 93% of women aged
21 to 65 years.21 Further, the burden of cervical cancer incidence
and mortality falls disproportionately on racial/ethnic and sexual/
gender minority groups, persons with disabilities, and low-
income and geographically defined populations.10
Scope of Review
The USPSTF commissioned a review of the evidence2,4 on screen-
ing for cervical cancer to update its 2012 recommendation.22 The
review focused on outcomes from trials and cohort studies in high-
resource countries that evaluated screening with hrHPV testing
alone or hrHPV and cytology together (cotesting) compared with
cervical cytology alone. The review did not examine data on test
accuracy or the effectiveness of cytology for screening for cervical
cancer, as both were established in the previous evidence review.23
Similarly, the review did not systematically examine data for
women younger than 21 years or for women who have had a hys-
terectomy with removal of the cervix except to confirm that the
evidence has not changed since the previous review.
Inadditiontothesystematicevidencereview,theUSPSTFcom-
missioned a decision analysis model3,5 to evaluate the age at which
to begin and end screening, the optimal interval for screening, the
effectiveness of different screening strategies, and how these fac-
torsaffecttherelativebenefitsandharmsofdifferentscreeningstrat-
egies. The USPSTF approach to the use of model-based analysis as
a complement to systematic evidence reviews is described in de-
tail elsewhere.24
Accuracy of Screening Tests
Evidence from RCTs indicates that hrHPV testing and cotesting can
detect more cases of CIN 3, but they also have higher false-positive
ratescomparedwithcytologyalone.Cotestinghasthehighestfalse-
positive rate. False-positive rates are also higher among women
younger than 30 years than among older women because of the
higherincidenceoftransientHPVinfectioninyoungerwomen,even
though cervical cancer incidence is lower in this age group.2
Estimates of sensitivity and specificity of any screening strat-
egyareheavilyinfluencedbythefollow-upofabnormalresults,and
follow-upprotocolsincervicalcancerscreeningtrialsvariedwidely.2
Effectiveness of Different Screening Strategies
The reduction of mortality and morbidity associated with the
introduction of cytology-based screening is consistent across
populations. A cluster RCT conducted in India found a nearly 50%
reduction in cervical cancer mortality after a single round of
hrHPV testing compared with a nonscreened control group after
8 years of follow-up.25 The evidence review did not address
whether screening for cervical cancer is effective but rather which
screening strategies are most effective, when to start screening,
and when to stop screening.
Women Younger Than 21 Years
The USPSTF considered the following types of evidence to deter-
mine when screening for cervical cancer should begin: cervical can-
cer incidence, prevalence, and mortality among young women; the
natural history of precancerous lesions and HPV infection; and the
effects of screening in populations of young women. Cervical can-
cer is rare among women younger than 20 years; according to US
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results data, 0.1% of all inci-
dent cancer cases occur in this age group.1 Precancerous lesions are
also uncommon. Estimated prevalence of CIN 3 among women
younger than 20 years is 0.2%, with a concurrent false-positive
cytology rate of about 3.1%.26 In addition, the decision analysis
model commissioned for the 2012 USPSTF recommendation
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Cervical Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
August 21, 2018
Volume 320, Number 7
679
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 showed no net benefit to starting screening before age 21 years.27
The USPSTF did not look at evidence for women younger than 21
years living with HIV or who are otherwise at higher risk of cervical
cancer, as they are outside the scope of this recommendation.
Women Aged 21 to 29 Years
The USPSTF recommends screening for cervical cancer every 3
years with cervical cytology alone in women aged 21 to 29 years.
Given the high prevalence of transient HPV infection among ado-
lescents and young adults, initial screening at age 21 years should
be with cytology alone. The question of what age at which
screening with hrHPV testing alone offers comparable benefit has
not been directly studied. The 4 trials that compared screening
with hrHPV testing alone vs cytology alone found a consistently
higher detection rate among younger women (younger than 30
or 35 years), which raises concern for overdiagnosis and over-
treatment of transient infection.28-31 Modeling estimates of the
effects of switching from screening with cytology alone to hrHPV
testing alone at ages 25, 27, and 30 years found minimal differ-
ences in terms of life-years gained compared with switching
screening strategies at age 30 vs 25 years (64 193 vs 64 195 life-
years gained per 1000 women screened, respectively). However,
screening with hrHPV testing alone starting at age 25 years rather
than age 30 years increased the number of colposcopies by
nearly 400 colposcopies per 1000 women screened.3 Therefore,
switching from cytology alone to hrHPV testing alone at age 30
years appears to offer similar benefits in terms of cancer reduc-
tion as switching at younger ages but with fewer associated tests
and procedures.
Women Aged 30 to 65 Years
TheUSPSTFfound8trialsofcervicalcancerscreening;4RCTscom-
pared screening with hrHPV testing alone vs cytology alone and 4
RCTs compared screening with cytology alone vs cotesting (cytol-
ogy in combination with hrHPV testing).2 No trials directly com-
pared screening strategies using hrHPV testing alone vs cotesting.
Meta-analysis was not possible because the trials varied substan-
tiallyintermsofcytologytype(conventionalvsliquid-based),hrHPV
test(polymerasechainreactionvshybridcapture),screeninginter-
val(2to5years),follow-upprotocolsforabnormalresults,andpro-
tocols for screening beyond the first round. No trial included more
than2roundsofscreening.Althoughthepurposeofscreeningisto
reducecervicalcancermortality,themortalityrateissolowincoun-
tries that have organized cytology screening programs that it is im-
practicaltodirectlymeasuretheeffectsofdifferentscreeningstrat-
egiesonmortalitythroughclinicaltrials.Therefore,trialsmeasured
the rate of CIN 3+ (CIN 3 or worse) detection, and some trials also
reported the rate of invasive cervical cancer.
hrHPV Testing Alone vs Conventional Cytology Alone
FourRCTs(N > 250 000women)comparedscreeningwithhrHPV
testing alone vs cytology alone: the New Technologies for Cervical
Cancer(NTCC)PhaseIItrialinItaly,28,32-34theHPVforCervicalCan-
cer Screening (HPV FOCAL) trial in Canada,29 the FINNISH trial in
Finland,30 and the Compass trial in Australia.31 Overall, the 4 trials
found that hrHPV testing alone led to an increase in the rate of
CIN 3+ detection compared with cytology alone in the first round
of screening. The NTCC Phase II and HPV FOCAL trials enrolled
women aged 25 to 60 or 65 years and had 2 rounds of screening 2
to 4 years apart. The FINNISH trial, which enrolled women aged 25
to 65 years, had a single round of screening and then followed up
participantsfor5yearsthroughacancerregistry.TheCompasstrial,
which enrolled 4995 women aged 25 to 64 years, randomized par-
ticipants to liquid-based cytology every 2.5 years or hrHPV pri-
mary screening every 5 years.
TheNTCCPhaseIItrialfoundthathrHPVtestingalonehadacu-
mulative CIN 3+ detection rate twice that of cytology alone (0.4%
vs 0.2%). The FINNISH trial measured the rate of invasive cervical
cancerdetectionat5years;screeningwithhrHPVtestingalonehad
a detection rate of 0.03% and screening with cytology alone had a
detection rate of 0.01%. Recently published results from the
HPV FOCAL trial35 found that hrHPV testing alone had a higher de-
tection rate for CIN 3+ (0.7%) compared with cytology (0.4%) af-
ter 4 years of follow-up. The Compass trial reported preliminary re-
sults consistent with those from the other 3 trials, but final results
at 5 years of follow-up have not yet been published.
The primary harms measured in the RCTs were the total num-
ber of follow-up tests, number of colposcopies, and false-positive
rates. Although follow-up tests and colposcopies are essential to
detection of cancer, they represent a burden and risk to patients
and are a proxy measure for downstream harms; therefore, screen-
ing strategies that minimize the number of tests and colposcopies
per each cancer case averted are desirable. Colposcopy rates were
higher for hrHPV testing alone than for cytology alone in 1 of 3 trials
(NTCC Phase II) and similar in 2 trials (FINNISH and HPV FOCAL).
False-positive rates for CIN 2+ were higher for hrHPV testing alone
than for cytology alone in 1 trial (NTCC Phase II) and similar in
another trial (FINNISH).
Cotesting vs Cytology Alone
Four RCTs (N > 130 000 women) compared screening with cytol-
ogy alone vs cotesting (cytology in combination with hrHPV
testing): the NTCC Phase I trial in Italy,28,32,34 Swedescreen in
Sweden,36,37 A Randomized Trial in Screening to Improve Cytology
(ARTISTIC) in the United Kingdom,38-40 and the Population-Based
Screening Study Amsterdam (POBASCAM) in the Netherlands.41 In
all 4 trials, the cumulative relative ratio of CIN 3+ detection
between the 2 strategies (cotesting vs cytology alone) were not
statistically significant after 2 rounds of screening. The trials varied
considerably in starting age (20 to 29 years), stopping age (38 to
64 years), and follow-up protocols. The NTCC Phase I, ARTISTIC,
and POBASCAM trials reported 2 rounds of screening at 3- to
5-year intervals, whereas Swedescreen reported 1 round of screen-
ing with registry follow-up at 3 years. Two trials (Swedescreen and
POBASCAM) reported no difference between screening strategies
at 13 to 14 years of follow-up.
These 4 trials reported hrHPV positive rates of 7% to 22% for
screening with cotesting; again, rates were highest among women
younger than 30 or 35 years. Colposcopy rates were higher for
screeningwithcotestingthanforcytologyalonein2trials(ARTISTIC
andNTCCPhaseI)andnotreportedintheother2trials(Swedescreen
andPOBASCAM).False-positiverateswerehigherforscreeningwith
cotesting in 3 of 4 trials (Swedescreen did not report the false-
positive rate for the intervention group).
The ARTISTIC trial also surveyed a subsample of patients
(N = 2508)aboutthepsychologicaleffectsofscreening.42Itfound
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Cervical Cancer
680
JAMA
August 21, 2018
Volume 320, Number 7
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 no difference in distress or anxiety between women screened
with cotesting and women screened with cytology alone. Women
in the cotesting group who were notified of positive HPV results
reported lower sexual satisfaction regardless of their cytology
results, but there were no statistically significant differences in
psychological distress or anxiety between study groups.38 A sepa-
rate cross-sectional study used a survey to evaluate the psycho-
logical effects of screening with hrHPV cotesting in women aged
20 to 64 years (N = 428) and found that women who received
a positive HPV result were more distressed and had more nega-
tive feelings about their sexual partners than women who
received a negative HPV result.43
Additional Evidence From Observational Studies
In addition to RCTs, the USPSTF also reviewed evidence from an
individual participant data meta-analysis that pooled patients
from 4 trials (NTCC Phase I, Swedescreen, ARTISTIC, and
POBASCAM), as well as a single trial of primary hrHPV testing
(NTCC Phase II). The meta-analysis found a 40% lower incidence
of invasive cervical cancer among patients screened with some
form of hrHPV testing compared with cytology alone.44 Biopsy
rates from the individual participant data meta-analysis suggest
that these higher colposcopy rates led to higher rates of biopsy
with cotesting than with cytology alone. However, since the
meta-analysis pooled data from trials with distinctly different
screening strategies and hrHPV test types, these findings cannot
be interpreted with certainty.
The trial evidence was also supplemented with results from 4
cohort studies. One study considered primary hrHPV screening,45
2 studies considered cotesting,46-51 and 1 reported on cotesting
among underscreened women.52 These outcomes were not nota-
bly different from the trial outcomes. A recently published report
on women (N = 1 262 713) screened 1 or more times in Kaiser
Permanente Northern California between 2003 and 2015, which
included women aged 25 to 29 years screened with cytology and
triage with hrHPV testing for atypical squamous cells of undeter-
mined significance and women aged 30 to 77 years screened with
cotesting, also suggests that women who test negative for hrHPV
have very low rates of subsequent CIN 3+, regardless of cytology
results.53 It is important to note that women younger than 30 or
35 years had higher hrHPV-positive and CIN 3+ rates, accompa-
nied by higher colposcopy rates.
Data from long-term follow-up studies37,54 and a large US co-
hortstudy55suggestaminimalriskofmissingcervicalcanceramong
women who test negative with cotesting or primary hrHPV screen-
ing. An analysis of long-term data from Kaiser Permanente North-
ern California suggests that women with 1 or more negative results
from cotesting have a reduced risk for future cancer.53
Benefits and Harms of Various Screening Strategies
Based on Decision Modeling
The decision model commissioned by the USPSTF reported ben-
efits and harms consistent with the outcomes observed in the
trials. Both hrHPV testing alone and cotesting would avert
approximately 1 additional cancer case per 1000 women screened
compared with cytology alone (17.8 vs 16.5 cases, respectively),
representing a very small improvement in life-years gained (64 193
vs 64 182 life-years, respectively).3 However, these 2 screening
strategies would also subject women to more tests and proce-
dures. Although no head-to-head trials compared screening with
hrHPV testing alone vs cotesting, modeling suggests that both
hrHPV testing alone and cotesting offer similar benefit over cytol-
ogy in terms of cancer cases averted and are also similar in terms
of the number of colposcopies required (1630 vs 1635, respec-
tively). In summary, all 3 screening strategies offer substantial ben-
efit in terms of reducing cancer incidence and mortality compared
with no screening.
Screening Interval Based on Decision Modeling
The decision model conducted for the 2012 USPSTF recommenda-
tion found that screening every 3 years with cytology alone starting
at age 21 years confers a similar number of life-years gained as
annual screening (69 247 vs 69 213 life-years gained per 1000
women screened, respectively), yet results in fewer than half the
number of colposcopies and fewer false-positive results.27 Screen-
ing intervals for hrHPV testing varied across trials from 2 to 5 years,
and observational studies of primary hrHPV testing and cotesting
examined intervals from 3 to 5 years. For women aged 30 to 65
years, modeling suggests similar life-years gained with 3- and
5-year screening intervals but more tests and procedures with
a 3-year screening interval (64 193.19 vs 64 193.07 life-years gained
per 1000 women screened every 3 and 5 years, respectively).3
Thus, the USPSTF recommends 5-year screening intervals for
hrHPV testing alone or for cotesting based on evidence from RCTs,
observational data, and modeling studies (Table).
Women Older Than 65 Years
Noneofthescreeningtrialsenrolledwomenolderthan65years,so
directevidenceonwhentostopscreeningisnotavailable.Whende-
liberating on the age at which to stop screening, the USPSTF con-
sideredtheincidenceofcervicalcancerinolderwomenandwhether
the pattern of cervical cancer incidence differs in screened vs un-
screened women. The incidence and prevalence of CIN peak in the
midreproductive years and begin to decline in approximately
thefourthdecadeoflife,ageneralpatternalsoapparentamongcer-
tainpreviouslyunscreenedwomen.Cervicalcancerinolderwomen
is not more aggressive or rapidly progressive than it is in younger
women. The rate of high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions di-
agnosed by cytology is low in older women who have had ad-
equate prior screening. The decision model commissioned by the
USPSTF also supports the current practice of stopping screening at
age 65 years in adequately screened women. The model projected
thatextendingscreeningbeyondage65yearsinwomenwithanad-
equate screening history would not have significant benefit using
any of the considered screening strategies.
Although screening women older than 65 years who have
an adequate screening history is not recommended, data sug-
gest that screening rates begin to decline before that age. As a
result, approximately 13% of 65-year-old women have not been
adequately screened, and this number increases to 37.1% if the
patient has no regular health care provider.13 A Kaiser Permanente
registry study found that the majority of cases of invasive cervical
cancer among women older than 65 years occurred among those
who had not met criteria for stopping screening.55,62 This suggests
that the decision to stop screening at age 65 years should only be
made after confirming that the patient has received prior adequate
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Cervical Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
August 21, 2018
Volume 320, Number 7
681
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 screening. Current guidelines define adequate screening as 3 con-
secutive negative cytology results or 2 consecutive negative HPV
results within 10 years before stopping screening, with the most
recent test performed within 5 years.6
Women Who Have Had a Hysterectomy With Removal of the Cervix
Two large studies have documented the low risk for cytology
abnormalities after hysterectomy. A cross-sectional study of more
than 5000 cytology tests among women older than 50 years
found that identification of vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia and
cancer was rare in this age group after hysterectomy.63 In a second
study of more than 10 000 Pap tests performed over 2 years in
6265 women who had a hysterectomy with removal of the cervix,
screening yielded 104 abnormal Pap test results and no cases of
cervical cancer; in addition, 6 cases of high-grade vaginal lesions
were detected, but it is not known whether detection of these
cases improved clinical outcomes.64
Harms of Screening
ScreeningwithcervicalcytologyandhrHPVtestingcanleadtoharms,
including more frequent follow-up testing and invasive diagnostic
procedures (eg, colposcopy and cervical biopsy), as well as unnec-
essarytreatmentinwomenwithfalse-positiveresults.Evidencefrom
RCTs and observational studies indicate that harms from diagnos-
tic procedures include vaginal bleeding, pain, infection, and failure
todiagnose(duetoinadequatesampling).Abnormalscreeningtest
results are also associated with psychological harms. In particular,
women who received positive hrHPV results reported greater dis-
tress and lower satisfaction with past and current sexual partners
than women who received abnormal cytology results.
TheUSPSTFfoundadequateevidencethattheharmsofhrHPV
testing alone in women aged 21 to 29 years are moderate. Primary
hrHPVtestinghasbeenfoundtoresultinhighratesofpositivetests
inthisagegroup,inwhichHPVinfectionsarelikelytoresolvespon-
taneously. The high frequency of transient HPV infection among
women younger than 30 years can lead to unnecessary follow-up
diagnostic and treatment interventions with potential for harm.
The USPSTF found adequate evidence that the harms of
screening for cervical cancer (with cytology alone, hrHPV testing
alone, or cotesting with both) in women aged 30 to 65 years are
moderate. Screening strategies that include hrHPV testing are
slightly more sensitive than those that include cytology alone but
also yield more false-positive results. Cotesting is also slightly
more sensitive than cytology alone but leads to the highest false-
positive rates.
The USPSTF found adequate evidence that the harms of
screening for cervical cancer in women older than 65 years who
have had adequate prior screening and are not otherwise at high
risk are at least small. The USPSTF also found adequate evidence
that the harms of screening for cervical cancer in women younger
than 21 years are moderate.
The USPSTF found adequate evidence that screening for cer-
vical cancer in women who have had a hysterectomy with removal
of the cervix and do not have a history of a high-grade precancer-
ous lesion or cervical cancer is associated with harms.
Harms of Treatment
The harms of treatment include risks from the treatment proce-
dure and the potential subsequent consequences of treatment.
Evidence from observational studies indicates that certain treat-
ments for precancerous lesions (eg, cold-knife conization and
loop excision) are associated with subsequent adverse pregnancy
outcomes, such as preterm delivery and related complications.2
The USPSTF found convincing evidence that many precancerous
cervical lesions will regress and that other lesions are indolent,
slow growing, and will not become clinically important over a
Table. Characteristics of Cervical Cancer Screening Tests
Method
Frequency
Evidence of Efficacy
Other Considerations
Women Aged 21-29 y
Cytology
Every 3 y
Observational data23
Modeling study27
Screening with cytology is recommended in this age group
Screening with hrHPV testing is not recommended because of the transient
nature of infection and natural clearance of HPV
Women Aged 30-65 y
Cytology
Every 3 y
Observational data23
Modeling study3,27
Cytology has lower sensitivity than primary hrHPV testing or cotesting and
a lower false-positive rate and rate of additional testing
The modeling study suggests that, compared with no screening, screening with
cytology every 3 y can reduce the number of cervical cancer deaths from
8.34 to 0.76 deaths per 1000 womena
Primary
hrHPV testing
Every 5 y
4 RCTs of hrHPV testing vs cytology
(screening intervals of 3.5 y,28,34 4 y,29,56-58
and 5 y30,31)
2 RCTs37,54 of cotesting, with 13-14 y of
follow-up of HPV-negative component
1 US prospective cohort study53 of cotesting,
with analysis of 5-y risk of death from
HPV component
Modeling study3
Primary hrHPV testing has adequate sensitivity; see the Clinical Considerations
section for triage protocols following a positive hrHPV test result
The modeling study suggests that, compared with no screening, switching from
cytology to primary hrHPV testing every 5 y at age 30 y can reduce the number
of cervical cancer deaths from 8.34 to 0.29 deaths per 1000 womena
Cotesting
Every 5 y
4 RCTs of cotesting vs cytology (screening
intervals of 3 y28,32,33,36-40,42 and 5 y41,54,59)
3 prospective cohort studies (United
States,46-51 Spain,52 and Germany60,61)
Modeling study3
Cotesting may detect slightly more cases of CIN than screening with
hrHPV testing alone but with a significant increase in the number of tests
and procedures
The modeling study suggests that, compared with no screening, switching from
cytology to cotesting every 5 y at age 30 y can reduce the number of cervical
cancer deaths from 8.34 to 0.30 deaths per 1000 womena
Abbreviations: CIN, cervical intraepithelial neoplasia; HPV, human papillomavirus;
hrHPV, high-risk humanpapillomavirus; RCT, randomized clinical trial.
a Outcomes calculated from models of cohorts of women aged 20 to 100 years;
screening is assumed to end at age 65 years.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Cervical Cancer
682
JAMA
August 21, 2018
Volume 320, Number 7
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 woman’
s lifetime; identification and treatment of these lesions
constitute overdiagnosis. Estimating the precise magnitude of
overdiagnosis associated with any screening or treatment strat-
egy is difficult, but it is of concern because it confers no benefit
and leads to unnecessary surveillance, diagnostic tests, and treat-
ments, with associated harms.
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
There is convincing evidence that screening with cervical cytology
alone, primary hrHPV testing alone, or cotesting can detect high-
grade precancerous cervical lesions and cervical cancer. The
USPSTF found convincing evidence that screening women aged 21
to 65 years substantially reduces cervical cancer incidence and
mortality. The USPSTF found adequate evidence that the harms of
screening for cervical cancer (with cytology alone, hrHPV testing
alone, or cotesting with both) in women aged 30 to 65 years are
moderate. The USPSTF concludes with high certainty that the ben-
efits of screening every 3 years with cytology alone in women aged
21 to 29 years substantially outweigh the harms. The USPSTF con-
cludes with high certainty that the benefits of screening every 3
years with cytology alone, every 5 years with hrHPV testing alone,
or every 5 years with both in combination in women aged 30 to 65
years outweigh the harms.
The USPSTF found adequate evidence that screening women
older than 65 years who have had adequate prior screening and
women younger than 21 years does not provide significant benefit.
There is convincing evidence that screening women who have had
a hysterectomy with removal of the cervix for indications other
than a high-grade precancerous lesion or cervical cancer provides
no benefit. The USPSTF found adequate evidence that the harms
of screening for cervical cancer in women younger than 21 years
and of screening with hrHPV testing alone in women aged 21 to 29
years are moderate. The USPSTF found adequate evidence that the
harms of screening for cervical cancer in women older than 65
years who have had adequate prior screening and are not other-
wise at high risk are at least small. The USPSTF found adequate evi-
dence that screening for cervical cancer in women who have had a
hysterectomy with removal of the cervix and do not have a history
of a high-grade precancerous lesion or cervical cancer is associated
with harms. The USPSTF concludes with moderate to high cer-
tainty that screening women older than 65 years who have had
adequate prior screening and are not otherwise at high risk for cer-
vical cancer, screening women younger than 21 years, and screen-
ing women who have had a hysterectomy with removal of the cer-
vix for indications other than a high-grade precancerous lesion or
cervical cancer does not result in a positive net benefit.
How Does Evidence Fit With Biological Understanding?
The natural history of cervical cancer has been well studied. Infec-
tion of the cervix with HPV is generally transient, but when the
infection is not cleared by an appropriate immune response and
the virus is of an oncogenic type, the infection can result in incorpo-
ration of HPV gene sequences into the host genome, which can
lead to precancerous lesions. The long preclinical phase from infec-
tion to development of precancerous lesions and cervical cancer
allows for the opportunity to effectively screen for, identify, and
treat precancerous lesions, thereby reducing cervical cancer inci-
dence and mortality.
Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted for
public comment on the USPSTF website from September 12,
2017, through October 13, 2017. Many comments pointed to a
need for greater clarity in describing differences between cotest-
ing and primary hrHPV testing. Several comments requested
clarification on the information presented in the modeling report.
Some comments highlighted implementation issues due to a lack
of tests approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for pri-
mary cervical cancer screening. In response to these comments,
the USPSTF now notes throughout the recommendation state-
ment that women aged 30 to 65 years may choose to get
screened every 3 years with cervical cytology alone, every 5 years
with hrHPV testing alone, or every 5 years with cotesting. Accord-
ingly, the USPSTF provided a table in the Clinical Considerations
section that presents detailed information about the available
evidence on the effectiveness, strengths, limitations, and unique
considerations of each screening method. For further clarification
on the modeling study, the USPSTF added the calibrated input
parameter values, which should enable informed readers to
assess the estimates used. The USPSTF added language through-
out the recommendation statement to emphasize the impor-
tance of several different factors that affect overall screening
effectiveness, including the primary screening test, screening
ages, screening interval, test characteristics, and follow-up proto-
cols, including triage of screen-positive women.
Update of Previous USPSTF Recommendation
This recommendation replaces the 2012 USPSTF recommendation.
The major change in the current recommendation is that the
USPSTF now recommends screening every 5 years with hrHPV
testing alone as an alternative to screening every 3 years with cytol-
ogy alone among women aged 30 to 65 years. These are the 2 pre-
ferred screening strategies based on the USPSTF review of trial,
cohort, and modeling results. Cotesting as an alternative strategy
has demonstrated similar effectiveness, although it may result in
more tests and procedures compared with either cytology or
hrHPV testing alone. As in the 2012 recommendation, the USPSTF
continues to recommend against screening in women younger
than 21 years, in women older than 65 years who have had
adequate prior screening and are not otherwise at high risk for cer-
vical cancer, and in women who have had a hysterectomy with
removal of the cervix and do not have a history of a high-grade pre-
cancerous lesion or cervical cancer.
Recommendations of Others
The ACS/ASCCP/ASCP recommend that women aged 21 to 29 years
be screened every 3 years with cytology alone (cervical cytology or
Pap testing). Women aged 30 to 65 years should be screened
every 5 years with cytology and HPV testing (cotesting) or every
3 years with cytology alone. Women at increased risk of cervical
cancer (ie, women with a history of cervical cancer, a compromised
immune system, or diethylstilbestrol exposure) may need to
be screened more often. Women who have had CIN 2+ should
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Cervical Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
August 21, 2018
Volume 320, Number 7
683
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 continue screening for 20 years after the last abnormal test result,
even if it extends screening beyond age 65 years.6 The ASCCP and
SGO issued interim guidance in 2015 that recommended primary
HPV screening starting at age 25 years as an alternative to cytology
alone or cotesting.7 The American Academy of Family Physicians
guidelines are in agreement with the USPSTF.65 The American Col-
lege of Obstetricians and Gynecologists stated in 2016 that cytol-
ogy alone and cotesting are still specifically recommended in cur-
rent guidelines from most major societies; however, primary HPV
screening in women 25 years or older can be considered as an alter-
native to current cytology-based screening if performed per ASCCP
and SGO interim guidance.66 The Panel on Opportunistic Infections
in HIV-Infected Adults and Adolescents has issued guidance on
screening for and management of HPV in patients living with HIV.18
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: July 18, 2018.
The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
members: Susan J. Curry, PhD; Alex H. Krist, MD,
MPH; Douglas K. Owens, MD, MS; Michael J. Barry,
MD; Aaron B. Caughey, MD, PhD; Karina W.
Davidson, PhD, MASc; Chyke A. Doubeni, MD, MPH;
John W. Epling Jr, MD, MSEd; Alex R. Kemper, MD,
MPH, MS; Martha Kubik, PhD, RN; C. Seth
Landefeld, MD; Carol M. Mangione, MD, MSPH;
Maureen G. Phipps, MD, MPH; Michael Silverstein,
MD, MPH; Melissa A. Simon, MD, MPH; Chien-Wen
Tseng, MD, MPH, MSEE; John B. Wong, MD.
Affiliations of The US Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) members: University of Iowa,
Iowa City (Curry); Fairfax Family Practice Residency,
Fairfax, Virginia (Krist); Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond (Krist); Veterans Affairs Palo
Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, California
(Owens); Stanford University, Stanford, California
(Owens); Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts (Barry); Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland (Caughey); Columbia
University, New York, New York (Davidson);
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (Doubeni);
Virginia Tech Carilion School of Medicine, Roanoke
(Epling); Nationwide Children’
s Hospital, Columbus,
Ohio (Kemper); Temple University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania (Kubik); University of Alabama at
Birmingham (Landefeld); University of California,
Los Angeles (Mangione); Brown University,
Providence, Rhode Island (Phipps); Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts (Silverstein);
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois (Simon);
University of Hawaii, Honolulu (Tseng); Pacific
Health Research and Education Institute, Honolulu,
Hawaii (Tseng); Tufts University, Medford,
Massachusetts (Wong).
Author Contributions: Dr Curry had full access to
all of the data in the study and takes responsibility
for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the
data analysis. The USPSTF members contributed
equally to the recommendation statement.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have
completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Authors
followed the policy regarding conflicts of interest
described at https://www
.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name
/conflict-of-interest-disclosures. All members of the
USPSTF receive travel reimbursement and an
honorarium for participating in USPSTF meetings.
Dr Barry reported serving as chief science officer of
Healthwise. Dr Epling reported serving as a
statewide presenter for a National Area Health
Education Center Organization grant from the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to
promote human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine use
among primary care physicians. Dr Simon reported
receiving a grant from the Merck Foundation
related to the topic of cervical cancer (Merck & Co
is the maker of the GARDASIL vaccine for HPV). No
other authors reported disclosures.
Funding/Support: The USPSTF is an independent,
voluntary body. The US Congress mandates that
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) support the operations of the USPSTF.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: AHRQ staff assisted
in the following: development and review of the
research plan, commission of the systematic
evidence review from an Evidence-based Practice
Center, coordination of expert review and public
comment of the draft evidence report and draft
recommendation statement, and the writing and
preparation of the final recommendation statement
and its submission for publication. AHRQ staff had
no role in the approval of the final recommendation
statement or the decision to submit for publication.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the
USPSTF are independent of the US government.
They should not be construed as an official position
of AHRQ or the US Department of Health and
Human Services.
Additional Contributions: We thank Prajakta
Adsul, MBBS, MPH, PhD (National Cancer Insti-
tute), Elizabeth Kato, MD, MRP (National Cancer
Institute), and Quyen Ngo-Metzger, MD, MPH
(AHRQ), who contributed to the writing of the
manuscript, and Lisa Nicolella, MA (AHRQ),
who assisted with coordination and editing.
REFERENCES
1. National Cancer Institute (NCI). Cancer
Stat Facts: cervical cancer. NCI website.
https://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/cervix.html.
Accessed June 28, 2018.
2. Melnikow J, Henderson JT, Burda BU, et al.
Screening for Cervical Cancer With High-Risk Human
Papillomavirus Testing: A Systematic Evidence
Review for the US Preventive Services Task Force:
Evidence Synthesis No. 158. Rockville, MD: Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2018. AHRQ
publication 15-05224-EF-1.
3. Kim JJ, Burger EA, Regan C, Sy S. Screening for
Cervical Cancer in Primary Care: A Decision Analysis
for the US Preventive Services Task Force. Rockville,
MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality;
2018. AHRQ publication 15-05224-EF-2.
4. Melnikow J, Henderson JT, Burda BU, Senger
CA, Durbin S, Weyrich MS. Screening for cervical
cancer with high-risk human papillomavirus testing:
updated evidence report and systematic review for
the US Preventive Services Task Force [published
August 21, 2018]. JAMA. doi:10.1001/jama.2018
.10400
5. Kim JJ, Burger EA, Regan C, Sy S. Screening for
cervical cancer in primary care: a decision analysis
for the US Preventive Services Task Force
[published August 21, 2018]. JAMA. doi:10.1001
/jama.2017.19872
6. Saslow D, Solomon D, Lawson HW, et al.
American Cancer Society, American Society for
Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology, and American
Society for Clinical Pathology screening guidelines
for the prevention and early detection of cervical
cancer. J Low Genit Tract Dis. 2012;16(3):175-204.
doi:10.1097/LGT.0b013e31824ca9d5
7. Huh WK, Ault KA, Chelmow D, et al. Use of
primary high-risk human papillomavirus testing for
cervical cancer screening: interim clinical guidance.
Obstet Gynecol. 2015;125(2):330-337. doi:10.1097
/AOG.0000000000000669
8. Benard VB, Watson M, Castle PE, Saraiya M.
Cervical carcinoma rates among young females in
the United States. Obstet Gynecol. 2012;120(5):1117-
1123.
9. National Center for Health Statistics. Health,
United States, 2015: With Special Feature on Racial
and Ethnic Health Disparities. Hyattsville, MD:
National Center for Health Statistics; 2016. Report
2016-1232.
10. Beavis AL, Gravitt PE, Rositch AF.
Hysterectomy-corrected cervical cancer mortality
rates reveal a larger racial disparity in the United
States. Cancer. 2017;123(6):1044-1050. doi:10.1002
/cncr.30507
11. Wang SS, Sherman ME, Hildesheim A,
Lacey JV Jr, Devesa S. Cervical adenocarcinoma
and squamous cell carcinoma incidence trends
among white women and black women in the
United States for 1976-2000. Cancer. 2004;100(5):
1035-1044. doi:10.1002/cncr.20064
12. Galic V, Herzog TJ, Lewin SN, et al. Prognostic
significance of adenocarcinoma histology in women
with cervical cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2012;125(2):
287-291. doi:10.1016/j.ygyno.2012.01.012
13. Benard VB, Thomas CC, King J, Massetti GM,
Doria-Rose VP, Saraiya M; Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC). Vital signs: cervical
cancer incidence, mortality, and screening—United
States, 2007-2012. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep.
2014;63(44):1004-1009.
14. Andresen EM, Peterson-Besse JJ, Krahn GL,
Walsh ES, Horner-Johnson W, Iezzoni LI. Pap,
mammography, and clinical breast examination
screening among women with disabilities:
a systematic review. Womens Health Issues. 2013;
23(4):e205-e214. doi:10.1016/j.whi.2013.04.002
15. Tracy JK, Schluterman NH, Greenberg DR.
Understanding cervical cancer screening among
lesbians: a national survey. BMC Public Health. 2013;
13:442. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-13-442
16. Peitzmeier SM, Reisner SL, Harigopal P,
Potter J. Female-to-male patients have high
prevalence of unsatisfactory Paps compared to
non-transgender females: implications for cervical
cancer screening. J Gen Intern Med. 2014;29(5):
778-784. doi:10.1007/s11606-013-2753-1
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Cervical Cancer
684
JAMA
August 21, 2018
Volume 320, Number 7
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 17. Advisory Committee for Immunization Practices
(ACIP), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Human papillomavirus (HPV) ACIP
vaccine recommendations. CDC website.
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/vacc
-specific/hpv.html. Accessed June 28, 2018.
18. Panel on Opportunistic Infections in
HIV-Infected Adults and Adolescents. Guidelines
for the prevention and treatment of opportunistic
infections in HIV-infected adults and adolescents:
human papillomavirus disease. National Institutes
of Health website. https://aidsinfo.nih.gov
/guidelines/html/4/adult-and-adolescent-oi
-prevention-and-treatment-guidelines/343/hpv.
Accessed June 28, 2018.
19. Freeman HP, Wingrove BK. Excess Cervical
Cancer Mortality: A Marker for Low Access to Health
Care in Poor Communities. Rockville, MD: National
Cancer Institute, Center to Reduce Cancer Health
Disparities; 2005. NIH publication 05-5282.
20. American Cancer Society (ACS). Cervix at a
glance. ACS website.https://cancerstatisticscenter
.cancer.org/#!/cancer-site/Cervix. Accessed
June 28, 2018.
21. Healthy People 2020. Cancer objectives.
HealthyPeople.gov website. https://www
.healthypeople.gov/2020/topics-objectives/topic
/cancer/objectives. Updated June 18, 2018.
Accessed June 28, 2018.
22. Moyer VA; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for cervical cancer: U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force recommendation statement
[published correction appears in Ann Intern Med.
2013;158(11):852]. Ann Intern Med.
2012;156(12):880-891, W312. doi:10.7326/0003-
4819-156-12-201206190-00424
23. Vesco KK, Whitlock EP, Eder M, et al. Screening
for Cervical Cancer: A Systematic Evidence Review
for the US Preventive Services Task Force: Evidence
Synthesis No. 86. Rockville, MD: Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality; 2011. AHRQ
publication 11-05156-EF-1.
24. Owens DK, Whitlock EP, Henderson J, et al;
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Use of decision
models in the development of evidence-based
clinical preventive services recommendations:
methods of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Ann Intern Med. 2016;165(7):501-508. doi:10.7326
/M15-2531
25. Sankaranarayanan R, Nene BM, Shastri SS, et al.
HPV screening for cervical cancer in rural India.
N Engl J Med. 2009;360(14):1385-1394. doi:10
.1056/NEJMoa0808516
26. Insinga RP, Glass AG, Rush BB. Diagnoses and
outcomes in cervical cancer screening:
a population-based study. Am J Obstet Gynecol.
2004;191(1):105-113. doi:10.1016/j.ajog.2004.01.043
27. Kulasingam SL, Havrilesky L, Ghebre R,
Myers ER. Screening for Cervical Cancer: A Decision
Analysis for the US Preventive Services Task Force.
Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality; 2011. AHRQ publication 11-05157-EF-1.
28. Ronco G, Giorgi-Rossi P, Carozzi F, et al; New
Technologies for Cervical Cancer screening (NTCC)
Working Group. Efficacy of human papillomavirus
testing for the detection of invasive cervical cancers
and cervical intraepithelial neoplasia: a randomised
controlled trial. Lancet Oncol. 2010;11(3):249-257.
doi:10.1016/S1470-2045(09)70360-2
29. Ogilvie GS, Krajden M, van Niekerk D, et al. HPV
for cervical cancer screening (HPV FOCAL):
Complete round 1 results of a randomized trial
comparing HPV-based primary screening to
liquid-based cytology for cervical cancer. Int J Cancer.
2017;140(2):440-448. doi:10.1002/ijc.30454
30. Leinonen MK, Nieminen P, Lönnberg S, et al.
Detection rates of precancerous and cancerous
cervical lesions within one screening round of
primary human papillomavirus DNA testing:
prospective randomised trial in Finland. BMJ. 2012;
345:e7789. doi:10.1136/bmj.e7789
31. Canfell K, Caruana M, Gebski V, et al. Cervical
screening with primary HPV testing or cytology in a
population of women in which those aged 33 years
or younger had previously been offered HPV
vaccination: results of the Compass pilot
randomised trial. PLoS Med. 2017;14(9):e1002388.
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1002388
32. Ronco G, Giorgi-Rossi P, Carozzi F, et al; New
Technologies for Cervical Cancer Screening Working
Group. Human papillomavirus testing and
liquid-based cytology in primary screening of
women younger than 35 years: results at
recruitment for a randomised controlled trial.
Lancet Oncol. 2006;7(7):547-555. doi:10.1016
/S1470-2045(06)70731-8
33. Ronco G, Segnan N, Giorgi-Rossi P, et al; New
Technologies for Cervical Cancer Working Group.
Human papillomavirus testing and liquid-based
cytology: results at recruitment from the new
technologies for cervical cancer randomized
controlled trial. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006;98(11):765-
774. doi:10.1093/jnci/djj209
34. Ronco G, Giorgi-Rossi P, Carozzi F, et al; New
Technologies for Cervical Cancer Screening Working
Group. Results at recruitment from a randomized
controlled trial comparing human papillomavirus
testing alone with conventional cytology as the
primary cervical cancer screening test. J Natl Cancer
Inst. 2008;100(7):492-501. doi:10.1093/jnci/djn065
35. Ogilvie GS, van Niekerk D, Krajden M, et al.
Effect of screening with primary cervical HPV
testing vs cytology testing on high-grade cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia at 48 months: the HPV
FOCAL randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2018;320
(1):43-52. doi:10.1001/jama.2018.7464
36. Naucler P, Ryd W, Törnberg S, et al. Human
papillomavirus and Papanicolaou tests to screen for
cervical cancer [published correction appears in
N Engl J Med. 2008;359(15):1637]. N Engl J Med.
2007;357(16):1589-1597. doi:10.1056
/NEJMoa073204
37. Elfström KM, Smelov V, Johansson AL, et al.
Long term duration of protective effect for HPV
negative women: follow-up of primary HPV
screening randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 2014;
348:g130. doi:10.1136/bmj.g130
38. Kitchener HC, Fletcher I, Roberts C, Wheeler P,
Almonte M, Maguire P. The psychosocial impact of
human papillomavirus testing in primary cervical
screening—a study within a randomized trial. Int J
Gynecol Cancer. 2008;18(4):743-748. doi:10.1111/j
.1525-1438.2007.01113.x
39. Kitchener HC, Almonte M, Gilham C, et al;
ARTISTIC Trial Study Group. ARTISTIC:
a randomised trial of human papillomavirus (HPV)
testing in primary cervical screening. Health Technol
Assess. 2009;13(51):1-150. doi:10.3310/hta13510
40. Kitchener HC, Almonte M, Thomson C, et al.
HPV testing in combination with liquid-based
cytology in primary cervical screening (ARTISTIC):
a randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol.
2009;10(7):672-682. doi:10.1016/S1470-2045(09)
70156-1
41. Rijkaart DC, Berkhof J, Rozendaal L, et al.
Human papillomavirus testing for the detection of
high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia and
cancer: final results of the POBASCAM randomised
controlled trial. Lancet Oncol. 2012;13(1):78-88. doi:
10.1016/S1470-2045(11)70296-0
42. C Kitchener H, Canfell K, Gilham C, et al.
The clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of
primary human papillomavirus cervical screening in
England: extended follow-up of the ARTISTIC
randomised trial cohort through three screening
rounds. Health Technol Assess. 2014;18(23):1-196.
doi:10.3310/hta18230
43. McCaffery K, Waller J, Forrest S, Cadman L,
Szarewski A, Wardle J. Testing positive for human
papillomavirus in routine cervical screening:
examination of psychosocial impact. BJOG. 2004;
111(12):1437-1443. doi:10.1111/j.1471-0528.2004
.00279.x
44. Ronco G, Dillner J, Elfström KM, et al;
International HPV Screening Working Group.
Efficacy of HPV-based screening for prevention
of invasive cervical cancer: follow-up of four
European randomised controlled trials. Lancet.
2014;383(9916):524-532. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736
(13)62218-7
45. Zorzi M, Frayle H, Rizzi M, et al; Veneto
HPV-screening Working Group. A 3-year interval is
too short for re-screening women testing negative
for human papillomavirus: a population-based
cohort study. BJOG. 2017;124(10):1585-1593. doi:10
.1111/1471-0528.14575
46. Katki HA, Kinney WK, Fetterman B, et al.
Cervical cancer risk for women undergoing
concurrent testing for human papillomavirus and
cervical cytology: a population-based study in
routine clinical practice. [published correction
appears in Lancet Oncol. 2011;12(8):722]. Lancet
Oncol. 2011;12(7):663-672. doi:10.1016/S1470-2045
(11)70145-0
47. Castle PE, Fetterman B, Poitras N, et al.
Variable risk of cervical precancer and cancer after a
human papillomavirus-positive test. Obstet Gynecol.
2011;117(3):650-656. doi:10.1097/AOG
.0b013e318209da59
48. Gage JC, Katki HA, Schiffman M, et al.
Age-stratified 5-year risks of cervical precancer
among women with enrollment and newly
detected HPV infection. Int J Cancer. 2015;136(7):
1665-1671. doi:10.1002/ijc.29143
49. Gage JC, Schiffman M, Katki HA, et al.
Reassurance against future risk of precancer and
cancer conferred by a negative human
papillomavirus test. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014;106(8):
dju153. doi:10.1093/jnci/dju153
50. Katki HA, Schiffman M, Castle PE, et al.
Five-year risks of CIN 3+ and cervical cancer among
women who test Pap-negative but are
HPV-positive. J Low Genit Tract Dis. 2013;17(5)(suppl
1):S56-S63. doi:10.1097/LGT.0b013e318285437b
51. Katki HA, Schiffman M, Castle PE, et al.
Benchmarking CIN 3+ risk as the basis for
incorporating HPV and Pap cotesting into cervical
screening and management guidelines. J Low Genit
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Cervical Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
August 21, 2018
Volume 320, Number 7
685
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Tract Dis. 2013;17(5)(suppl 1):S28-S35. doi:10.1097
/LGT.0b013e318285423c
52. Ibáñez R, Autonell J, Sardà M, et al. Protecting
the underscreened women in developed countries:
the value of HPV test. BMC Cancer. 2014;14:574.
doi:10.1186/1471-2407-14-574
53. Demarco M, Lorey TS, Fetterman B, et al. Risks
of CIN 2+, CIN 3+, and cancer by cytology and
human papillomavirus status: the foundation of
risk-based cervical screening guidelines. J Low Genit
Tract Dis. 2017;21(4):261-267. doi:10.1097/LGT
.0000000000000343
54. Dijkstra MG, van Zummeren M, Rozendaal L,
et al. Safety of extending screening intervals
beyond five years in cervical screening programmes
with testing for high risk human papillomavirus: 14
year follow-up of population based randomised
cohort in the Netherlands. BMJ. 2016;355:i4924.
doi:10.1136/bmj.i4924
55. Castle PE, Kinney WK, Xue X, et al. Effect of
several negative rounds of human papillomavirus
and cytology co-testing on safety against cervical
cancer: an observational cohort study. Ann Intern
Med. 2018;168(1):20-29. doi:10.7326/M17-1609
56. Coldman AJ, Gondara L, Smith LW, et al.
Disease detection and resource use in the safety
and control arms of the HPV FOCAL cervical cancer
screening trial. Br J Cancer. 2016;115(12):1487-1494.
doi:10.1038/bjc.2016.368
57. Cook DA, Mei W, Smith LW, et al. Comparison
of the Roche cobas® 4800 and Digene Hybrid
Capture® 2 HPV tests for primary cervical cancer
screening in the HPV FOCAL trial. BMC Cancer.
2015;15:968. doi:10.1186/s12885-015-1959-5
58. Ogilvie GS, van Niekerk DJ, Krajden M, et al.
A randomized controlled trial of human
papillomavirus (HPV) testing for cervical cancer
screening: trial design and preliminary results (HPV
FOCAL Trial). BMC Cancer. 2010;10:111. doi:10.1186
/1471-2407-10-111
59. Bulkmans NW, Rozendaal L, Snijders PJ, et al.
POBASCAM, a population-based randomized
controlled trial for implementation of high-risk HPV
testing in cervical screening: design, methods and
baseline data of 44,102 women. Int J Cancer. 2004;
110(1):94-101. doi:10.1002/ijc.20076
60. Luyten A, Buttmann-Schweiger N, Luyten K,
et al. Early detection of CIN3 and cervical cancer
during long-term follow-up using HPV/Pap smear
co-testing and risk-adapted follow-up in a locally
organised screening programme. Int J Cancer. 2014;
135(6):1408-1416. doi:10.1002/ijc.28783
61. Petry KU, Luyten A, Scherbring S. Accuracy of
colposcopy management to detect CIN3 and
invasive cancer in women with abnormal screening
tests: results from a primary HPV screening project
from 2006 to 2011 in Wolfsburg, Germany. Gynecol
Oncol. 2013;128(2):282-287. doi:10.1016/j.ygyno
.2012.10.017
62. Dinkelspiel H, Fetterman B, Poitras N, et al.
Screening history preceding a diagnosis of cervical
cancer in women age 65 and older. Gynecol Oncol.
2012;126(2):203-206. doi:10.1016/j.ygyno
.2012.04.037
63. Fox J, Remington P, Layde P, Klein G. The effect
of hysterectomy on the risk of an abnormal
screening Papanicolaou test result. Am J Obstet
Gynecol. 1999;180(5):1104-1109. doi:10.1016/S0002
-9378(99)70601-0
64. Pearce KF, Haefner HK, Sarwar SF, Nolan TE.
Cytopathological findings on vaginal Papanicolaou
smears after hysterectomy for benign gynecologic
disease. N Engl J Med. 1996;335(21):1559-1562.
doi:10.1056/NEJM199611213352103
65. American Academy of Family Physicians
(AAFP). Clinical preventive service
recommendation: cervical cancer. AAFP website.
https://www.aafp.org/patient-care/clinical
-recommendations/all/cervical-cancer.html. 2018.
Accessed June 28, 2018.
66. Committee on Practice Bulletins—Gynecology.
Practice Bulletin No. 168: cervical cancer screening
and prevention. Obstet Gynecol. 2016;128(4):e111-
e130. doi:10.1097/AOG.0000000000001708
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Cervical Cancer
686
JAMA
August 21, 2018
Volume 320, Number 7
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
