 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Screening for Obstructive Sleep Apnea in Adults
US Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement
US Preventive Services Task Force
T
heUSPreventiveServicesTaskForce(USPSTF)makesrec-
ommendationsabouttheeffectivenessofspecificpreven-
tivecareservicesforpatientswithoutobviousrelatedsigns
or symptoms.
It bases its recommendations on the evidence of both the
benefits and harms of the service and an assessment of the bal-
ance. The USPSTF does not consider the costs of providing a ser-
vice in this assessment.
TheUSPSTFrecognizesthatclinicaldecisionsinvolvemorecon-
siderations than evidence alone. Clinicians should understand the
evidence but individualize decision making to the specific patient
or situation. Similarly, the USPSTF notes that policy and coverage
decisionsinvolveconsiderationsinadditiontotheevidenceofclini-
cal benefits and harms.
Summary of Recommendation and Evidence
TheUSPSTFconcludesthatthecurrentevidenceisinsufficienttoas-
sess the balance of benefits and harms of screening for obstructive
sleep apnea (OSA) in asymptomatic adults (I statement) (Figure 1).
SeetheClinicalConsiderationssectionforsuggestionsforprac-
tice regarding the I statement.
Rationale
Importance
Based on data from the 1990s, the estimated prevalence of OSA
in the United States is 10% for mild OSA and 3.8% to 6.5% for
IMPORTANCE Based on data from the 1990s, estimated prevalence of obstructive sleep
apnea (OSA) in the United States is 10% for mild OSA and 3.8% to 6.5% for moderate to
severe OSA; current prevalence may be higher, given the increasing prevalence of obesity.
Severe OSA is associated with increased all-cause mortality, cardiovascular disease and
cerebrovascular events, diabetes, cognitive impairment, decreased quality of life, and motor
vehicle crashes.
OBJECTIVE To issue a new US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommendation on
screening for OSA in asymptomatic adults.
EVIDENCE REVIEW The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on the accuracy, benefits,
and potential harms of screening for OSA in asymptomatic adults seen in primary care,
including those with unrecognized symptoms. The USPSTF also evaluated the
evidence on the benefits and harms of treatment of OSA on intermediate and final health
outcomes.
FINDINGS The USPSTF found insufficient evidence on screening for or treatment of OSA in
asymptomatic adults or adults with unrecognized symptoms. Therefore, the USPSTF was
unable to determine the magnitude of the benefits or harms of screening for OSA or whether
there is a net benefit or harm to screening.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATION The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is
insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of screening for OSA in asymptomatic
adults. (I statement)
JAMA. 2017;317(4):407-414. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.20325
Editorial page 368
Author Audio Interview
Related article page 415
CME Quiz at
jamanetworkcme.com
Related articles at
jamaotolaryngology.com
jamainternalmedicine.com
jamaneurology.com
Author/Group Information: The US
Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) members are listed at the
end of this article.
Corresponding Author: Kirsten
Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD, MAS
(chair@uspstf.net).
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA | US Preventive Services Task Force | RECOMMENDATION STATEMENT
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
January 24/31, 2017
Volume 317, Number 4
407
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
moderate to severe OSA.1-3 Current prevalence may be higher,
given the increasing prevalence of obesity.4,5 The proportion of
persons with OSA who are asymptomatic or have unrecognized
symptoms is unknown. Severe OSA is associated with increased
all-cause mortality6; however, the role OSA plays in increasing
overall mortality, independent from other risk factors (older age,
higher body mass index [BMI], and other cardiovascular risk fac-
tors), is less clear. In addition to mortality, other adverse health
outcomes associated with untreated OSA include cardiovascular
disease and cerebrovascular events, diabetes, cognitive impair-
ment, decreased quality of life, and motor vehicle crashes.
Detection
Evidence on the use of validated screening questionnaires
in asymptomatic adults (or adults with unrecognized symptoms)
to accurately identify who will benefit from further testing for
OSA is inadequate. The USPSTF identified this as a critical gap in
the evidence.
Benefits of Early Detection and Intervention or Treatment
The USPSTF found inadequate direct evidence on the benefit of
screeningforOSAinasymptomaticpopulations.TheUSPSTFfound
no studies that evaluated the effect of screening for OSA on health
Figure 1. US Preventive Services Task Force Grades and Levels of Certainty
What the USPSTF Grades Mean and Suggestions for Practice
Grade
Definition
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
Suggestions for Practice
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate, or
there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients
based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty
that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service for selected
patients depending on individual
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the service
has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits
and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of
benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section
of the USPSTF Recommendation
Statement. If the service is offered,
patients should understand the
uncertainty about the balance of benefits
and harms.
USPSTF Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary care
populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be
strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the estimate
is constrained by such factors as 
the number, size, or quality of individual studies.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice.
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be large
enough to alter the conclusion.
The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as
benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature
of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of
the limited number or size of studies.
important flaws in study design or methods.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
gaps in the chain of evidence.
findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice.
lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Obstructive Sleep Apnea in Adults
408
JAMA
January 24/31, 2017
Volume 317, Number 4
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
outcomes.TheUSPSTFfoundatleastadequateevidencethattreat-
ment with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) and man-
dibularadvancementdevices(MADs)canimproveintermediateout-
comes (eg, the apnea-hypopnea index [AHI], Epworth Sleepiness
Scale [ESS] score, and blood pressure) in populations referred for
treatment. However, the applicability of this evidence to screen-
detected populations is limited. The adequacy of the evidence var-
ies based on the type of intervention and the reported intermedi-
ate outcomes. The USPSTF found inadequate evidence on the link
between change in the intermediate outcome (eg, AHI) and reduc-
tion in the health outcome (eg, mortality). The USPSTF found evi-
dence that treatment with CPAP can improve general and sleep-
related quality of life in populations referred for treatment, but the
applicability of this evidence to screen-detected populations is un-
known. The USPSTF found inadequate evidence on whether
treatment with CPAP or MADs improves other health outcomes
(mortality, cognitive impairment, motor vehicle crashes, and car-
diovascular or cerebrovascular events). The USPSTF also found in-
adequate evidence on the effect of treatment with various surgical
procedures in improving intermediate or health outcomes.
Harms of Early Detection and Intervention or Treatment
The USPSTF found inadequate evidence on the direct harms of
screening for OSA. The USPSTF found adequate evidence that the
harms of treatment of OSA with CPAP and MADs are small. Re-
portedharmsincludeoralornasaldryness;eyeorskinirritation;rash;
epistaxis; pain; excess salivation; and oral mucosal, dental, and jaw
symptoms. The USPSTF found inadequate evidence on the harms
of surgical treatment of OSA.
USPSTF Assessment
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to
assess the balance of benefits and harms of screening for OSA in
asymptomaticadults.Evidenceonscreeningtoolstoaccuratelyde-
tect persons in asymptomatic populations who should receive fur-
ther testing and treatment of subsequently diagnosed OSA to im-
prove health outcomes is lacking, and the balance of benefits and
harms cannot be determined.
Clinical Considerations
Patient Population Under Consideration
Thisrecommendationappliestoasymptomaticadults(18yearsand
older).ItalsoappliestoadultswithunrecognizedsymptomsofOSA
(Figure 2). This includes persons who are not aware of their symp-
toms or do not report symptoms as being a concern to their clini-
cian. This recommendation does not apply to persons presenting
with symptoms (eg, snoring, witnessed apnea, excessive daytime
sleepiness, impaired cognition, mood changes, or gasping or chok-
ing at night) or concerns about OSA, persons who have been re-
ferredforevaluationortreatmentofsuspectedOSA,orpersonswho
haveacuteconditionsthatcouldtriggertheonsetofOSA(eg,stroke).
Care of these persons should be managed as clinically appropriate.
Thisrecommendationalsodoesnotapplytochildren,adolescents,
or pregnant women.
Suggestions for Practice Regarding the I Statement
Potential Preventable Burden
Based on data from the 1990s, the estimated prevalence of OSA
in the United States is 10% for mild OSA and 3.8% to 6.5% for
moderate to severe OSA.1-3 Current prevalence may be higher,
given the increasing prevalence of obesity.4,5 Extrapolation from
long-term follow-up data from the Wisconsin Sleep Cohort Study
(1988-1994 to 2007-2010) results in an estimated prevalence of
16% for mild OSA and 10% for moderate to severe OSA.4 The
Figure 2. Screening for Obstructive Sleep Apnea in Adults: Clinical Summary
Population
Recommendation 
Asymptomatic adults, including those with unrecognized symptoms
No recommendation. 
Grade: I (insufficient evidence)
Risk Assessment
Screening Tests
Treatment and
Interventions
Balance of Benefits
and Harms
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting documents, please
go to https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.   
Risk factors associated with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) include male sex, older age (40 to 70 y), postmenopausal status, higher
body mass index, and craniofacial and upper airway abnormalities. Evidence on other risk factors, such as smoking, alcohol and
sedative use, and nasal congestion, is sparse or mixed.
Evidence on the use of validated screening questionnaires in asymptomatic adults (or adults with unrecognized symptoms) to
accurately identify who will benefit from further testing for OSA is inadequate.
Treatment with continuous positive airway pressure or mandibular advancement devices can improve intermediate outcomes
(apnea–hypopnea index, Epworth Sleepiness Scale score, and blood pressure) in populations referred for treatment. However, the
applicability of this evidence to screen-detected populations is limited.
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of screening for OSA in
asymptomatic adults.
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Obstructive Sleep Apnea in Adults
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
January 24/31, 2017
Volume 317, Number 4
409
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
prevalence of severe OSA in asymptomatic persons is unknown.
In the Wisconsin Sleep Cohort Study, approximately 6% of adults
with no or mild OSA progressed to moderate to severe OSA over
4 years.7
Risk factors associated with OSA include male sex, older age
(40 to 70 years), postmenopausal status, higher BMI, and cranio-
facial and upper airway abnormalities. The evidence on other risk
factors, such as smoking, alcohol and sedative use, and nasal con-
gestion, is sparse or mixed.1
Observationalstudieshavereportedanassociationbetweense-
vereOSAandmortalityrisk.8Intheory,screeningforOSAcouldim-
prove mortality by identifying OSA early and providing treatment
before it can adversely influence mortality. Although studies gen-
erally show that treatment of OSA with CPAP and MADs improves
intermediate outcomes, such as AHI and ESS score, there is a lack
of studies demonstrating that change in AHI or ESS score improves
health outcomes, and no well-controlled trials have demonstrated
an improvement in mortality with treatment of OSA.
In trials reviewed by the USPSTF, treatment with CPAP effec-
tivelyreducedAHItonormal(<5)ornear-normal(<10)levels.Treat-
ment with MADs showed more modest improvements in AHI.
Treatment with either CPAP or MADs improved ESS scores by ap-
proximately2points,andtrialsevaluatingtreatmentwithCPAPalso
found reductions in blood pressure. However, the clinical signifi-
canceofthesesmallreductionsisunclear.Ofnote,trialsthatevalu-
atedtreatmentwithCPAPorMADswereprimarilyconductedinre-
ferred or sleep clinic patients, not screen-detected patients from
primary care settings.
Potential Harms
Direct evidence on the harms of screening for OSA is lacking. Com-
monlyreportedharmsoftreatmentwithCPAPincludeoralornasal
dryness, eye or skin irritation, rash, epistaxis, and pain.1 An esti-
mated14%to32%ofpatientsdiscontinuetreatmentwithCPAPover
4 years.6 Commonly reported harms of treatment with MADs in-
cludeoralmucosal,dental,orjawsymptoms,suchasmucosalorden-
talpain,discomfortortenderness,mucosalerosions,andjawortem-
poromandibular joint pain or discomfort. Less common harms
include oral dryness and excess salivation. Limited study data sug-
gest that 7% of patients discontinue treatment with MADs be-
cause of harms.1
Current Practice
Most primary care clinicians do not routinely screen for OSA.1
According to a practice-based research network study of 44 prac-
tices,only20%ofpatientswithsleep-relatedsymptomswhoregu-
larlyvisitaprimarycareclinicianspontaneouslyreportedtheirsymp-
toms to their clinician.9 Some potential barriers to screening cited
by clinicians include being unsure about how to identify and diag-
nose OSA, uncertainty regarding which type of sleep monitors are
best for the diagnosis of OSA, and how to follow up patients who
have been diagnosed with OSA.1
Screening Tests
Potential screening questionnaires and clinical prediction tools
include the ESS, STOP Questionnaire (Snoring, Tiredness,
Observed Apnea, High Blood Pressure), STOP-Bang Questionnaire
(STOP Questionnaire plus BMI, Age, Neck Circumference, and
Gender), Berlin Questionnaire, Wisconsin Sleep Questionnaire, and
the Multivariable Apnea Prediction (MVAP) tool. However, none of
these instruments have been adequately validated in a primary
care setting.1
Other Considerations
Research Needs and Gaps
The identification of valid and reliable clinical prediction tools that
could accurately determine which asymptomatic persons (or per-
sons with unrecognized symptoms) would benefit from further
evaluation and testing for OSA is needed. In addition, studies that
evaluatetheeffectofOSAtreatmentsorinterventionsonhealthout-
comes(eg,all-causeandcardiovascularmortality,cardiovasculardis-
ease and cerebrovascular events, motor vehicle crashes, and cog-
nitive impairment) that are adequately powered and have an
appropriatelengthoffollow-upareneeded.Studiesarealsoneeded
to evaluate whether improvement in AHI (for mild to severe OSA)
leads to improvement in health outcomes. These represent critical
gaps in the current evidence base. The USPSTF has identified the
needforfurtherresearchontheeffectonhealthoutcomesofscreen-
ing for OSA among asymptomatic persons in the general popula-
tion, as well as the role of sleepiness in determining health out-
comes.MoredataonthenaturalhistoryofmildOSAarealsoneeded,
in particular the rates of progression from mild to severe OSA, the
length of duration before progression, and the magnitude of ben-
efit if OSA is identified and treated earlier.
Discussion
Burden of Disease
Obstructive sleep apnea is the repeated collapse and obstruction of
the upper airway during sleep, which results in reduced airflow
(hypopnea) or complete airflow cessation (apnea), oxygen desatu-
ration, and arousals from sleep.6 The severity of OSA can be cat-
egorized as mild, moderate, or severe based on the number of
apnea and hypopnea events per hour (known as the AHI).1 An AHI
of 5 to less than 15 is considered mild, 15 to less than 30 is consid-
ered moderate, and 30 or greater is considered severe. Obstructive
sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) is defined as having an AHI of 5 or
greater with evidence of daytime sleepiness.
Reported estimates of OSA prevalence vary based on the
study definition of OSA, sampling bias, and year of study pub-
lication.10 A 2013 systematic review reported an estimated preva-
lence of 2% to 14% based on 4 community-based studies,11 while 2
US-based studies conducted in the 1990s reported an estimated
prevalence of 10% for mild OSA and 3.8% to 6.5% for moderate or
severe OSA.1-3 Obstructive sleep apnea is more common in men
than in women (odds ratio, 3.1 [95% CI, 2.5 to 3.8])11 and increases
with age through the 60s and 70s and then plateaus.12-14 The
prevalence difference between men and women narrows after
menopause.2,3,14,15 In both men and women, observational studies
have found that the prevalence of OSA progressively increases as
BMI increases. Using data from the Wisconsin Sleep Cohort Study, 1
study found that a 10% increase in weight was associated with a
6-fold increase in risk of incident OSA over 4 years of follow-up.7
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Obstructive Sleep Apnea in Adults
410
JAMA
January 24/31, 2017
Volume 317, Number 4
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Patients with severe untreated OSA have an increased risk of
all-causemortality.Basedonprospectivecohortstudies,severeOSA
has been found to be associated with a 2-fold increased risk of all-
cause mortality (hazard ratio, 2.07 [95% CI, 1.48 to 2.91]) and car-
diovascularmortality(hazardratio,2.9[95%CI,1.1to7.3]to5.9[95%
CI, 2.6 to 13.3]).1 However, it is unclear whether OSA contributes to
this increase in mortality independently, beyond the contributions
of age, BMI, and other confounding factors.1 Other adverse out-
comes have also been reported with OSA, such as increased risk of
motor vehicle and other crashes; cognitive impairment; lost work
days, work disability, and impaired work performance; and de-
creased quality of life.1
Scope of Review
The USPSTF commissioned a systematic review1,8 to evaluate the
evidence on the accuracy, benefits, and potential harms of screen-
ing for OSA in asymptomatic adults seen in primary care, including
those with unrecognized symptoms. The systematic review also
evaluated the evidence on the benefits and harms of treatment of
OSA on intermediate outcomes (eg, change in AHI, sleepiness, and
blood pressure) and health outcomes (eg, mortality, quality of life,
cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events, and cognitive impair-
ment). The review focused on studies in adults 18 years and older
and excluded children, adolescents, and pregnant women.
Accuracy of Screening and Diagnostic Tests
Several screening questionnaires and clinical prediction tools have
been developed to identify persons who are at higher risk of OSA.
The USPSTF found evidence on 2 tools that have been evaluated in
primary care or general populations (vs referral populations): the
Berlin Questionnaire and the MVAP tool.1 The Berlin Questionnaire
was evaluated in a single cross-sectional study that sampled
Norwegian residents from the National Population Register; 16 302
participants completed the questionnaire, and 518 went on to have
polysomnography.16 Based on analyses that adjusted for over-
sampling of high-risk participants, the Berlin Questionnaire had a
sensitivity of 37.2% (95% CI, 36.0% to 38.4%) and a specificity of
84.0% (95% CI, 83.2% to 84.7%) when using an AHI cutpoint of 5
or greater. Using an AHI cutpoint of 15 or greater, the Berlin Ques-
tionnaire had a sensitivity of 43.0% (95% CI, 41.2% to 44.8%) and
a specificity of 79.7% (95% CI, 79.0% to 80.5%).1,16 Overall, the
study found poor accuracy. In addition, this single study has not
been externally validated and was found to have moderate risk of
bias due to missing data, attrition bias, and spectrum bias.
Two studies evaluated the MVAP tool in community or primary
care settings. Although both studies were published by the same
research group, one study was conducted in Medicare patients
with daytime sleepiness (n = 452),17 while the other was con-
ducted in patients with hypertension (n = 250) visiting internal
medicine practices (US Department of Veterans Affairs medical
center system and a university-based hypertension clinic).18
Among the Medicare patients with daytime sleepiness, the MVAP
tool had a sensitivity of 90.9% and a specificity of 64.4% to predict
severe OSAS (defined in the study as an AHI �30 and ESS score
>10).17 Among patients with hypertension, the MVAP tool had a
sensitivity of 91.5% and a specificity of 43.9% to predict severe
OSAS.18 When unattended, in-home portable sleep monitor testing
was added, the sensitivity of the MVAP tool to predict severe OSAS
increased to 90.9% and specificity increased to 75.7%17; in the
study of Medicare patients, while sensitivity decreased to 88.2%,
specificity increased to 71.6% among patients with hypertension.18
The 2 studies that evaluated the MVAP tool were conducted in
populations that had a high prevalence of OSAS (and thus were
more likely to be symptomatic) and a high risk of spectrum bias
(ie, the study population does not represent the general primary
care population).
The USPSTF also evaluated the evidence on the accuracy of
diagnostic tests for OSA. In particular, it evaluated the evidence
on the various types of portable sleep monitors compared with
polysomnography. Evidence was obtained from 2 systematic
reviews and 19 additional studies.1 Most studies evaluated type III
and type IV portable monitors. The USPSTF reviewed evidence
from 3 studies (n = 160) on type II portable monitors, 21 studies
(n = 1691) on type III portable monitors, and 84 studies (n = 8773)
on type IV portable monitors.1 None of the studies were conducted
in screen-detected populations, and most were conducted in refer-
ral populations being evaluated for suspected OSA. Studies were
conducted in a variety of settings (home or laboratory) and used a
variety of AHI cutpoints, which were not always well reported.1 The
overall quality of evidence on type II and type IV portable monitors
was found to be fair, while the overall quality of evidence on type III
portable monitors was found to be good. A broad range of sensitiv-
ity and specificity was reported across multiple AHI cutpoints. Gen-
erally, studies on type II and type III portable monitors reported
moderate to high sensitivity and specificity, whereas sensitivity and
specificity of type IV portable monitors was highly variable and
inconsistent (more information is available in Table 5 of the full evi-
dence report1). Overall, consistent with findings from other sys-
tematic reviews, type III and type IV portable monitors seem to be
generally accurate in diagnosing OSA but have a wide and variable
bias in estimating actual AHI6,19 in patients being evaluated for sus-
pected OSA. It is unclear how these portable sleep monitors would
perform in asymptomatic, screen-detected persons.
Effectiveness of Early Detection and Treatment
The USPSTF found no studies that directly evaluated the effect of
screening for OSA on health outcomes, such as mortality, quality of
life,andcardiovascularandcerebrovascularevents.TheUSPSTFdid
identify and review studies on the effect of treatment on interme-
diateoutcomes(eg,AHI,ESSscore,andbloodpressure)andhealth
outcomes(eg,mortality,qualityoflife,andcardiovascularandcere-
brovascular events).
The USPSTF reviewed evidence from 76 good- to fair-quality
treatment trials that described the effect of various interventions
on intermediate outcomes, including AHI, ESS score, and blood
pressure.1 The most evidence was available on CPAP and found
that compared with sham intervention, CPAP reduced AHI
(weighted mean difference [WMD], −33.8 [95% CI, −42.0 to
−25.6]; 13 studies; n = 543), ESS score (WMD, −2.0 [95% CI, −2.6 to
−1.4]; 22 studies; n = 2721), and blood pressure (diurnal systolic
blood pressure WMD, −2.4 [95% CI, −3.9 to −0.9] and diurnal dia-
stolic blood pressure WMD, −1.3 [95% CI, −2.2 to −0.4]; 15 studies;
n = 1190).1 Less evidence was available on the effect of treatment
with MADs on intermediate outcomes. Meta-analysis found that
compared with sham intervention, MADs reduced AHI (WMD,
−12.6 [95% CI, −15.5 to −9.7]; 6 studies; n = 307) and ESS score
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Obstructive Sleep Apnea in Adults
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
January 24/31, 2017
Volume 317, Number 4
411
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
(WMD, −1.5 [95% CI, −2.8 to −0.2]; 5 studies; n = 267) but not
blood pressure. Five studies evaluated treatment with upper air-
way surgery; each evaluated a different surgical technique. Find-
ings on AHI were inconsistent, and no statistically significant
improvements in ESS score or blood pressure were found.
Although studies generally showed that treatment with CPAP
reduced AHI to near-normal levels, treatment with MADs resulted
in more modest reductions, and the clinical significance of the small
reductions in ESS score is uncertain. Small reductions in blood pres-
sure are associated with cardiovascular disease benefits at the
population level, but no evidence of this benefit was seen in these
studies. Further, given that most of the trials were conducted in
referred or sleep clinic patients, the applicability of this evidence to
a screen-detected population is limited.
The USPSTF reviewed evidence from 50 fair- to good-quality
trials that evaluated the effect of various treatments or interven-
tions on health outcomes.1 The most evidence was available on
CPAP; however, the USPSTF found the evidence on most outcomes
to be inadequate because of short length of follow-up and under-
powered studies (ie, too few events observed). Thirty-one trials
(n = 2673) reported on the effect of treatment with CPAP on mor-
tality; most trials (29/31) followed up participants for only 12 weeks
or less, and most trials (27/31) reported no deaths in either study
group.1 Twelve trials reported on cognitive function; however,
they used heterogeneous outcome measures, which made com-
parison difficult, and results were generally inconsistent. Five trials
(n = 1529) reported on incidence of myocardial infarction. Most
trials (4/5) followed up participants for less than 1 year, and when
combined, only reported 1 death (in the control group). Few trials
reported on motor vehicle crashes, cerebrovascular events, or
heart failure.1 Evidence was available on general and sleep-related
quality of life, and there were small but statistically significant
improvements in sleep-related quality-of-life scores, but the clinical
significance of these improvements is unclear. Importantly, given
the characteristics of included study participants (who were from
sleep clinics or referral populations, were largely symptomatic, and
had daytime sleepiness and more severe OSA), the applicability of
this evidence to an asymptomatic, screen-detected population is
questionable. Few studies reported on the effect of treatment with
MADs (6 studies; n = 510) or upper airway surgery (4 studies;
n = 187) on any health outcomes.
Despite the consistent observational findings of an associa-
tionbetweensevereOSAandincreasedmortality,theUSPSTFiden-
tified no studies that reported on change in AHI and associated
change in mortality. Thus, it is unclear whether treatments that im-
prove AHI would also improve mortality.
Potential Harms of Screening and Treatment
The USPSTF identified no studies that directly evaluated the harms
of screening for OSA. A subset of studies that evaluated the effec-
tiveness of various OSA treatments also reported on harms of
treatment. Nine studies (n = 1759) reported on harms of treatment
with CPAP. Follow-up in these studies was generally from 8 to 12
weeks, and most participants were men, with a mean age range of
42 to 61 years, who were overweight or obese (mean BMI, 27-39
[calculated as weight in kilograms divided by height in meters
squared]). Overall, 2% to 47% of trial participants reported any
adverse effects from treatment with CPAP, including oral or nasal
dryness, eye or skin irritation, rash, epistaxis, and pain.1 Eight trials
(n = 443) reported on harms of treatment with MADs. Follow-up in
these studies was generally from 4 to 6 weeks. In 7 trials, 17% to
74% of participants reported oral mucosal, dental, or jaw symp-
toms, compared with 0% to 17% of participants in comparator
groups. In 4 studies, 5% to 33% of participants reported oral dry-
ness, compared with 0% to 3% in control groups, and in 3 studies,
23% to 68% of participants reported excessive salivation, com-
pared with 0% to 3% in comparator groups.1 Four trials (n = 205)
reported harms of treatment with upper airway surgery; 1% to 81%
of participants reported any harms, which included pain, postop-
erative bleeding, difficulty speaking and swallowing, change in
vocal quality, hematomas, ulcerations, infections, and temporary
nasal regurgitation.1
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
Overall, the USPSTF found insufficient evidence on screening for
OSA in asymptomatic adults or adults with unrecognized symp-
toms. No studies directly evaluated the benefits or harms of
screening for OSA. Few studies evaluated the accuracy of specific
screening tools to identify persons at high risk for OSA who could
benefit from further testing. Although numerous studies evaluated
the effectiveness of treatment with CPAP or MADs to improve
intermediate outcomes (eg, AHI, ESS score, or blood pressure) in
patients already receiving care or referred for care at a sleep clinic,
the clinical significance of these changes and the applicability of
this evidence to asymptomatic, screen-detected populations are
unclear. Further, evidence is insufficient to determine whether
treatment of screen-detected asymptomatic or unrecognized OSA
improves final health outcomes (eg, mortality or cardiovascular
events) or whether improving intermediate outcomes (eg, AHI or
ESS score) would improve these final health outcomes. Studies
that evaluated the effect of treatment with CPAP or MADs on mor-
tality were either underpowered or of too short duration to detect
a difference between treated and untreated groups, and no studies
reported on whether change in AHI or ESS score affects mortality.
Fewer studies reported on the harms of treatment. Overall, the
USPSTF was unable to determine the magnitude of the benefits or
harms of screening for OSA or whether there is a net benefit or
harm to screening in asymptomatic adults or adults with unrecog-
nized symptoms.
How Does Evidence Fit With Biological Understanding?
Accordingtoobservationalstudies,severeuntreatedOSAhasbeen
found to be associated with an increased risk of all-cause and car-
diovascular mortality.1 Other adverse outcomes that have been re-
portedincludeincreasedriskofmotorvehicleandothercrashes;cog-
nitiveimpairment;lostworkdays,workdisability,andimpairedwork
performance; and decreased quality of life.1 However, it is unclear
what role OSA plays in causing these adverse outcomes, indepen-
dent from other associated factors such as obesity, older age, hy-
pertension, and general lifestyle. One hypothesis is that OSA leads
to chronic disturbances in gas exchange, sympathetic nervous sys-
tem arousal, and fragmented sleep.1,6
Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted
for public comment on the USPSTF website from June 14 to
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Obstructive Sleep Apnea in Adults
412
JAMA
January 24/31, 2017
Volume 317, Number 4
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
July 11, 2016. Some comments expressed concern that the defini-
tion of “
asymptomatic”is unclear, did not agree that an asymptom-
atic population is the same as persons with unrecognized symp-
toms, or expressed concern that many symptomatic patients do
not report symptoms to their health care professional. The USPSTF
discussed its definitional approach extensively when creating the
research plan. In the research plan, the USPSTF established that
persons without symptoms or with unrecognized symptoms are
the population of interest in which to identify potentially unrecog-
nized OSA. In response to comments, the USPSTF described com-
mon symptoms of OSA and defined what is meant by persons with
unrecognized symptoms. Other comments suggested that a num-
ber of key studies were omitted that link OSA treatment to
improved health outcomes. The USPSTF examined these studies
and found they were either already included in the review, did not
meet eligibility criteria for inclusion in the review, or were other-
wise outside the scope of the review. A few comments suggested
that persons who work in safety-sensitive transportation occupa-
tions (eg, truck drivers or rail operators) have unique testing needs.
Clinicians seeking information on testing persons who work in
these occupations can consult the appropriate agency’
s guidelines.
The US Department of Transportation recently sought public input
related to the evaluation of moderate to severe OSA among per-
sons with these occupations.19
Recommendations of Others
TheAmericanAcademyofFamilyPhysicians’
recommendationiscon-
sistent with that of the USPSTF and concludes that the current evi-
dence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of
screeningforOSAinasymptomaticadults.20TheAmericanCollege
ofPhysiciansrecommendsconductingasleepstudyforpatientswith
unexplaineddaytimesleepiness(grade:weakrecommendation,low-
qualityevidence).Italsorecommendspolysomnographyfordiagnos-
tic testing in patients with suspected OSA. For patients without se-
riouscomorbidconditions,portablesleepmonitorsarerecommended
whenpolysomnographyisnotavailable(grade:weakrecommenda-
tion,moderate-qualityevidence).21TheAmericanAcademyofSleep
Medicinerecommendsthatroutinehealthmaintenanceevaluations
includequestionsaboutOSAandevaluationforriskfactors(obesity,
retrognathia,andtreatment-refractoryhypertension).Positivefind-
ingsshouldtriggeracomprehensivesleepevaluation.22TheNational
InstituteforHealthandCareExcellencestatesthatmoderatetose-
vereOSAorhypopneasyndromecanbediagnosedfrompatienthis-
toryandanin-homesleepstudyusingoximetryorothermonitoring
devices.Insomecases,furtherstudiesthatmonitoradditionalphysi-
ological variables in a sleep laboratory or at home may be required,
especially when alternative diagnoses are being considered.23
ARTICLE INFORMATION
The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
members: Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD,
MAS; David C. Grossman, MD, MPH;
Susan J. Curry, PhD; Karina W. Davidson, PhD,
MASc; John W. Epling Jr, MD, MSEd; Francisco A. R.
García, MD, MPH; Jessica Herzstein, MD, MPH; Alex
R. Kemper, MD, MPH, MS; Alex H. Krist, MD, MPH;
Ann E. Kurth, PhD, RN, MSN, MPH; C. Seth
Landefeld, MD; Carol M. Mangione, MD, MSPH;
William R. Phillips, MD, MPH; Maureen G.
Phipps, MD, MPH; Michael P. Pignone, MD, MPH;
Michael Silverstein, MD, MPH; Chien-Wen
Tseng, MD, MPH, MSEE.
Affiliations of The US Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) members: University of California,
San Francisco (Bibbins-Domingo); Group Health
Research Institute, Seattle, Washington
(Grossman); University of Iowa, Iowa City (Curry);
Columbia University, New York, New York
(Davidson); State University of New York Upstate
Medical University, Syracuse (Epling); Pima County
Department of Health, Tucson, Arizona (García);
Independent consultant, Washington, DC
(Herzstein); Duke University, Durham, North
Carolina (Kemper); Fairfax Family Practice
Residency, Fairfax, Virginia (Krist); Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond (Krist);
Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut
(Kurth); University of Alabama at Birmingham
(Landefeld); University of California, Los Angeles
(Mangione); University of Washington, Seattle
(Phillips); Brown University, Providence, Rhode
Island (Phipps); University of Texas at Austin
(Pignone); Boston University, Boston,
Massachusetts (Silverstein); University of Hawaii,
Manoa (Tseng).
Author Contributions: Dr Bibbins-Domingo had
full access to all of the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis. The USPSTF
members contributed equally to the
recommendation statement.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors
have completed and submitted the ICMJE Form
for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest.
Authors followed the policy regarding conflicts
of interest described at https://www
.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name
/conflict-of-interest-disclosures. All members of the
USPSTF receive travel reimbursement and an
honorarium for participating in USPSTF meetings.
Funding/Support: The USPSTF is an independent,
voluntary body. The US Congress mandates that
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) support the operations of the USPSTF.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: AHRQ staff assisted
in the following: development and review of the
research plan, commission of the systematic
evidence review from an Evidence-based Practice
Center, coordination of expert review and public
comment of the draft evidence report and draft
recommendation statement, and the writing and
preparation of the final recommendation statement
and its submission for publication. AHRQ staff had
no role in the approval of the final recommendation
statement or the decision to submit for publication.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the
USPSTF are independent of the US government.
They should not be construed as an official position
of AHRQ or the US Department of Health and
Human Services.
Additional Contributions: We thank Tina Fan, MD,
MPH, and Robert McNellis, MPH, PA (AHRQ), who
contributed to the writing of the manuscript, and
Lisa Nicolella, MA (AHRQ), who assisted with
coordination and editing.
REFERENCES
1. Jonas DE, Amick HR, Feltner C, et al. Screening
for Obstructive Sleep Apnea in Adults: An Evidence
Review for the US Preventive Services Task Force:
Evidence Synthesis No. 146. Rockville, MD: Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2017. AHRQ
publication 14-05216-EF-1.
2. Young T, Palta M, Dempsey J, Skatrud J, Weber S,
Badr S. The occurrence of sleep-disordered
breathing among middle-aged adults. N Engl J Med.
1993;328(17):1230-1235.
3. Bixler EO, Vgontzas AN, Lin HM, et al.
Association of hypertension and sleep-disordered
breathing. Arch Intern Med. 2000;160(15):2289-
2295.
4. Peppard PE, Young T, Barnet JH, Palta M, Hagen
EW, Hla KM. Increased prevalence of
sleep-disordered breathing in adults. Am J Epidemiol.
2013;177(9):1006-1014.
5. Young T, Palta M, Dempsey J, Peppard PE, Nieto
FJ, Hla KM. Burden of sleep apnea: rationale,
design, and major findings of the Wisconsin Sleep
Cohort study. WMJ. 2009;108(5):246-249.
6. Balk EM, Moorthy D, Obadan NO, et al. Diagnosis
and Treatment of Obstructive Sleep Apnea in Adults:
Comparative Effectiveness Review No. 32. Rockville,
MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality;
2011. Report 11-EHC052.
7. Peppard PE, Young T, Palta M, Dempsey J,
Skatrud J. Longitudinal study of moderate weight
change and sleep-disordered breathing. JAMA.
2000;284(23):3015-3021.
8. Jonas DE, Amick HR, Feltner C, et al. Screening
for obstructive sleep apnea in adults: evidence
report and systematic review for the US Preventive
Services Task Force. JAMA. doi:10.1001/jama.2016
.19635
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Obstructive Sleep Apnea in Adults
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
January 24/31, 2017
Volume 317, Number 4
413
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
9. Mold JW, Quattlebaum C, Schinnerer E,
Boeckman L, Orr W, Hollabaugh K. Identification
by primary care clinicians of patients with
obstructive sleep apnea: a Practice-Based Research
Network (PBRN) study. J Am Board Fam Med. 2011;
24(2):138-145.
10. Caples SM, Gami AS, Somers VK. Obstructive
sleep apnea. Ann Intern Med. 2005;142(3):187-197.
11. Myers KA, Mrkobrada M, Simel DL. Does this
patient have obstructive sleep apnea? The Rational
Clinical Examination systematic review. JAMA.
2013;310(7):731-741.
12. Young T, Shahar E, Nieto FJ, et al; Sleep Heart
Health Study Research Group. Predictors of
sleep-disordered breathing in community-dwelling
adults: the Sleep Heart Health Study. Arch Intern Med.
2002;162(8):893-900.
13. Bixler EO, Vgontzas AN, Ten Have T, Tyson K,
Kales A. Effects of age on sleep apnea in men, I:
prevalence and severity. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.
1998;157(1):144-148.
14. Bixler EO, Vgontzas AN, Lin HM, et al.
Prevalence of sleep-disordered breathing in
women: effects of gender. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.
2001;163(3, pt 1):608-613.
15. Young T, Skatrud J, Peppard PE. Risk factors for
obstructive sleep apnea in adults. JAMA. 2004;
291(16):2013-2016.
16. Hrubos-Strøm H, Randby A, Namtvedt SK, et al.
A Norwegian population-based study on the risk
and prevalence of obstructive sleep apnea: the
Akershus Sleep Apnea Project (ASAP). J Sleep Res.
2011;20(1, pt 2):162-170.
17. Morales CR, Hurley S, Wick LC, et al. In-home,
self-assembled sleep studies are useful in
diagnosing sleep apnea in the elderly. Sleep. 2012;
35(11):1491-1501.
18. Gurubhagavatula I, Fields BG, Morales CR, et al.
Screening for severe obstructive sleep apnea
syndrome in hypertensive outpatients. J Clin
Hypertens (Greenwich). 2013;15(4):279-288.
19. Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration.
U.S. DOT seeks input on screening and treating
commercial motor vehicle drivers and rail workers
with obstructive sleep apnea. https://www.fmcsa
.dot.gov/newsroom/us-dot-seeks-input-screening
-and-treating-commercial-motor-vehicle-drivers
-and-rail-workers. March 8, 2016. Accessed
January 3, 2017.
20. American Academy of Family Physicians.
Clinical preventive services recommendations.
http://www.aafp.org/patient-care/browse/type.tag
-clinical-preventive-services-recommendations
.html. Accessed December 29, 2016.
21. Qaseem A, Dallas P, Owens DK, Starkey M,
Holty JE, Shekelle P; Clinical Guidelines Committee
of the American College of Physicians. Diagnosis of
obstructive sleep apnea in adults: a clinical practice
guideline from the American College of Physicians.
Ann Intern Med. 2014;161(3):210-220.
22. Epstein LJ, Kristo D, Strollo PJ Jr, et al; Adult
Obstructive Sleep Apnea Task Force of the
American Academy of Sleep Medicine. Clinical
guideline for the evaluation, management and
long-term care of obstructive sleep apnea in adults.
J Clin Sleep Med. 2009;5(3):263-276.
23. National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence. NICE Technology Appraisal Guidance
139: Continuous Positive Airway Pressure for the
Treatment of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea/Hypopnoea
Syndrome. London, United Kingdom: National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence; 2008.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Obstructive Sleep Apnea in Adults
414
JAMA
January 24/31, 2017
Volume 317, Number 4
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
