 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Screening for Skin Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement
US Preventive Services Task Force
T
heUSPreventiveServicesTaskForce(USPSTF)makesrec-
ommendationsabouttheeffectivenessofspecificpreven-
tivecareservicesforpatientswithoutobviousrelatedsigns
or symptoms.
It bases its recommendations on the evidence of both the
benefits and harms of the service and an assessment of the bal-
ance. The USPSTF does not consider the costs of providing a ser-
vice in this assessment.
The USPSTF recognizes that clinical decisions involve more
considerations than evidence alone. Clinicians should understand
the evidence but individualize decision making to the specific
patient or situation. Similarly, the USPSTF notes that policy and
coverage decisions involve considerations in addition to the evi-
dence of clinical benefits and harms.
Summary of Recommendation and Evidence
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to
assessthebalanceofbenefitsandharmsofvisualskinexamination
by a clinician to screen for skin cancer in adults (I statement)
(Figure 1).
Rationale
Importance
Skin cancer includes melanoma and basal and squamous cell carci-
noma. Basal and squamous cell carcinoma, known together as
IMPORTANCE Basal and squamous cell carcinoma are the most common types of cancer in the
United States and represent the vast majority of all cases of skin cancer; however, they rarely
result in death or substantial morbidity, whereas melanoma skin cancer has notably higher
mortality rates. In 2016, an estimated 76 400 US men and women will develop melanoma
and 10 100 will die from the disease.
OBJECTIVE To update the 2009 US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
recommendation on screening for skin cancer.
EVIDENCE REVIEW The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on the effectiveness of screening for
skin cancer with a clinical visual skin examination in reducing skin cancer morbidity and
mortality and death from any cause; its potential harms, including any harms resulting from
associated diagnostic follow-up; its test characteristics when performed by a primary care
clinician vs a dermatologist; and whether its use leads to earlier detection of skin cancer
compared with usual care.
FINDINGS Evidence to assess the net benefit of screening for skin cancer with a clinical visual
skin examination is limited. Direct evidence on the effectiveness of screening in reducing
melanoma morbidity and mortality is limited to a single fair-quality ecologic study with
important methodological limitations. Information on harms is similarly sparse. The potential
for harm clearly exists, including a high rate of unnecessary biopsies, possibly resulting in
cosmetic or, more rarely, functional adverse effects, and the risk of overdiagnosis and
overtreatment.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATION The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is
insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of visual skin examination by a
clinician to screen for skin cancer in adults (I statement).
JAMA. 2016;316(4):429-435. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.8465
Editorial page 398
Author Audio Interview at
jama.com
Related article page 436 and
JAMA Patient Page page 470
CME Quiz at
jamanetworkcme.com
Related articles at
jamaoncology.com
jamadermatology.com
jamainternalmedicine.com
Authors/Group Information: The
USPSTF members are listed
at the end of this article.
Corresponding Author: Kirsten
Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD, MAS
(chair@uspstf.net).
Clinical Review & Education
US Preventive Services Task Force | RECOMMENDATION STATEMENT
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
July 26, 2016
Volume 316, Number 4
429
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
nonmelanoma skin cancer, are the most common types of cancer
in the United States and represent the vast majority of all cases of
skincancer(>98%).1However,nonmelanomaskincancerrarelyre-
sults in death or substantial morbidity (<0.1% of patient deaths are
caused by this type of cancer), whereas melanoma skin cancer has
notablyhighermortalityrates.1Forthisreason,althoughavisualskin
examination by a clinician will detect all 3 of these cancer types, in
understanding the potential benefit of screening, the USPSTF pri-
oritized outcomes related to melanoma in developing this recom-
mendation statement. In 2016, an estimated 76 400 US men and
womenwilldevelopmelanomaand10 100willdiefromthedisease.1
Detection
Evidence is adequate that visual skin examination by a clinician has
modest sensitivity and specificity for detecting melanoma. Evi-
denceismorelimitedandinconsistentregardingtheaccuracyofthe
clinical visual skin examination for detecting nonmelanoma skin
cancer.2
Benefits of Early Detection and Treatment
Evidence is inadequate to reliably conclude that early detection of
skin cancer through visual skin examination by a clinician reduces
morbidity or mortality.
Figure 1. US Preventive Services Task Force Grades and Levels of Certainty
What the USPSTF Grades Mean and Suggestions for Practice
Grade
Definition
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
Suggestions for Practice
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate, or
there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients
based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty
that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service for selected
patients depending on individual
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the service
has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits
and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of
benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section
of the USPSTF Recommendation
Statement. If the service is offered,
patients should understand the
uncertainty about the balance of benefits
and harms.
USPSTF Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary care
populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be
strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the estimate
is constrained by such factors as 
the number, size, or quality of individual studies.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice.
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be large
enough to alter the conclusion.
The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as
benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature
of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of
the limited number or size of studies.
important flaws in study design or methods.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
gaps in the chain of evidence.
findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice.
lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Skin Cancer
430
JAMA
July 26, 2016
Volume 316, Number 4
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Harms of Early Detection and Treatment
Evidence is adequate that visual skin examination by a clinician to
screen for skin cancer leads to harms that are at least small, but cur-
rent data are insufficient to precisely bound the upper magnitude of
theseharms.Potentialharmsofskincancerscreeningincludemisdi-
agnosis,overdiagnosis,andtheresultingcosmeticand—morerarely—
functionaladverseeffectsresultingfrombiopsyandovertreatment.
USPSTF Assessment
TheUSPSTFconcludesthatthecurrentevidenceisinsufficientand
that the balance of benefit and harms of visual skin examination by
a clinician to screen for skin cancer in asymptomatic adults cannot
be determined.
Clinical Considerations
Patient Population Under Consideration
This recommendation applies to asymptomatic adults who do not
have a history of premalignant or malignant skin lesions (Figure 2).
Patients who present with a suspicious skin lesion or who are al-
ready under surveillance because of a high risk of skin cancer, such
asthosewithafamilialsyndrome(eg,familialatypicalmoleandmela-
noma syndrome), are outside the scope of this recommendation
statement.
Assessment of Risk
Skin cancer of any type occurs more commonly in men than in
women and among persons with a fair complexion, persons who
use indoor tanning beds, and persons with a history of sunburns
or previous skin cancer. Specific risk factors for melanoma include
having a dysplastic nevus (atypical mole), having multiple
(ie, �100) nevi, and having a family history of melanoma.3,4 Like
most types of cancer, the risk of melanoma increases with age;
the median age at diagnosis is 63 years, and the median age at
death is 69 years.1
Suggestions for Practice Regarding the I Statement
Potential Benefit of Early Detection and Treatment
Direct evidence to assess the effect of screening with a clinical
visual skin examination on the risk of death from skin cancer is
limited.3 A single ecologic study (Skin Cancer Research to Provide
Evidence for Effectiveness of Screening in Northern Germany
[SCREEN]) with important methodological limitations suggests
that a 1-time, general population–based screening program (with
limited participation of 19%) combined with a disease awareness
campaign may result in, at most, 1 fewer death due to melanoma
per 100 000 persons over a decade.5 An independent analysis of
the SCREEN population found that the observed melanoma mor-
tality rate returned to preintervention levels after 5 years of
follow-up (Figure 3).6
Figure 2. Screening for Skin Cancer: Clinical Summary
Population
Asymptomatic adults 
Recommendation 
No recommendation.
Grade: I (insufficient evidence)
Risk Assessment 
Screening Tests 
Treatment and
Interventions  
Balance of Benefits
and Harms   
Other Relevant
USPSTF
Recommendations   
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting documents, please
go to http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.   
Skin cancer occurs more commonly in men than in women and among persons with a fair complexion, persons who use indoor tanning
beds, and persons with a history of sunburns or previous skin cancer. Specific risk factors for melanoma include having a dysplastic
nevus (atypical mole), multiple (≥100) nevi, and a family history of melanoma. Risk of melanoma also increases with age.
The clinical visual skin examination assesses skin lesions using the “ABCDE rule,” which involves looking for the following
characteristics: asymmetry, border irregularity, nonuniform color, diameter >6 mm, and evolving over time.
Treatment of screen-detected melanoma generally involves excision, with or without lymph node management, depending on the
stage at diagnosis. There are a variety of treatments available for squamous and basal cell carcinoma, including surgical excision,
Mohs micrographic surgery, radiation therapy, curettage and electrodessication, and cryosurgery.
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient and that the balance of benefit and harms of visual skin examination
by a clinician to screen for skin cancer in asymptomatic adults cannot be determined.
The USPSTF recommends that children, adolescents, and young adults aged 10 to 24 years who have fair skin be counseled about
minimizing their exposure to ultraviolet radiation to reduce their risk of developing skin cancer. This recommendation is available
on the USPSTF website (http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org).
USPSTF indicates US Preventive Services Task Force.
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Skin Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
July 26, 2016
Volume 316, Number 4
431
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Potential Harms of Early Detection and Treatment
Information on the harms of screening is also sparse.3 The ma-
jority of suspicious skin lesions excised during screening are not
cancerous; for example, the SCREEN study found that between 20
and 55 excisions were performed to detect 1 case of melanoma,
depending on patient age.7 The SCREEN study did not report the
number of excisions required to prevent 1 death from melanoma,
but it can be estimated at more than 4000. Overdiagnosis and
overtreatment—the diagnosis and treatment of cancer that would
never have harmed the patient in the absence of screening—are
other important potential harms. Ecologic evidence suggests that
screening with a visual skin examination results in the overdiagno-
sis of skin cancer8,9; however, current evidence is insufficient to be
reliably certain of the magnitude of this effect.
Current Practice
Contemporarydataonclinicianpracticepatternsrelatedtoskincan-
cerscreeningarelimited.A2005surveyofUSphysiciansfoundthat
81% of dermatologists, 60% of primary care physicians, and 56%
of internists reported performing a full-body visual skin cancer
screening examination on their adult patients.10
Screening Tests
The clinical visual skin examination assesses skin lesions using the
“
ABCDE rule,”which involves looking for the following characteris-
tics: asymmetry, border irregularity, nonuniform color, diameter
greater than 6 mm, and evolving over time.
Screening Interval
Theoptimalintervalforvisualskinexaminationbyacliniciantoscreen
for skin cancer, if it exists, is unknown.
Treatment
Treatment of screen-detected melanoma generally involves exci-
sion, with or without lymph node management, depending on the
stage at diagnosis. There are a variety of treatments available for
squamousandbasalcellcarcinoma(whichhaveexcellentcurerates),
including surgical excision, Mohs micrographic surgery, radiation
therapy,curettageandelectrodessication,andcryosurgery,among
other options.
Other Approaches to Prevention
The USPSTF recommends that children, adolescents, and young
adults aged 10 to 24 years who have fair skin be counseled about
minimizingtheirexposuretoultravioletradiationtoreducetheirrisk
of developing skin cancer.11
Useful Resources
The Community Preventive Services Task Force has made a number
of recommendations related to preventing skin cancer through the
use of interventions that target child care centers; outdoor occupa-
tional,recreational,andtourismsettings;primaryandmiddleschools;
and communities (available at http://www.thecommunityguide.org
/cancer/index.html).
Other Considerations
Research Needs and Gaps
The USPSTF recognizes the challenge of conducting a definitive
randomized clinical trial (RCT) on primary screening, with cause-
specific mortality as an end point, to provide clear evidence on
the efficacy of the clinical visual skin examination in screening for
skin cancer, given the comparatively low rate of death from mela-
noma in the population (even among persons at higher risk). If
adequately powered RCTs are not possible, a high-quality case-
control study could provide sufficient power without requiring a
large sample size. However, this study design has limitations in the
ability to create an appropriate comparison group, the ability to
accurately measure the exposure of interest (because of recall bias
and other sources of misclassification), healthy volunteer bias (per-
sons receiving skin examinations likely have other good health hab-
its), and other unmeasured sources of confounding. Studies would
have to be carefully designed to avoid these threats to validity.
Despite these challenges, the USPSTF concludes that further evi-
dence is necessary to advance the field on this essential question.
An optimized version of the SCREEN study (ie, a time-series study),
in which the clinical visual skin examination alone, without the
potential confounding of a second intervention, is evaluated,
would also be useful. Additional research on the possible harms of
screening for skin cancer—particularly the potential for overdiagno-
sis and overtreatment—is also needed to help fully understand the
ultimate net benefit of the clinical visual skin examination.
Figure 3. Cutaneous Melanoma Mortality Rates in the Schleswig-Holstein
Region Participating in the SCREEN Study as Compared With the Whole
of Germany, 1994-2013
4.0
2.0
2.5
3.5
3.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
1994
1996
1998
2000
2012
Melanoma Mortality per 100 000 Persons
Year
2010
2008
2006
2004
2002
Screened region
Germany
SCREEN
project
(July 2003-
June 2004)
Men
Women
First
pilot
project
Melanoma mortality rates for men and women in the Schleswig-Holstein region
of Germany, which participated in the Skin Cancer Research to Provide Evidence
for Effectiveness of Screening in Northern Germany (SCREEN) study,6 as
compared with the whole of Germany. The original SCREEN study reported a
relative 48% reduction in melanoma mortality (or 1 fewer death per 100 000
screened) resulting from a program of 1-time clinical visual skin cancer screening
combined with a disease awareness campaign. The screening program occurred
during 2003-2004, and the mortality results were calculated based on
follow-up until 2008. An independent study provided an additional 5 years of
follow-up (through 2013) and found that the observed declines in melanoma
mortality rates for men and women in the region that had participated in the
SCREEN study did not persist with time. (Image originally published in: Boniol
M, Autier P, Gandini S. Melanoma mortality following skin cancer screening in
Germany. BMJ Open. 2015;5:e008158.6)
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Skin Cancer
432
JAMA
July 26, 2016
Volume 316, Number 4
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Discussion
Scope of Review
The USPSTF commissioned a systematic evidence review3,4 to up-
dateits2009recommendationonscreeningforskincancer.There-
view addressed several questions about screening for skin cancer
with the clinical visual skin examination, including its effectiveness
inreducingskincancermorbidityandmortalityanddeathfromany
cause; its potential harms, including any harms resulting from as-
sociated diagnostic follow-up; its test characteristics when per-
formed by a primary care clinician vs a dermatologist; and whether
itsuseleadstoearlierdetectionofskincancercomparedwithusual
care.3 Unlike in the previous review, the evidence concerning pa-
tientself-examinationforskincancerwasnotincludedinthisstate-
ment. The visual skin self-examination will be addressed in a sepa-
rate recommendation statement on counseling to prevent skin
cancer.
Accuracy of Screening Tests
Asystematicreviewof11studiesonthediagnosticaccuracyofscreen-
ing by primary care clinicians and dermatologists identified during
the previous evidence review found that screening by primary care
clinicianshadasensitivityof42%to100%andaspecificityof98%
forthediagnosisofmelanoma.12Sincethen,2additionalstudieson
the test characteristics of the clinical visual skin examination have
been published: 1 evaluating screening performed by primary care
clinicians and 1 evaluating screening performed by dermatologists
orplasticsurgeons.Thesestudiesfoundthatsensitivityrangedfrom
40% to 70%, which sharply decreased as the length of follow-up
increased(from12to24or36months).Specificityrangedfrom86%
to98%.3,13,14Noneofthestudiescoulddrawreliableconclusionsas
towhetherscreeningperformedbyanyoftheclinicalspecialtiesdif-
fered in diagnostic accuracy.3,12-14
Effectiveness of Early Detection and Treatment
No RCT has directly evaluated the effectiveness of the clinical vi-
sual skin examination for reducing skin cancer morbidity or mortal-
ity (a pilot study by Aitken et al in Queensland, Australia, began in
2002,butafulltrialwasnevercompleted).3Asinglefair-qualityeco-
logicstudy(SCREEN)comparedtrendsinmelanomamortalityrates
in1regionofGermanyusingapopulation-basedskincanceraware-
ness campaign, clinician education and training, and clinical visual
skinexaminationprovidedthroughacancerscreeningprogramwith
several surrounding regions that did not have similar interventions
available. After a 2-year public skin cancer awareness campaign,
360 288adults20yearsandolder(about19%oftheeligiblepopu-
lation)receivedasingleclinicalvisualskinexamination.After10years,
the study found a 48% relative reduction in the risk of dying from
melanoma in the region that instituted the interventions com-
paredwiththecontrolregions,whichtranslatesintoanabsolutere-
duction of 1 fewer death from melanoma per 100 000 persons
screened.15
The SCREEN study has several important limitations. First, it
does not provide individual patient-level data on the effect of the
clinical visual skin examination, and as an ecologic observational
study, it is subject to the potential effects of known and unknown
biases and confounders. Second, the separate effects of the pub-
lic education component cannot be disentangled from those of
the clinical visual skin examination component; therefore, it is
likely that the effect of screening alone is smaller than estimated.
In addition, the melanoma mortality rate in the region receiving
the interventions was already declining prior to the introduction
of the cancer screening program. This also suggests that the 48%
relative reduction overestimates the true effect size of screening.
Several other data points raise questions about the plausibility of
the observed effect: (1) only 19% of the total eligible population
was actually screened, and 37% of these individuals were lost to
follow-up, yet the relative magnitude of the mortality reduction in
the population is larger than in almost any other cancer screening
intervention currently available; and (2) three-fourths of the
population screened were women, yet equal reductions in mela-
noma mortality were observed among both men and women.15
Furthermore, an independent study evaluating an additional 5
years of follow-up in the SCREEN study population found that the
observed reduction in melanoma mortality rates did not persist
over time but essentially returned to the baseline rates observed
before the screening program was initiated (Figure 3).6
When direct, overarching evidence concerning the benefit of
a screening intervention on health outcomes is inconclusive, the
USPSTF looks to a chain of indirect evidence to assess the effec-
tiveness of the preventive service. In the case of the clinical visual
skin examination, this includes linking together information about
the ability of screening to detect melanoma earlier than in usual
care and the link between earlier detection of skin cancer and
resultant morbidity and mortality. The USPSTF identified only 1
fair-quality case-control study pertaining to the question of
whether screening for skin cancer with a clinical visual skin exami-
nation leads to the earlier detection of melanoma compared with
usual care.3 It found a modest association between the clinical
visual skin examination and early detection (odds ratio, 0.84
[95% CI, 0.75-0.98]).16 However, because the study used patient
self-report to identify exposure to clinician skin examination,
recall bias is a potential concern.
Harms of Early Detection and Treatment
Evidence on the harms of the clinical visual skin examination is
limited.3 In the SCREEN study, approximately 4.4% of screened in-
dividuals (1 of 23 participants) underwent a skin excision for a sus-
piciouslesion.Themajorityofthesebiopsiesdidnotresultinacan-
cerdiagnosis.Overall,forbothmenandwomen,1caseofmelanoma
was detected per 28 excisions performed. However, this varied
greatlybypatientage.Forexample,amongmenaged20to34years
vs 65 years and older, 1 case of melanoma was detected per 52 vs
20 skin excisions, respectively.7
Cosmeticor,morerarely,functionaladverseeffectsmayalsore-
sult from an excisional biopsy prompted by clinical visual skin ex-
amination, although there are few data available on the frequency
or specific details of these events. One fair-quality study of a single
physician’
s performance of skin cancer screening and razor-blade
shave biopsy among patients who were not ultimately diagnosed
withskincancerfoundthat7%ofthesepatientsexpressedpoorsat-
isfaction with the cosmetic results (whereas the physician felt the
results were poor in 16% of cases).3,17
Overdiagnosis and overtreatment—the identification and
treatment of cancer that would never have harmed the patient in
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Skin Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
July 26, 2016
Volume 316, Number 4
433
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
the absence of screening—is also a potential outcome of concern. It
is not possible to directly determine for any individual patient
whether a diagnosed cancer will progress or not; as such, measur-
ing overdiagnosis is not a straightforward process and must be indi-
rectly quantified. In the case of skin cancer, there is limited research
to estimate the potential magnitude of the burden of overdiagnosis
associated with screening. An ecologic study linking melanoma
incidence and mortality data from the National Cancer Institute’
s
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program with Medi-
care claims for skin biopsy among patients 65 years and older
found that from 1986 to 2001, the average incidence of melanoma
increased 2.4 times (from 45 to 108 cases per 100 000 persons),
while the average biopsy rate increased 2.5 times (from 2847 to
7222 biopsies performed per 100 000 persons). However, the
increased cancer incidence was entirely due to extra cases of in situ
and local disease, without the expected complementary decrease
in the incidence of advanced melanoma or death from melanoma.
The authors concluded that this pattern strongly suggested that
screening efforts in the United States were generating overdiagno-
sis, rather than depicting a true increase in the occurrence of
melanoma.8
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
Evidence to assess the net benefit of screening for skin cancer with
theclinicalvisualskinexaminationislimited.Directevidenceonthe
effectivenessofscreeninginreducingmelanomamorbidityandmor-
talityislimitedtoasinglefair-qualityecologicstudywithimportant
methodologicallimitations.Thisstudysuggeststhat,atbest,apro-
gramofpubliceducationanddiseaseawarenesscoupledwith1-time
visual skin examination by a clinician may reduce the risk of dying
from melanoma among average-risk adults by about 1 death per
100 000 persons screened after 10 years; however, there are rea-
sonstobelievethattheeffectsizeislikelysmaller.Theindirectpath-
way of evidence (ie, examining the accuracy of screening; the link
between visual skin examination and earlier detection of mela-
noma, such as lesion thickness; and the link between earlier detec-
tionofmelanomaandskincancer–relatedmorbidityandmortality)
and the studies included as part of this pathway are subject to sev-
eral important biases of screening, including lead-time bias and
length-biased sampling. These biases preclude the USPSTF’
s abil-
ity to draw reliable conclusions about the efficacy of the clinical vi-
sualskinexaminationwithreasonablecertainty.Therefore,thereis
insufficientevidencetoreliablyconcludewhetherscreeningforskin
cancerwithaclinicalvisualskinexaminationreducesmelanomamor-
bidity or mortality.
Informationonharmsissimilarlysparse.Thepotentialforharm
clearly exists, including a high rate of unnecessary biopsies, possi-
bly resulting in cosmetic or—more rarely—functional adverse ef-
fects,andtheriskofoverdiagnosisandovertreatment.Itisdifficult
for the USPSTF to accurately bound the magnitude of these poten-
tial harms without better information about the frequency with
which skin cancer is likely overdiagnosed and overtreated. Further,
it is challenging for the USPSTF to correctly bound the magnitude
of the net benefit without more accurate and precise information
aboutthesizeofthepotentialmortalitybenefit,ifoneexists.Assuch,
theUSPSTFconcludesthattheevidenceisinsufficienttoassessthe
balance of benefit and harms of screening for skin cancer in adults
with a clinical visual skin examination.
Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted for
public comment on the USPSTF website from December 1 through
December 28, 2015. In response to the comments received, the
USPSTF added a reference to a study that examined longer-term
melanoma mortality rates in the SCREEN study population.6 The
USPSTFalsoclarifiedthattherecommendationdoesencompassall
formsofskincancer(ie,squamousandbasalcellcarcinomaandmela-
noma). A clinical visual skin examination will detect all skin cancer
types; however, in assessing the potential benefit of screening, the
USPSTFfocusedonmelanomabecausetheassociatedmorbidityand
mortality rates for this type of skin cancer are substantially greater
than for the others. In addition, although the systematic evidence
reviewsearchedforstudiesofallskincancertypes,theevidencethat
met the prespecified inclusion criteria for the review only de-
scribed efficacy outcomes for melanoma.
Several comments stressed that the USPSTF should place
greater emphasis on the benefits of detecting and treating
nonmelanoma skin cancer, noting the risk for such cancer to be-
come locally destructive and lead to disfigurement if left un-
treated. Although the USPSTF agrees that reduced morbidity from
nonmelanomaskincanceroritsrequisitetreatmentwouldbeanim-
portant benefit of screening, there is currently no evidence avail-
able to address this outcome for the clinical visual skin examina-
tion.Itisthereforeunknownwhetherthereisanincrementalbenefit
to detecting nonmelanoma skin cancer through a program of regu-
larvisualclinicalexaminationvspatientself-identificationaspartof
general body awareness followed by reasonably prompt evalua-
tion by a clinician.
Several comments suggested that the USPSTF should con-
sider making a separate positive recommendation for persons who
are at increased risk for skin cancer (eg, those with a family history
of melanoma), as they may potentially benefit more from a screen-
ing intervention. At present, there is insufficient evidence for any
populationthatregularvisualskinexaminationbyacliniciancanre-
duceskincancer–relatedmorbidityandmortality;theUSPSTFagrees
thattargetedresearchamongpopulationswiththehighestburden
of disease would be useful.
Update of Previous USPSTF Recommendation
Thisrecommendationupdatesthe2009USPSTFrecommendation.18
The USPSTF has again concluded that the current evidence is insuf-
ficienttoassessthebalanceofbenefitandharmsofscreeningforskin
cancer in adults with a clinical visual skin examination. However, the
USPSTFdecidedtonolongerincludeastatementaboutpatientskin
self-examination in the current recommendation. This intervention
willbeaddressedintheUSPSTF’
supdateofitsrecommendationstate-
ment on counseling to prevent skin cancer.
Recommendations of Others
Most professional organizations in the United States have no spe-
cific recommendations about screening for skin cancer with the
clinical visual skin examination. The American College of Physicians
has no current guidance on skin cancer screening performed by a
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Skin Cancer
434
JAMA
July 26, 2016
Volume 316, Number 4
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
clinician, nor does the American College of Preventive Medicine
(the latter has an archived statement from 199819). The American
Academy of Family Physicians concludes that the current evidence
is insufficient to assess the balance of benefit and harms of visual
skin cancer screening in adults.20 The American Academy of
Dermatology does not have formal guidelines on skin cancer
screening, although it does encourage and provide resources for its
physician members to hold free skin cancer screening events for
the public.21 The American Cancer Society recommends that adults
20 years and older who receive periodic health examinations
should have their skin examined as part of a general cancer-related
checkup.22
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Authors/US Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) members include the following
individuals: Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD,
MAS; David C. Grossman, MD, MPH; Susan J. Curry,
PhD; Karina W. Davidson, PhD, MASc; Mark Ebell,
MD, MS; John W. Epling Jr, MD, MSEd; Francisco A.
R. García, MD, MPH; Matthew W. Gillman, MD, SM;
Alex R. Kemper, MD, MPH, MS; Alex H. Krist, MD,
MPH; Ann E. Kurth, PhD, RN, MSN, MPH; C. Seth
Landefeld, MD; Carol M. Mangione, MD, MSPH;
William R. Phillips, MD, MPH; Maureen G. Phipps,
MD, MPH; Michael P. Pignone, MD, MPH; Albert L.
Siu, MD, MSPH.
Affiliations of Authors/US Preventive Services
Task Force (USPSTF) members: University of
California, San Francisco (Bibbins-Domingo); Group
Health Research Institute, Seattle, Washington
(Grossman); University of Iowa, Iowa City (Curry);
Columbia University, New York, New York
(Davidson); University of Georgia, Athens (Ebell);
State University of New York Upstate Medical
University, Syracuse (Epling); Pima County
Department of Health, Tucson, Arizona (García);
Harvard Medical School and Harvard Pilgrim Health
Care Institute, Boston, Massachusetts (Gillman);
Duke University, Durham, North Carolina (Kemper);
Fairfax Family Practice Residency, Fairfax, Virginia
(Krist); Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond (Krist); Yale University, New Haven,
Connecticut (Kurth); University of Alabama at
Birmingham (Landefeld); University of California,
Los Angeles (Mangione); University of Washington,
Seattle, (Phillips); Brown University, Providence,
Rhode Island (Phipps); University of Texas at Austin
(Pignone); Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, New York (Siu); James J. Peters Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Bronx, New York (Siu).
Author Contributions: Dr Bibbins-Domingo had
full access to all of the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis. The USPSTF
members contributed equally to the
recommendation statement.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have
completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest and
none were reported. Authors followed the policy
regarding conflicts of interest described at http:
//www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page
/Name/conflict-of-interest-disclosures.
Funding/Support: The USPSTF is an independent,
voluntary body. The US Congress mandates that
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) support the operations of the USPSTF.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: AHRQ staff assisted
in the following: development and review of the
research plan, commission of the systematic
evidence review from an Evidence-based Practice
Center, coordination of expert review and public
comment of the draft evidence report and draft
recommendation statement, and the writing and
preparation of the final recommendation statement
and its submission for publication. AHRQ staff had
no role in the approval of the final recommendation
statement or the decision to submit for publication.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the
USPSTF are independent of the US government.
They should not be construed as an official position
of AHRQ or the US Department of Health and
Human Services.
Additional Contributions: We thank Jennifer
Croswell, MD, MPH, and Tracy Wolff, MD, MPH,
of AHRQ, who contributed to the writing of the
manuscript, and Lisa Nicolella, MA, of AHRQ,
who assisted with coordination and editing.
REFERENCES
1. Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al. SEER
cancer statistics review, 1975–2013. National Cancer
Institute. http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2013/.
Accessed May 18, 2016.
2. Wolff T, Tai E, Miller T. Screening for skin cancer:
an update of the evidence for the US Preventive
Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2009;150(3):
194-198.
3. Wernli KJ, Henrikson NB, Morrison CC, Nguyen
M, Pocobelli G, Whitlock EP. Screening for Skin
Cancer in Adults: An Updated Systematic Evidence
Review for the US Preventive Services Task Force:
Evidence Synthesis No. 137. Rockville, MD: Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality; 2016. AHRQ
publication 14-05210-EF-1.
4. Wernli KJ, Henrikson NB, Morrison CC, Nguyen
M, Pocobelli G, Blasi PR. Screening for skin cancer in
adults: an updated systematic evidence review for
the US Preventive Services Task Force. JAMA. doi:
10.1001/jama.2016.5415.
5. Katalinic A, Waldmann A, Weinstock MA, et al.
Does skin cancer screening save lives? an
observational study comparing trends in melanoma
mortality in regions with and without screening.
Cancer. 2012;118(21):5395-5402.
6. Boniol M, Autier P, Gandini S. Melanoma
mortality following skin cancer screening in
Germany. BMJ Open. 2015;5(9):e008158.
7. Waldmann A, Nolte S, Geller AC, et al. Frequency
of excisions and yields of malignant skin tumors in a
population-based screening intervention of
360,288 whole-body examinations. Arch Dermatol.
2012;148(8):903-910.
8. Welch HG, Woloshin S, Schwartz LM. Skin biopsy
rates and incidence of melanoma: population based
ecological study. BMJ. 2005;331(7515):481.
9. Welch HG, Black WC. Overdiagnosis in cancer.
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010;102(9):605-613.
10. Oliveria SA, Heneghan MK, Cushman LF,
Ughetta EA, Halpern AC. Skin cancer screening by
dermatologists, family practitioners, and internists:
barriers and facilitating factors. Arch Dermatol.
2011;147(1):39-44.
11. Moyer VA; US Preventive Services Task Force.
Behavioral counseling to prevent skin cancer: US
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation
statement. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157(1):59-65.
12. Chen SC, Bravata DM, Weil E, Olkin I.
A comparison of dermatologists’and primary care
physicians’accuracy in diagnosing melanoma:
a systematic review. Arch Dermatol. 2001;137(12):
1627-1634.
13. Aitken JF, Janda M, Elwood M, Youl PH, Ring IT,
Lowe JB. Clinical outcomes from skin screening
clinics within a community-based melanoma
screening program. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2006;54
(1):105-114.
14. Fritschi L, Dye SA, Katris P. Validity of
melanoma diagnosis in a community-based
screening program. Am J Epidemiol. 2006;164(4):
385-390.
15. Breitbart EW, Waldmann A, Nolte S, et al.
Systematic skin cancer screening in Northern
Germany. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2012;66(2):201-211.
16. Aitken JF, Elwood M, Baade PD, Youl P, English
D. Clinical whole-body skin examination reduces
the incidence of thick melanomas. Int J Cancer.
2010;126(2):450-458.
17. Gambichler T, Senger E, Rapp S, Alamouti D,
Altmeyer P, Hoffmann K. Deep shave excision of
macular melanocytic nevi with the razor blade
biopsy technique. Dermatol Surg. 2000;26(7):662-
666.
18. US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening
for skin cancer: US Preventive Services Task Force
recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med.
2009;150(3):188-193.
19. Ferrini RL, Perlman M, Hill L. American College
of Preventive Medicine policy statement: screening
for skin cancer. Am J Prev Med. 1998;14(1):80-82.
20. Clinical preventive service recommendation:
skin cancer. American Academy of Family
Physicians. http://www.aafp.org/patient-care
/clinical-recommendations/all/skin-cancer.html.
Accessed June 23, 2016.
21. SPOTme skin cancer screening program.
American Academy of Dermatology. https://www
.aad.org/members/volunteer/skin-cancer
-screening-program. Accessed May 17, 2016.
22. American Cancer Society guidelines for the
early detection of cancer. American Cancer Society.
http://www.cancer.org/healthy/findcancerearly
/cancerscreeningguidelines/american-cancer
-society-guidelines-for-the-early-detection-of
-cancer. Accessed May 17, 2016.
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Skin Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
July 26, 2016
Volume 316, Number 4
435
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
