 Screening for Osteoporosis to Prevent Fractures
US Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement
US Preventive Services Task Force
IMPORTANCE By 2020, approximately 12.3 million individuals in the United States older than
50 years are expected to have osteoporosis. Osteoporotic fractures, particularly hip
fractures, are associated with limitations in ambulation, chronic pain and disability, loss of
independence, and decreased quality of life, and 21% to 30% of patients who experience a
hip fracture die within 1 year. The prevalence of primary osteoporosis (ie, osteoporosis
without underlying disease) increases with age and differs by race/ethnicity. With the aging of
the US population, the potential preventable burden is likely to increase in future years.
OBJECTIVE To update the 2011 US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommendation
on screening for osteoporosis.
EVIDENCE REVIEW The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on screening for and treatment of
osteoporotic fractures in men and women, as well as risk assessment tools, screening
intervals, and efficacy of screening and treatment in subgroups. The screening population
was postmenopausal women and older men with no known previous osteoporotic fractures
and no known comorbid conditions or medication use associated with secondary
osteoporosis.
FINDINGS The USPSTF found convincing evidence that bone measurement tests are accurate
for detecting osteoporosis and predicting osteoporotic fractures in women and men. The
USPSTF found adequate evidence that clinical risk assessment tools are moderately accurate
in identifying risk of osteoporosis and osteoporotic fractures. The USPSTF found convincing
evidence that drug therapies reduce subsequent fracture rates in postmenopausal women.
The USPSTF found that the evidence is inadequate to assess the effectiveness of drug
therapies in reducing subsequent fracture rates in men without previous fractures.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATION The USPSTF recommends screening for osteoporosis
with bone measurement testing to prevent osteoporotic fractures in women 65 years and
older. (B recommendation) The USPSTF recommends screening for osteoporosis with bone
measurement testing to prevent osteoporotic fractures in postmenopausal women younger
than 65 years at increased risk of osteoporosis, as determined by a formal clinical risk
assessment tool. (B recommendation) The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is
insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of screening for osteoporosis to
prevent osteoporotic fractures in men. (I statement)
JAMA. 2018;319(24):2521-2531. doi:10.1001/jama.2018.7498
Editorial page 2483
Author Audio Interview
Related article page 2532 and
JAMA Patient Page page 2566
CME Quiz at
jamanetwork.com/learning
and CME Questions page 2554
Related article at
jamainternalmedicine.com
Author/Group Information: The US
Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) members are listed at the
end of this article.
Corresponding Author: Susan J.
Curry, PhD, University of Iowa,
111 Jessup Hall, Iowa City, IA 52242
(chair@uspstf.net).
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA | US Preventive Services Task Force | RECOMMENDATION STATEMENT
(Reprinted)
2521
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 T
heUSPreventiveServicesTaskForce(USPSTF)makesrec-
ommendations about the effectiveness of specific clinical
preventive services for patients without obvious related
signs or symptoms.
Itbasesitsrecommendationsontheevidenceofboththebenefits
andharmsoftheserviceandanassessmentofthebalance.TheUSPSTF
doesnotconsiderthecostsofprovidingaserviceinthisassessment.
TheUSPSTFrecognizesthatclinicaldecisionsinvolvemorecon-
siderations than evidence alone. Clinicians should understand the
evidence but individualize decision making to the specific patient
or situation. Similarly, the USPSTF notes that policy and coverage
decisionsinvolveconsiderationsinadditiontotheevidenceofclini-
cal benefits and harms.
Summary of Recommendations and Evidence
TheUSPSTFrecommendsscreeningforosteoporosiswithbonemea-
surement testing to prevent osteoporotic fractures in women 65
years and older (B recommendation) (Figure 1).
TheUSPSTFrecommendsscreeningforosteoporosiswithbone
measurement testing to prevent osteoporotic fractures in post-
menopausalwomenyoungerthan65yearswhoareatincreasedrisk
of osteoporosis, as determined by a formal clinical risk assessment
tool. (B recommendation)
See the Clinical Considerations section for information on risk
assessment.
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient
to assess the balance of benefits and harms of screening for osteo-
porosis to prevent osteoporotic fractures in men. (I statement)
SeetheClinicalConsiderationssectionforsuggestionsforprac-
tice regarding the I statement.
Rationale
Importance
By2020,approximately12.3millionindividualsintheUnitedStates
older than 50 years are expected to have osteoporosis.1 Osteopo-
rotic fractures, particularly hip fractures, are associated with limi-
tation of ambulation, chronic pain and disability, loss of indepen-
dence,anddecreasedqualityoflife,and21%to30%ofpatientswho
experience a hip fracture die within 1 year.2 Seventy-one percent of
osteoporotic fractures occur among women,3 and women have
higher rates of osteoporosis than men at any given age; however,
men have a higher fracture-related mortality rate than women.2,4
The prevalence of primary osteoporosis (ie, osteoporosis without
underlying disease) increases with age and differs by race/
ethnicity. With the aging of the US population, the potential pre-
ventable burden is likely to increase in future years.1
Detection
The USPSTF found convincing evidence that bone measurement
tests are accurate for predicting osteoporotic fractures in women
andmen.Themostcommonlyusedtestiscentraldual-energyx-ray
absorptiometry (DXA) of the hip and lumbar spine. Although sev-
eral bone measurement tests similarly predict risk of fracture, DXA
provides measurement of bone mineral density (BMD), and most
treatmentguidelinesusecentralDXAtodefineosteoporosisandthe
threshold at which to start drug therapies to prevent osteoporotic
fractures.TheUSPSTFfoundadequateevidencethatclinicalriskas-
sessmenttoolsaremoderatelyaccurateinidentifyingriskofosteo-
porosis and osteoporotic fractures.
Benefits of Early Detection and Treatment
TheUSPSTFfound1studythatevaluatedtheeffectofscreeningfor
osteoporosisonfracturerates;thestudyreportedareductioninhip
fractures but did not find a reduction in other types of fractures.4-6
Multiple studies show that drug therapies reduce fractures in
postmenopausalwomenwithosteoporosis.Forwomen65yearsand
older,theUSPSTFfoundconvincingevidencethatscreeningcande-
tect osteoporosis and that treatment of women with osteoporosis
can provide at least a moderate benefit in preventing fractures. For
postmenopausal women younger than 65 years who are at in-
creased risk of osteoporosis, the USPSTF found adequate evi-
dence that screening can detect osteoporosis and that treatment
provides a moderate benefit in preventing fractures.
For men, the USPSTF found inadequate evidence on the ben-
efits and harms of treating screen-detected osteoporosis to re-
duce the risk of osteoporotic fractures.
Harms of Early Detection and Treatment
The USPSTF found a single study that described harms of screen-
ing for osteoporosis. It reported no increase in anxiety and no de-
crease in quality of life from screening.4-6 Based on the nature of
screening with bone measurement tests and the low likelihood of
seriousharms,theUSPSTFfoundadequateevidencetoboundthese
harmsasnogreaterthansmall.Harmsassociatedwithscreeningmay
include radiation exposure from DXA and opportunity costs (time
and effort required by patients and the health care system).
Harms of drug therapies for osteoporosis depend on the spe-
cificmedicationused.TheUSPSTFfoundthattheriskofseriousad-
verseevents,uppergastrointestinalevents,orcardiovascularevents
associated with the most common class of osteoporosis medica-
tion(bisphosphonates)isnogreaterthansmall.Overall,theUSPSTF
found adequate evidence that the harms of osteoporosis medica-
tions are small.
USPSTF Assessment
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that the net ben-
efit of screening for osteoporosis in women 65 years and older is at
least moderate.
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that the net
benefit of screening for osteoporosis in postmenopausal women
younger than 65 years who are at increased risk of osteoporosis is
at least moderate.
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insuffi-
cient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of screening for
osteoporosis in men.
Clinical Considerations
Patient Population Under Consideration
This recommendation applies to older adults without a history
of low-trauma fractures and without conditions that may cause
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Osteoporosis to Prevent Fractures
2522
JAMA
June 26, 2018
Volume 319, Number 24
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 secondary osteoporosis (such as metabolic bone disease or
untreated hyperthyroidism) and patients without conditions that
may increase their risk of falls (Figure 2). This recommendation
does not apply to persons who take long-term medications that
may cause secondary osteoporosis (eg, glucocorticoids, aromatase
inhibitors, or gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists).
Assessment of Risk
In deciding which postmenopausal women younger than 65 years
to screen with bone measurement testing, clinicians should first
consider factors associated with increased risk of osteoporotic
fractures. These include parental history of hip fracture, smoking,
excessive alcohol consumption, and low body weight. In addition,
menopausal status in women is also an important consideration
because studies demonstrating treatment benefit mainly enrolled
postmenopausal women. For postmenopausal women younger
than 65 years who have at least 1 risk factor, a reasonable
approach to determine who should be screened with bone mea-
surement testing is to use a clinical risk assessment tool.
Several tools are available to assess osteoporosis risk: the
Simple Calculated Osteoporosis Risk Estimation (SCORE; Merck),
Osteoporosis Risk Assessment Instrument (ORAI), Osteoporosis
Index of Risk (OSIRIS), and the Osteoporosis Self-Assessment
Tool (OST). These tools seem to perform similarly and are
moderately accurate at predicting osteoporosis. The FRAX tool
(University of Sheffield), which assesses a person’s 10-year risk of
Figure 1. USPSTF Grades and Levels of Certainty
What the USPSTF Grades Mean and Suggestions for Practice
Grade
Definition
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
Suggestions for Practice
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate, or
there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients
based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty
that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service for selected
patients depending on individual
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the service
has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits
and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of
benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section
of the USPSTF Recommendation
Statement. If the service is offered,
patients should understand the
uncertainty about the balance of benefits
and harms.
USPSTF Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary care
populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be
strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the estimate
is constrained by such factors as 
the number, size, or quality of individual studies.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice.
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be large
enough to alter the conclusion.
The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as
benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature
of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of
the limited number or size of studies.
important flaws in study design or methods.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
gaps in the chain of evidence.
findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice.
lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Osteoporosis to Prevent Fractures
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
June 26, 2018
Volume 319, Number 24
2523
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 fracture, is also a commonly used tool. The FRAX tool includes
questions about previous DXA results but does not require this
information to estimate fracture risk. Because the benefits of
treatment are greater in persons at higher risk of fracture, one
approach is to perform bone measurement testing in postmeno-
pausal women younger than 65 years who have a 10-year FRAX
risk of major osteoporotic fracture (MOF) (without DXA) greater
than that of a 65-year-old white woman without major risk fac-
tors. For example, in the United States, a 65-year-old white
woman of mean height and weight7 without major risk factors has
a 10-year FRAX risk of MOF of 8.4%.4,8 In comparison, a 60-year-
old white woman of mean height and weight7 with a parental his-
tory of hip fracture has a 10-year FRAX risk of MOF of 13%.4,8
Clinicians should note that the presence of a given risk factor
or a certain age does not represent a particular risk threshold. Al-
though the risk of osteoporosis and osteoporotic fractures gener-
ally increases with age, the presence of multiple risk factors at a
younger age may indicate that the risk-benefit profile is favorable
for screening with bone measurement testing.
Screening Tests
The most commonly used bone measurement test used to screen
for osteoporosis is central DXA; other screening tests include
peripheral DXA and quantitative ultrasound (QUS). Central DXA
measures BMD at the hip and lumbar spine. Most treatment
guidelines3,4,9-11 recommend using BMD, as measured by central
DXA, to define osteoporosis and the treatment threshold to pre-
vent osteoporotic fractures.4,12 All the osteoporosis drug therapy
studies reviewed by the USPSTF used central DXA to determine eli-
gibility for study enrollment.4,6 Peripheral DXA measures BMD at
the lower forearm and heel. Quantitative ultrasound also evaluates
peripheral sites and has similar accuracy in predicting fracture risk
as DXA, while avoiding the risk of radiation exposure; however, it
does not measure BMD. Peripheral DXA and QUS are measured
with portable devices and may be less costly and more accessible
than central DXA measurement (Table 1).
Screening Intervals
Some observational and modeling studies have suggested screen-
ing intervals based on age, baseline BMD, and calculated projected
time to transition to osteoporosis. However, limited evidence from
2 good-quality studies found no benefit in predicting fractures
from repeating bone measurement testing 4 to 8 years after initial
screening.4
Treatment
The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved mul-
tipledrugtherapiestoreduceosteoporoticfractures,includingbis-
phosphonates,parathyroidhormone,raloxifene,andestrogen.The
choice of therapy should be an individual one based on the pa-
tient'
s clinical situation and the trade-off between benefits and
harms. Clinicians should educate patients on how to minimize the
Figure 2. Clinical Summary: Screening for Osteoporosis to Prevent Fractures
Population
Recommendation 
Women 65 years and older
Postmenopausal women younger than
65 years at increased risk
Screen for osteoporosis.
Grade: B
Men
No recommendation.
Grade: I (insufficient evidence)
Screen for osteoporosis.
Grade: B
Risk Assessment
Screening Tests
Other Relevant
USPSTF
Recommendations
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting documents, please
go to https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.   
Risk factors for osteoporotic fractures include parental history of hip fracture, smoking, excessive alcohol consumption, and low body
weight. In addition, menopausal status in women is also an important consideration. For postmenopausal women younger than 65
years who have at least 1 risk factor, a reasonable approach to determine who should be screened with bone measurement testing
is to use a clinical risk assessment tool. Several tools are available to assess osteoporosis risk, such as OST, ORAI, OSIRIS, SCORE,
and FRAX.
The most commonly used test is central dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) of the hip and lumbar spine. Although several bone
measurement tests similarly predict risk of fractures, most treatment guidelines use bone mineral density (BMD) as measured by
central DXA to define osteoporosis and the treatment threshold to prevent osteoporotic fractures. Other screening tests include
peripheral DXA and quantitative ultrasound (QUS).
Treatments
The US Food and Drug Administration has approved multiple drug therapies to reduce osteoporotic fractures, including
bisphosphonates, parathyroid hormone, raloxifene, and estrogen. The choice of therapy should be an individual one based on
the patient’
s clinical situation and the trade-off between benefits and harms.
The USPSTF has made recommendations on interventions to prevent falls in community-dwelling older adults and the use of
vitamin D, calcium, or combined supplementation for the primary prevention of fractures in community-dwelling adults.
FRAX indicates Fracture Risk Assessment Tool; ORAI, Osteoporosis Risk Assessment Instrument; OSIRIS, Osteoporosis Index of Risk; OST, Osteoporosis
Self-assessment Tool; SCORE, Simple Calculated Osteoporosis Risk Estimation Tool.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Osteoporosis to Prevent Fractures
2524
JAMA
June 26, 2018
Volume 319, Number 24
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 adverse effects of drug therapies, such as reducing esophageal
irritation from bisphosphonate therapy by taking the medication
with a full glass of water and not lying down for at least 30 min-
utes afterward.
Suggestions for Practice Regarding the I Statement
When deciding whether to screen for osteoporosis to prevent os-
teoporotic fractures in men, clinicians should consider the follow-
ing factors.
Potential Preventable Burden
The prevalence of osteoporosis in men is generally lower than in
women (4.3% vs 15.4%, respectively).1 An estimated 1 to 2 million
men in the United States have osteoporosis.5 Although men ac-
count for 29% of osteoporotic fractures in the United States, men
have higher fracture-related morbidity and mortality rates than
women.3,4 Each year, about 80 000 men in the United States will
have a hip fracture; 1 in 3 men who experience a hip fracture will die
within a year.13
Olderageinmenisanimportantriskfactorforosteoporoticfrac-
ture. In the absence of other risk factors, it is not until age 80 years
thattheprevalenceofosteoporosisinwhitemenstartstoreachthat
ofwhitewomenatage65years.1Forexample,intheUnitedStates,
the 10-year FRAX risk of MOF is 5.0%8 in a 65-year-old white man
of mean height and weight7 without any risk factors, and 8.4%8 at
age80years(vs8.4%ina65-year-oldwhitewomanofmeanheight
and weight7 without any risk factors8). In the presence of multiple
riskfactors,the10-yearFRAXriskofMOFina55-year-oldwhiteman
canapproximatetheriskofa65-year-oldwhitewomanwithnorisk
factors; for example, the 10-year FRAX risk of MOF is 8.9% in a 55-
year-oldwhitemanofmeanheightandweight7withaparentalhis-
toryofhipfracturewhocurrentlysmokesanddrinks3ormoreunits
of alcohol per day.8
Similar to women, risk factors for fractures in men include
low body mass index, excessive alcohol consumption, current
smoking, long-term corticosteroid use, previous fractures, and
history of falls within the past year. A recent systematic review of
risk factors for osteoporosis in men also found that hypogonad-
ism, history of cerebrovascular accident, and history of diabetes
are associated with an increased risk of fractures, although their
clinical use in identifying men who need further bone measure-
ment testing is unclear.4,14
Although clinical risk assessment tools and imaging tests to di-
agnose osteoporosis seem to perform as well in men as in women,
evidence on the effectiveness of medications to treat osteoporosis
inmenislacking.4,6Althoughsometreatmentshavebeenfoundto
beeffectiveinpreventingfracturesinpostmenopausalwomenwith
osteoporosis, it cannot be assumed that they will be equally effec-
tive in men because the underlying biology of bones may differ in
menduetodifferencesintestosteroneandestrogenlevels.There-
view identified limited evidence on the effect of treatment of men
with osteoporosis on the prevention of fractures.4,6 One good-
quality study found a reduction in morphometric vertebral frac-
tures but not clinical (vertebral and nonvertebral) fractures in men
with osteoporosis who were treated with zoledronic acid.15 A small
study examining treatment with parathyroid hormone in men was
consistent in the direction of benefit but the finding was not statis-
tically significant.16
Potential Harms of Screening
The USPSTF found no studies that directly examined harms of
screening in men. Potential harms of screening in men are likely to
be similar to those in women. Evidence on harms of drug therapies
in men is very limited.4,6
Current Practice
Data on how frequently men are screened for osteoporosis are
limited. Several organizations have issued statements on screen-
ing in men at increased risk. Progress toward the Healthy People
2020 objectives for osteoporosis have shown little change in
the number of hip fracture hospitalizations among men (464.9
vs 442.6 hospitalizations per 100 000 men in 2000 and 2010,
respectively).17
Additional Approaches to Prevention
AccordingtotheUSCentersforDiseaseControlandPrevention,en-
gaging in 120 to 300 minutes of at least moderate-intensity aero-
bic activity each week can reduce the risk of hip fractures, and per-
forming balance and muscle-strengthening activities each week
alongwithmoderate-intensityaerobicactivitycanhelppreventfalls
in older adults.18 The National Academy of Medicine (formerly the
Institute of Medicine) has issued dietary reference intakes for cal-
cium and vitamin D to support health; recommended daily allow-
ances are based on age.19)
Table 1. Characteristics of the Most Common Bone Measurement
Screening Tests for Osteoporosis
Screening
Test
Description
Other Considerations
Central DXA
Most commonly studied
and used bone measurement
test to screen for
osteoporosis; reference to
which other tests are
compared; uses radiation
to measure BMD at the hip
and lumbar spine
Most treatment guidelines
recommend using BMD, as
measured by central DXA, to
define osteoporosis and the
treatment threshold to
prevent osteoporotic
fractures
Peripheral
DXA
Uses radiation to measure
BMD at peripheral sites, such
as the lower forearm and
heel; similar accuracy to that
of central DXA (AUC,
0.67-0.80 in women with
a mean age of 61 years
[2 studies; n = 712])
Measured with portable
devices, which may help
increase access to screening
in locations where machines
that perform central DXA
are not available;
no treatment studies
reviewed by the USPSTF
used BMD measured by
peripheral DXA to define
treatment threshold
QUS
Uses ultrasound to evaluate
peripheral bone sites
(most commonly, the
calcaneus); similar
accuracy to that of
central DXA (pooled AUC:
0.77 in women [7 studies;
n = 1969] and 0.80 in men
[3 studies; n = 5142])
No exposure to radiation;
measured with portable
devices, which may help
increase access to screening
in locations where machines
that perform central DXA
are not available; does not
measure BMD, and no
treatment studies use QUS
measurements to define
treatment threshold;
cannot be routinely
used to initiate treatment
without further DXA
measurement
Abbreviations: AUC, area under the curve; BMD, bone mineral density;
DXA, central dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry; QUS, quantitative
ultrasound; USPSTF, US Preventive Services Task Force.
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Osteoporosis to Prevent Fractures
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
June 26, 2018
Volume 319, Number 24
2525
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Useful Resources for Primary Care
The USPSTF recommends exercise interventions to prevent falls in
community-dwelling adults 65 years and older at increased risk of
falls and selectively offering multifactorial interventions based on
circumstances of prior falls, presence of comorbid medical condi-
tions, and the patient’s values and preferences; it recommends
against vitamin D supplementation to prevent falls.20 In a separate
recommendation, the USPSTF recommends against supplementa-
tion with 400 IU or less of vitamin D and 1000 mg or less of cal-
cium in postmenopausal women to prevent fractures.21 The
USPSTF found insufficient evidence on supplementation with
higher doses of vitamin D and calcium, alone or combined, to pre-
vent fractures in postmenopausal women, or at any dose in men
and premenopausal women.21
Other Considerations
Implementation
Tools that can help identify women younger than 65 years who
are at increased risk of osteoporosis include SCORE, ORAI,
OSIRIS, and OST.22-26 The most commonly used thresholds to
identify increased risk of osteoporosis or osteoporotic fractures
are greater than or equal to 6 for SCORE, greater than or equal to
9 for ORAI, less than 1 for OSIRIS, and less than 2 for OST
(Table 2). Additionally, the FRAX tool8 is a computerized algo-
rithm that calculates the 10-year probability of hip fracture and
MOF using clinical risk factors. FRAX models are country specific,
as they include country epidemiology. In the United States, the
Table 2. Characteristics of Clinical Risk Assessment Tools for Osteoporosisa
Tool
Risk Factors
Scoring
Frequently Used Threshold for Increased
Osteoporosis Risk
OST
Weight, kg
(kg − y) × 0.2
<2
Age, y
ORAI
Age, y
≥9
≥75
15
65-74
9
55-64
5
45-54
0
Weight, kg
<60
9
60-69
3
≥70
0
No current estrogen use
2
OSIRIS
Age, y
−0.2 × age
<1
Weight, kg
0.2 × weight
Current estrogen use
2
Prior low-impact fracture
−2
SCORE
Non–black race
5
≥6
Rheumatoid arthritis
4
Prior rib/wrist/hip fracture
4 for each type of nontraumatic rib/wrist/hip
fracture after age 45 y (max 12)
Never used estrogen
1
Age, y
3 × first digit of age
Weight, lb
−1 × weight divided by 10
FRAX
Age, y
Refer to websiteb
9.3% (major osteoporotic fracture)c
Sex
Weight, kg
Height, cm
Previous fracture
Parental hip fracture
Current smoking
Glucocorticoid use
Rheumatoid arthritis
Secondary osteoporosis
Alcohol consumption ≥3 U/d
Abbreviations: FRAX, Fracture Risk Assessment Tool; ORAI, Osteoporosis Risk
Assessment Instrument; OSIRIS, Osteoporosis Index of Risk; OST, Osteoporosis
Self-Assessment Tool; SCORE, Simple Calculated Osteoporosis Risk Estimation.
a Table adapted from Chen SJ, et al.42
bRefer to https://www.sheffield.ac.uk/FRAX.
c 9.3% represents the 10-y major osteoporotic fracture risk in a 65-y-old white
woman without any other risk factors in the United States, as calculated in
2011. Currently, FRAX calculates this risk to be 8.4%.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Osteoporosis to Prevent Fractures
2526
JAMA
June 26, 2018
Volume 319, Number 24
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 risk of MOF is 8.4% in a 65-year-old white woman of mean height
and weight without any other risk factors.4,7,8
Research Needs and Gaps
The majority of reviewed studies focused on women. Treatment
trials that focus on or include men and report on fracture out-
comes (rather than BMD) as well as harms are needed. More stud-
ies are also needed that evaluate the direct effect of screening for
osteoporosis (either with BMD or clinical risk assessment tools)
on fracture outcomes. Additional research is needed to deter-
mine whether clinical risk assessment tools alone (without BMD)
could help identify patients at risk of fractures and help guide
decisions to initiate medications to prevent fractures. The devel-
opment of prognostic models incorporating age, baseline BMD,
and hormone replacement therapy use27,28 may also help identify
optimal screening intervals.
Discussion
Burden of Disease
Osteoporosis is a skeletal disorder characterized by loss of
bone mass, microarchitectural deterioration of bone tissue, and
decline in bone quality leading to increased bone fragility
and risk of fractures.9,12 The World Health Organization defines
osteoporosis as bone density at the hip or spine that is at least
2.5 SDs (ie, T score�−2.5) below the mean bone density of a ref-
erence population of young healthy women, presumably at peak
bone mass.29
In the United States, the estimated prevalence of osteoporo-
sis among the community-dwelling population 50 years and older
in 2010 was 10.3% (10.2 million adults), based on National Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey data.1 After age 50 years, the
prevalence of osteoporosis is greater in women than in men
(15.4% vs 4.3%, respectively).1 The prevalence of osteoporosis
varies by race/ethnicity and is highest in Mexican American
(13.4%) and non-Hispanic white adults (10.2%) and lowest in non-
Hispanic black adults (4.9%).1 The prevalence of osteoporosis
increases dramatically with age, from 5.1% in adults aged 50 to 59
years to 26.2% in those 80 years and older.1 As the US population
ages, it is projected that the number of persons living with osteo-
porosis will also increase. The number of adults 50 years and
older with osteoporosis will increase from 10.2 million in 2010 to
an estimated 12.3 million in 2020 and 13.6 million in 2030.1 Based
on Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set data, the
rate of women aged 65 to 85 years enrolled in Medicare who
reported ever having a bone density test increased from 64.4%
to 71.3% in 2006 and from 73.8% to 79.3% in 2016.30
In 2005, approximately 2 million osteoporotic fractures oc-
curred in the United States.3 Nearly 40% of persons who experi-
enceafractureareunabletowalkindependentlyat1year,and60%
require assistance with at least 1 essential activity of daily living.31
Hip fractures account for a large portion of the morbidity and mor-
tality associated with osteoporotic fractures, with 21% to 30% of
patients dying within 1 year of a hip fracture.2
Osteoporosis is usually asymptomatic until a fracture occurs;
preventing osteoporotic fractures is the main goal of an osteopo-
rosis screening strategy.
Scope of Review
The USPSTF commissioned a systematic evidence review4,6 to
search for updated evidence since the previous review in 2011
and examine newer evidence on screening for and treatment of
osteoporotic fractures in men and women. The review also
sought evidence on risk assessment tools, screening intervals,
and efficacy of screening and treatment in subgroups. The USP-
STF defined the screening population as postmenopausal women
and older men with no known previous osteoporotic fractures
and no known comorbid conditions or medication use associated
with secondary osteoporosis. The review excluded adults
younger than 40 years as well as adults with no known conditions
that may increase their risk of falls.
Accuracy of Screening Tests
and Clinical Risk Assessment Tools
DXA
Bone measurement testing with central DXA is the most com-
monly used and studied method for the diagnosis of osteoporo-
sis. Central DXA uses radiation to measure BMD at central bone
sites (hip and lumbar spine), which is the established standard for
diagnosis of osteoporosis and for guiding decisions about treat-
ment. DXA can also be used at peripheral bone sites (such as the
lower forearm and heel) to identify persons with low bone mass;
however, most treatment guidelines recommend follow-up with
central DXA before initiating treatment for osteoporosis. Screen-
ing with peripheral DXA and other imaging techniques may help
increase access to screening in geographic locations (eg, rural
areas) where machines that perform central DXA may not be
available. The USPSTF identified 2 studies (n = 712) that reported
on the accuracy of peripheral DXA at the calcaneus to identify
osteoporosis; compared with central DXA, the area under the
curve (AUC) ranged from 0.67 to 0.80 in women with a mean age
of 61 years.4,32,33
QUS
Quantitative ultrasound is another imaging technique used at
peripheral bone sites (most commonly the calcaneus), and it does
not require radiation exposure. Compared with central DXA, the
AUC for QUS measured at the calcaneus in women ranged from
0.69 to 0.90, with a pooled estimate of 0.77 (95% CI, 0.72-0.81; 7
studies; n = 1969).4 In men, the AUC ranged from 0.70 to 0.93,
with a pooled estimate of 0.80 (95% CI, 0.67-0.94; 3 studies;
n = 5142).4 However, QUS does not measure BMD, that is the cur-
rent diagnostic criteria for osteoporosis. In addition, drug therapy
trials for osteoporosis treatment generally use central DXA mea-
surement of BMD as criteria for inclusion of study populations.4,12
Thus, before QUS results could be routinely used to initiate treat-
ment without any further DXA measurement, a method for con-
verting or adapting QUS results to the DXA scale needs to be
developed.
Clinical Risk Assessment Tools
TheUSPSTFevaluatedtheaccuracyofclinicalriskassessmenttools
toidentifyriskofosteoporosis.Manyofthesetoolscanalsobeused
to calculate risk of future fractures; however, the USPSTF focused
on their accuracy to identify osteoporosis because all the treat-
ment studies evaluated by the USPSTF enrolled patients based on
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Osteoporosis to Prevent Fractures
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
June 26, 2018
Volume 319, Number 24
2527
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 bone measurement testing, specifically central DXA measurement
ofBMD.ThemostfrequentlystudiedtoolsinwomenweretheORAI
(10studies;n = 16 780),OSIRIS(5studies;n = 5649),OST(13stud-
ies;n = 44 323),andSCORE(8studies;n = 15 362).ThepooledAUCs
for these tools were all similar and ranged from 0.65 to 0.70. The
FRAX tool (without BMD), which has been studied extensively as a
clinical risk assessment tool to predict fracture risk, performs simi-
larly in its ability to identify osteoporosis (AUC range, 0.58-0.82; 4
studies; n = 22 141).4 These clinical risk assessment tools could be
appliedtopostmenopausalwomenyoungerthan65yearswhoare
at increased risk of osteoporosis to help clinicians determine who
should be screened with bone measurement testing. Fewer stud-
ies are available that evaluate the performance of these tools spe-
cifically in younger women, and 1 study has suggested that FRAX is
inferior to OST and SCORE in discriminating women with
osteoporosis.34 However, in the studies reviewed by the USPSTF,
the range of AUCs of these tools (ORAI, OSIRIS, OST, SCORE, and
FRAX)toidentifyosteoporosisinwomenyoungerthan65yearswere
similar to the pooled AUCs for women of all ages; the AUC from in-
dividual studies of clinical risk assessment tools in women younger
than 65 years ranged from 0.58 to 0.85.4 Table 2 provides more in-
formationontheseclinicalriskassessmenttoolsandcommonlyused
thresholds to determine risk of osteoporosis.
Effectiveness of Early Detection and Treatment
A single fair-quality controlled study (n = 12 483) evaluated the ef-
fect of screening for osteoporosis on fracture rates in postmeno-
pausal women aged 70 to 85 years.4-6 This study reported no sig-
nificant difference in the primary outcome of any osteoporotic
fracture in women screened with FRAX vs women receiving usual
care (12.9% vs 13.5%; hazard ratio [HR], 0.94 [95% CI, 0.85-1.03]).
There was also no significant difference for incidence of all clinical
fractures (15.3% vs 16.0%; HR, 0.94 [95% CI, 0.86-1.03]) or mor-
tality (8.8% vs 8.4%; HR, 1.05 [95% CI, 0.93-1.19]). However, the
studyreportedastatisticallysignificantreductioninhipfracturein-
cidence (2.6% vs 3.5%; HR, 0.72 [95% CI, 0.59-0.89]).4-6
The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on drug therapies for the
primary prevention of osteoporotic fractures. The vast majority of
studieswereconductedinpostmenopausalwomenexclusively;only
2 studies were conducted in men.4 Overall, the USPSTF found that
drug therapies are effective in treating osteoporosis and reducing
fractures in postmenopausal women.
Bisphosphonates
Bisphosphonates were studied most frequently; the USPSTF iden-
tified 7 studies on alendronate, 2 trials on zoledronic acid, 4 trials
onrisedronate,and2trialsonetidronate.4Allbut1studywerecon-
ducted in postmenopausal women. For women, bisphosphonates
were found to significantly reduce vertebral fractures (relative risk
[RR], 0.57 [95% CI, 0.41-0.78]; 5 studies; n = 5433) and nonverte-
bralfractures(RR,0.84[95%CI,0.76-0.92];8studies;n = 16 438)
but not hip fractures (RR, 0.70 [95% CI, 0.44-1.11]; 3 studies;
n = 8988).4 However, most studies reporting on hip fractures may
havebeenunderpoweredtodetectadifferenceinthisoutcome.In
the single study of men (n = 1199), zoledronic acid was found to re-
duce morphometric vertebral fractures (RR, 0.33 [95% CI, 0.16-
0.70]) but not clinical nonvertebral fractures (RR, 0.65 [95% CI,
0.21-1.97]).4,15
Raloxifene
Only 1 study (n = 7705) on raloxifene met inclusion criteria for the
review.Thestudyevaluatedtreatmentwithraloxifeneinpostmeno-
pausalwomenandfoundareductioninvertebralfractures(RR,0.64
[95%CI,0.53-0.76])butnotnonvertebralfractures(RR,0.93[95%
CI, 0.81-1.06]).4
Denosumab
The USPSTF identified 4 studies that evaluated denosumab; how-
ever,only1studywasadequatelypoweredtodetectadifferencein
fractures. This study (n = 7868) evaluated treatment with deno-
sumabinwomenandfoundasignificantreductioninvertebralfrac-
tures (RR, 0.32 [95% CI, 0.26-0.41]), nonvertebral fractures (RR,
0.80 [95% CI, 0.67-0.95]), and hip fractures (RR, 0.60 [95% CI,
0.37-0.97]).4,35
Parathyroid Hormone
The USPSTF reviewed evidence from 2 trials on parathyroid hor-
mone. One trial (n = 2532) conducted in women found a signifi-
cant reduction in vertebral fractures (RR, 0.32 [95% CI, 0.14-0.75])
butnotnonvertebralfractures(RR,0.97[95%CI,0.71-1.33]).4,36The
other trial, conducted in men, found a nonsignificant reduction in
nonvertebral fractures (RR, 0.65 [95% CI, 0.11-3.83]) when com-
paring the FDA-approved dose of 20 μg/d vs placebo (n = 298).4,16
However, the number of fractures in the study was small and the
studywasstoppedearlyduetoconcernsaboutosteosarcomafound
in animal studies.
Estrogen
Although the USPSTF did not identify any studies on estrogen for
the primary prevention of fractures that met inclusion criteria, the
previous review found that estrogen reduces vertebral fractures
based on data from the Women’s Health Initiative trial.12
Potential Harms of Screening and Treatment
Onetrialevaluatedtheeffectofscreeningonanxietyandqualityof
life and found no difference between screened and unscreened in-
terventiongroups.4-6Additionalpotentialharmsofscreeningforos-
teoporosis include false-positive test results, which can lead to un-
necessary treatment, and false-negative test results. The USPSTF
did review several studies that reported on harms of various osteo-
porosismedications.4,6Overall,theUSPSTFdeterminedthatthepo-
tential harms of osteoporosis drug therapies are small.
Bisphosphonates
Similar to the evidence on the benefits of drug therapy for the pri-
mary prevention of fractures, the most available evidence on the
harms is for bisphosphonates. The USPSTF identified 16 studies on
alendronate, 4 studies on zoledronic acid, 6 studies on risedronate,
2 studies on etidronate, and 7 studies on ibandronate that reported
on harms. Overall, based on pooled analyses, studies on bisphos-
phonates showed no increased risk of discontinuation (RR, 0.99
[95% CI, 0.91-1.07]; 20 studies; n = 17 369), serious adverse events
(RR, 0.98 [95% CI, 0.92-1.04]; 17 studies; n = 11 745), or upper gas-
trointestinal events (RR, 1.01 [95% CI, 0.98-1.05]; 13 studies;
n = 20 485).4 Evidence on bisphosphonates and cardiovascular
events is more limited and generally shows no significant differ-
ence or nonsignificant increases in atrial fibrillation with bisphos-
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Osteoporosis to Prevent Fractures
2528
JAMA
June 26, 2018
Volume 319, Number 24
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 phonate therapy. Concerns have been raised about osteonecrosis
of the jaw and atypical fractures of the femur with bisphosphonate
therapy. The USPSTF found only 3 studies that reported on osteo-
necrosis of the jaw, and none of these studies found any cases.4
The previous review12 noted an FDA case series that reported on
osteonecrosis of the jaw with bisphosphonate use in patients with
cancer. A more recent systematic review that did not meet inclu-
sion criteria (because it included populations with a previous frac-
ture) found higher incidence of osteonecrosis of the jaw with intra-
venous bisphosphonate use and with longer use. No studies that
met inclusion criteria for the current review reported on atypical
fractures of the femur, although some studies and systematic
reviews that did not meet inclusion criteria (because of wrong
study population, study design, or intervention comparator)
reported an increase in atypical femur fractures with bisphospho-
nate use. No studies reported any cases of kidney failure, although
the FDA has added a warning label noting that zoledronic acid is
contraindicated in certain patients. Three trials that reported on
harms of bisphosphonates included men (either combining results
for men and women or including men only); results were consistent
with those of women for risk of discontinuation, serious adverse
events, and upper gastrointestinal events.
Raloxifene
Sixtrialsofraloxifenetherapyinwomenreportedonvariousharms.
Pooledanalysesshowednoincreasedriskofdiscontinuationdueto
adverse events (RR, 1.12 [95% CI, 0.98-1.28]; 6 studies; n = 6438)
or increased risk of leg cramps (RR, 1.41 [95% CI, 0.92-2.14]; 3 stud-
ies;n = 6000).4However,analysesfoundanonsignificanttrendfor
increased risk of deep vein thrombosis (RR, 2.14 [95% CI, 0.99-
4.66];3studies;n = 5839),aswellasanincreasedriskofhotflashes
(RR, 1.42 [95% CI, 1.22-1.66]; 5 studies; n = 6249).4 The previous
review12foundanincreasedriskofthromboemboliceventswithral-
oxifene (RR, 1.60 [95% CI, 1.15-2.23]).4
Denosumab
Four studies (n = 8663) reported on harms of denosumab therapy
in postmenopausal women. Pooled analyses showed no significant
increase in discontinuation (RR, 1.14 [95% CI, 0.85-1.52]) or serious
adverse events (RR, 1.12 [95% CI, 0.88-1.44]) but found a nonsig-
nificant increase in serious infections (RR, 1.89 [95% CI,
0.61-5.91]).4 Three studies reported higher infection rates in
women taking denosumab, and further analysis found a higher rate
of cellulitis and erysipelas.4 One study reported no occurrences of
osteonecrosis of the jaw.4
Parathyroid Hormone
Asinglestudyofparathyroidhormonetherapyinwomen(n = 2532)
reportedanincreasedriskofdiscontinuation(RR,1.23[95%CI,1.08-
1.40])andotheradverseevents,suchasnauseaandheadache(RR,
2.47[95%CI,2.02-3.03]),4,36whereasasinglesmallerstudyinmen
found no increased risk of discontinuation (RR, 1.94 [95% CI, 0.81-
4.69]) or cancer (RR, 0.97 [95% CI, 0.2-4.74])4 using the FDA-
approved dose of 20 μg/d (n = 298).4,16
Estrogen
Similar to the evidence on the benefits of estrogen for the primary
preventionoffractures,nostudiesmetinclusioncriteriaforthecur-
rent review. However, based on findings from the Women’s Health
Initiative trial, the previous review found an increased rate of gall-
bladder events, stroke, and venous thromboembolism with estro-
gen therapy, and an increased risk of urinary incontinence during 1
year of follow-up.4,12 Women taking combined estrogen and pro-
gestinhadanincreasedriskofinvasivebreastcancer,coronaryheart
disease, probable dementia, gallbladder events, stroke, and ve-
nousthromboembolismcomparedwithwomentakingplacebo,and
anincreasedriskofurinaryincontinenceduring1yearoffollow-up.4,12
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
The USPSTF found convincing evidence that bone measurement
tests are accurate for detecting osteoporosis and predicting osteo-
porotic fractures in women and men. The USPSTF found adequate
evidence that clinical risk assessment tools are moderately accu-
rate in identifying risk of osteoporosis and osteoporotic fractures.
TheUSPSTFfoundconvincingevidencethatdrugtherapiesre-
ducesubsequentfractureratesinpostmenopausalwomen.Theben-
efitoftreatingscreen-detectedosteoporosisisatleastmoderatein
women65yearsandolderandinyoungerpostmenopausalwomen
who have similar fracture risk. The harms of treatment range from
no greater than small for bisphosphonates and parathyroid hor-
mone to small to moderate for raloxifene and estrogen. Therefore,
the USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that the net ben-
efitofscreeningforosteoporosisinthesegroupsofwomenisatleast
moderate. The single study that directly evaluated the effect of
screening (with FRAX) on fracture outcomes was generally consis-
tent with this conclusion.
TheUSPSTFfoundthattheevidenceisinadequatetoassessthe
effectivenessofdrugtherapiesinreducingsubsequentfracturerates
in men without previous fractures. Treatments that have been
proveneffectiveinwomencannotnecessarilybepresumedtohave
similar effectiveness in men, and the direct evidence is too limited
todrawdefinitiveconclusions.Thus,theUSPSTFconcludesthatthe
evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms
of screening for osteoporosis in men.
How Does Evidence Fit With Biological Understanding?
Low bone density is a risk factor for fractures, especially in older
adults. Screening for low BMD and subsequent treatment can re-
sult in increased BMD and decrease the risk of subsequent frac-
tures and fracture-related morbidity and mortality. Most evidence
supportsscreeningforandtreatmentofosteoporosisinpostmeno-
pausal women; the evidence for primary prevention in men is lack-
ing, and future research is needed. It cannot be assumed that the
bones of men and women are biologically the same, especially be-
cause bone density is affected by differing levels and effects of tes-
tosterone and estrogen in men and women. Moreover, rapid bone
loss occurs in women due to the loss of estrogen during meno-
pause.Mentendtoexperiencefracturesatanolderagethanwomen,
when risk of comorbid conditions and overall mortality are higher;
thus,thenetbalanceofbenefitsandharmsofscreeningforandtreat-
ment of osteoporosis in men is unclear.
Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted for
public comment on the USPSTF website from November 7, 2017,
to December 4, 2017. In response to comments, the USPSTF
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Osteoporosis to Prevent Fractures
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
June 26, 2018
Volume 319, Number 24
2529
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 added information on the accuracy of certain clinical risk assess-
ment tools to identify osteoporosis in women younger than 65
years to the Discussion section. In addition, the USPSTF clarified
that adults with certain conditions that may increase their risk of
falls or those using certain medications (such as aromatase inhibi-
tors) that may increase one’s risk of fractures are excluded from
this recommendation. Some comments expressed concern that
the USPSTF did not recommend screening for osteoporosis in
men. Although the USPSTF agrees that prevention of osteopo-
rotic fractures in men is an important public health issue, there is
currently not enough evidence demonstrating that screening for
and subsequent treatment of osteoporosis in men prevents pri-
mary fractures. Studies that have evaluated screening and treat-
ment in men have focused on populations that are out of scope
for this recommendation, such as men with a history of previous
fractures or men taking certain medications that may cause sec-
ondary osteoporosis. The USPSTF is calling for more research in
osteoporosis screening and treatment in men, and clarified why it
found the evidence insufficient to make a recommendation for or
against screening in men. Last, the USPSTF updated the recom-
mendation to include information from a recent trial that evalu-
ated the direct effect of screening for osteoporosis on the inci-
dence of fractures.
Update of Previous USPSTF Recommendation
This recommendation is consistent with the 2011 USPSTF recom-
mendationonscreeningforosteoporosis.37Themajorchangeinthe
current recommendation is that the USPSTF expanded its consid-
erationofevidencerelatedtofractureriskassessment,withorwith-
out BMD testing. The USPSTF found there is still insufficient evi-
dence on screening for osteoporosis in men.
Recommendations of Others
In2014,theNationalOsteoporosisFoundationrecommendedBMD
testing in all women 65 years and older and all men 70 years and
older.38 It also recommended BMD testing in postmenopausal
women younger than 65 years and men aged 50 to 69 years based
ontheirriskfactorprofile,includingiftheyhadafractureasanadult.
The International Society for Clinical Densitometry recommends
BMD testing in all women 65 years and older and all men 70 years
and older. It also recommends BMD testing in postmenopausal
womenyoungerthan65yearsandmenyoungerthan70yearswho
have risk factors for low bone mass.39 As part of Choosing Wisely,
the American Academy of Family Physicians recommends against
DXA screening in women younger than 65 years and men younger
than70yearswithnoriskfactors.40In2012(andreaffirmedin2014),
the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recom-
mended BMD testing with DXA beginning at age 65 years in all
womenandselectivescreeninginpostmenopausalwomenyounger
than 65 years who have osteoporosis risk factors or an adult
fracture.9TheAmericanAssociationofClinicalEndocrinologistsalso
recommendsevaluatingallwomen50yearsandolderforosteopo-
rosisriskandconsideringBMDtestingbasedonclinicalfracturerisk
profile.10TheEndocrineSocietyrecommendsscreeninginmenolder
than 70 years and adults aged 50 to 69 years with significant risk
factors or fracture after age 50 years.41
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: May 17, 2018.
Author Contributions: Dr Curry had full access to
all of the data in the study and takes responsibility
for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the
data analysis. The USPSTF members contributed
equally to the recommendation statement.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have
completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Authors
followed the policy regarding conflicts of interest
described at https://www
.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name
/conflict-of-interest-disclosures. All members of the
USPSTF receive travel reimbursement and an
honorarium for participating in USPSTF meetings.
No other disclosures were reported.
The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
members: Susan J. Curry, PhD; Alex H. Krist, MD,
MPH; Douglas K. Owens, MD, MS; Michael J. Barry,
MD; Aaron B. Caughey, MD, PhD; Karina W.
Davidson, PhD, MASc; Chyke A. Doubeni, MD, MPH;
John W. Epling Jr, MD, MSEd; Alex R. Kemper, MD,
MPH, MS; Martha Kubik, PhD, RN; C. Seth
Landefeld, MD; Carol M. Mangione, MD, MSPH;
Maureen G. Phipps, MD, MPH; Michael Pignone,
MD, MPH; Michael Silverstein, MD, MPH; Melissa A.
Simon, MD, MPH; Chien-Wen Tseng, MD, MPH,
MSEE; John B. Wong, MD.
Affiliations of The US Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) members: University of Iowa,
Iowa City (Curry); Fairfax Family Practice Residency,
Fairfax, Virginia (Krist); Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond (Krist); Veterans Affairs Palo
Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, California
(Owens); Stanford University, Stanford, California
(Owens); Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts (Barry); Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland (Caughey); Columbia
University, New York, New York (Davidson);
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (Doubeni);
Virginia Tech Carilion School of Medicine, Roanoke
(Epling); Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Columbus,
Ohio (Kemper); Temple University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania (Kubik); University of Alabama at
Birmingham (Landefeld); University of California,
Los Angeles (Mangione); Brown University,
Providence, Rhode Island (Phipps); Department of
Medicine, Dell Medical School, University of Texas,
Austin (Pignone); University of Texas, Austin
(Pignone); Boston University, Boston,
Massachusetts (Silverstein); Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois (Simon); University of
Hawaii, Honolulu (Tseng); Pacific Health Research
and Education Institute, Honolulu, Hawaii (Tseng);
Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts (Wong).
Funding/Support: The USPSTF is an independent,
voluntary body. The US Congress mandates that
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) support the operations of the USPSTF.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: AHRQ staff assisted
in the following: development and review of the
research plan, commission of the systematic
evidence review from an Evidence-based Practice
Center, coordination of expert review and public
comment of the draft evidence report and draft
recommendation statement, and the writing and
preparation of the final recommendation statement
and its submission for publication. AHRQ staff had
no role in the approval of the final recommendation
statement or the decision to submit for publication.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the
USPSTF are independent of the US government.
They should not be construed as an official position
of AHRQ or the US Department of Health and
Human Services.
Additional Contributions: We thank Tina Fan, MD,
MPH (AHRQ), who contributed to the writing of the
manuscript, and Lisa Nicolella, MA (AHRQ), who
assisted with coordination and editing.
REFERENCES
1. Wright NC, Looker AC, Saag KG, et al. The recent
prevalence of osteoporosis and low bone mass in
the United States based on bone mineral density at
the femoral neck or lumbar spine. J Bone Miner Res.
2014;29(11):2520-2526. doi:10.1002/jbmr.2269
2. Brauer CA, Coca-Perraillon M, Cutler DM, Rosen
AB. Incidence and mortality of hip fractures in the
United States. JAMA. 2009;302(14):1573-1579.
doi:10.1001/jama.2009.1462
3. Burge R, Dawson-Hughes B, Solomon DH, Wong
JB, King A, Tosteson A. Incidence and economic
burden of osteoporosis-related fractures in the
United States, 2005-2025. J Bone Miner Res. 2007;
22(3):465-475. doi:10.1359/jbmr.061113
4. Viswanathan M, Reddy S, Berkman N, et al.
Screening to Prevent Osteoporotic Fractures: An
Evidence Review for the US Preventive Services Task
Force: Evidence Synthesis No. 162. Rockville, MD:
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Osteoporosis to Prevent Fractures
2530
JAMA
June 26, 2018
Volume 319, Number 24
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2018.
AHRQ publication 15-05226-EF-1.
5. Shepstone L, Lenaghan E, Cooper C, et al;
SCOOP Study Team. Screening in the
community to reduce fractures in older women
(SCOOP): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet.
2018;391(10122):741-747. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736
(17)32640-5
6. Viswanathan M, Reddy S, Berkman N, et al.
Screening to prevent osteoporotic fractures:
updated evidence report and systematic review for
the US Preventive Services Task Force [published
June 26, 2018]. JAMA. doi:10.1001/jama.2018.6537
7. Fryar CD, Gu Q, Ogden CL, Flegal KM; National
Center for Health Statistics. Anthropometric
reference data for children and adults:
United States, 2011-2014. Vital Health Stat 3. 2016;
(39):1-46.
8. University of Sheffield. FRAX fracture risk
assessment tool. https://www.sheffield.ac.uk/FRAX
/tool.aspx?country=23. Accessed May 15, 2018.
9. Committee on Practice Bulletins-Gynecology,
The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists. ACOG practice bulletin N 129:
osteoporosis. Obstet Gynecol. 2012;120(3):718-734.
doi:10.1097/AOG.0b013e31826dc45d
10. Camacho PM, Petak SM, Binkley N, et al.
American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists
and American College of Endocrinology clinical
practice guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment
of postmenopausal osteoporosis—2016—executive
summary. Endocr Pract. 2016;22(9):1111-1118.
doi:10.4158/EP161435.ESGL
11. North American Menopause Society.
Management of osteoporosis in postmenopausal
women: 2010 position statement of the North
American Menopause Society. Menopause. 2010;17
(1):25-54. doi:10.1097/gme.0b013e3181c617e6
12. Nelson HD, Haney EM, Dana T, Bougatsos C,
Chou R. Screening for osteoporosis: an update for
the US Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern
Med. 2010;153(2):99-111. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-
153-2-201007200-00262
13. Willson T, Nelson SD, Newbold J, Nelson RE,
LaFleur J. The clinical epidemiology of male
osteoporosis: a review of the recent literature.
Clin Epidemiol. 2015;7:65-76.
14. Drake MT, Murad MH, Mauck KF, et al. Clinical
review: risk factors for low bone mass-related
fractures in men: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97(6):
1861-1870. doi:10.1210/jc.2011-3058
15. Boonen S, Reginster JY, Kaufman JM, et al.
Fracture risk and zoledronic acid therapy in men
with osteoporosis. N Engl J Med. 2012;367(18):1714-
1723. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1204061
16. Orwoll ES, Scheele WH, Paul S, et al. The effect
of teriparatide [human parathyroid hormone (1-34)]
therapy on bone density in men with osteoporosis.
J Bone Miner Res. 2003;18(1):9-17. doi:10.1359/jbmr
.2003.18.1.9
17. National Center for Health Statistics. Healthy
People 2020 Midcourse Review. Hyattsville, MD:
National Center for Health Statistics; 2016.
18. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Physical activity and health. https://www.cdc.gov
/physicalactivity/basics/pa-health/index.htm.
Updated February 13, 2018. Accessed May 15, 2018.
19. Institute of Medicine. Dietary reference intakes
for calcium and vitamin D. 2010. http://www
.nationalacademies.org/hmd/~/media/Files/Report
%20Files/2010/Dietary-Reference-Intakes-for
-Calcium-and-Vitamin-D/calciumvitd_lg.jpg?la=en.
Accessed May 15, 2018.
20. Grossman DC, Curry SJ, Owens DK, et al; US
Preventive Services Task Force. Interventions to
prevent falls in community-dwelling older adults:
US Preventive Services Task Force
recommendation statement. JAMA. 2018;319(16):
1696-1704. doi:10.1001/jama.2018.3097
21. Grossman DC, Curry SJ, Owens DK, et al; US
Preventive Services Task Force. Vitamin D, calcium,
or combined supplementation for the primary
prevention of fractures in community-dwelling
adults: US Preventive Services Task Force
recommendation statement. JAMA. 2018;319(15):
1592-1599. doi:10.1001/jama.2018.3185
22. Lydick E, Cook K, Turpin J, Melton M, Stine R,
Byrnes C. Development and validation of a simple
questionnaire to facilitate identification of women
likely to have low bone density. Am J Manag Care.
1998;4(1):37-48.
23. Cadarette SM, Jaglal SB, Kreiger N, McIsaac WJ,
Darlington GA, Tu JV. Development and validation
of the Osteoporosis Risk Assessment Instrument
to facilitate selection of women for bone
densitometry. CMAJ. 2000;162(9):1289-1294.
24. Sedrine WB, Chevallier T, Zegels B, et al.
Development and assessment of the Osteoporosis
Index of Risk (OSIRIS) to facilitate selection of
women for bone densitometry. Gynecol Endocrinol.
2002;16(3):245-250. doi:10.1080/gye.16.3.245.250
25. Koh LK, Sedrine WB, Torralba TP, et al;
Osteoporosis Self-Assessment Tool for Asians
(OSTA) Research Group. A simple tool to identify
Asian women at increased risk of osteoporosis.
Osteoporos Int. 2001;12(8):699-705. doi:10.1007
/s001980170070
26. Richy F, Gourlay M, Ross PD, et al. Validation
and comparative evaluation of the osteoporosis
self-assessment tool (OST) in a Caucasian
population from Belgium. QJM. 2004;97(1):39-46.
doi:10.1093/qjmed/hch002
27. Gourlay ML, Fine JP, Preisser JS, et al; Study
of Osteoporotic Fractures Research Group.
Bone-density testing interval and transition to
osteoporosis in older women. N Engl J Med. 2012;
366(3):225-233. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1107142
28. Frost SA, Nguyen ND, Center JR, Eisman JA,
Nguyen TV. Timing of repeat BMD measurements:
development of an absolute risk-based prognostic
model. J Bone Miner Res. 2009;24(11):1800-1807.
doi:10.1359/jbmr.090514
29. Kanis JA; World Health Organization Scientific
Group. Assessment of Osteoporosis at the Primary
Health Care Level: Technical Report. Sheffield, United
Kingdom: University of Sheffield; 2007.
30. National Committee for Quality Assurance.
Osteoporosis testing and management in older
women. http://www.ncqa.org/report-cards/health
-plans/state-of-health-care-quality/2017-table-of
-contents/osteoporosis. Accessed May 15, 2018.
31. US Congress, Office of Technology Assessment.
Hip Fracture Outcomes in People Age 50 and Over:
Background Paper. Washington, DC: US Government
Printing Office; 1994. OTA-BP-H-120.
32. Jiménez-Núñez FG, Manrique-Arija S,
Ureña-Garnica I, et al. Reducing the need for
central dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry in
postmenopausal women: efficacy of a clinical
algorithm including peripheral densitometry.
Calcif Tissue Int. 2013;93(1):62-68. doi:10.1007
/s00223-013-9728-4
33. Harrison EJ, Adams JE. Application of a triage
approach to peripheral bone densitometry reduces
the requirement for central DXA but is not cost
effective. Calcif Tissue Int. 2006;79(4):199-206.
doi:10.1007/s00223-005-0302-6
34. Crandall CJ, Larson J, Gourlay ML, et al.
Osteoporosis screening in postmenopausal women
50 to 64 years old: comparison of US Preventive
Services Task Force strategy and two traditional
strategies in the Women’s Health Initiative.
J Bone Miner Res. 2014;29(7):1661-1666.
doi:10.1002/jbmr.2174
35. Cummings SR, San Martin J, McClung MR, et al;
FREEDOM Trial. Denosumab for prevention of
fractures in postmenopausal women with
osteoporosis. N Engl J Med. 2009;361(8):756-765.
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa0809493
36. Greenspan SL, Bone HG, Ettinger MP, et al;
Treatment of Osteoporosis with Parathyroid
Hormone Study Group. Effect of recombinant
human parathyroid hormone (1-84) on vertebral
fracture and bone mineral density in
postmenopausal women with osteoporosis:
a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2007;146(5):
326-339. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-146-5
-200703060-00005
37. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for osteoporosis: US Preventive Services
Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern
Med. 2011;154(5):356-364. doi:10.7326/0003
-4819-154-5-201103010-00307
38. Cosman F, de Beur SJ, LeBoff MS, et al;
National Osteoporosis Foundation. Clinician’s guide
to prevention and treatment of osteoporosis.
Osteoporos Int. 2014;25(10):2359-2381.
doi:10.1007/s00198-014-2794-2
39. International Society for Clinical Densitometry.
2015 ISCD official positions—adult. http://www
.iscd.org/official-positions/2015-iscd-official
-positions-adult/. Modified June 18, 2015. Accessed
May 15, 2018.
40. American Association of Family Physicians.
Choosing wisely: DEXA for osteoporosis.
https://www.aafp.org/patient-care/clinical
-recommendations/all/cw-osteoporosis.html.
Accessed May 15, 2018.
41. Watts NB, Adler RA, Bilezikian JP, et al;
Endocrine Society. Osteoporosis in men: an
Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97(6):1802-1822.
doi:10.1210/jc.2011-3045
42. Chen SJ, Chen YJ, Cheng CH, Hwang HF,
Chen CY, Lin MR. Comparisons of different
screening tools for identifying fracture/
osteoporosis risk among community-dwelling older
people. Medicine (Baltimore). 2016;95(20):e3415.
doi:10.1097/MD.0000000000003415
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Osteoporosis to Prevent Fractures
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
June 26, 2018
Volume 319, Number 24
2531
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
