 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Screening for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
US Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement
US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
T
heUSPreventiveServicesTaskForce(USPSTF)makesrec-
ommendationsabouttheeffectivenessofspecificpreven-
tivecareservicesforpatientswithoutobviousrelatedsigns
or symptoms.
Itbasesitsrecommendationsontheevidenceofboththebenefits
andharmsoftheserviceandanassessmentofthebalance.TheUSPSTF
doesnotconsiderthecostsofprovidingaserviceinthisassessment.
TheUSPSTFrecognizesthatclinicaldecisionsinvolvemorecon-
siderations than evidence alone. Clinicians should understand the
evidence but individualize decision making to the specific patient
or situation. Similarly, the USPSTF notes that policy and coverage
decisionsinvolveconsiderationsinadditiontotheevidenceofclini-
cal benefits and harms.
Summary of Recommendation and Evidence
The USPSTF recommends against screening for chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease (COPD) in asymptomatic adults. (D recom-
mendation) (Figure 1)
Rationale
Importance
About 14% of US adults aged 40 to 79 years have COPD, and it is
thethirdleadingcauseofdeathintheUnitedStates.
1,2Personswith
severe COPD are often unable to participate in normal physical ac-
tivity due to deterioration of lung function.
Detection
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is defined as airflow limita-
tion that is not fully reversible. Chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
ease is associated with an abnormal inflammatory response of the
lung to harmful particles or gases. Diagnosis is based on postbron-
chodilator spirometry, which detects fixed airway obstruction; a
forced expiratory volume in 1 second to forced vital capacity
(FEV1/FVC) ratio of less than 0.70 is the current criterion for a posi-
tiveCOPDdiagnosis.PersonswithCOPDoften,butnotalways,have
symptoms such as dyspnea (difficulty breathing or shortness of
breath), chronic cough, and chronic sputum production. Patients
IMPORTANCE About 14% of US adults aged 40 to 79 years have chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), and it is the third leading cause of death in the United States.
Persons with severe COPD are often unable to participate in normal physical activity due to
deterioration of lung function.
OBJECTIVE To update the 2008 US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
recommendation on screening for COPD in asymptomatic adults.
EVIDENCE REVIEW The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on whether screening for COPD in
asymptomatic adults (those who do not recognize or report respiratory symptoms) improves
health outcomes. The USPSTF reviewed the diagnostic accuracy of screening tools (including
prescreeningquestionnairesandspirometry);whetherscreeningforCOPDimprovesthedelivery
anduptakeoftargetedpreventiveservices,suchassmokingcessationorrelevantimmunizations;
and the possible harms of screening for and treatment of mild to moderate COPD.
FINDINGS Similar to 2008, the USPSTF did not find evidence that screening for COPD in
asymptomatic persons improves health-related quality of life, morbidity, or mortality. The
USPSTF determined that early detection of COPD, before the development of symptoms, does
not alter the course of the disease or improve patient outcomes. The USPSTF concludes with
moderate certainty that screening for COPD in asymptomatic persons has no net benefit.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATION The USPSTF recommends against screening for COPD
in asymptomatic adults. (D recommendation)
JAMA. 2016;315(13):1372-1377. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.2638
Editorial page 1343
Author Audio Interview at
jama.com
Related article page 1378 and
JAMA Patient Page page 1419
CME Quiz at
jamanetworkcme.com and
CME Questions page 1398
Related article at
jamainternalmedicine.com
Authors/Group Information: The
USPSTF members are listed at the
end of this article.
Corresponding Author: Albert L. Siu,
MD, MSPH (chair@uspstf.net).
Clinical Review & Education
Special Communication | USPSTF RECOMMENDATION STATEMENT
1372
JAMA
April 5, 2016
Volume 315, Number 13
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
often have a history of exposure to risk factors such as cigarette
smokeorheatingfuelsoroccupationalexposuretodustsorchemi-
cals. Although postbronchodilator spirometry is required to make
a definitive diagnosis, prescreening questionnaires can elicit cur-
rentsymptomsandpreviousexposurestoharmfulparticlesorgases.
Benefits of Detection and Early Treatment
TheUSPSTFfoundinadequateevidencethatscreeningforCOPDin
asymptomatic persons using questionnaires or spirometry im-
proves health outcomes.
Harms of Detection and Early Treatment
The USPSTF found inadequate evidence on the harms of screen-
ing. However, given the lack of benefit of early detection and
treatment, the opportunity cost associated with screening asymp-
tomatic persons may be large. The amount of time and effort
required to screen for COPD in asymptomatic persons (using
screening spirometry with or without prescreening question-
naires) is not trivial.
USPSTF Assessment
The USPSTF determined that early detection of COPD, before the
development of symptoms, does not alter the course of the dis-
easeorimprovepatientoutcomes.TheUSPSTFconcludeswithmod-
erate certainty that screening for COPD in asymptomatic persons
hasnonetbenefit.Thus,screeningisnotrecommendedinpersons
who do not have symptoms suggestive of COPD. The USPSTF rec-
ommends against screening for COPD in asymptomatic adults.
Figure 1. US Preventive Services Task Force Grades and Levels of Certainty
What the USPSTF Grades Mean and Suggestions for Practice
Grade
Definition
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
Suggestions for Practice
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate, or
there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients
based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty
that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service for selected
patients depending on individual
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the service
has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits
and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of
benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section
of the USPSTF Recommendation
Statement. If the service is offered,
patients should understand the
uncertainty about the balance of benefits
and harms.
USPSTF Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary care
populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be
strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the estimate
is constrained by such factors as 
the number, size, or quality of individual studies.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice.
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be large
enough to alter the conclusion.
The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as
benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature
of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of
the limited number or size of studies.
important flaws in study design or methods.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
gaps in the chain of evidence.
findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice.
lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
April 5, 2016
Volume 315, Number 13
1373
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Clinical Considerations
Patient Population Under Consideration
This recommendation statement applies to asymptomatic adults
who do not recognize or report respiratory symptoms (Figure 2).
It does not apply to at-risk persons who present to clinicians with
symptoms such as chronic cough, sputum production, dyspnea, or
wheezing. It also does not apply to persons with a family history of
α1-antitrypsin deficiency.
Risk Assessment
Exposure to cigarette smoke or toxic fumes increases the risk for
COPD. Epidemiological studies have found that 15% to 50%
of smokers develop COPD.3 More than 70% of all COPD cases oc-
cur in current or former smokers. Occupational exposure to toxins,
dusts, or industrial chemicals contributes an estimated 15% of all
COPD cases. Environmental pollution, including wood smoke and
trafficpollutants,isalsoassociatedwithincreasedriskforCOPD.Non-
modifiable risk factors for COPD include history of asthma or child-
hood respiratory tract infections and α1-antitrypsin deficiency.
Screening Tests
Screening adults in primary care involves either risk assessment
via a formal prescreening questionnaire and, if positive, follow-up
with diagnostic spirometry testing or screening spirometry
administered without a bronchodilator and, if positive, follow-up
with diagnostic spirometry testing. Patients identified as high risk
by a prescreening questionnaire or screening spirometry are
referred for diagnostic spirometry testing. Diagnosis by spirom-
etry requires persistent airway obstruction after administration of
an inhaled bronchodilator, such as albuterol (ie, postbronchodila-
tor spirometry). Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is diag-
nosed when the patient has a postbronchodilator FEV1/FVC ratio
of less than 0.70. Severity is defined by the percentage of pre-
dicted postbronchodilator FEV1; 80% or more is mild, 50% to
79% is moderate, 30% to 49% is severe, and less than 30% is
very severe.
Other Approaches to Prevention
Preventionofexposuretocigarettesmokeandothertoxicfumesis
the best way to prevent COPD. Interventions to prevent the initia-
tion of tobacco use are an effective way to prevent exposure to
cigarette smoke. Current smokers should receive smoking cessa-
tioncounselingandbeofferedbehavioralandpharmacologicalthera-
pies to stop smoking.
Useful Resources
TheUSPSTFrecommendsthatcliniciansaskalladults,includingpreg-
nant women, about tobacco use and provide tobacco cessation in-
terventions for those who use tobacco products. The USPSTF also
recommends that clinicians provide interventions, including edu-
cation or brief counseling, to prevent initiation of tobacco use in
school-aged children and adolescents. These recommendations
andtheirsupportingevidenceareavailableontheUSPSTFwebsite
(http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org).
Figure 2. Screening for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Clinical Summary
Population
Asymptomatic adults who do not present with respiratory symptoms
Recommendation 
Do not screen for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Grade: D
Risk Assessment 
Screening Tests 
Treatment and
Interventions
Balance of Benefits
and Harms   
Other Relevant
USPSTF
Recommendations   
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting documents, please
go to http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.   
Risk factors include history of exposure to cigarette smoke or heating fuels; occupational exposure to toxins, dusts, or industrial
chemicals; exposure to environmental pollution, such as wood smoke and traffic pollutants; history of asthma or childhood
respiratory tract infections; and α1-antitrypsin deficiency.
Primary care screening involves either risk assessment via a formal prescreening questionnaire and, if positive, follow-up with
diagnostic spirometry testing or screening spirometry administered without a bronchodilator and, if positive, follow-up with
diagnostic spirometry testing.
Medications used to treat COPD include long-acting β-agonists, inhaled corticosteroids, long-acting anticholinergics, and
combination therapy with corticosteroids and long-acting β-agonists.
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that screening for COPD in asymptomatic persons has no net benefit.
The USPSTF recommends that clinicians ask all adults, including pregnant women, about tobacco use and provide tobacco cessation
interventions for those who use tobacco products. The USPSTF also recommends that clinicians provide interventions, including
education or brief counseling, to prevent initiation of tobacco use in school-aged children and adolescents. These recommendations
are available on the USPSTF website (http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org).
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
1374
JAMA
April 5, 2016
Volume 315, Number 13
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Other Considerations
Research Needs and Gaps
The USPSTF reviewed studies whose participants included former
and current smokers, but many studies, including those that exam-
ined the accuracy of screening tools, did not report results sepa-
ratelybysmokingstatus(ie,currentvsformersmokers).Futurestud-
ies that stratify risk by smoking status could help identify different
risk groups that may benefit from screening. In addition, trials are
neededthatassesstheeffectsofscreeningamongcurrentandpre-
vioussmokersinprimarycareonlong-termhealthoutcomes.Long-
termtrialsoftreatmentofCOPDinscreen-detectedpatientsarealso
needed. Better treatment options for COPD and long-term epide-
miologicalstudiesofthenaturalhistoryandheterogeneityofCOPD
progressioncouldalsohelpidentifypatientswhoareatgreatestrisk
for clinical deterioration.
Discussion
Burden of Disease
About 13.7 million US adults are affected annually by COPD.4 As
lung function deteriorates over time, patients with COPD experi-
ence significant restrictions in their ability to work and participate
in other activities of daily living. In 2013, COPD was responsible
for about 10.3 million physician visits and 1.5 million emergency
department visits.4 Health care costs associated with COPD are
an estimated $32 billion per year.3 The prevalence of COPD and
its associated mortality have been rising among women, possibly
due to increasing smoking rates, environmental exposures, or
biological mechanisms that increase susceptibility to COPD.
Among different racial/ethnic groups, the prevalence of COPD is
highest among non-Hispanic white individuals (14.9%) and non-
Hispanic black individuals (12.8%).2,5
Scope of Review
Since the 2008 USPSTF recommendation, there is still no evi-
dence that screening for COPD in asymptomatic persons improves
health-related quality of life, morbidity, or mortality. The USPSTF
commissioned a systematic review to examine whether screening
for COPD improves the delivery and uptake of targeted preventive
services, such as smoking cessation or relevant immunizations. In
addition to the potential benefits of screening, the USPSTF also ex-
amined the possible harms of screening for and treatment of mild
to moderate COPD. The diagnostic accuracy of screening tools
(including prescreening questionnaires and spirometry) was not
part of the previous systematic review but was evaluated in the
current review.3,6
Accuracy of Prescreening and Screening Tests
The USPSTF identified 3 externally validated questionnaires based
on risk factors, symptoms, or both: the COPD Diagnostic
Questionnaire,7,8theLungFunctionQuestionnaire,9andtheCOPD
Population Screener.10 In addition, 3 other questionnaires are cur-
rently in development but have not yet been externally validated.3
TheCOPDDiagnosticQuestionnaireisan8-itemquestionnaire;using
a cutoff of greater than 16.5, it has a sensitivity of about 90% and
specificityofabout40%foridentifyingpersonswithCOPDinapri-
marycarepopulation.3TheLungFunctionQuestionnaireisa5-item
questionnaire; using a cutoff of 18 or greater, it has a sensitivity of
approximately 88% and specificity of approximately 25% in a pri-
mary care population of current and former smokers.3 The COPD
PopulationScreenerisa5-itemquestionnaire;usingacutoffof4or
greater, it has a sensitivity of 67% and specificity of 73% in a gen-
eral population in Japan.3
The USPSTF found 2 heterogeneous international studies of
screening with handheld peak flow meters that were not consid-
ered applicable to a US primary care population.3 Screening with
pulmonary function tests (without bronchodilators) was studied
in primary care populations in Australia and Sweden3 and yielded
sensitivity of about 50% and specificity of 90% for a cutoff of
less than 0.70. Another screening study conducted in Greece
evaluated postbronchodilator spirometry and yielded sensitivity
of 80% and specificity of 95% for the same cutoff.3 The USPSTF
found no pulmonary function screening studies conducted in the
United States.3
Effectiveness of Early Detection and Treatment
The USPSTF found no studies that directly assessed the effects of
screening for COPD in asymptomatic adults on morbidity, mortal-
ity, or health-related quality of life. The USPSTF also found no stud-
iesthatexaminedtheeffectivenessofscreeningonrelevantimmu-
nization rates. The USPSTF identified 5 studies that assessed the
effectsofscreeningonsmokingcessation.11-15Thesestudiesprimar-
ily examined the incremental value of adding spirometry testing to
existing smoking cessation programs. One trial showed a statisti-
cally significant increase in smoking cessation rates between par-
ticipantswhoreceivedexplanationsoftheirspirometryresultsusing
“lung age”and those who did not.11 The other 4 trials did not report
any significant differences in smoking abstinence rates.
The USPSTF examined the treatment efficacy of 4 classes of
medications used to treat COPD: long-acting β-agonists (LABAs),
inhaled corticosteroids, long-acting anticholinergics (tiotropium),
and combination therapy with corticosteroids and LABAs.3 No
treatment trials were conducted in asymptomatic or screen-
detected populations; all were conducted in populations with mod-
erate COPD. Two studies of LABAs found no difference in all-cause
mortality but found decreased exacerbation of COPD symptoms in
the treatment vs control group in post hoc subanalysis. Decreased
exacerbation of COPD symptoms was reported for patients with
moderate to severe symptoms of COPD. However, rates of COPD
exacerbation were extremely low at baseline (<1 episode per year),
even among participants reporting symptoms. Six trials of inhaled
corticosteroids found decreased exacerbation of COPD symptoms
but no difference in all-cause mortality, dyspnea, or quality of life.
One trial of combination therapy with corticosteroids and LABAs
found decreased exacerbation of COPD symptoms but no differ-
ences in mortality or quality of life. Five trials of anticholinergics
found decreased exacerbation of COPD symptoms but insufficient
evidence on other outcomes. For all classes of medications, the one
consistent finding was that treatment decreases exacerbation of
COPD symptoms in persons with moderate COPD but has no con-
sistent effects on all-cause mortality, dyspnea, or quality of life.
There was insufficient evidence on the effects of treatment on
exercise capacity and functional status.
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
April 5, 2016
Volume 315, Number 13
1375
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
The potential harms of using prescreening questionnaires and
screening spirometry are false-positive and false-negative results.
The USPSTF found no evidence to estimate the short- or long-term
harms of these screening tests. Potential harms of treatment in-
cludepneumoniawithuseofLABAsandinhaledcorticosteroidsand
decreased bone density and increased fractures with use of in-
haled corticosteroids. However, data were sparse, with few ad-
verseevents,andtherewerenodifferencesbetweentheinterven-
tion and control groups.3
Because all of the treatment trials were conducted in persons
with mild to moderate COPD, it is unclear how these results would
apply to asymptomatic populations. The potential treatment ben-
efit of decreased exacerbation of symptoms may not apply to
patients who report no symptoms to begin with. Given the lack of
potential benefits of treatment in asymptomatic persons and the
not-trivial work of screening, the USPSTF determined that there is
no net benefit of screening.
How Does the Evidence Fit With Biological Understanding?
Todate,treatmenttrialsofCOPDhavefoundmodesttreatmentben-
efits in patients with mild to moderate COPD. Because the majority
of COPD cases result from exposure to cigarette smoke and other
toxicfumes,themosteffectivewaytopreventCOPDistolimitsuch
exposure. Persons with a history of exposure and symptoms such
as dyspnea, chronic cough, or sputum production should be evalu-
ated for the diagnosis of COPD.
Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted for
public comment on the USPSTF website from August 18 to Sep-
tember 14, 2015. The USPSTF received requests for clarification
about whether high-risk groups, such as current smokers, were
included in the systematic review. In response, the USPSTF clari-
fied that both current and former smokers were included in the
studies reviewed. However, the lack of stratified results by smok-
ing status limits the USPSTF’
s ability to make a separate recom-
mendation for screening in persons who are at higher risk for
COPD. The USPSTF recognizes that patients who have mild COPD
may underreport symptoms. The USPSTF encourages clinicians to
offer smoking cessation interventions to all patients who currently
smoke and to pursue active case-finding for COPD in patients with
risk factors, such as exposure to cigarette smoke or heating fuels,
occupational exposure to dusts or chemicals, or a family history of
α1-antitrypsin deficiency.
Update of Previous USPSTF Recommendation
This is an update of the 2008 USPSTF recommendation. In 2008,
the USPSTF recommended against screening for COPD with spi-
rometry in asymptomatic adults (D recommendation). This recom-
mendationwasbasedontheconclusionthatscreeningforCOPDhad
no net benefit and large associated opportunity costs.
Recommendations of Others
In 2011, the American College of Physicians, American College of
Chest Physicians, American Thoracic Society, and European Respi-
ratory Society issued joint guidelines recommending that spirom-
etry be used to diagnose airflow obstruction in patients with respi-
ratorysymptoms.16Thejointpanelrecommendedagainstscreening
for COPD with spirometry in asymptomatic patients, citing the lack
ofbenefit.Similarly,in2010,theUKNationalInstituteforHealthand
CareExcellencerecommendedagainstscreeningforCOPDinasymp-
tomatic patients.17 Recent guidelines from the Global Initiative for
Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease recommended case-finding in
symptomatic patients but did not recommend screening in asymp-
tomatic populations.18
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Authors/US Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) members include the following
individuals: Albert L. Siu, MD, MSPH; Kirsten
Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD, MAS; David C.
Grossman, MD, MPH; Karina W. Davidson, PhD,
MASc; John W. Epling Jr, MD, MSEd; Francisco A. R.
García, MD, MPH; Matthew Gillman, MD, SM; Alex
R. Kemper, MD, MPH, MS; Alex H. Krist, MD, MPH;
Ann E. Kurth, PhD, CNM, MSN, MPH; C. Seth
Landefeld, MD; Carol M. Mangione, MD, MSPH;
Diane M. Harper, MD, MPH, MS; William R. Phillips,
MD, MPH; Maureen G. Phipps, MD, MPH; Michael P.
Pignone, MD, MPH.
Affiliations of Authors/US Preventive Services
Task Force (USPSTF) members: Mount Sinai
School of Medicine, New York, New York (Siu);
James J. Peters Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Bronx, New York (Siu); University of California,
San Francisco (Bibbins-Domingo); Group Health
Research Institute, Seattle, Washington
(Grossman); Columbia University, New York,
New York (Davidson); State University of New York
Upstate Medical University, Syracuse (Epling); Pima
County Department of Health, Tucson, Arizona
(García); Harvard Medical School and Harvard
Pilgrim Health Care Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts (Gillman); Duke University, Durham,
North Carolina (Kemper); Fairfax Family Practice,
Fairfax, Virginia (Krist); Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond (Krist); Yale School of
Nursing, West Haven, Connecticut (Kurth);
University of Alabama at Birmingham (Landefeld);
University of California, Los Angeles (Mangione);
University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky
(Harper); University of Washington, Seattle
(Phillips); Brown University, Providence, Rhode
Island (Phipps); University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill (Pignone).
Author Contributions: Dr Siu had full access to all
of the data in the study and takes responsibility for
the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the
data analysis. The USPSTF members contributed
equally to the Recommendation Statement.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have
completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest and
none were reported. Authors followed the policy
regarding conflicts of interest described at
http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org
/Page/Name/conflict-of-interest-disclosures.
Funding/Support: The USPSTF is an independent,
voluntary body. The US Congress mandates that
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) support the operations of the USPSTF.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: AHRQ staff assisted
in the following: development and review of the
research plan, commission of the systematic
evidence review from an Evidence-based Practice
Center, coordination of expert review and public
comment of the draft evidence report and draft
recommendation statement, and the writing and
preparation of the final recommendation statement
and its submission for publication. AHRQ staff had
no role in the approval of the final recommendation
statement or the decision to submit for publication.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the
USPSTF are independent of the US government.
They should not be construed as an official position
of AHRQ or the US Department of Health and
Human Services.
Additional Contributions: We thank
Quyen Ngo-Metzger, MD, MPH, of AHRQ, who
contributed to the writing of the manuscript,
and Lisa Nicolella, MA, of AHRQ, who assisted
with coordination and editing.
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
1376
JAMA
April 5, 2016
Volume 315, Number 13
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
REFERENCES
1. Kochanek KD, Murphy SL, Xu J, Arias E. Mortality
in the United States, 2013. NCHS Data Brief. 2014;
(178):1-8.
2. Tilert T, Dillon C, Paulose-Ram R, Hnizdo E,
Doney B. Estimating the US prevalence of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease using pre- and
post-bronchodilator spirometry: the National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES) 2007-2010. Respir Res. 2013;14:103.
3. Guirguis-Blake JM, Senger CA, Webber EM,
Mularski R, Whitlock EP. Screening for Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A Systematic
Evidence Review for the US Preventive Services Task
Force: Evidence Synthesis No. 130. Rockville, MD:
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2016.
AHRQ Publication 14-05205-EF-1.
4. Ford ES, Croft JB, Mannino DM, Wheaton AG,
Zhang X, Giles WH. COPD surveillance: United
States, 1999-2011. Chest. 2013;144(1):284-305.
5. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
among adults: United States, 2011. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2012;61(46):938-943.
6. Guirguis-Blake JM, Senger CA, Webber EM,
Mularski RA, Whitlock EP. Screening for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: evidence report
and systematic review for the US Preventive
Services Task Force. JAMA. doi:10.1001/jama.2016
.2654.
7. Price DB, Tinkelman DG, Halbert RJ, et al.
Symptom-based questionnaire for identifying
COPD in smokers. Respiration. 2006;73(3):285-295.
8. Price DB, Tinkelman DG, Nordyke RJ, Isonaka S,
Halbert RJ; COPD Questionnaire Study Group.
Scoring system and clinical application of COPD
diagnostic questionnaires. Chest. 2006;129(6):
1531-1539.
9. Yawn BP, Mapel DW, Mannino DM, et al;
Lung Function Questionnaire Working Group.
Development of the Lung Function Questionnaire
(LFQ) to identify airflow obstruction. Int J Chron
Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2010;5:1-10.
10. Martinez FJ, Raczek AE, Seifer FD, et al;
COPD-PS Clinician Working Group. Development
and initial validation of a self-scored COPD
Population Screener Questionnaire (COPD-PS).
COPD. 2008;5(2):85-95.
11. Parkes G, Greenhalgh T, Griffin M, Dent R.
Effect on smoking quit rate of telling patients their
lung age: the Step2quit randomised controlled trial.
BMJ. 2008;336(7644):598-600.
12. Risser NL, Belcher DW. Adding spirometry,
carbon monoxide, and pulmonary symptom results
to smoking cessation counseling: a randomized
trial. J Gen Intern Med. 1990;5(1):16-22.
13. Kotz D, Wesseling G, Huibers MJ,
van Schayck OC. Efficacy of confronting smokers
with airflow limitation for smoking cessation. Eur
Respir J. 2009;33(4):754-762.
14. Sippel JM, Osborne ML, Bjornson W, Goldberg
B, Buist AS. Smoking cessation in primary care
clinics. J Gen Intern Med. 1999;14(11):670-676.
15. McClure JB, Ludman EJ, Grothaus L, Pabiniak C,
Richards J. Impact of a brief motivational smoking
cessation intervention: the Get PHIT randomized
controlled trial. Am J Prev Med. 2009;37(2):116-123.
16. Qaseem A, Wilt TJ, Weinberger SE, et al;
American College of Physicians; American College
of Chest Physicians; American Thoracic Society;
European Respiratory Society. Diagnosis and
management of stable chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: a clinical practice guideline
update from the American College of Physicians,
American College of Chest Physicians, American
Thoracic Society, and European Respiratory Society.
Ann Intern Med. 2011;155(3):179-191.
17. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in over
16s: NICE guidelines [CG101]. National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence. https://www.nice.org
.uk/guidance/cg101. Accessed July 22, 2015.
18. Global strategy for diagnosis, management,
and prevention of COPD: 2016. Global Initiative for
Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease. http://www
.goldcopd.org/guidelines-global-strategy-for
-diagnosis-management.html. Accessed July 22,
2015.
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
April 5, 2016
Volume 315, Number 13
1377
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
