 ORIGINAL PAPER
Negotiating Discourses of Shame, Secrecy, and Silence: Migrant
and Refugee Women’s Experiences of Sexual Embodiment
Jane M. Ussher1
• Janette Perz1 • Christine Metusela1 • Alexandra J. Hawkey1 •
Marina Morrow2 • Renu Narchal1 • Jane Estoesta3
Received: 18 July 2016 / Revised: 27 October 2016 / Accepted: 31 October 2016 / Published online: 12 January 2017
� The Author(s) 2017. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract InAustraliaandCanada,thesexualhealthneedsof
migrantand refugee womenhavebeenofincreasingconcern,
becauseoftheirunderutilizationofsexualhealthservicesand
higher rate of sexual health problems. Previous research on
migrant women’s sexual health has focused on their higher
risk of difficulties, or barriers to service use, rather than their
construction or understanding of sexuality and sexual health,
which may influence service use and outcomes. Further, few
studies of migrant and refugee women pay attention to the
overlapping role of culture, gender, class, and ethnicity in
women’sunderstandingofsexualhealth.Thisqualitativestudy
used an intersectional framework to explore experiences and
constructions of sexual embodiment among 169 migrant and
refugee women recently resettled in Sydney, Australia and
Vancouver, Canada, from Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia, South
Sudan, Sudan, Sri Lanka, India, and South America, utilizing a
combinationofindividualinterviewsandfocusgroups.Across
alloftheculturalgroups,participantsdescribedadiscourseof
shame, associated with silence and secrecy, as the dominant
cultural and religious construction of women’s sexual embod-
iment.Thiswasevidentinconstructionsofmenarcheandmen-
struation, the embodied experience that signifies the transfor-
mation of a girl into a sexual woman; constructions of sexual-
ity,includingsexualknowledgeandcommunication,premari-
tal virginity, sexual pain, desire, and consent; and absence of
agencyinfertilitycontrolandsexualhealth.Womenwerenot
passive in relation to a discourse of sexual shame; a number
demonstrated active resistance and negotiation in order to
achievea degreeof sexualagency,yetalsomaintaincultural
andreligiousidentity.Identifyingmigrantandrefugeewomen’s
experiencesandconstructionsofsexualembodimentareessential
for understanding sexual subjectivity, and provision of cultur-
allysafesexualhealthinformationinordertoimprovewell-being
and facilitate sexual agency.
Keywords Women’s sexual embodiment �
Migrant and refugee sexual health � Intersectionality �
Sexual shame � Sexual health
Introduction
Sexual embodiment refers to the experience of living in, per-
ceiving, and experiencing the world from the location of our
sexual bodies (Tolman, Bowman, & Fahs, 2014). Women’s
experience of sexual embodiment is located in the historical
and cultural context in which they live (Jackson & Scott,
2007). This does not deny the material reality of the sexual
body—but conceptualizes embodiment in a social context,
reflexively constructed and reconstructed through sexual and
social interactions (Jackson & Scott, 2002), which influences
both how we see and experience our own and others’ sexual
bodies (Ussher, 1997b). Discursive constructions of normal
sexual experience and expression, mediated by factors such
as race, social class, and cultural background, determine the
sexual scripts which women are allowed to adopt, as well as
the possibilities for resistance (Tiefer, 2004). Discursive con-
structionsofsexandthemeaningofthesexualbodyalsohave
implications for sexual health and sexual subjectivity—a
woman’s experience of herself as a sexual being, her feeling
of entitlement tosexual pleasure andsexual safety, herability
& Jane M. Ussher
j.ussher@westernsydney.edu.au
1
Centre for Health Research, School of Medicine, Western
Sydney University, Sydney, NSW 2751, Australia
2
Centre for the Study of Gender, Social Inequities and Mental
Health, Simon Fraser University, Vancouver, BC, Canada
3
Family Planning New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia
123
Arch Sex Behav (2017) 46:1901–1921
DOI 10.1007/s10508-016-0898-9
 to make active sexual choices, and her identity as a sexual
being (Tolman,2002). Within this‘‘material-discursive’’theo-
retical standpoint (Ussher, 1997a, 2008),discourses constitute
systems of thoughts composed of ideas, attitudes, courses of
action, beliefs and practices, that‘‘systematically construct the
subjects and the worlds of which they speak’’(Foucault, 1972,
p. 49).
In the English-speaking Western world, including North
America, the UK, and Australasia, dominant discourses sur-
rounding women’s sexuality have traditionally been tied to
white, middle- and upper-class norms which dictate that‘‘good’’
women engage in self-policing to contain and control their sex-
ual desires (Fine & McClelland, 2006; Jackson & Lyons, 2013;
Tolman, 2002). Acting as passive sexual gatekeepers within
heterosexual relationships (Gagnon, 1990), women were not
expected to know about sex, as they‘‘simply need to say no’’
(Curtin, Ward, Merriwether, & Caruthers, 2011, p. 50). How-
ever,socialconstructionistandfeministtheoristshaveargued
that women have the potential to ‘rewrite’ or resist traditional
constructions of sexuality through the mobilization of coun-
ter-stories that position their sexuality in more agentic ways
(Day, Johnson, Milnes, & Rickett, 2010; McKenzie-Mohr &
Lafrance, 2014). This is evident in young women’s adoption
of ‘‘raunch culture,’’ discursive representations of a ‘‘sexually
liberated, savvy and active woman’’who is‘‘up for it’’in terms
ofsex(Evans,Riley,&Shankar,2010,p.115).Itisalsoevident
in the widespread acceptance of a human rights-based sexual
health discourse promoted by international governing bodies
(United Nations, 2014), wherein‘‘the sexual rights of all per-
sons…arerespected,protectedandfulfilled’’(WorldHealth
Organization,2016).Thisrights-basedsexualhealthdiscourse
serves to legitimate women’s sexual agency—their ability to
make free choices about their sexual expression (Corre
ˆa, Petch-
esky, & Parker, 2008).
However, processes of patriarchal and heterosexist cultural,
religious and familial power serve to create limitations to ways
in which women can construct themselves and their options
forresistance(Frosh,Phoenix,&Pattman,2003).Womenwho
embrace‘‘raunchculture’’andsexualagencymaybe vulnerable
tosocialcondemnation(Bishop,2012),withagenticfemalesex-
ualitypositionedassexual‘‘promiscuity’’andthewomanherself
at risk of being described as a ‘‘slag’’ (Bale, 2011; Jackson &
Lyons,2013).Despite this,there isevidencethatmanyWestern
women negotiate competing constructions of feminine sexual-
ity in order to attain positive and agentic sexual subjectivity
(Bishop, 2012; Gavey & McPhillips, 1999) and sexual health
(Bale, 2011; Stewart, 1999). This negotiation is analogous to
what McKenzie-Mohr and Lafrance (2011) call ‘‘tight-rope
talk,’’whereinwomenconstructthemselvesas‘‘bothactiveand
acted upon’’(p. 64),takingcreditfor sexualagencyatthe same
time asmaintainingthe cultural capital thataccruesfromadher-
ing to dominant discourses of feminine (hetero)sexual embod-
iment.ForwomenwhomigratetotheWestfromcultureswhere
a discourse of women’s sexual agency is less common (Rogers
& Earnest, 2015), and where deeply entrenched social and cul-
turaldiscriminationmaycreatebarrierstowomen’ssexualhealth
(UnitedNations,2014)thisnegotiationmaybeamoredifficult
and complex process. In this vein, previous researchers have
argued that there is a need for research on how culturally and lin-
guistically diverse (CALD)1 migrant and refugee women nego-
tiatediversediscoursesandculturalconstraintsassociatedwith
sexual embodiment (Rogers & Earnest, 2015; Sargent, 2006),
in order to understand their sexual subjectivity and facilitate their
sexual health. This is the aim of the present study.
Examininghowmigrantandrefugeewomennegotiatedis-
cursive constructions of sexuality and sexual embodiment is
importantfora numberofreasons. Oneoftheoutcomesofthe
adoptionof a rights-basedsexualhealth discourse intheWest
has been the widespread availability of sexual and reproduc-
tive health services for women, and sexuality education for
young people, with positive implications for quality of life,
mental health, and sexual well-being (Aggleton & Campbell,
2000;Chen,Subramanian,Acevedo-Garcia,&Kawachi,2005;
Stephensonetal.,2008).However,inAustraliaandCanada,the
sexual health needs of migrant and refugee women has been of
increasing concern, because of their underutilization of sexual
healthservices(Botfield,Newman,&Zwi,2016;Manderson&
Allotey, 2003; McMullin, De Alba, Cha
´vez, & Hubbell, 2005;
Robinson et al., 2011). This has a number of consequences.
Young migrant and refugee women may be ill equipped to
articulate their sexual rights (Martinez & Phillips, 2008), hav-
inglittleknowledgeof,oraccessto,preventativesexualhealth
measures (Salad, Verdonk, de Boer, & Abma, 2015) or con-
traception (Ngum Chi Watts, Liamputtong, & Carolan, 2014).
Absence of education about sexually transmitted infections
(STIs)andfertilitycontrolcanleadtoinformationbeingsought
from unreliable sources, such as peer groups or the media
(McMichael&Gifford,2009;Rawson&Liamputtong,2009),
aswellasengagementinriskybehaviors(Rawson&Liamput-
tong, 2010). Delayed testing or screening may result in late
diagnosis and treatment of cervical cancer (Manderson &
Allotey, 2003; McMullin et al., 2005), HIV, or STIs (Fenton,
2001). Inadequate contraception can lead to unplanned preg-
nancy, or family size that is not desired (Rademakers, Mou-
thaan,&Neef,2005),withnegativepsychosocialimplications
for women (Bunevicius et al., 2009; Tsui, McDonald-Mosley,
& Burke, 2010).
1 Theterm‘‘culturallyandlinguistically diverse’’(CALD)isusedbythe
Australian government to describe people who have a cultural heritage
different from that of the majority of people from the dominant Anglo-
Australian culture (Australian Government Department of Health, 2016),
replacingthepreviouslyusedtermofpeoplefroma‘‘non-Englishspeaking
background’’(NESB).AsthistermisnotusedinCanada,weprefertheuseof
‘‘migrant and refugee women’’to describe the women who participated in
the study.
1902
Arch Sex Behav (2017) 46:1901–1921
123
 Specificculturalfactors,combinedwithpatriarchalfamily
structures, may present barriers to accessing positive sexual
embodiment and access to sexual health services following
migration. Some cultural groups avoid all discussion of repro-
ductive and sexual health, as it is viewed as too sensitive or
disrespectful (Beck, Majumdar, Estcourt, & Petrak, 2005; Raw-
son&Liamputtong,2010),resultinginhealthconcernsnotbeing
addressedwithpartners,familymembers,or healthproviders.At
the sametime, sexualhealth servicesmay be seenasculturally
inappropriate(Allotey,Manderson,Baho,&Demian,2004;
Guerin,Allotey,Elmi,&Baho,2006;Richters&Khoei,2008),
or may not match cultural constructions of good treatment
(Manderson& Allotey,2003),andthus be avoided.Cultural
constructions about the etiology of illness, or the impact of
interventions, may also inhibitaccess to sexual health services
(Gagnon, Merry, & Robinson, 2002; Manderson & Allotey,
2003).Forexample,youngmigrantwomenhavebeenreported
to avoid emergency contraception because of the mispercep-
tion that it is an abortifacient, which affects long-term health
and fertility (Shoveller, Chabot, Soon, & Levine, 2007).
Culturally prescribed gender roles combined with patriar-
chal values can also influence a woman’s ability to negotiate
safer sex practices within relationships (Gifford, Bakopanos,
Dawson,&Yesilyurt,1998;Ussheretal.,2012),makingwomen
morevulnerabletoSTIsandunplannedpregnancy(Giffordetal.,
1998). A discourse of marital sexual duty can lead to women
focusingonthe sexualneedsoftheir husband(Khoei,Whelan,
& Cohen, 2008), or enduring marital rape (Boonzaier & de La
Rey, 2003), resulting in the absence of sexual agency and sig-
nificantlevels of distress (Martin,Taft, & Resick, 2007). Ithas
been reported that many women from immigrant and refugee
communitiesthink itisinappropriate and disrespectful toraise
issuesofsexualhealthwithin a relationship,and somemarried
womenfearedtheirhusbandswoulddivorcethemiftheyinsisted
onsafersex(Giffordetal.,1998),oriftheycontractedasexually
transmitted disease (Go et al., 2002). Cultural shame and stigma
can act as barriers to positive sexual embodiment and access to
sexualhealthservices(deAnstiss&Ziaian,2010;McMichael&
Gifford, 2009), sometimes reinforced by stigmatizing messages
fromhealthproviders(Shovelleretal.,2007),resultinginavoid-
ance of health care and information being sought from informal
sourcesinstead(deAnstiss&Ziaian,2010;Manderson,Kelaher,
Woelz-Stirling, Kaplan, & Greene, 2002; Rawson & Liamput-
tong, 2010). Within cultures that emphasize the importance of
virginity,sexualhealthservicesmaybeseenasinappropriatefor
youngandunmarriedwomen(Becketal.,2005;McMullinetal.,
2005), with personal reputation or family honor jeopardized if it
is known women are engaging in premarital sex (Manderson
etal.,2002;Rawson&Liamputtong,2010).Thiscanresultin
youngwomenbeingillequippedtoarticulatetheirsexualrights
(Martinez&Phillips,2008),havinglittleknowledgeof,oraccess
to, contraception, and social exclusion if pregnancy occurs out-
side marriage (Ussher et al., 2012).
Cultural shame associated with menarche and menstrua-
tion (Cooper & Koch, 2007; Sommer, Ackatia-Armah, Con-
nolly, & Smiles, 2015), premarital sex (Kebede, Hilden, &
Middelthon, 2014; Meldrum, Liamputtong, & Wollersheim,
2014), discussion of sexuality (Dean, Mitchell, Stewart, &
Debattista, 2017; Quelopana & Alcalde, 2014), STIs (McMi-
chael & Gifford, 2009), HPV inoculation and cervical cancer
screening (Salad et al., 2015), and contraception use (Ngum Chi
Watts et al., 2014; Sargent, 2006), may also influence women’s
sexualembodiment. This shame needs to be conceptualized in
the context of broader cultural and historical constructions of
women’s sexual and reproductive bodies asdirty or polluted
(Douglas, 1966), as a sign of abjection (Kristeva, 1982), descri-
bedasthe‘‘monstrousfeminine’’(Ussher,2006).Thissuggests
thatwhile theremaybeconflictbetweensexualdiscoursesand
norms in migrant and refugee women’s country of origin and
country of settlement (Meldrum et al., 2014; Wray, Ussher, &
Perz, 2014), there are also commonalities across cultures.
One of the limitations of previous research in this field is
that it has not examined commonalities or differences in con-
structions or experiences of the different aspects of sexuality
and sexual health outlined above, leading to a potential frag-
mentationofresearchfindingsintospecifictopicareas,suchas
menstruation,contraception,orsexualhealthscreening.There
hasalsobeenafocusonexperiencesofyoungunmarriedwomen
(e.g., McMichael & Gifford, 2009;Rawson& Liamputtong,
2010;Wrayetal.,2014),withonlyaminorityofstudiesexam-
ining adult women’s sexual health (e.g., Richters & Khoei,
2008;Ussheretal.,2012),leadingtoacallforresearchonadult
women and those who are parents (Keygnaert, Vettenburg,
Roelens, & Temmerman,2014; McMichael & Gifford, 2009).
Equally,whiletherehasbeendocumentationofconflictbetween
sexual discourses and norms in women’s country of origin
and country of settlement (Meldrum et al., 2014; Wray et al.,
2014),littleattentionhasbeenpaidtowomen’snegotiationof
thisconflict.Andwhileresearchershavebeguntoexaminesex-
ual embodiment in other areas of sexuality studies (e.g., Dun-
can, 2010; Jackson & Scott,2001,2002; Tolman et al.,2014),
a focus on‘‘the experience of living in, perceiving, and expe-
riencingtheworldfromtheveryspecificlocationofourbodies’’
(Tolman et al., 2014, p. 760) has been absent from research on
migrant women’s sexual health.
The focus of sexual and reproductive health research has
also been on single cultural groups, primarily Vietnamese or
South-East Asian populations (Gagnon et al., 2002; Garrett,
Dickson,Whelan,&Whyte,2010),whichresultsinthemarginal-
izationorinvisibilityof sexualhealthexperiencesandneeds
across a range of migrant groups (Garrett et al., 2010). If more
than one cultural group is included, migrants are invariably
treated as a homogenous population, which negates variations
whichoccurwithinandbetweencultures(Beiser,2005;Rawson
& Liamputtong, 2010), the complexity of culture as a concept
(Morrow,Smith,Lai,&Jaswal,2008),aswellastheintersections
Arch Sex Behav (2017) 46:1901–1921
1903
123
 of cultural background with other social structuring factors, such
asage,religion, orgeographicallocation (Botfieldetal.,2016;
Manderson & Allotey, 2003; Martinez & Phillips, 2008). There
isaneedforfurtherresearchtounderstandtheintersectinginflu-
encesofculture,age,religion,geography,migratoryexperience,
and relationship status on women’s sexual embodiment.
Theaimofthisstudywastoaddressthesegapsintheresearch
literature, through examining the negotiation of discursive con-
struction of sexual embodiment, across a range of experiences,
in adult migrant and refugee women from a number of cultural
groups,livinginSydney,Australia,andVancouver,Canada.The
research questions were: 1. How do migrant and refugee women
discursivelyconstructtheirsexualembodiment—focusingonthe
processes by which cultural meanings associated with sexual
embodimentareproducedandunderstoodbywomen?2.Howdo
women negotiate competing discourses associated with sex-
uality and sexual embodiment? 3. What are the implications of
these constructions and negotiations for sexual health knowl-
edge and behavior? Our questions were meant to explore
women’s experiences of sexual embodiment and also the
ways in which intersecting forms of oppression (especially
sexism and heterosexism) might form structural barriers
related to accessing sexual health information.
Method
Participants
Eighty-four one-to-one interviews and 16 focus groups com-
prised of 85 participants were conducted (total n = 169) from
July 2014 to March 2016. The majority of participants (73%,
n = 124) were interviewed in their first language by commu-
nity interviewers, women from the same cultural background
as the interviewees. Women who preferred to speak English,
or who could speak English and preferred to be interviewed
byanon-communitymember,wereinterviewedbyamember
oftheresearch team,infivefocusgroups(n = 16)and29one-
to-one interviews.
Participants were migrant and refugee women 18years and
over who had settled in Australia or Canada in the last 10years.
Participants originated from various countries, including Afgha-
nistan, Iraq, Somalia and Sudan. Sri Lankan (Tamil), Indian
(Punjab) and South Sudanese women were also included in the
Australian sample and women from various South American
(Latina) backgrounds in the Canadian sample, to allow for
analysis of sexual embodiment within and across cultural groups.
Women identified as practicing a range of religions, including
Islam, Christianity, Sikhism and Hinduism, and encompassed a
range of social class backgrounds within their country of origin.
All participants, except for one Latina woman, identified as being
heterosexual and ranged from 18 to 70years old, with a mean
age of 35. The average length of time since migration was
6.3years,withthe majorityofwomenmigratingashumanitar-
ianrefugees. TheexceptionswerePunjabi participants inAus-
traliawhomigratedasskilledmigrantsorforfamilyreunion,and
the Latina women who migrated as farm workers. Recruitment
within cultural groups continued until saturation of data was
achieved—no new information in three consecutive inter-
views. Table1 provides the demographic information for the
sample.
Australia and Canada were chosen as the geographical site
for the research as they are similar geographically, econom-
ically and politically, and have comparable migrant and refu-
gee populations. Our intention was to include adult women
fromarangeofculturalbackgrounds,religions,andagegroups,
who had migrated within the previous 10 years. The specific
cultural groups were chosen through consultation between the
researchteamandcommunitystakeholderswhopartneredwith
usintheresearch.Thesestakeholdersareinvolvedwithsupport-
ing or providing sexual and reproductive healthcare to migrant
andrefugeepopulations,andincludedmigrantresourcecenters;
sexual health, family planning and maternal health clinics; and
community health centers, in both Sydney and Vancouver. The
cultural groups selected were recognized as being underrepre-
sented in previous sexual health research and were identified as
underutilizingcurrentsexualhealthservices,despitereflectinga
significant proportion of the recent migrant and refugee popu-
lationofAustraliaandCanada.WeexcludedwomenfromSouth-
East Asia, as they have been the focus of a substantial proportion
of sexual and reproductive health research in Canada and Aus-
tralia, and women from China, who are part of very established
communities in both countries, with established networks of
health support.
Procedure
Communitystakeholdersandkeyinformantsfromthecultural
backgroundsofthewomenweinterviewed,includingourcom-
munity interviewers, were consulted in the development of the
proposal, research design and methods, for guidance on the
interview scheduleand to gaincultural insight.Thesecommu-
nity stakeholders were identified through migrant resource
centers that partnered with us in the research. Women were
recruited to participate in the study through community sup-
port workers, community interviewers, pre-existing commu-
nity groups, flyers, and snowballsampling.Before takingpart,
women were informed that participation would involve dis-
cussion of sexual and reproductive health. Any queries about
participationwereaddressedverballywithacommunityworker
in the first language of the participant to ensure understanding.
The interviews and focus groupsweresemi-structuredand
lasted an average of 90 min. Women were informed that the
discussionwouldexaminetheirexperienceofsexualandrepro-
ductive health. Consent was given by participants to audio-
1904
Arch Sex Behav (2017) 46:1901–1921
123
 record all interviews and focus groups, with the exception of
one interview where the participant declined to be recorded
andextensivenotesweretakeninstead.Theinterviewandfocus
group schedule included open-ended questions exploring
women’sexperiencesofmenarcheandmenstruation,andtheir
association with a sense of sexual embodiment; fertility and
contraception; sexual rights and sexual agency (the right to
saynotosex,sexualpleasure);sexualhealthscreening;sexual-
ity education; and sexual health information seeking. At the
end of the interview, women were given information about
sourcesofadviceandinformation,iftheywishedtofollowup
issues discussed in the interview. The interviews were pilot
testedprior tothe research,inbotha focusgroupandinterview
format (Ussher et al., 2012; Wray et al., 2014).
Individual interviews enable the collection of personal in-
depthaccounts,onasensitivesubject,thatmaynotbedisclosed
inagroupsetting(Creswell,2009).Focusgroupsprovideasyn-
ergistic setting to gather insight into cultural and community
norms, usinginteraction dataresultingfrom discussionamong
participants (e.g., questioning one another, commenting on each
other’s experiences) to increase the depth of the inquiry and
unveil aspects of the phenomenon assumed to be otherwise
less accessible (Creswell, 2009; Duggleby, 2005; Lambert &
Loiselle,2008).Thecombinationofmethodsallowsforexam-
ination of complementarity in analysis to enhance data rich-
ness:elaboration,illustration,andclarificationacrossmethods
(Lambert & Loiselle, 2008). The focus groups were homoge-
nous,asisrecommended(Krueger,2014),consistingofwomen
from the same cultural group, but involved separate groups for
married and single women where possible.
Usingcommunityinterviewersisa methodologywhichhas
beensuccessfulinpastsexualandreproductivehealthresearch
Table 1 Demographics for participant interviews and focus groups by ethnicity
Afghani
Iraqi
Latina
Somali
South Sudanese
Sudanese
Tamil
Punjabi
(n = 35)
(n = 27)
(n = 17)
(n = 38)
(n = 11)
(n = 20)
(n = 12)
(n = 9)
Age range
19–50
18–70
28–46
19–68
30–45
26–54
26–50
25–45
Variable
M (SD)
M (SD)
M (SD)
M (SD)
M (SD)
M (SD)
M (SD)
M (SD)
Age
31.4 (9.1)
38.7 (12.5)
37.1 (5.6)
31.9 (10.4)
36.6 (6.2)
38.7 (7.5)
36.8 (7.3)
35.67 (6.22)
Years since migration
5.1 (4.1)
4.3 (2.1)
8.3 (4.9)
5.4 (3.1)
10.8 (2.1)
8.9 (3.4)
5.1 (2.5)
8.11 (2.37)
Number of children
3.3 (1.3)
2.7 (1.2)
1.5 (0.7)
3.7 (2.0)
4.5 (2.2)
2.9 (1.1)
2.1 (0.5)
2.40 (0.89)
n (%)
n (%)
n (%)
n (%)
n (%)
n (%)
n (%)
n (%)
Have children
Yes/pregnant
20 (57.1)
20 (74.1)
11 (73.3)
23 (60.5)
11 (100.0)
19 (95.0)
11 (91.7)
5 (55.6)
No
15 (42.9)
7 (25.9)
4 (26.7)
15 (39.5)
–
1 (5.0)
1 (8.3)
4 (44.4)
Religion
Islamic
35 (100.0)
23 (85.2)
–
38 (100.0)
–
16 (80.0)
–
–
Christian
–
3 (11.1)
10 (58.8)
–
11 (100.0)
4 (20.0)
5 (41.7)
–
Buddhist
–
–
1 (5.9)
–
–
–
–
–
Hindu
–
–
–
–
–
–
7 (58.3)
5 (55.6)
Sikh
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
3 (33.3)
Non-practicing
–
1 (3.7)
6 (35.3)
–
–
–
–
1 (11.1)
Education
Primary
7 (20.0)
6 (22.2)
–
8 (21.1)
3 (27.3)
4 (20.0)
–
1 (11.1)
Secondary
15 (42.9)
3 (11.1)
2 (11.8)
3 (7.9)
2 (18.2)
5 (25.0)
7 (58.3)
–
Tertiary
6 (17.1)
18 (66.7)
10 (58.8)
3 (7.9)
2 (18.2)
10 (50.0)
5 (41.7)
8 (88.9)
Nil
2 (5.7)
–
–
1 (2.6)
2 (18.2)
1 (5.0)
–
–
Other
1 (2.9)
–
–
2 (5.3)
2 (18.2)
–
–
–
No response
4 (11.4)
–
5 (29.4)
21 (55.3)
–
–
–
–
Relationship status
Married/de facto
17 (48.6)
14 (51.9)
13 (76.5)
13 (34.2)
6 (54.5)
13 (65.0)
12 (100.0)
9 (100.0)
Single
12 (34.3)
7 (25.9)
2 (11.8)
14 (36.8)
1 (9.1)
1 (5.0)
–
–
Divorced/separated
2 (5.7)
5 (18.5)
2 (11.8)
8 (21.1)
4 (36.4)
6 (30.0)
–
–
Widowed
4 (11.4)
1 (3.7)
–
3 (7.9)
–
–
–
–
Arch Sex Behav (2017) 46:1901–1921
1905
123
 withmigrantwomen(Goetal.,2002;Morrowetal.,2008).The
community interviewers were recruited specifically for this
project, through partner organizations and other community
networks. They were all migrant or refugee women, who had
high school or tertiary education priorto migration. None had
previousexperience of qualitativeresearch.Prior to commenc-
ing data collection, they received interview training in the
schedule to be used in this research, in how to conduct con-
versational interviews, and how to transcribe data, by mem-
bers of the research team, in a 1-day workshop. Ongoing sup-
port and advice was provided for the interviewers throughout
the data collection process by a member of the research team,
who commented on transcripts as they were submitted, gave
advice on questions that were not fully addressed in the tran-
script, and supported the interviewers in the general data col-
lection.Each community interviewer was responsible for con-
ducting approximately five interviews and one or two focus
groups. Interviews and focus groups took place at venues pre-
ferred by participants, primarily in residences or community
facilitiessuchaslibrariesandcommunitycentersandchildcare
wasprovidedwherenecessary.Theinterviewsandfocusgroups
undertaken in English were conducted by AH, a member of the
researchteamtrainedinqualitativeresearch,whowasnotfroma
migrant or refugee background.
Allwomenprovidedinformedconsent,andtheresearchwas
approved by Western Sydney University and Family Planning
UniversityEthicsCommitteesandethicscommitteesofthepro-
ject partners.
Analysis
In our analysis, we adopted a material-discursive theoretical
approach (Ussher, 1997a), embedded within a critical realist
epistemology (Bhaskar, 1989). Described as a way forward
for research examining health in a sociocultural context (Wil-
liams, 2003), critical realism is an epistemological standpoint
which recognizes the materiality of the body, and other aspects
of experience, but conceptualizes this materiality as always
mediatedbydiscourse,culture,andsocialorpoliticalpractices
(Bhaskar,1989).Thisapproachallowsustoexaminewomen’s
experiences of sexual embodiment, the ways in which ‘‘our
socialandhistoricalenvironmentsenterintoandbecomeentan-
gled with our bodies’’(Tolman et al., 2014, p. 761). This view-
pointemphasizesthewaysinunderstandinghowthesexualbody
is influenced by cultural norms and discourses, which constitute
bodily feelings and behaviors (Bartky, 1990; Bordo, 1993), and
which come to‘‘constitute the phenomenology of embodiment’’
(Tolman et al., 2014, p. 761). We also drew on the concept of
intersectionality (Crenshaw, 1991), an approach previously
recommendedforresearchonmigrantandrefugeewomen’s
sexualhealth(NgumChi Wattsetal.,2014; Saladetal.,2015).
Intersectionality was originally proposed as a critique of femi-
nist and anti-racism research that examined women’s identity
through a lens of gender, or a lens of race, using an‘‘either/or
proposition’’(Crenshaw,1991,p.1242),thusservingtomarginal-
ize women of color, whose experiences‘‘are frequently the pro-
ductofintersectingpatternsofracismandsexism’’(Crenshaw,
1991, p. 1243). More recent developments of intersectionality
focusontheinteractionandmutuallyconstitutivenatureofgen-
der,race,religion,age,andothercategoriesofdifferenceinindi-
vidual lives and social practices (Davis, 2008, p. 68). There is
recognition that all people are characterized simultaneously
bymultipleandinterconnectedsocialcategories;thatadimen-
sion of inequality or power is embedded within each category;
and that the categories are properties of the individual in terms
of their identity, as well as characteristics of social structures
(Else-Quest & Hyde, 2016). Within this framework, categories
such as gender and culture are recognized as complex and
dynamic concepts, closely linked to the processes and struc-
tures embedded in society that shape individual and group
behavior (Dyck, 2001).
Thematic-decomposition was used to analyze the data (Par-
ton,Ussher,&Perz,2016;Stenner,1993;Stenner,McFarquhar,
& Bowling, 2011), a form of discourse analysis which attempts
to separate a given text into coherent themes which reflect sub-
ject positions allocated to, or taken up by, a person (Davies &
Harre,1990).Analysiswasinductive,wherebythedevelopment
of themes was driven by the data and not by existing theory,
researchorhypothesis.Interviewsandfocusgroupsconducted
in the first language of participants were transcribed and trans-
lated into English by the community interviewers who inter-
viewed them. Interviews and focus groups conducted in Eng-
lish or with English spoken sections were professionally tran-
scribed verbatim. Transcripts were integrity checked by lis-
teningtothe audiorecordingandreading writtentexttoensure
authenticityandaccuracy.Toimprovereadability,fillerwords
such as‘‘ah ha,’’‘‘um’’and ‘mmm’ were removed. All partic-
ipants were given pseudonyms. A subset of interviews and
focus groups were read and re-read by three of the research
teamindependently(JU,AH,andCM) toidentifyfirst-order
conceptsorcodes,suchas‘‘menstruallearning,’’‘‘talkingabout
sex,’’‘‘constructionsofdisease,’’and‘‘screeningbehaviors.’’The
coding frame was then discussed and modified by the whole
research team, in order to ensure clarity, relevance, and appro-
priateness for addressing the research questions. The entire
data set was coded by two members of the research team (AH
and CM) utilizing the computer software NVivo, a program
that helps facilitate the organization of coded data. Each
researcher coded separate sections of the data independently,
by extracting sections of text and filing them under the agreed
coding frame. The accuracy of coding was assessed by a third
memberoftheteam(JU),whoreadthroughthecodeddataasit
was progressing, and provided feedback. The codes were then
grouped through a process of vigilant decision-making through
1906
Arch Sex Behav (2017) 46:1901–1921
123
 discussion between JU, AH, JP, and MM, to create fewer, more
distinct categories as the process continued. Following the cod-
ing process, each coded category was summarized in detail by
AH and CM, to identify themes within codes, and participants
whowerereportingeachtheme,aprocesswhichservedtohigh-
light commonalities as well as unique stories across the data.
This enabled us to identify how women discursively experi-
ence and construct their sexual and reproductive health needs
inrelationtotheirwidersocioculturalcontexts(Ussher&Perz,
2014) (see Fig. 1. Thematic map).
Throughout our analysis, we engaged ina process ofreflex-
ivity (which isgermane to an intersectional approach), involv-
ingself-awarenessoftheintersubjectivedynamicsbetweenthe
researcherandtheresearched,andcriticalreflectiononhowour
social and cultural backgrounds, assumptions and positioning
impacted upon the research process (Finlay & Gough, 2003).
The research team consisted of white women, and women of
color; women who had migrated and those born in Australia
and Canada; academic researchers; and those working with
migrant women in the community. Our different experiences
were reflected upon in the design of the research, and the anal-
ysisandinterpretationofdata.Wewerealsoreflexiveaboutthe
roleofcommunityinterviewers,whosharedmanyoftheexpe-
riences of the women they interviewed, but also experienced
differences in their views or experiences. This was discussed
duringtheinterviewtraining,aspartofencouraginginterview-
ers to be non-judgmental, and was also something we consid-
ered in our analysis, and our suggestions for future research.
Within the quotes presented in this article‘‘…’’are used to
identify sections of discussion not relevant to the analytical
context. Further,‘‘[]’’signifies text that has been added by the
authors to improve readability and meaning. Quotes are sub-
stantiated by the use of pseudonym, ethnic background, and
age. Through our analysis, no notable difference was found
between the accounts of women from Australia or Canada;
therefore,nodistinctionismadewithregardtocurrentcountry
of residence. No notable differences were found across indi-
vidualinterviewsandfocusgroups;however,wehaveprovided
informationofthetypeofinterviewconducted,aspseudonyms
were not allocated to focus group participants. Where differ-
ences across culture, age or religions were identified, they are
reported.
Results
Women’s Sexual Embodiment: Negotiating Shame,
Secrecy, and Silence
Across all of the cultural groups, participants described shame
as the dominant discursive construction of women’s sexual
embodiment. This was associated with secrecy and silence,
with public discussion of women’s sexual embodiment or
experience described as culturally taboo. This shame, secrecy
and silence had implications for women’s knowledge and
behavior in relation to sexual embodiment and sexual health,
potentially limiting agency and causing distress. While a dis-
courseofsexualshamewasadoptedinmanywomen’saccounts,
there were also accounts of resistance, both before and after
migration. Adoption and resistance of a discourse of sexual
shame were not polarized and discrete subject positions, how-
ever. Women’s accounts demonstrated active negotiation of
dominant cultural discursive constructions of women’s sexual
embodiment in order to achieve a degree of sexual agency,
Menstruation and
fertility: 
An unknown 
connection
Shame and
concealment at 
menarche
Women’s 
Sexual 
Embodiment:
Negotiating 
shame, secrecy 
and silence
Negotiating a 
discourse of 
sexual shame
Negotiating 
menstrual 
shame and
secrecy
Resisting shame, 
silence and secrecy: 
Menstrual and sex 
education for 
daughters
The naïve virgin:
Premarital chastity 
and sexual silence
Resisting 
premarital sexual 
silence and the 
chastity imperative
Marital sexual 
duty: Silencing 
desire, pain and
consent
Disclosing 
pleasure, pain and 
refusing consent
Absence of 
agency: 
Fertility 
control and
sexual health
Inadequate 
knowledge of 
fertility control and
screening
Negotiating 
health seeking 
behavior
Fig. 1 Thematic map
Arch Sex Behav (2017) 46:1901–1921
1907
123
 yetalsomaintainculturalandreligiousidentity.Thisisreflected
in the overarching theme presented in this article ‘‘Women’s
sexual embodiment: Negotiating shame, secrecy,andsilence,’’
and the three sub-themes, examining the negotiation of men-
strual shame and secrecy; negotiation of sexual shame; and
absence of agency: fertility control and sexual health.
‘‘Yesterday You Were a Girl, But Today You’re a Woman’’:
Negotiating Menstrual Shame and Secrecy
Shame and Concealment at Menarche
The construction of
sexual embodiment as an object of shame, necessitating secrecy
and silence, began with menarche, an embodied experience that
signifies the transformation of a girl into a sexual woman. This is
reflectedinretrospectiveaccountsofmenarchesignifyingagirl’s
abilitytobemarried:‘‘afterI gotmyperiodIhave togetmarried’’
(Sudanese focus group);‘‘they tell you now you grow up. After
period you can get married’’(Hasina, Somali, age 25). For
the majority of women, menstruation was positioned as‘‘some-
thingdirtyandsomethingtofeelbadabout’’(Latinafocusgroup),
orasignof‘‘dirtinsidethebody’’(Sharifa,age39,Iraqi),asignifier
ofabjectfemininity(Kristeva,1982).Discussionoftheprocessof
menstrual bleeding was culturally‘‘shameful’’:‘‘in Sudanese cul-
ture,itisshametotalkaboutit[menstruation]…Theybelieveit’s
very sensitive and private issue this why they don’t talk about it’’
(Saba, Sudanese, age 48); ‘‘everything [about periods] was so
shameful, even we don’t have parents to talk to’’(Erina, Somali,
age 39). Talking about menstruation was described as‘‘gossip’’
that women should‘‘keep away from’’(Darya, Afghani, age 24),
or something that only‘‘naughty girls’’(Andrea, Tamil, age
26) woulddiscuss. Breakingthistaboowas‘‘disrespectful’’anda
sign‘‘youdon’t have respect for yourself’’(Suhaira, Afghani, age
20).Theonlyexceptiontothispositioningofmenarcheasshame-
fulwasfoundinaccountsofaminorityofwomenfromTamiland
SouthSudanesebackgrounds,whodescribedcelebrationofmenar-
chethroughfamilyritualsandpractices,includingceremonies,par-
tiesandanimalsacrifice.Theseritualsweredescribedasmorecom-
mon in‘‘older generations,’’rarely practiced since migration, and
not desired by young women, as they drew attention to menstru-
ation:‘‘it’s not good when people come over and say ‘oh, she got
her period, now she’s a big girl’’’(Suz, South Sudanese, age 42).
As a result of this culturally sanctioned secrecy and silence,
many participants reported having had no knowledge of men-
strual bleeding or its function prior to menarche:‘‘I didn’t know
what it was actually’’(Tamil focus group),‘‘I thought I was the
only girl who got it’’(Ara, Afghani, age 34). When recounting
their menarcheal experiences, some participants thought men-
strual blood was feces or urine:‘‘I had no knowledge about it. I
thought I had diarrhoea with blood’’(Afghani focus group);‘‘I
thought I peed myself’’(Hani, Somali, age 32). Others thought
they had committed‘‘a sin’’or‘‘done something wrong,’’or that
theyhadinjuredthemselves,asillustratedintheaccountsoftwo
Afghani focus group participants:‘‘I was thinking that I might
havetornmyvaginalarea,’’‘‘IthoughtImusthaverippedsome-
thinginmybelly.’’Asaresult,manyofourparticipantsreported
distress when they first bled:‘‘I was really scared, I will never
forget my experience’’(Afghani focus group);‘‘I couldn’t func-
tionlikenormally,Iwasverysad.Ididn’taskquestionsandpeo-
ple didn’t guide me’’(Latina focus group).
Silencing and secrecy was also associated with reports of
embarrassmentatmenarche,whereinadolescentgirlsreported
being‘‘ashamed,’’aswellas‘‘shy’’or‘‘afraid’’todisclosetheir
firstperiod,learningtoconcealmenstruationinisolation.Thus,
Arliyosaid‘‘Ihideit[period],Iwashiding1yearandtheydidn’t
know it’’(Somali, age 26), and an Afghani focus group partic-
ipanttoldus‘‘Irememberthatforaboutayear,notevenmymum
knewthatitwashappening,becauseinAfghanistan,wehave,
youknow,asenseofshame.’’Concealmentofmenstrualblood
and self-surveillance was imperative:‘‘I went to the toilet so
manytimes…checkingeverythingisok’’;‘‘Iwasworriedpeo-
plecouldseebloodspotsonmyclothes’’(Afghanifocusgroup).
The imperative for concealment extended beyond menstrual
bloodtothe menarchealwoman,withmanyparticipantsdescrib-
ing practices of self-seclusion. This is illustrated in the following
accounts:‘‘I wassoembarrassedIdidn’twanttoshowmyface to
anyone…I locked myself in a room’’(Hooria, Sudanese, age 35);
‘‘No I didn’t tell anyone I just put [on] padsand isolated myself.I
can’t look to my father and mother faces’’(Saba, Sudanese, age
48).
Menstruation and Fertility: An Unknown Connection
This
culturally sanctioned secrecy and silence meant that many par-
ticipantsreportedhavingreceivedinadequateknowledgeregard-
ing the connection between menstruation, sexuality and fertility.
As Arliyo (Somali, age 26) told us:‘‘I didn’t know that, because
nobodytellsus,nobodytalkaboutit.Wedon’tknowhowwegeta
baby.’’ Some participants entered into engagement or marriage
with inadequate information, as Zinat’s account typified,‘‘I was
19yearswhenIgotmarried.WhenIgotengaged,Iexperienceda
lotoftensionhowtofindoutifoneisgoingtohaveababy.Till19
years I did not know anything’’(Punjabi, age 45). Some partici-
pants described learning the connection between menstruation,
sexual intercourse, and pregnancy through sex education at
school following migration: ‘‘I found out after a few years
that my period and pregnancy were connected to each other
when I came to Australia and I attended high school’’(Fahmo,
Somali, age 23). This illustrates the potential influence of sex-
uality education and migration on women’s sexual knowledge.
Some post-menarcheal girls did receive informal education
about the association between menstruation and sexuality, pri-
marily from sisters, aunts and friends. However, some partici-
pants were given inaccurate information, as the following account
illustrates,‘
‘IwastoldthatnowIhavestartedbleeding,andifIsiton
my brother’s chair or maybe I wear his pants, I will become preg-
nant’
’(Somalifocusgroup).Otherswerewarnedaboutcontactwith
1908
Arch Sex Behav (2017) 46:1901–1921
123
 men, but didn’t understand why:‘
‘They say it’s not good when the
boy touches you…I didn’t know the meaning of that’
’(Suz, South
Sudanese, age 45). These beliefs served to regulate relationships
betweenmenandwomen,nowthatyoungwomenwerecapableof
getting pregnant. As the South Sudanese focus group participant
wentontosay,‘
‘OnceIgotit[period],Iwasscaredofmen.Because
my mum always told me these stories.’
’In contrast, young women
whohadreceivedsexualityeducationthroughschools,parents
orotherfamilymembers,andknewabouttheassociationofmen-
struation with sexuality and fertility, positioned menarche as a
welcome signof normality:‘‘I turned16, exactly twodaysafter,
the period, it come to me, I was very happy, now was thinking
I’m going to have kids because I have period’’(Era, Sudanese,
age26).Suchaccountswereprimarilyfromyoungwomenwhose
first menstrual period occurred after the majority of their peer
group.
Resisting Shame, Silence, and Secrecy: Menstrual Education
for Daughters
As all of our participants were adult women,
accounts of shame, secrecy, and silence associated with men-
struation were retrospective, illustrating the ways in which
patriarchal family structures intersect with age, and culture.
Very few women currently adhered to a discourse of menstrual
shame. The majority of participants described resistance to the
culturaltaboosurroundingdiscussionofmenstrualbloodinorder
to prepare their daughters for menarche, as evidenced in the fol-
lowing accounts:‘‘It’s very good to teach your daughters these
things’’(Homa, Afghani, age 40);‘‘I treat my daughters not like
whatmymothertreatedme…Idon’twantthemtobeshockedlike
I was’’(Madina, Iraqi, age 45).
I want toavoidwhathappenedtome whennoone toldme,
soItoldmydaughter.Itoldherwhatwasgoingtohappen…
Soshealreadyknows.Onceshegetsherperiod,Iwillknow
and my daughter knows (Sudanese focus group).
This negotiation of menstrual shame and secrecy resistance
was not without difficulty, however, as many women expressed
concernsabouttheprocessofprovidingmenstrualeducation.For
example,Asilah(Iraqi,age34)saidshewouldonlytellherdaugh-
teraboutmenarchewhensheaskedheraboutit:‘
‘Iwishshewould
ask me so I could answer her questions.’’Ara (Afghani, age 34)
gave a similar account, and relied on her daughter’s school to tell
them:‘‘If they hear and they come up to me and ask something,
thenobviouslyIwillexplain,butI’msureinAustraliaonceyougo
toschool,youknow abouteverything.’’At thesame time,a num-
ber of women had discussed menstruation with their daughters,
but avoided explanation of the association of menstruation and
sexualityorfertility:‘‘Wewereraisedjustlike,alittlebitshyfrom
those matters [sex]. Even I can’t talk with my daughter frankly’’
(Raana,Iraqi,age43);‘‘Itoldthemit’snormaltohavethatchang-
ingprocessinawoman’sbody.Iboughtthemthethingstheyneed
when they bleed….But I do not talk to them about sex’’(Saafi,
Somali, age 43).A minority of womengave accountsof warning
theirdaughtersto‘‘watchtheir steps’’(Amran,Somali,age 47),or
‘‘be careful, don’t mix with a lot of boys, just mix with the girls’’
(Sudanese focus group), reproducing the warnings they had
received from their own mothers, without explaining the rea-
soningbehindthewarning.Theseaccountsdemonstratethecom-
plexity of women’s negotiation of cultural discourse associated
with menstruation, with certain cultural taboos more difficult to
resist.
‘‘A Lady Doesn’t Talk About These Things or Behave in That
Way’’: Negotiating a Discourse of Sexual Shame
The discursive association of sexual embodiment with shame,
leadingtosecrecyandsilence,extendedtoadultwomen’ssex-
uality.Talkingaboutsexwaspositionedasshamefulfromboth
a cultural and religious point of view. For example, Hooria
(Sudanese, age 35) told us that‘‘it is shame to talk about sex
with anyone in my culture and I feel embarrassed to talk about
it’’andHabibah(Iraqi,age43)said‘‘inreligionitisnotallowed
to talk about our sexual relation with others.’’Women who
broke the taboo and talked about sex were positioned by par-
ticipants as having‘‘no values at all’’(Akoi, South Sudanese,
age 40); a‘‘whore’’(Ariana, Latina, age 40);‘‘vulgar,’’‘‘not
behaving like a lady,’’or as a‘‘woman with poor education’’
(Catalina,Latina,age 45);‘‘nota goodgirl’’(Eira,Sudanese,
age 26).
The Naı
¨ve Virgin; Premarital Chastity and Sexual Silence
Cul-
tural strictures surrounding discussion of sex were most sev-
ere for unmarried women and girls, illustrated in the follow-
ing examples:‘‘I can’t ask my sister because I am a virgin’’
(Hasina, Sudanese, age 25);‘‘your mother would kill you if she
heard that word [sex]’’(Arliyo, Somali, age 26). A number of
participantsdescribedsexeducationoftheir daughtersassome-
thing they didn’t approve of:‘‘I can’t accept it, because I came
from this sort of cultural background, I feel I can’t accept it’’
(Jane,Tamil,age32);‘‘inSudan,theythinkifboysandgirlsget
any kind of knowledge about sex, they will turn into bad peo-
ple…that’swhytheydon’teducatethem’’(Wafa,Sudanese,age
40).
Thissilencing andsecrecy wasattributedtothepatriarchal
cultural and religious dictate that unmarried women remain
virgins, and thus ‘‘to even think about this [sex] is wrong’’
(Afghani focus group). Sex before marriage was described as
‘‘somethingverybad,somethingthatit’sasin,somethingthat
isnotallowed,somethingthatyoudon’tdo’’(Isabella,Latina,
age 46),‘‘forbidden’’and‘‘not lawful’’(Hawa, Sudanese, age
Arch Sex Behav (2017) 46:1901–1921
1909
123
 30), and‘‘sexual abuse for the woman’’(Iraqi focus group). A
number of participants described having felt‘‘proud,’’‘‘pure,’’
‘‘innocent,’’‘‘honorable,’’and having‘‘cleanliness in the heart’’
through being virgins on their wedding night—the antithesis of
sexualshame.Conversely,womenwhobrokethetaboobyhav-
ingsexbeforemarriageweredescribedas‘‘disgraced’’andneed-
ing to be saved by God to‘‘show them the right path’’(Afghani
focusgroup),becauseofhavingbeenshamed.Insomecontexts,
womenwerealsoatriskofviolence,socialostracization,orwere
positioned as unmarriageable.
Taboosassociatedwithdiscussionofsexpre-maritallymeant
that many participants had no prior knowledge about what sex
involved before their wedding night, as these women told us:‘‘I
evencouldn’taskanybodybecauseitwassomethingforbidden’’
(Wafa, Sudanese, age 40); ‘‘I didn’t know how you even [do]
sex’’(Suz,SouthSudanese,age42)whentheygotmarried.This
lackofknowledge wasassociatedwithdifficultfirstsexual expe-
riences,asdemonstratedbythefollowingaccounts,‘
‘Itwasacom-
plete surprise to me if I am honest with you…I was really scared’
’
(Banoo, Afghani, age 28);‘‘the first day for my wedding day I
thought he is doing the wrong things, and I start screaming’’
(Nasira,Iraqi,age52);‘‘afterthefirstnight,Ifeltlikerunningback
hometomymother’
’(Anju,Tamil,age44).Reportsofunexpected
sexual pain on the first occasion were very common:‘
‘I felt that it
hurtandIgotabitupset.Icouldn’tallowhimtodoanything,andhe
was a bit disappointed too’
’(Aameeka, Tamil, age 40);‘
‘I didn’t
enjoy it because it was very painful, very, very painful. And, I was
like, ‘Oh my God, what is this’?’’(Isabella, Latina, age 46). For
somewomen,theirsurprisewasthatsexwaspleasurableor‘
‘okay’
’
:
‘
‘I didn’t [know anything] but all went okay…he was gentle and it
didn’t go for long’
’(Sumi, Tamil, age 37);‘
‘it was very, very good.
Andafter,Itoldhim,‘Ihadagoodexperience’’
’(Laughs)(Saadia,
Iraqi,age30).Positiveexperiencesoffirstsexwereintheminority,
however, with the majority of women reporting fear, embarrass-
ment, discomfort or pain.
Resisting Premarital Sexual Silence and the Chastity Impera-
tive
Adherencetopremaritalsexualsecrecyandsilencewas
not universal. A number of women gave accounts of resistance
through seeking out sexual information before they were mar-
ried, as Nasira (Iraqi, age 52) told us:
My mum and auntie, they don’t allow us to read this book
because it’s about sex, it’s about people asking the ques-
tions.Inourage,theysayit’snotallowed,sowhenwebuy
it, we hide it. We read it and hide it, this book.
Otherwomentalkedaboutseekingoutinformationontheinter-
net, or talking about sex with close friends. As Akoi (South
Sudanese, age 40) told us:‘‘I had a friend and my friend had
another friend and we actually talked about sex…it’s part of
lifethat’showweactuallytalkedaboutit.’’Manywomenposi-
tioned sex education of their daughters as important, such as
Fahmo (Somali, age 23) who said,‘‘I just think that sex edu-
cation is very important for young girls as well as learning
about periods.’’The acceptabilityofsexeducation inAustralia
and Canadacontributed tothisopen communication,allowing
women to let go of a sense of shame:‘‘before I was thinking
shame, I’m not feeling shame now. I answer them everything
they are asking me…I feel more freedom. Before, there was
something I’m hiding, I’m not hiding now’’ (Erina, Somali,
age39).Severalwomenwereinterestedinfindingoutwaysto
approach talking about sex with their daughters as the follow-
ing accounts highlight:‘‘I would actually want to arm myself
with all the right information so I could actually educate my
daughter how she can go about those things’’(Akeck, South
Sudanese, age 31);‘‘since I am a mother, I would like to have
informationaboutsexualeducationforkidsandyoungpeople.
Iwouldliketohavesomeadviceorguidanceonhowtoapproach
these kind of issues with my daughter’’(Mariana, Latina, age
38). One woman learnt about sex, as well as how to educate
her children, through attending her child’s school sex educa-
tion class, described as‘‘me and my child learning at the same
time’’(Tamil focus group).
A number of women resisted a discourse of sexual shame
throughchallengingthechastityimperative.Someparticipants
said that sex before marriage could be acceptable if you were
intendingtomarrytheman,orthatitshouldbeapersonalchoice.
For example, Joy (South Sudanese, age 45) said that‘‘if it hap-
pens, it happens’’when asked about her views on her daughter
havingpremaritalsex.Thechastityimperativewasalsoresisted
through questioning of the sexual double standard wherein men
could have sexual experience before marriage and women
couldn’t:‘‘TheSomali men,althoughtheyare notvirgins,they
like to have a virgin wife and that is not fair’’(Somali focus
group). A small minority, most commonly from Punjabi and
Latina backgrounds, acknowledged that they had engaged in
sexual intercourse before marriage:‘‘I think that live-in rela-
tionshipsarea verygoodtesttohavebeforemarriage,maybea
little more practical, I think than the way we go about things
traditionally (Anu, Punjabi, age 35):
I was a rebel…I had sex before marriage….I personally
believethatnowomenshouldmarrybeingavirgin,right?
Youcannotgetmarriedtosomeonewithoutknowinghow
you are going to work together in bed. You don’t know if
you are sexually compatible (Sofia, Latina, age 40).
Women’sresistancetothechastityimperativewasfacilitated
by secrecy and silence:‘‘no-one knows, it’s between you and
your partner’’(Afghani focus group);‘‘that’s up to you and god’’
(Erina, Somali, age 39);‘‘It’s something you have to keep secret
becauseit’sstilltaboo’’(Afghanifocusgroup);‘‘I’msurelotsthey
have it [sex before marriage], but in a secret way’’(Raana, Iraqi,
1910
Arch Sex Behav (2017) 46:1901–1921
123
 age43);‘‘ifithappensinoursociety,noonewillevertalkaboutit’’
(Wafa,Sudanese,age40).Thisisevidenceofsilenceandsecrecy
servingasameansofresistance,describedinpreviousresearchas
a‘‘negotiatedsilence’’(Kebedeetal.,2014,p.673).Secrecycould
also be maintained through hymenoplasty, allowing women
to engage in premarital sex, yet appear to be a virgin on their
weddingnight:‘‘thereissomedoctorstheydorepairofhymen’’
(Nadiya,Iraqi,age 70,);‘‘oneofmyclassmatesinhigh-school,
she was mentioning that she was thinking of doing a hymen
repair’’(Ariana, Latina, age 40).
Silencing and secrecy extended to women’s self-disclosure
withintheinterviews,aspremaritalsexwasprimarilydiscussed
inrelationto‘other’women.Thosespecificallymentionedwere
womenofa‘‘lowersocialclass,’’women‘‘fromthecountry,’’or
‘‘recent generations,’’as a Sudanese focus group participant
commented:‘‘these types of relations[exist] and happen and
especially nowadays, especially the recent generations…But
my religion prevents me from doing these things.’’This sug-
gests that women could negotiate a discourse of sexual shame
by discussing premarital sex existence without judgment, yet
atthesametimemaintaintheirownpositionas‘‘goodwomen.’’
MaritalsexualDuty:SilencingSexualDesireandPain
While
premarital sex was prohibited for women, marital sex was imper-
ative, described as a ‘‘duty’’ and ‘‘the meaning of marriage,’’
within religious and cultural discourse. For many women, mar-
ital sex was associated with silence, as sex was a forbidden
topic between a woman and her husband,as Arifa (Iraqi, age
48) explained:
Theculturedoesnotpermitsuchconversation…Wearenot
allowed to talk about sex, and some sexual conversations
wearenotallowedtotalkabout,noteveninourbedroom…
there are some issues we can never talk about, it’s a taboo.
Lack of sexual communication and knowledge meant that
somemarriedwomenhadnoconcept oftheir ownsexualplea-
sure.Anu(Punjabi,age35)explained,‘‘soactuallywedon’ttalk
aboutsexatall,soIhavenoideawhetherwe’remeanttoenjoyit
or not to be honest.’’A Latina focus group participant explained
that an‘‘open’’environment with greater sexual communication
andeducationwouldhave enabledhertoenjoysex,but because
sexualknowledgewastaboosheexperiencedfeelingsof‘‘guilt’’
and‘‘shame.’’
Formanyparticipants,women’ssexualitywasconstructedas
somethingthatistogivepleasuretoaman,ratherthanforthem-
selves,‘‘to give joy to her husband and to bear children,’’in the
wordsofNasima(Iraqi,age43).Shecontinued:‘‘itisraretofind
a man who cares about giving his wife pleasure. Beside some
womendonotknowanybetterandareverynaı
¨ve.’’Self-pleasure
throughmasturbationwassomethingthe majority of women had
noknowledgeabout,orwerejudgmentalof,saying‘
‘Ineverknew
thistypeofstuff exists,’’‘‘it’sdirty,’’or‘‘such a badthingtodo’’
(Afghani focus group). Heterosexism, in its association with
culture, was clearly apparent as same-sex relationships were
also something many participants had not heard about before
movingtoAustralia orCanada,describedassomethingthatdidn’t
existoutsideofWesternculture:‘‘It’snotinourculture,it’snotin
our religion, it’s not something we chose’’(Somali focus group);
‘‘wedon’thavethis’’(Amer,Sudanese,age34);‘‘inmyopinion,it
isreligiouslyillegal‘haram’[sinful]andformyopinionitiscom-
pletely totally refused’’(Iraqi focus group). If same-sex relation-
shipswereacknowledged,theywere positionedas‘
‘secret’
’
:‘
‘these
relations are found in our societies but in secret because it is for-
bidden’’(Iraqifocusgroup).Onlya small number of women,pri-
marily those educated in Australia or Canada, resisted condem-
nation of same-sex relationships. Some adopted a discourse of
sexualfreedomandchoice:‘‘withthechildrenthathavegrown
upinthe westernculture where there isa freedom ofchoice, so
you can do whatever you like for yourself’’(Akon, Sudanese,
age 30). Others adopted a discourse of sexual rights, as Samira
(Afghani, age 21) commented,‘‘I personally think that so long
as people don’t harm you, then you should not interfere with
their lives.’’
Some of the women we interviewed did provide accounts
of sexual pleasure and desire, as Arifa (Iraqi, age 48) told us’’:
I get the feeling that I need a man in my life, it’s hormones,
sometimesIstronglyfeelIneedaman,andwanttohavesex.’’
For some women this was a cultural and religious imperative,
as Samira told us: ‘‘In Islam, you are supposed to…You’re
supposed to enjoy it [sex]’’(Afghani, age 21), and‘‘if he can’t
please her, then he has to actually answer for it on judgment
day’’(Homa, Afghani, age 40). However, if women adhered
to the cultural prohibitions surrounding sexual communica-
tion, they were not able to initiate or express their desire for
sex with their husband. For example, one participant said,
‘‘[t]his is a culture thing. So it’s an understanding in the cul-
ture.Womenneveraskforsex’’(Sudanesefocusgroup).Another
participant said,‘‘[a]sa woman,inourculture,we donotsay,and
just,however,badlywereallywanttohavesexthatnight,it’snot
justeasytosay,wejustdon’t,wedon’teventalkaboutit’’(Somali
focus group). For a number of women, initiating or desiring sex
feltwrongreligiously,asanAfghanifocusgroupparticipantcom-
mented,‘
‘IfeltasenseasifI’mcommittingasin,itfeltsinful.’’She
wentontosay,‘‘eventhoughIknewheislegallymyhusbandand
it’s okay, it’s allowed…it felt very strange and uncomfortable if
hedidn’tinitiateit.Ijust,Iwouldn’t.’’Womenwhoinitiatedsexor
expressedtheirdesireswereatriskofbeingnegativelylabeledand
stigmatized within a discourse of sexual shame:‘‘everybody sees
that kind of woman as a whore, as somebody that doesn’t have
valuesor principles,andnot a goodeducation. Theyperceive her
as a bad woman’’(Sofia, Latina, age 40);‘‘it’s not acceptable, it’s
shame…theynevershowtheirdesirestotheirhusbands’’(Husna,
Arch Sex Behav (2017) 46:1901–1921
1911
123
 Sudanese, age 45).
Silence,secrecyandshameextendedtoexperiencesofsexual
pain,acommonoccurrenceformanywomen,asDaryatoldus
‘‘it hurts every time’’(Afghani, age 24). Some participants
enduredpainfulsexbecauseofculturalnormstoremainsilent,
as Hooria (Sudanese, age 35) said:
I feel pain in my vagina and my body[is] sore and can’t
move especially the hours after the sex…I can’t talk to
my husband or complain…I have to keep quiet. In my
culture its shame to talk about this pain, it is considered
a normal [part] of having sex.
In Hooria’s account, painful sex was normalized, associated
with vaginal tightening, and repair of a previouslyinfibulated
labia,after childbirth,‘‘to beas virginand tomakethe husband
happy and enjoying sex.’’Other women associated pain with
sexual frequency, but would not tell their husband of their
discomfortasthiswouldbe‘‘annoying’’orhe‘‘wouldnotunder-
stand,’’as Arifa said:‘‘he considers it joyful, but I consider it as
painful especially if it’s few times a day, it becomes annoying
too. He would not understand, so why would I tell him. It will
notmakeadifference’’(Iraqi,age48).Somewomenalsospoke
of being‘‘scared’’(Shiwa, Afghani,age 50) of violentrepercus-
sionsiftheydiscussedsexualpain,whichcouldimplyrefusalof
sex, as Akoi said of her relationship with her ex-husband:‘‘we
justwanthimtogetanddoitandfinishandthensleep,that’sall.
And if you don’t, if you say no, you will be beaten’’(South
Sudanese, age 40).
Sexual Consent:‘‘A Woman Isa Man’s Property’’
Silence
extended to the issue of sexual consent. Many participants gave
accounts of having no consensual rights in relation to sex with
theirhusbands,feelingunabletorefusesexualadvances,asAkoi
(South Sudanese, age 40) explained, it was considered a man’s
‘‘right’’to have sex because‘‘they pay dowry, so you are own-
ed…likesheisyourproperty.’’Arifa(Iraqi,age48)said‘‘It’snot
my right to say no.’’For a number of participants, refusing to
have sex was considered a‘‘sin’’(Afghani focus group). As
Amran explained,‘‘even if you don’t feel like doing it, you
just say,‘‘yes,’’because you’re scared of being cursed by the
angels’’(Somali, age 47).Otherparticipantspositionedhaving
sex a wife’s duty out of‘‘respect’’for their husband,or‘‘respect
for his desire’’(Kamelah,Sudanese,age 36).For example, Saba
(Sudanese, age 48) stated:
EvenifIamnothappyIcan’ttalkatall,womenhastohave
sex, including me, when the husband asks for it, even if
women have no desire to have it. They have to respect the
husband’s desire.
There was also a risk of their husbandleaving if a woman said
no to sex, as a Somali focus group participant told us‘‘if you
don’t want to have sex and it bothers you, allow him to marry
another woman…But if you want to have him, just make sure
that you are ready whatever time he wants.’’If a woman did
attempttosayno,itwasdeemedunacceptablebymanyhusbands.
For example, Faasio (age 32, Somali) described her husband as
‘‘cranky and angry’’if she tried to refuse sex.
Disclosing Pleasure, Pain and Refusing Consent: Negotiating
Sexual Shame Within Marriage
Negotiation of a discourse
of sexual shame within marriage was evident in accounts of
resistance to the cultural dictate that married women never
discusssex,orrefusesex,withtheirhusband.Anumberofwomen
describedmaritalrelationshipswhereopencommunicationabout
sexualityhadalwaysbeenthenorm,asoneIraqifocusgrouppar-
ticipantcommented‘‘wealwaystalkabouteverything[todowith
sex].’’ALatinainterviewee,Mariana(age38)describedopenness
about sexual desire and sexual pain across the course of her rela-
tionship:
I would feel free to ask for certain things and to com-
municate my needs and pleasures, the way that I like to
betouched,andallthat.Andthesamewhen,sexstartedto
becomepainfulafterIgotmybaby,Idon’thavemuchlubri-
cationthesedays,andthefirsttimewehadsex,afterthat,it
wasextremelypainful.Andyes,Iwasabletotellhim,letus
stop because this is being like a torture for me.
A small number of participants told us that since migration they
saw sexual pleasure as their right,‘‘…of course your society is
opened so we learnt a lot from your society so I see that it’s my
righttotellhimwhatIenjoyandwhatIdon’tenjoyinthesexual
relation’’(Sudanese focus group). Saadia (Iraqi, age 30) said
thatitwasnow‘‘easy[to]talkaboutthepositionsyouwant’’when
having sex‘‘to have different positions.’’Several participants told
theywerenowabletosaynotosex,becausethey‘
‘haverightsabout
what their choices are and they actually communicate that’
’(Akoi,
South Sudanese, age 40).
When I came to Australia we go to school and learn the
rightofthewoman…Womenwhenshesay’sno,means
no,youcan’t force her…sothat’swhyI sayweget peace
in Australia because we are independent now, we do our
own thing by our self, no beating up…no someone force
meallthe timeto havesex,whether you’resick,whether
you don’t want it (Suz, South Sudanese, age 42).
Otherssaidnotosex,butfeltguilty:‘‘moreoftenthannot,Ido
say no. But I do feel that it hurts him more than anything else’’
(Anu, Punjabi, age 34). Other women resisted the marital sex
imperative bypositioningunwanted sexas‘rape’.For example,
Najiba said‘‘[e]very night he used to rape me and that affected
my health’’(Afghani, age 64), when describing her relationship
with her ex-husband. In this vein, some women saw a need for the
1912
Arch Sex Behav (2017) 46:1901–1921
123
 men in their community to be educated about sexual health
‘‘because their information about sexual health is not enough’’
(Husna, Sudanese, age 45). For example, Saba (Sudanese, age
48) said:
The focus has to be on men in regards to sexual health
education because their information and knowledge
about sexual health is very poor. They want to apply the
way they grew up in this country. They have to under-
stand that forcing women for sex is rape and it is a crime
in Australia.
Theseaccountsareevidenceofwomen’sadoptionofahuman
rights-based sexual health discourse, in order to attain sex-
ualagency,sincemigration,asreportedinpreviousresearch
(Quelopana & Alcalde, 2014).
Absence of Agency: Fertility Control and Sexual Health
Inadequate Knowledge of Fertility Control and Sexual Screen-
ing
Cultural and religious taboos associated with women’s
sexualembodimenthadbroaderimplicationsfortheirknowl-
edge and behavior in relation to sexual health. Fertility con-
trolthroughcontraceptiveusewassubjecttosilenceandsecrecy
for many women. For example, participants told us ‘‘I haven’t
talked about it to anyone…Yea, our friends are very secretive,
theydon’ttalkabout,yeah,Idon’teventalkthattopic’’(Aameeka,
Tamil, age 40);‘‘no, I don’t know anything about it [contracep-
tion]’’ (Amaal, Somali, age 42); ‘‘I have no idea about contra-
ception’’(Akeck, South Sudanese, age 31). A number of women
told us that contraception was forbidden within their religion, as
women were expected to bear children, suggesting that contra-
ception use would be associated with shame:‘‘To reject having a
baby is forbidden in Islam’’(Suhaira, Afghani, age 20);‘‘no the
religiondoesnotallowwomantousecontraceptives’
’(Hido,Soma-
li,age 68).Otherssaidthattheyneededpermissionfromtheirhus-
band:‘
‘I think the men should decide…in our culture every deci-
sion…you have to get permission from the male’
’(Safia, Afghani,
age 28);‘
‘the lady have to tell the man’
’(Joy, South Sudanese, age
45).Awomanwhousedcontraceptionwithouttellingherhusband
wasatriskofviolenceorabandonment,soshehadtokeepitsecret:
‘
‘I use it, but still men don’t like it…I used to hide them from him
sometimes…wehadafightandhehitme’
’(Faaiso,Somali,age32);
‘
‘ifyoumakethemedicinetostopbabiesandthemansaysno…he
may separate withthe wife…andwillmarrya new wife’
’(Elmera,
Sudanese, age 34).
Somewomendidreceiveinformationabout contraception
fromfamilyorfriends,fromschool,thefamilydoctor,women’s
health groups, the media, or within a refugee camp, and a num-
berofwomenwereusingIUDs,thecontraceptivepill,implants,
or natural methods. However, incorrect knowledge about con-
traception was common. Participants told us they believed that
contraception would impact negatively on their reproductive
function,causing‘‘ablockage,’’makingawoman‘‘bleedtohell’’
(Akoi, South Sudanese, age 40), or that‘‘taking a pill every day
will get to your blood’’ (Afghani focus group), which ‘‘may
damage your next baby…it may affect the next generation’’
(Safia, Afghani, age 28). Contraception before the first child
was born was considered to be particularly damaging:
[Contraception is] not allowed at the beginning. You
can’t take it before you have a baby. They even put in
our minds that if you get contraception before they first
come in and see you, you will never get pregnant any-
more (Iraqi focus group).
Othersreportedmoregeneralizedhealthconsequences,saying
it‘‘affectsyourorgans’’(Arliyo,Somali,age28),‘‘cangiveyou
some kind of sickness’’(Lokoya, South Sudanese, age 42), or
that‘‘it creates a whole lot of other damages’’(Afghani focus
group).Forthesereasons,manyofwomenweinterviewedsaid
they‘‘don’t thinkof using it.’’One of the consequences of poor
or incorrect knowledge was unwanted pregnancy. For exam-
ple, an Afghani focus group participant told us, ‘‘two of my
childrenareamistake,’’andAsilah(Iraqi,age34)said‘‘thefirst
baby I was so happy, but I surprised when I was expecting the
second one. I don’t know how to control [having babies].’’For
other women, unwanted pregnancy was followed by abortion:
‘‘I got a termination two times’’(Tamil focus group);‘‘I fell
pregnant 5 times; I did abortion because I didn’t want more
children’’(Najiba,Iraqi,age64).Whileabortionwasdescribed
as‘‘as sin’’or‘‘illegal,’’itwas justifiedbythe familybeing poor
and‘‘want[ing] finance’’(Andrea, Tamil,age 26), orawoman
beingpregnantbeforemarriage.Itwasusuallyconducted‘‘before
the fetus is old and it becomes illegal and wrong’’(Habibah,
Iraqi,age43)andinsecret:‘‘neversharewithfamilymembers’’
(Andrea, Tamil, age 26). However, unwanted pregnancy and
abortioncouldalsofunctionasamotivationforwomentoseek
contraceptive information, as Ariana (Latina, age 40) com-
mented‘‘Ithoughtthatthiscannothappentomeagain.Icannot
get pregnantagain,sothatwasa turningpointinmylifeforme
to start to get more informed and more proactive around con-
traceptive methods.’’
Absenceofopendiscussionaboutsexualhealthalsomeant
that some participants knew little about the existence or pur-
pose of cervical screening. For example, a focus group par-
ticipant asked,‘‘do we need to do it still? Is it important?’’The
participant went on to say:‘‘Isn’t it lack of knowledge? Lack
of knowledge is the main thing…we don’t know what it is,
what is that, how much is that important for us and things like
that’’(Tamil focus group). Similarly, Akeck (South Sudanese,
age31)statedaboutherlackofpapsmearknowledge,‘‘Yeah,I
don’t knowanythingabout them, it’sveryshocking.’’Equally,
few participants knew about the existence or function of the
Arch Sex Behav (2017) 46:1901–1921
1913
123
 human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine, even though many
women had teenage girls who are the target of preventative
health programs. While a number of women told us that they
‘‘don’tknowaboutit,’’othersdidnotseeitsrelevancefortheir
daughters:‘‘ifmydaughtersaidthatshehasnosexualrelations,
why I give her this vaccine?’’(Iraqi focus group). Others held
misconceptions about the vaccine:‘‘I think maybe the injec-
tion itself is causing cancer’’(Somali focus group).
STIs were also a source of confusion for some women, or
positioned as not relevant ‘‘because we don’t have sex with
othermen’’(Tamilfocus group),or‘‘Idon’tknowmuchabout
that’’(Banoo, Afghani, age 28). This lack of knowledge was
positioned as a cultural norm, maintained by silence:‘‘in my
culture,wedon’tknowanythingaboutthat…I’venevercome
across [it], no,’’said Jane (Tamil, age 32). Otherssaid that they
only knew about HIV infection, or knew friends or relations
that had experienced a STI, including urinary tract infections,
or vaginal infections; however, women had little knowledge
about what this entailed, or how to recognize symptoms. Sev-
eral participants, most commonly from the Somali commu-
nity, told us that they preferred not to have any discussion or
knowledgeaboutSTIsduetoconstructingdiseaseinafatalistic
way:
No,I don’t thinkaboutthese things,youknow,whatever
will happentome, ithas already beendecided byGod.If
things will happen to me, it will happen to me no matter
what,andifitdoesn’thappen,itdoesn’thappen(Amran,
Somali, age 47).
Similar accounts were found in relation to discussion of cer-
vical cancer screening:‘‘if it is meant to end your life then it
will,nothingcanpreventthat’’(Hoodo,age29,Somali);‘‘ifany-
thing happens, it happens’’(Jane, Tamil, age 32). This suggests
thattheintersectionofreligionandculture,associatedwithcul-
turalconstructionsofillnessasdeterminedbyagodorfate,may
serve toreinforce silence and secrecyassociatedwithwomen’s
sexual embodiment.
Negotiating Health Seeking Behavior
As a consequence of
the silence, secrecy and shame surrounding women’s sexual
embodiment,anumberofparticipantstoldustheywerereluctant
to seek professional medical advice for reproductive and sexual
concerns. Some women were reluctant to‘‘expose the body’’
(Andrea,Tamil,age 26) tohealth careprofessionals.A Somali
focus group participant explained that during the delivery of her
baby,‘‘Ikindofletthismaledoctortoattendtome,butonthecon-
dition that when I’m having the baby, when I’m delivering the
baby,heshouldnotlookatme.Imean,heshouldnotlookatmy
vagina.’’Seeking help often occurred late and only in extreme
cases, as Arliyo (Somali, age 26) said,‘‘they just go to doctors
when they are just dying.’’In this vein, a Latina focus group par-
ticipant went to the doctor after over 20years of experiencing
extreme menstrual bleeding:
It was very traumatic because I used to bleed a lot, like a
lot…like so much, I would have to change the feminine
paper every two hours and experienced like that for
about20,24years,untilmymumbroughtmetothedoctor
because it was not normal. I would bleed so much that, to
the point that I will faint, so I would faint almost every
month, every time that I will get my period.
Thisdelayedactionlefttheparticipantfeelingtraumatized,‘‘I
couldn’t really function like normally…basically I was very
sad. I didn’t ask questions and people didn’t guide me.’’
Inanotherexample,Hawa(Sudanese,age30)preferrednat-
uralmethodsandself-treatmentduetotheshameofdiscussing
menstruationwithahealthcareprofessional.Shesaidshewould
‘‘maybe’’see a doctor‘‘if bleeding stops completely’’because
‘‘in our culture, it’s, it’s shameful to actually go to the doctor
and talk about those things…I would eat fruits or try to help
myself before going to the doctor.’’Other participants chose
not toseekmedical help.For example,Akeck(SouthSudanese,
age 31) refused to go to a post-caesarean check-up even though
she had been bleeding for an extended time:
I had my daughter, I had a total caesarean, and like the
bleedingactuallydid notstop forcertaintimes, but Idid
not actually go to see a doctor…I think it was six months
after that…But…I failed to see my GP.
In the context of experiencing painful sex, Saba (Sudanese,
age48)‘‘keptquietanddidn’ttellanyone’’andMariana(Latina,
age 48) had not‘‘taken any action or been proactive.’’
Conversely, many women described a greater openness
abouttheirownsexualhealthconcernssincemigration,asevi-
dencedbythefollowingaccounts:‘‘talkingaboutsexualhealth
is veryimportant.Thankfully,we are here in Australia so we
can talk about it openly. Because back home, we can’t talk
about it’’ (Sudanese focus group); ‘‘here I feel really com-
fortable about obtaining any kind of information related to
my sexual health, but in Sudan and Saudi Arabia, I feelembar-
rassed to ask for this kind of information’’(Wafa, Sudanese,
age40).Thisopennessfacilitatedwomenobtainingknowledge
about sexuality and sexual health, as well as seeking profes-
sional support if they experienced difficulties:‘‘I have gone
tothe doctor aboutsexbecause mylibidoisquite low’’(Anu,
Punjabi, age 35). Some women dealt with their own feelings
of embarrassment or shame by seeking help in educating their
daughters,illustratedinthecommentsofaSudanesefocusgroup
participant:
Before I told my daughter, I was scared to tell her about
the period. Because my daughter might misunderstand
me.Iwasscaredandshytotalkaboutthistopic.Butwhat
1914
Arch Sex Behav (2017) 46:1901–1921
123
 happenedisI wenttoa migrant resourcecentreandthere
wasaladytalkingaboutwomen’shealth.Shetalkedabout
the periods and how to tell their daughters. I learned from
that session I had to tell my daughter and I found it easy to
handle.
A number of participants reported having changed their sex-
ual and reproductive health screening behaviors post migra-
tion, for example, Hooria (Sudanese, age 35) told us that she
nowhasregularpapsmears,‘‘Iwasn’tawareofitbeforeIcame
to Australia, my family doctor told me about it, I got all the
information and I do it on regular basis.’’A Tamil focus group
participant told us that since migration they now‘‘talk more’’
about contraception, although onarrival they had‘‘nil’’contra-
ceptive knowledge. Akeck (South Sudanese, age 31) sought
information about contraception. She countered the reproduc-
tive imperative discourse by saying,‘‘information that educat-
ingyoungpeople,howtheycanprotectthemselves,justtoenjoy
or play, just not to have babies when they are not prepared to
havebabies,itisacritical,verycriticalthingthatisveryimpor-
tant.’’Other women talked of seeking contraceptive advise
from‘‘olderwomeninthe community’’(Afghanifocusgroup),
andofhavingpositiveexperiencesoffertilitycontrol,asNasira
(Iraqi, age 52) said of her use of an IUD,‘‘it was really good.’’
However, many women wanted more sexual and reproductive
health information, such as Setara (Afghani, age 23) who said,
‘‘Ithinkinregardstodifferentdiseases,sexuallytransmitted
diseases I think, I usually get scared about them, I want to
know about them.’’ Other women wanted information about
contraception,sexualpain,breastcancer,cervicalscreening,and
menopause, suggesting there is a need for culturally safe sexual
health information, in order to improve women’s sexual and
reproductive health.
Discussion
The sexual embodiment of migrant and refugee women is
constructed and experienced in the context of transnational
migrationandtheensuingconfigurationofidentity,wherein
womennegotiatediversediscourses,andpatriarchalhetero-
sexist constraints as mediated through culture (Sargent, 2006).
Across each of the cultural groups who took part in this study,
traditionalculturalandreligiousdiscourse positionedthe ideal
woman as silent in relation to sexual embodiment, lacking in
sexual knowledge and experience prior to marriage, and pas-
siveandreceptiveinrelationtoheterosexualmaritalsex.Women
reproducedandresistedadiscourseofsexualshameinorderto
account for, and make sense of, their sexual embodiment and
sexual health. These findings confirm the findings of previous
qualitative research with migrant and refugee women, that
identified shame associated with menarche and menstruation
(Cooper & Koch, 2007; Sommer et al., 2015), premarital sex
(Kebedeetal.,2014;Meldrumetal.,2014),discussionofsex-
uality (Dean et al., 2017; Quelopana & Alcalde, 2014), STIs
(McMichael & Gifford, 2009), HPV inoculation and cervical
cancer screening (Salad et al., 2015) and contraception use
(Ngum Chi Watts etal., 2014; Sargent,2006). This isa matter
ofconcernforthoseinterestedinmigrantandrefugeewomen’s
sexualhealthandwell-being,assexualshameisassociatedwith
absence of knowledge and communication about sexuality,
manifested in secrecy and silence, and has an impact on sexual
health and health seeking behavior, as evidenced by women’s
accounts in the present study.
Inadditiontolackofpreparationformenarche(Uskul,2004),
menstrualshamehasbeenlinkedtoincreasedsexualrisk-taking
(Schooler, Ward, Merriwether, & Caruthers, 2005) and embar-
rassment toward other reproductive functions, such as breast-
feeding (Bramwell, 2001; Johnston-Robledo, Sheffield, Voigt,
& Wilcox-Constantine, 2007) and childbirth (Moloney, 2010).
Shame associated with premarital sexual knowledge or activity
prohibits single women from accessing sexual health informa-
tion or services (Beck et al., 2005; McMullin et al., 2005; Mel-
drum et al., 2014; Wray et al., 2014), with personal reputation or
family honor jeopardized if it is known they are engaging in pre-
marital sex (Quelopana & Alcalde, 2014; Rawson & Liamput-
tong,2010;Ussheretal.,2012).Thepositioningofdiscussionof
sexuality as disrespectful, indecent and culturally inappropriate
results in sexual health concerns not being addressed with part-
ners, family members, or health providers (Kebede et al., 2014;
Quelopana & Alcalde, 2014; Rawson & Liamputtong, 2010;
Rogers&Earnest,2015).Inadequateknowledgeaboutsexual
desire, satisfaction or pain can lead to distress, isolation and
underutilization of proactive coping strategies (Ussher et al.,
2012; World Health Organisation, 2009), and an‘‘absent dis-
courseofdesire’’(Tolman,Impett,Tracy,&Michael,2006),with
implications for women’s sexual subjectivity (Fine & McClel-
land, 2006; Ussher, 1997b). Cultural constructions of the eti-
ology of illness, or the efficacy of interventions, may inhibit
access to sexual health services (Gagnon et al., 2002; Man-
derson & Allotey, 2003; Salad et al., 2015), with sexual and
reproductive health services seen as culturally inappropriate
(Guerin et al., 2006; Richters & Khoei, 2008), threatening fer-
tility or the virginity imperative (Ngum Chi Watts et al., 2014;
Saladetal.,2015),orunderminingpatriarchalpower(Sargent,
2006). This has implications for the ability of health services
providers to address migrant and refugee women’s sexual health
needs,withimplicationsforsexualhealth,pleasureandwell-being.
The discourseof sexualshameislocatedinpatriarchaland
heterosexist cultural and religious ideologies, legitimating con-
jugal,familialandinstitutionalregulationofwomen’ssexuality.
Internalizationofsexualshame,throughaprocessofsubjectifica-
tion (Foucault, 1979), leads to women engaging in self-surveil-
lanceandself-policing:notspeakingoftheirsexualembodiment,
Arch Sex Behav (2017) 46:1901–1921
1915
123
 ortheirsexualneedsandconcerns(Hawkey,Ussher,Perz,&
Metusela, 2016b). This is reinforced by fear of the material
consequences of transgression, which include stigmatization,
social exclusion and violence, as illustrated by the accounts of
participantsinthepresentstudy.However,womenarenotsim-
ply positioned within existing discourses, but can re-position
themselves,variablyadopting,resisting,negotiatingandtailoring
discourses associated with sexuality to achieve a desired sexual
subjectivity (Day et al., 2010). In accountsof negotiationwomen
reproduced and resisted a discourse of sexual shame. As Brown
(2007) has argued, the‘‘both/and’’position‘‘honors women’s
agencyandpowerwhilenotminimizingtheimpactofoppressive
social discourses and social relations’’(p. 275).‘‘Both/and’’nego-
tiation allows acknowledgement of the material consequences of
transgressionofadiscourseofsexualshameandwomen’sagency
andpowerinnegotiatingadegreeofsexualagency.Fromthisper-
spective, reproduction and resistance of discourse overlap rather
than being discrete and separate processes (Day et al., 2010).
Inthepresentstudy,manywomenadoptedahumanrights-
based sexualhealth discourseinorder toresist traditional cul-
turalandreligiousconstructionsofsexualembodiment,allow-
ing them to communicate or gain knowledge about sexuality
anddevelopsexualagency,ortoallowtheirdaughterstodoso.
Participants negotiated a discourse of menstrual shame through
acknowledging the cultural positioning of menstrual blood as
abject,atthesametimeascontraveningpracticesofsecrecyand
silence in order to educate their daughters, or to critically reflect
upon their own menarcheal experience (Hawkey, Ussher, Perz,
& Metusela, 2016a). As reported previously (Cooper & Koch,
2007; Kissling, 1996), those with little menarcheal support
themselveswerethosewhointendedtoprovidetheirdaughters
withmenstrualeducation.Negotiationofadiscourseofsexual
shamewasevidentinaccountsofwomenseekinginformation
about sexuality, and in non-judgmental accounts of‘‘other’’
women’spre-maritalsexualpractices.Aspremaritalchastityis
associated with a woman’s self-worth and self-respect (Salad
etal.,2015),andopentransgressionwithculturalandreligious
sanctions, it is not surprising that few women adopted a posi-
tionofopenresistancein thissphere, through admittingtopre-
marital sexual experiences. Further negotiation of a discourse
of sexual shame was evident in accounts of women discussing
sexual issues within their marriage, refusing marital sex, dis-
cussingcontraception,controllingtheirfertility,andaccessing
sexual health services. These accounts give us insight into the
shiftingbalanceof power between womenand men inmigrant
and refugee communities (Fa
´bos, 2001) and the negotiation
of women’s sexual embodiment in the context of intimate
relationships.
Anumberofintersectingfactorsfacilitatedwomen’sability
to negotiate traditional discourses associated with feminine
sexuality.Migrationandaprocessofacculturationprovided
alternative discourses to conceptualize sexual health, a stron-
ger legal framework that facilitated resistance to sexual vio-
lence,andaccesstosexualhealthservicesthatpromoteagency
inrelationtofertilitycontrol(Rogers&Earnest,2015;Sargent,
2006). Generational changes within cultural groups, as well as
social class, and rural/urban influences, were also influential
factors,asreportedinpreviousresearch(Fa
´bos,2001),aswere
the particularities of a woman’s relationship with her family,
and more specifically with her husband. There were also some
differences across cultural and religious groups, in terms of
menstrual celebration beingpracticed byTamil,Sudaneseand
SouthSudanesewomen,premaritalsexbeingmoreopenlynego-
tiated by Punjabi and Latina women, and women’s sexual plea-
sure as a religious right only acknowledged by Islamic women.
While it is important to recognize and acknowledge the com-
monalitiesacrossculturalgroupsintermsoftheirnegotiationofa
discourseofsexualshame,itisalsoimportanttoacknowledge
differences.Itistheintersectionofthesocialcategoriesofgen-
der, age, culture, religion, and marital status, resulting in a
‘‘crossroadsofmultiple oppressions’’(Marecek,2016,p.178),
thatinfluencesmigrant and refugee women’sconstructionand
experience of their sexual embodiment. This suggests that an
intersectional theoretical framework (Hankivsky & Cormier,
2009)isessentialforfutureresearchinthisfield,andthatstruc-
tural inequalities and imbalances of power which influence
women’s sexual and reproductive health must be acknowl-
edged and addressed. In providing culturally safe services
and support for migrant and refugee women’s sexual health,
it is important for health educators and service providers to
understand and acknowledge the cultural and religious frame
of reference within which women construct and experience
theirsexualembodiment(Keygnaertetal.,2014).However,it
isalsoimportanttoacknowledgethefluidanddynamicnatureof
differences between women, the meaning and experience of
simultaneously belonging to multiple intertwined social cat-
egories (Else-Quest & Hyde, 2016), acknowledged within an
intersectional approach (Ngum Chi Watts et al., 2014; Salad
etal.,2015),andwomen’scapacitytonegotiatecompetingdis-
cursive constructions of sexuality and sexual embodiment.
Thereareanumberofstrengthsandlimitationsofthisstudy.
Strengthsincludethemajorityofparticipantsbeinginterviewed
in their first language, which allowed for experiences to be
explored in-depth without limitation of language, and par-
ticipationofwomenwhowererecentmigrantsandmightnot
befluentinEnglish.TheuseofanEnglish-speakinginterviewer
fortheremainingproportionfacilitatedexaminationofwhether
accounts were being modified in the presence of a community
interviewer, something we did not find. Interviewing a rel-
atively large number of women from diverse cultural groups
made both within and between cultural group comparisons
possible. The use of both focus groups and individual inter-
1916
Arch Sex Behav (2017) 46:1901–1921
123
 views was a strength, as it allowed for in-depth discussion of
individual women’s experiences. The fact that we didn’t find
notable differences across the interview modalities was unex-
pected. What was notable was that many women were reluctant
to discuss sexual matters in depth, regardless of the interview
modality,andmanyofthecommunityinterviewerswerereluc-
tant to pursue the matter. This may reflect cultural restrictions
on discussion of sexuality, reflected in our analysis. The fact
thatour interviewschedule started withthe discussionofmen-
struation, a topic all women were comfortable discussing with
interviewers, mayhavefacilitateddiscussionofsexuality later
in the interviews, as women had gained a sense of comfort and
confidence in the interview process. Limitations include the
fact that researchers could not back-check translated tran-
scripts for accuracy due to limitations in resources; partici-
pantswereaconveniencesample;womenwereretrospectively
reflecting on some of their experiences; and women’s stories
shared in this research might not necessarily be representative
of their culture of origin, given we spoke to a small subset of
women from each group.
There are a number of practical implications of these find-
ings for service providers. The establishment of migrant and
refugee women’s sexual and reproductive rights requires a
combinationofsystemimprovementsandservicesthatbenefit
women (Sen & Govender, 2015). This includes acknowledge-
ment of the specific needs of migrant and refugee women and
the production of culturally safe health promotion strategies
and sexual health resources (Botfield et al., 2016; Keygnaert
etal.,2014).Sexualhealthpromotionneedstobeakeypartof
early resettlement for migrant and refugee women (McMi-
chael & Gifford, 2009). More specifically, there is a need for
recognition of potential lack of knowledge in young women
about the association between menstruation and fertility, a
needforprovisionofinformationforcommunityworkerson
menstruationandmenopausetofacilitateeducationofmigrant
and refugee women, and support for women in educating their
daughtersaboutmenstruation(Hawkeyetal.,2016a).Miscon-
ceptions and absence of information about contraception need
tobeaddressed,throughtheprovisionofresourcesandsupport
in a range of modalities, in the language of different cultural
groups, and husbands involved in the discussion (Ngum Chi
Watts, McMichael, & Liamputtong, 2015). Difficulties expe-
rienced by unmarried women in obtaining information about
contraception, and sex and sexual health need to be acknowl-
edged(Saladetal.,2015).Understandingofthe socialandcul-
tural sensitivitiesthatmanymigrant and refugee women expe-
rience regarding discussion of sex or sexual concerns and the
implications this has for sexual health and sexual rights will
havebenefitsforprovisionofsexualhealthservices,andunder-
standing of sexual embodiment (Dean et al., 2017). Resources
onsexualrightsandconsent,thevalueofpleasureanddesire,
female genital cutting, sexual infections and screening, how to
discuss sexual concerns with a health professional, and how to
avoid or treat sexual pain and discomfort, as well as sexuality
educationforyoungpeople,canaddresswomen’sunmetneeds
inthissphere(Helmer,Senior,Davison,&Vodic,2015).Over-
all,sensitivitytolanguageandotherbarrierstosexualhealth
serviceuseneedtobeimproved,withpreviousresearchsuggest-
ing a need for bilingual community-based interpretersor‘‘nav-
igators’’(Henderson & Kendall, 2011, p. 195).
In conclusion, this study demonstrated that migrant and
refugeewomen’ssexualembodimentisexperiencedinthecon-
textofculturaldiscoursesandpractices,withimplicationsfor
sexualknowledge,sexualbehaviorandsexualhealth.Women’s
sexual subjectivityisconstructedandreconstructedthrough
social interactions and negotiation of competing discourses
associated with sexual embodiment. Researchers and health
service providers need to be aware of the cultural and reli-
giousconstraintswhichmayimpedethedevelopmentofmigrant
and refugee women’s agentic sexual subjectivity, but also their
capacity for resistance and negotiation.
Acknowledgements This study was funded by an Australian Research
Council Linkage Grant LP130100087,inconjunction withFamily Plan-
ning New South Wales (FPNSW), The Community Migrant Resource
Centre (CMRC) and Centre for the Study of Gender, Social Inequities
and Mental Health, Simon Fraser University, Vancouver, Canada. The
chief investigators on the project were Jane Ussher, Janette Perz and
Renu Narchal. Partner investigators were Marina Morrow, Jane Estoesta,
Jane Wicks and Melissa Monterio. Christine Metusela was the research
coordinator, and Alexandra Hawkey a doctoral candidate. Brenda Jamar
and Sevinj Asgarova coordinated the Canadian data collection. Thanks
are offered to Katherine Bennett and Rob Hardy for comments on the
article and discussion of translational outcomes. We also thank our Com-
munity interviewers: Salwa Alhag, Tabitha Ajak, Naima Abdullah, Mala
Punnia-Moorthy, Nabila Qalandarzadah, Hela Jaffar in Australia, and
Hoda Nassar, Rahma Abdullahi, Hala Habibi, Rima Hijazi and Adriana
PazinCanada,andthefollowingpeopleandcommunityorganizationsfor
assistance with recruitment: Conscila Emilianus, Faiza Shakori, Nuha
Razaq, Nazifa Ali, CMRC, Options for Sexual Health, East Van Youth
Clinic, Evergreen Community Health Centre, Burnaby New Canadian
Clinic, Surrey New Canadian Clinic, and Healthiest Babies Possible,
Vancouver Coastal Health.
Funding
This study was funded by Australian Research Council Link-
age Grant LP130100087
Compliance with Ethical Standards
Conflict of interest The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
Human and animal rights All procedures involving human partici-
pants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the Australian
National Health and Medical Research Council and with the 1964 Helsinki
declaration and its later amendments.
Informed consent Informed consent was obtained from all individual
participants included in the study.
Arch Sex Behav (2017) 46:1901–1921
1917
123
 Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommo
ns.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution,
andreproductioninanymedium,providedyougiveappropriatecreditto
the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
Aggleton,P.,&Campbell,C.(2000).Workingwithyoungpeople—towards
anagendaforsexualhealth.SexualandRelationshipTherapy,15,283–
296. doi:10.1080/14681990050109863
Allotey, P., Manderson, L., Baho, S., & Demian, L. (2004). Reproductive
health for resettling refugee and migrant women. Journal of Health
Issues, 78, 12–17.
Australian Government Department of Health. (2016). People from cul-
turally and linguistically diverse backgrounds. http://health.gov.
au/internet/publications/publishing.nsf/Content/mental-pubs-p-
mono-toc*mental-pubs-p-mono-pop*mental-pubs-p-mono-pop-
cul
Bale, C. (2011). Raunch or romance? Framing and interpreting the rela-
tionshipbetweensexualizedcultureandyoungpeople’ssexualhealth.
Sex Education, 11, 303–313. doi:10.1080/14681811.2011.590088
Bartky, S. L. (1990). Femininity and domination: Studies in the phe-
nomenology of oppression. New York: Routledge.
Beck, A., Majumdar, A.,Estcourt, C., &Petrak, J. (2005).‘‘Wedon’t really
have cause to discuss these things, they don’t affect us’’: A collabora-
tivemodelfordevelopingculturallyappropriatesexualhealthservices
with the Bangladeshi community of Tower Hamlets. Sexually Trans-
mitted Infections, 81, 158–162. doi:10.1136/sti.2004.012195
Beiser, M. (2005). The health of immigrants and refugees in Canada.
Canadian Journal of Public Health, 96, S30–S44.
Bhaskar, R. (1989). Reclaiming reality: A critical introduction to con-
temporary philosophy. London: Verso.
Bishop,E.C.(2012).Examiningtheraunchculturethesisthroughyoung
Australian women’s interpretations of contradictory discourses.
Journal of Youth Studies, 15, 821–840. doi:10.1080/13676261.2012.
693597
Boonzaier, F., & de La Rey, C. (2003).‘‘He’s a man, and I’m a woman’’:
CulturalconstructionsofmasculinityandfemininityinSouthAfrican
women’s narratives of violence. Violence Against Women, 9, 1003–
1029. doi:10.1177/1077801203255133
Bordo, S. (1993). Unbearable weight: Feminism, culture and the body.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Botfield, J. R., Newman, C. E., & Zwi, A. B. (2016). Young people from
culturally diverse backgrounds and their use of services for sexual
andreproductivehealthneeds:Astructuredscopingreview.Sexual
Health, 13, 1–9. doi:10.1071/SH15090
Bramwell, R. (2001). Blood and milk: Constructions of female bodily
fluids in Western society. Women and Health, 34, 85–96. doi:10.
1300/J013v34n04_06
Brown, C. (2007). Feminist therapy, violence, problem drinking and re-
storying women’s lives: Reconceptualizing anti-oppressive fem-
inist therapy. In D. Baines (Ed.), Doing anti-oppressive practice
(pp. 128–144). Halifax, NS: Fernwood Publishing.
Bunevicius, R., Kusminskas, L., Bunevicius, A., Nadisauskiene, R. J.,
Jureniene, K., & Pop, V. J. M. (2009). Psychosocial risk factors for
depression during pregnancy. Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica
Scandinavica, 88, 599–605. doi:10.1080/00016340902846049
Chen,Y.,Subramanian,S.V.,Acevedo-Garcia,D.,&Kawachi,I.(2005).
Women’s status and depressive symptoms: A multilevel analysis.
Social Science and Medicine, 60, 49–60. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.
2004.04.030
Cooper, S. C., & Koch, P. B. (2007). ‘‘Nobody told me nothing’’:
Communication about menstruation among low-income African
American women. Women and Health, 46, 57–78. doi:10.1300/
J013v46n01_05
Corre
ˆa, S., Petchesky, R. P., & Parker, R. (2008). Sexuality, health and
human rights. New York, NY: Routledge.
Crenshaw, K. (1991). Mapping the margins: Intersectionality, identity
politics,andviolenceagainstwomenofcolor.StanfordLawReview,
43, 1241–1299. doi:10.2307/1229039
Creswell, J. W. (2009). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and
mixed methods approaches (3rd ed.). London: Sage.
Curtin, N., Ward, L. M., Merriwether, A., & Caruthers, A. (2011).
Femininityideologyandsexualhealthinyoungwomen:Afocuson
sexual knowledge, embodiment, and agency. International Journal
of Sexual Health, 23, 48–62. doi:10.1080/19317611.2010.524694
Davies, B., & Harre, R. (1990). Positioning: The discursive production
of selves. Journal of the Theory of Social Behaviour, 20, 43–65.
doi:10.1111/j.1468-5914.1990.tb00174.x
Davis, K. (2008). Intersectionality as buzzword: A sociology of science
perspective on what makes a feminist theory successful. Feminist
Theory, 9, 67–85. doi:10.1177/1464700108086364
Day,K.,Johnson,S.,Milnes,K.,&Rickett,B.(2010).ExploringWomen’s
agency and resistance in health-related contexts: Contributors’ intro-
duction. Feminism & Psychology, 20, 238–241. doi:10.1177/095935
3509359761
de Anstiss, H., & Ziaian, T. (2010). Mental health help-seeking and
refugee adolescents: Qualitative findings from a mixed-methods
investigation. Australian Psychologist, 45, 29–37. doi:10.1080/00
050060903262387
Dean, J., Mitchell, M., Stewart, D., & Debattista, J. (2017). Intergen-
erational variation in sexual health attitudes and beliefs among
Sudanese refugee communities in Australia. Culture, Health and
Sexuality, 19, 17–31. doi:10.1080/13691058.2016.1184316
Douglas, M. (1966). Purity and danger. New York: Ark Publication.
Duggleby, W. (2005). What about focus group interaction data? Quali-
tative Health Research, 15, 832–840. doi:10.1177/10497323042
73916
Duncan,D.(2010).Embodyingthegayself:Bodyimage,reflexivityand
embodied identity. Health Sociology Review, 19, 437–450. doi:10.
5172/hesr.2010.19.4.437
Dyck, I. (2001). Who and what is Canada? Constructing cultural iden-
tities in health care research. Journal of Historical Geography, 27,
417–429. doi:10.1006/jhge.2001.0330
Else-Quest, N. M.,&Hyde,J. S.(2016). Intersectionality inquantitative
psychological research. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 40, 155–
170. doi:10.1177/0361684316629797
Evans, A., Riley, S., & Shankar, A. (2010). Technologies of sexiness:
Theorizing women’s engagement in the sexualization of culture.
Feminism & Psychology, 20, 114–131. doi:10.1177/0959353509
351854
Fa
´bos, H. A. (2001). Embodying transition: FGC, displacement, and
gender-making for Sudanese in Cairo. Feminist Review, 69, 90–
110. doi:10.1080/01417780110070139
Fenton, K. A. (2001). Strategies for improving sexual health in ethnic
minorities. Current Opinion in Infectious Diseases, 14, 63–69.
doi:10.1097/00001432-200102000-00011
Fine, M., & McClelland, S. (2006). Sexuality education and desire: Still
missing after all these years. Harvard Educational Review, 76,
297–338. doi:10.17763/haer.76.3.w5042g23122n6703
Finlay, L., & Gough, B. (2003). Reflexivity: A practical guide for
researchers in health and social sciences. Malden, MA: Blackwell
Science.
Foucault, M. (1972). The archeology of knowledge and the discourse on
language. New York: Pantheon Books.
1918
Arch Sex Behav (2017) 46:1901–1921
123
 Foucault, M.(1979). Discipline andpunishment:Thebirthoftheprison.
London: Penguin.
Frosh, S., Phoenix, A., & Pattman, R. (2003). Taking a stand: Using
psychoanalysis to explore the positioning of subjects in discourse.
BritishJournalofSocialPsychology, 42,39–53.doi:10.1348/0144
66603763276117
Gagnon, A., Merry, L., & Robinson, C. (2002). A systematic review of
refugee women’s reproductive health. Refuge, 21, 6–17.
Gagnon, J. H. (1990). The explicit and implicit use of the scripting per-
spective in sex research. Annual Review of Sex Research, 1, 1–43.
Garrett, P., Dickson, H., Whelan, A., & Whyte, L. (2010). Represen-
tations and coverage of non-English-speaking immigrants and
multicultural issues in three major Australian health care publica-
tions. Australia and New Zealand Health Policy, 7. doi:10.1186/
1743-8462-7-1
Gavey, N., & McPhillips, K. (1999). Subject to romance: Heterosexual
passivity as an obstacle to women initiating condom use. Psychol-
ogy of Women Quarterly, 23, 349–367. doi:10.1111/j.1471-6402.
1999.tb00366.x
Gifford, S. M., Bakopanos, C., Dawson, M.-T., & Yesilyurt, Z. (1998).
Riskingforprotection:Discoursesaround‘safesex’amongChilean,
Turkish and second-generation Greek women living in Melbourne,
Australia.Ethnicity & Health, 3, 95–116. doi:10.1080/13557858.19
98.9961852
Go, V. F., Quan, V. M., Chung, A., Zenilman, J., Hanh, V. T. M., &
Celentano, D. (2002). Gender gaps, gender traps: Sexual identity
andvulnerabilitytosexuallytransmitteddiseases amongwomenin
Vietnam. Social Science and Medicine, 55, 467–481. doi:10.1016/
S0277-9536(01)00181-2
Guerin, P. B., Allotey, P., Elmi, F. H., & Baho, S. (2006). Advocacy as a
means to an end: Assisting refugee women to take control of their
reproductive health needs. Women and Health, 43, 7–25. doi:10.
1300/J013v43n04_02
Hankivsky,O.,&Cormier,R.(2009).Intersectionality:Movingwomen’s
health research and policy forward. Vancouver, BC: Women’s
Health Research Network. http://www.whrn.ca/intersectionality-
download.php
Hawkey,A.,Ussher,J.M.,Perz,J.,&Metusela,C.(2016a).Experiences
and constructions of menstruation among migrant and refugee
women. Qualitative Health Research. doi:10.1177/1049732316
672639
Hawkey, A., Ussher, J. M., Perz, J., & Metusela, C. (2016b). Regulation
andresistance:Negotiationofpremaritalsexualityinthecontextof
migrantandrefugeewomen.Manuscriptsubmittedforpublication.
Helmer, J., Senior, K., Davison, B., & Vodic, A. (2015). Improving sex-
ual health for young people: Making sexuality education a priority.
Sex Education, 15, 158–171. doi:10.1080/14681811.2014.989201
Henderson,S., &Kendall,E.(2011). Culturally and linguisticallydiverse
peoples’ knowledge of accessibility and utilisation of health services:
Exploring the need for improvement in health service delivery. Aus-
tralian Journal of Primary Health, 17, 195–201. doi:10.1071/PY10
065
Jackson, S., & Lyons, A. (2013). Girls’ ‘‘new femininity’’ refusals and
‘‘good girl’’recuperations in soap talk. Feminist Media Studies, 13,
228–244. doi:10.1080/14680777.2012.708511
Jackson, S., & Scott, S. (2001). Putting the body’s feet on the ground:
Towardsasociologicalreconceptualizationofgenderedandsexual
embodiment. In K. Backett-Milburn & L. McKie (Eds.), Construct-
ing gendered bodies (pp. 9–24). London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Jackson, S., & Scott, S. (2002). Embodying orgasm: Gendered power
relations andsexualpleasure.Women&Therapy,24,99–110. doi:10.
1300/J015v24n01_13
Jackson, S., & Scott, S. (2007). Faking like a woman? Towards an inter-
pretive theorization of sexual pleasure. Body & Society, 13, 95–
116. doi:10.1177/1357034x07077777
Johnston-Robledo, I., Sheffield, K., Voigt, J., & Wilcox-Constantine, J.
(2007).Reproductiveshame:Self-objectificationandyoungwomen’s
attitudes toward their reproductive functioning. Women and Health,
46, 25–39. doi:10.1300/J013v46n01_03
Kebede, M. T., Hilden, P. K., & Middelthon, A.-L. (2014). Negotiated
silence: The management of the self as a moral subject in young
Ethiopian women’s discourse about sexuality. Sex Education, 14,
666–678. doi:10.1080/14681811.2014.924918
Keygnaert, I., Vettenburg, N., Roelens, K., & Temmerman, M. (2014).
Sexualhealthisdeadinmybody:Participatoryassessmentofsexual
health determinants byrefugees, asylumseekers and undocumented
migrants in Belgium and the Netherlands. BMC Public Health, 14.
doi:10.1186/1471-2458-14-416
Khoei, E. M., Whelan, A., & Cohen, J. (2008). Sharing beliefs: What
sexuality means to Muslim Iranian women living in Australia. Cul-
ture, Health & Sexuality, 10, 237–248. doi:10.1080/136910507017
40039
Kissling, E. A. (1996). Bleeding out loud: Communication about men-
struation. Feminism & Psychology, 6, 481–504. doi:10.1177/095
9353596064002
Kristeva, J. (1982). Powersof horror: An essay on abjection. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Krueger, R. A. (2014). Focus groups: A practical guide for applied
research (5th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lambert, S. D., & Loiselle, C. G. (2008). Combining individual inter-
viewsandfocusgroupstoenhancedatarichness.JournalofAdvanced
Nursing, 62, 228–237. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2648.2007.04559.x
Manderson,L.,&Allotey,P.(2003).Storytelling,marginality,andcom-
munity in Australia: How immigrants position their difference in
healthcaresettings.Medical Anthropology,22,1–21.doi:10.1080/
01459740306767
Manderson,L., Kelaher,M., Woelz-Stirling, N.,Kaplan, J., & Greene, K.
(2002).Sex,contraceptionandcontradictionamongyoungFilipinas
in Australia. Culture, Health & Sexuality, 4, 381–391. doi:10.1080/
1369105021000041034
Marecek, J. (2016). Invited reflection: Intersectionality theory and fem-
inist psychology. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 40, 177–181.
doi:10.1177/0361684316641090
Martin,E.K.,Taft,C.T.,&Resick,P.A.(2007).Areviewofmaritalrape.
Aggression and Violent Behavior, 12, 329–347. doi:10.1016/j.avb.
2006.10.003
Martinez, A., & Phillips, K. P. (2008). Challenging ethno-cultural and
sexual inequities: An intersectional feminist analysis of teachers,
health partners and universitystudents’ views on adolescent sexual
and reproductive health rights. Canadian Journal of Human Sexu-
ality, 17, 141–159.
McKenzie-Mohr, S., & Lafrance, M. N. (2011). Telling stories without
the words: ‘Tightrope talk’ in women’s accounts of coming to live
well after rape or depression. Feminism & Psychology, 21, 49–73.
doi:10.1177/0959353510371367
McKenzie-Mohr, S., & Lafrance, M. N. (Eds.). (2014). Women voicing
resistance:Discursiveandnarrativeexplorations.London:Routledge.
McMichael, C., & Gifford, S. (2009).‘‘It is good to know now…before
it’s too late’’: Promoting sexual health literacy amongst resettled
youngpeoplewithrefugeebackgrounds.SexualityandCulture,13,
218–236. doi:10.1007/s12119-009-9055-0
McMullin, J. M., De Alba, I., Cha
´vez, L. R., & Hubbell, A. F. (2005).
Influenceofbeliefsaboutcervicalcanceretiologyonpapsmearuse
among Latina immigrants. Ethnicity & Health, 10, 3–18. doi:10.
1080/1355785052000323001
Meldrum,R.,Liamputtong,P.,&Wollersheim,D.(2014).Caughtbetween
two worlds: Sexuality and young Muslim women in Melbourne,
Australia.SexualityandCulture,18, 166–179.doi:10.1007/s12119-
013-9182-5
Arch Sex Behav (2017) 46:1901–1921
1919
123
 Moloney, S. (2010). How menstrual shame affects birth. Women and
Birth, 23, 153–159. doi:10.1016/j.wombi.2010.03.001
Morrow, M., Smith, J. E., Lai, Y., & Jaswal, S. (2008). Shifting land-
scapes: Immigrant women and postpartum depression. Health Care
for Women International, 29, 593–617. doi:10.1080/07399330802
089156
Ngum Chi Watts, M. C., Liamputtong, P., & Carolan, M. (2014).
Contraception knowledge and attitudes: Truths and myths among
African Australian teenage mothers in Greater Melbourne, Aus-
tralia. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 23, 2131–2141. doi:10.1111/jocn.
12335
Ngum Chi Watts, M. C., McMichael, C., & Liamputtong, P. (2015).
Factors influencing Contraception awareness and use: The expe-
riences of young African Australian mothers. Journal of Refugee
Studies, 28, 368–387. doi:10.1093/jrs/feu040
Parton, C. M., Ussher, J. M., & Perz, J. (2016). Women’s construction of
embodiment and the abject sexual body after cancer. Qualitative
Health Research, 26, 490–503. doi:10.1177/1049732315570130
Quelopana, A. M., & Alcalde, C. (2014). Exploring knowledge, belief
andexperiencesinsexualandreproductivehealthinimmigranthis-
panicwomen.JournalofImmigrantandMinorityHealth,16,1001–
1006. doi:10.1007/s10903-013-9807-7
Rademakers, J., Mouthaan, I., & Neef, Md. (2005). Diversity in sexual
health: Problems and dilemmas. European Journal of Contracep-
tion & Reproductive Health Care, 10, 207–211. doi:10.1080/1362
5180500279847
Rawson, H., & Liamputtong, P. (2009). Influence of traditional
Vietnamesecultureontheutilisationofmainstream healthservices
forsexualhealthissuesbysecond-generationVietnameseAustralian
young women. Sexual Health, 6, 75–81. doi:10.1071/SH08040
Rawson, H., & Liamputtong, P. (2010). Culture and sex education: The
acquisitionofsexualknowledgeforagroupofVietnameseAustralian
young women. Ethnicity & Health, 15, 343–364. doi:10.1080/13557
851003728264
Richters, J., & Khoei, E. M. (2008). Concepts of sexuality and health
among Iranian women in Australia. Australian Family Physician,
37, 190–192.
Robinson, M., Mattes, E., Oddy, W. H., Pennell, C. E., van Eekelen, A.,
McLean, N. J., & Newnham, J. P. (2011). Prenatal stress and risk of
behavioral morbidity from age 2 to 14 years: The influence of the
number, type, and timing of stressful life events. Development and
Psychopathology,23, 507–520. doi:10.1017/S0954579411000241
Rogers, C., & Earnest, J. (2015). Sexual and reproductive health com-
munication among Sudanese and Eritrean women: An exploratory
study from Brisbane, Australia. Culture, Health & Sexuality, 17,
223–236. doi:10.1080/13691058.2014.967302
Salad, J., Verdonk, P., de Boer, F., &Abma, T. A. (2015).‘‘A Somali girl
is Muslim and does not have premarital sex. Is vaccination really
necessary?’’AqualitativestudyintotheperceptionsofSomaliwomen
in the Netherlands about the prevention of cervical cancer. Interna-
tional Journal for Equity in Health, 14. doi:10.1186/s12939-015-01
98-3
Sargent, C. F. (2006). Reproductive strategies and Islamic discourse.
Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 20, 31–49. doi:10.1525/maq.2006.
20.1.31
Schooler, D., Ward, L. M., Merriwether, A., & Caruthers, A. S. (2005).
Cycles of shame: Menstrual shame, body shame, and sexual deci-
sion-making. Journal of Sex Research, 42, 324–334. doi:10.1080/
00224490509552288
Sen, G., & Govender, V. (2015). Sexual and reproductive health and
rights in changing health systems. Global Public Health, 10, 228–
242. doi:10.1080/17441692.2014.986161
Shoveller, J., Chabot, C., Soon, J. A., & Levine, M. (2007). Identifying
barrierstoemergencycontraceptionuseamountyoungwomenfrom
various social groups in British Columbia, Canada. Perspectives on
Sexual and Reproductive Health, 39, 13–20. doi:10.1363/3901307
Sommer, M., Ackatia-Armah, N., Connolly, S., & Smiles, D. (2015). A
comparison of the menstruation and education experiences of girls
in Tanzania, Ghana, Cambodia and Ethiopia. Compare: A Journal
of Comparative and International Education, 45, 589–609. doi:10.
1080/03057925.2013.871399
Stenner,P.(1993).Discoursingjealousy.InE.Burman&I.Parker(Eds.),
Discourse analytic research (pp. 114–134). London: Routledge.
Stenner, P., McFarquhar, T., & Bowling, A. (2011). Older people and
‘active ageing’: Subjective aspects of ageing actively. Journal of
Health Psychology, 16, 467–477. doi:10.1177/13591053103842
98
Stephenson,J.,Strange,V.,Allen,E.,Copas,A.,Johnson,A.,Bonell,C.,
…Petruckevitch,A.(2008).Thelong-termeffectsofapeer-ledsex
education programme (RIPPLE): A cluster randomised trial in
schools in England. PLoS Medicine, 5, 1579–1590. doi:10.1371/
journal.pmed.0050224
Stewart, F. (1999). ‘‘Once you get a reputation, your life’s like …
‘wrecked’’’: The implications of reputation for young women’s
sexual health and well-being. Women’s Studies International Forum,
22, 373–383. doi:10.1016/S0277-5395(99)00030-8
Tiefer,L.(2004).Sexisnotanaturalact:Andotheressays.Boulder,CO:
Westview Press.
Tolman, D. (2002). Dilemmas of desire: Teenage girls talk about
sexuality. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Tolman,D. L., Bowman,C.P.,&Fahs,B.(2014). Sexualityand embod-
iment. In D. L. Tolman & L. M. Diamond (Eds.), APA handbook of
sexuality and psychology: Vol. 1. Person-based approaches (pp.
759–803).Washington,DC:AmericanPsychologicalAssociation.
Tolman,D.L.,Impett,E.A.,Tracy,A.J.,&Michael,A.(2006).Looking
good, sounding good: Femininity ideology and adolescent girls’
mental health. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 30, 85–95. doi:10.
1111/j.1471-6402.2006.00265.x
Tsui, A. O., McDonald-Mosley, R., & Burke, A. E. (2010). Family
planningandtheburdenofunintendedpregnancies.Epidemiologic
Reviews, 32, 152–174. doi:10.1093/epirev/mxq012
United Nations. (2014). Sexual health and reproductive rights: Articles
21,22,23and24oftheUnitedNationalsdeclarationontherightsof
indigenous peoples. New York: Department of Economic Affairs,
United Nations.
Uskul, A. K. (2004). Women’s menarche stories from a multicultural
sample. Social Science and Medicine, 59, 667–679. doi:10.1016/j.
socscimed.2003.11.031
Ussher,J.M.(1997a).Bodytalk:Thematerialanddiscursiveregulation
of sexuality, madness and reproduction. London: Routledge.
Ussher, J. M. (1997b). Fantasies of femininity: Reframing the bound-
aries of sex. London: Penguin/Rutgers.
Ussher, J. M. (2006). Managing the monstrous feminine: Regulating the
reproductive body. London: Routledge.
Ussher, J. M. (2008). Reclaiming embodiment within critical psychol-
ogy:Amaterial-discursiveanalysisofthemenopausalbody.Social
andPersonality PsychologyCompass,2,1781–1798.doi:10.1111/
j.1751-9004.2008.00151.x
Ussher, J. M., & Perz, J. (2014). Discourse analysis. In P. Rohleder & A.
Lyons (Eds.), Qualitative research in clinical and health psychol-
ogy (pp. 226–237). London: Palgrave MacMillan.
Ussher, J. M., Rhyder-Obid, M., Perz, J., Rae, M., Wong, W. K. T., &
Newman,P.(2012).Purity,privacyandprocreation:Constructions
and experiences of sexual and reproductive Health in Assyrian and
Karen women living in Australia. Sexuality and Culture, 16, 467–
485. doi:10.1007/s12119-012-9133-6
Williams,S.(2003).Beyondmeaning,discourseandtheempiricalworld:
Critical realist reflections on health. Social Theory & Health, 1, 42–
47. doi:10.1057/palgrave.sth.8700004
World Health Organisation. (2009). Mental health aspects of women’s
reproductive health: A global review of the literature. Geneva:
1920
Arch Sex Behav (2017) 46:1901–1921
123
 Author. http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/43846/1/978924
1563567_eng.pdf
World Health Organization. (2016). Defining sexual health. from http://
www.who.int/reproductivehealth/topics/sexual_health/sh_definitions/
en/
Wray, A., Ussher, J. M., & Perz, J. (2014). Constructions and experi-
encesofsexualhealthamongyoung,heterosexual,unmarriedMuslim
womenimmigrants inAustralia.Culture,Health&Sexuality,16,76–
89. doi:10.1080/13691058.2013.833651
Arch Sex Behav (2017) 46:1901–1921
1921
123
