 B E H AV I O R A L N E U R O S C I E N C E
Copyright © 2017
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim to
original U.S. Government
Works. Distributed
under a Creative
Commons Attribution
NonCommercial
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Structural plasticity of the social brain: Differential
change after socio-affective and cognitive
mental training
Sofie L. Valk,1 Boris C. Bernhardt,1,2 Fynn-Mathis Trautwein,1 Anne Böckler,1,3 Philipp Kanske,1,4
Nicolas Guizard,2 D. Louis Collins,2 Tania Singer1*
Although neuroscientific research has revealed experience-dependent brain changes across the life span in sensory,
motor, and cognitive domains, plasticity relating to social capacities remains largely unknown. To investigate whether
the targeted mental training of different cognitive and social skills can induce specific changes in brain morphology,
we collected longitudinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data throughout a 9-month mental training intervention
from a large sample of adults between 20 and 55 years of age. By means of various daily mental exercises and weekly
instructed group sessions, training protocols specifically addressed three functional domains: (i) mindfulness-based
attention and interoception, (ii) socio-affective skills (compassion, dealing with difficult emotions, and prosocial
motivation), and (iii) socio-cognitive skills (cognitive perspective-taking on self and others and metacognition). MRI-
based cortical thickness analyses, contrasting the different training modules against each other, indicated spatially
diverging changes in cortical morphology. Training of present-moment focused attention mostly led to increases in
cortical thickness in prefrontal regions, socio-affective training induced plasticity in frontoinsular regions, and socio-
cognitive training included change in inferior frontal and lateral temporal cortices. Module-specific structural brain
changes correlated with training-induced behavioral improvements in the same individuals in domain-specific
measures of attention, compassion, and cognitive perspective-taking, respectively, and overlapped with task-relevant
functional networks. Our longitudinal findings indicate structural plasticity in well-known socio-affective and
socio-cognitive brain networks in healthy adults based on targeted short daily mental practices. These findings could
promote the development of evidence-based mental training interventions in clinical, educational, and corporate
settings aimed at cultivating social intelligence, prosocial motivation, and cooperation.
INTRODUCTION
With growing globalization, interconnectedness, and complexity of our
societies, “soft skills” have become increasingly important. Social com-
petences, such as empathy, compassion, and taking the perspective of
another person, allow for a better understanding of others’ feelings and
different beliefs and are crucial for successful cooperation. Previous
research has shown a reciprocal relationship between social abilities,
mental health (1, 2), and altruistic behavior (3), suggesting that cultivat-
ing these capacities may have therapeutic and social benefits. Despite
extensive research on the neural mechanisms underlying social skills
such as empathy, compassion, and cognitive perspective-taking [Theory
of Mind (ToM)] in healthy and clinical populations (4–24), it remains
unknown whether training these capacities can induce structural brain
changes. Plasticity research, despite its tradition and relevance to neuro-
science, has, so far, mainly focused on learning-dependent brain re-
organization of sensory, motor, and memory systems in animals and
humans (25–33).
Recent mental training and mindfulness research in humans (34–38)
has begun to address changes in gray matter volume after the training of
higher-level skills, such as present-moment attention and mindfulness
based on contemplative practices (38–41). However, most studies have
been cross-sectional, focusing on meditation practitioners and not di-
rectly assessing training-related plasticity within training-naïve subjects
(42). The few published longitudinal training studies on structural plas-
ticity to date have mainly assessed the effects of cultivating a rather
broad range of mindfulness-related capacities, including attention, ac-
ceptance, and interoceptive awareness (39–41). Notably, samples in
these studies were relatively small, and studies often lacked active con-
trol groups; furthermore, testing intervals were short, providing neither
generalizable and robust estimates of brain change norinformation about
the effects of different types of mental practices on plasticity (38–41).
An increasing body of social cognitive neuroscience research sug-
gests that we can distinguish at least two major routes of interpersonal
understanding: a socio-affective route encompassing social emotions
and motivation, such as empathy [the sharing of affect with others
(4)] and compassion [the concern for others and motivation to benefit
the welfare of another (5)]. Conversely, there is also evidence for socio-
cognitive mechanisms that enable an individual to understand others’
beliefs and intentions [also referred to as ToM, mentalizing, or cognitive
perspective-taking (6, 7)]. Functional neuroimaging supported this dis-
tinction by revealing dissociable brain substrates underlying these pro-
cesses. For socio-affective processing, studies have consistently
identified a network, including limbic/paralimbic cortical areas, such
as the anterior insula (AI) and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) for em-
pathy (8, 9, 20, 21), together with lateral areas involved in emotion reg-
ulation, such as the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) and
supramarginal gyrus (SMG) (19, 24, 43). Compassion further involves
orbitofrontal cortices and ACC, as well as subcortical structures such as
the ventral striatum and ventral tegmental area (18, 22, 23). In contrast,
cognitive perspective-taking or ToM is primarily supported by a
network that includes the medial PFC, temporoparietal junction
1Department of Social Neuroscience, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive
and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany. 2McConnell Brain Imaging Centre, Montreal
Neurological Institute and Hospital, Montreal, Québec, Canada. 3Department of
Psychology, Würzburg University, Würzburg, Germany. 4Department of Psychology,
Institute of Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, Technische Universität Dresden,
Dresden, Germany.
*Corresponding author. Email: singer@cbs.mpg.de
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Valk et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1700489
4 October 2017
1 of 11
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 (TPJ), superior temporal gyrus/superior temporal sulcus (STS), and
posterior midline regions such as the precuneus (7–17). Individual dif-
ferences in empathizing and ToM competences have been found to
show only a little correlation and to instead differentially relate to the
function and structure of these networks (5, 11–13). Despite evidence of
two dissociable functional networks supporting our capacity not only to
empathize with and have compassion for others but also to infer their
thoughts and beliefs, it is unknown whether these two functions can be
differentially targeted by mental training and whether this intervention
would result in changes in brain structure.
To study structural plasticity of attentional and social capacities in
adulthood, we designed a secular mental training program that lasted
over 9 months—the ReSource Project (44). The main goal was to inves-
tigate the effects of three different mental training modules (Presence,
Affect, and Perspective; each lasting 3 months) on magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI)–based markers of cortical morphology and to relate
those to behavioral indices. The first module (Presence) focused
on cultivating present-moment attention and interoception. This
module resembled well-known mindfulness interventions (37, 45).
On the basis of previous research, we expected increases in thickness
in both attention-related networks in PFC, ACC, and parietal cortices
(46, 47), as well as interoceptive regions, such as AI (48, 49). With
respect to the two social intersubjective training modules (Affect
and Perspective), we made predictions in line with the abovemen-
tioned literature showing dissociable networks underlying socio-
emotional processes, such as empathy and compassion (8, 9, 18–23),
and ToM (7–17). We expected that the socio-cognitive Perspective
Module would result in changes in ToM networks, including the medial
PFC, ventrolateral PFC, precuneus, temporal neocortices, and TPJ
(7–17). We expected that the Affect Module would primarily target
the structure of regions implicated in socio-emotional processing,
such as AI, ACC, and orbital frontal regions, as well as the SMG and
lateral PFC, the latter playing an important role in emotion regulation
(8, 9, 18–24). Conversely, we expected that the socio-cognitive Per-
spective Module would result in changes in ToM networks, including
the medial PFC, ventrolateral PFC, precuneus, temporal neocortices,
and TPJ (7–17). Module-specific changes in morphology were expected
to correlate with training-related behavioral changes in the same indi-
viduals, assessed via markers matched to the main functions trained in a
module [that is, attention for Presence, compassion for Affect, and ToM
for Perspective (8, 44, 47, 50)].
For details on cohort selection, training content, behavioral pheno-
typing, image processing, and analysis, see the Supplementary
Materials. Briefly, two randomly assigned training cohorts (TC1 and
TC2) underwent three distinct 3-month modules with weekly instructed
group sessions at the testing sites and daily exercises completed via
smartphone and internet platforms (Fig. 1, A and B, and table S1). Both
cohorts underwent these three modules in alternating order (TC1:
Presence→Affect→Perspective; TC2: Presence→Perspective→Affect),
each serving as “active” control group for the other. In addition, we
studied a matched retest control cohort (RCC) that did not undergo
any training but followed the same measures as the training cohorts.
Last, a third training cohort (TC3) completed only the Affect Module
for 3 months, specifically to be compared to the first 3-month Presence
training module.
Because the Presence Module fostered present-moment attention
and interoception as abilities that may also support further practices
(51), it was administered first in line with the sequencing of other con-
templative traditions and secular mindfulness programs (37, 45). We
subsequently opted for a crossover design that trained Affect and Per-
spective Modules in different order in our two closely matched training
cohorts (TC1 and TC2), allowing for direct comparison between both
social capacity trainings while accounting for sequence effects. To test
for the effects of the Presence Module, we added another control group
(TC3) undergoing a 3-month Affect training (TC3) without a preceding
Presence Module. This design enabled the assessment of specific effects
of a module against the others, both within and between cohorts. No-
tably, it offered control over unspecific effects associated with engaging
in group training, teacher effects, and test-retest.
Whereas the Presence Module aimed at calming and stabilizing
the mind using classical meditative practices, Affect and Perspective
Modules targeted intersubjective capacities by training socio-affective
or socio-cognitive skills, using classical meditation–based and dyadic
interpersonal exercises. The latter dyads were practiced with another
partner for 10 min daily via a smartphone application or in person
during the weekly group sessions [for details, see Singer et al. (44) and
Kok and Singer (52)].
Participants were tested at baseline (T0) and after each 3-month
module (T1, T2, and T3) using 3-TMRI and behavioralmeasures. More-
over, although all participants were scanned on the same MRI platform
in Leipzig, participants were recruited and trained at two different sites
(Berlin and Leipzig), with site-based subcohorts being matched for
gender, age, education, and several socio-emotional trait markers
(44). Assessing these subcohorts separately allowed for the testing
of consistency across sites.
Extensive quality control by two independent raters (S.L.V. and
B.C.B.) corrected for segmentation faults and excluded cases with
MRI artifacts by consensus (table S1). Surface extractions underwent
manual corrections (11, 53, 54). At the time of study initialization
(2013), emerging techniques to prospectively control for so-called
micromotion in structural MRI data were not yet fully established
(55–58). However, by means of a parallel-acquired resting-state
functional MRI (fMRI) acquisition in the same session, we assessed
overall head motion as a proxy for the tendency of a subject to move
in the scanner (59, 60) and evaluated whether the effects were
consistent after regressing out this surrogate marker. For details on
quality control, sample selection, and analysis, see Materials and
Methods. Longitudinal changes in the brain structure were assessed
using mixed-effects analysis of MRI-based cortical thickness (61),
and data were smoothed at 20-mm full width at half maximum
(FWHM). Results were corrected for multiple comparisons using
random field theory (see Materials and Methods for details).
To assess structural change following each of the three training
modules and to test for behavioral and functional specificities, we
applied three canonical analyses: (i) We compared thickness change
of each training module against the other modules and RCC; (ii)
correlated individual differences in training-related thickness change
withtraining-relatedbehavioralchangeinmarkersofattention(Presence),
compassion (Affect), and ToM (Perspective); (iii) and assessed the overlap
between functional brain activation maps measured in these tasks at
baseline and the observed structural change after training.
RESULTS
By investigating changes over the 9-month period of testing in the RCC,
we observed only decreases in corticalthickness in lateral frontal regions
[family-wise error (FWE) <0.025] (Fig. 1C and table S2), consistent
with findings showing aging-related cortical atrophy (62, 63). Conversely,
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Valk et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1700489
4 October 2017
2 of 11
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 examining both training cohorts (TC1 and TC2) over the same 9 months
revealed increases in thickness in right lateral and medial frontal regions
(FWE <0.001), together with focal decreases in the right lingual gyrus
(FWE <0.025) (fig. S1 and table S3).
To assess changes specific to the different mental practices, we com-
pared longitudinal thickness changes between the training modules
(Fig. 1). For Presence (targeting interoception and attention), we
observed thickness increases in the right PFC extending to ACC
(FWE <0.001) and in bilateral occipital regions extending to inferior
temporal cortices [FWE <0.05 (left) and <0.001 (right)] in both training
cohorts relative to Affect and Perspective Modules (Fig. 1D and table
S2). These findings were consistent across training cohorts (Fig. 1E),
clusters (fig. S2), sites (that is, Berlin and Leipzig; fig. S3 and table S2),
and when comparing TC1 and TC2 undergoing Presence to RCC
Fig. 1. Training design and overall change. (A) Training design of the 9-month ReSource intervention. After baseline testing (T0), participants trained Presence
followed by Affect and Perspective (TC1) or Presence followed by Perspective and Affect (TC2). An RCC not undergoing any training was also studied. A further Affect
cohort (TC3) was included to specifically compare Affect to Presence training in comparable testing intervals. Note that the full design of the ReSource Project also
included follow-up measurements (T4), which were not assessed in the current study. (B) Training modules and core daily practices of each module. Details can be
found in Singer et al. (44) and Materials and Methods. (C) Thinning in RCC (T0→T1, n = 72; T1→T2, n = 65; T2→T3, n = 68) over the full duration of the ReSource study. No
significant increases were observed in these participants. (D) Differential structural increases in the three training modules (Presence, n = 132; Perspective, n = 120;
Affect, n = 193), contrasted against each other across time points (T0→T1, T1→T2, and T2→T3) and in all training groups (TC1, TC2, and TC3). Structural change in
Presence (yellow; TC1 and TC2, T0→T1), Affect (red; TC3, T0→T1; TC1, T1→T2; TC2, T2→T3), and Perspective (green; TC2, T1→T2; TC1, T2→T3). Each training module was
contrasted against the average effect of the other two modules, serving as an active control condition. The findings were corrected for multiple comparisons using
random field theory for nonisotropic images (105) controlling the probability of reporting an FWE of <0.05 [cluster-defining threshold (CDT), P = 0.025]. The findings
significant at an FWE of <0.05 with a conservative CDT (P = 0.001) are highlighted with black outlines. (E) Bar charts of mean change ± 95% confidence interval of the
combined clusters of relative increase in each module, plotted per cohort. The colors represent the content of the training or RCC (blue).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Valk et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1700489
4 October 2017
3 of 11
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 (fig. S4 and table S4). Affect (socio-affective training) induced increases
inaclusterextendingfromtherightSMGtotheinsular-opercularregions
and dlPFC (FWE <0.001), left mid/posterior cingulate (FWE <0.001),
and bilateral parahippocampal areas [FWE <0.005 (left) and <0.025
(right)] (Fig. 1D and table S2). Patterns were again consistent across
cohorts (Fig. 1E), clusters (fig. S2), and sites (fig. S3). A similar pattern
was observed when testing Affect versus Perspective within-subjects
only (TC1 and TC2; fig. S5 and table S5). Last, Perspective (socio-
cognitive training) resulted in increases in thickness of the left ven-
trolateral PFC (FWE <0.05), left occipital regions (FWE < 0.025), and
right middle temporal gyrus (FWE <0.05) (Fig. 1D and table S2).
These findings were again consistent in both cohorts (Fig. 1E), clusters
(fig. S2), andwhen testing Perspective versusAffect within-subjectsonly
(fig. S5 and table S5).
In addition to assessing differential plasticity induced by the three
modules, we were also interested in how changes would relate to im-
provements in targeted behavioral capacities. We developed and
adapted behavioral tasks assessing components of attention (47),
as well as compassion and ToM (8), each being a target outcome of
one of the three training modules (Fig. 1B). In a related publication
(50), we showed that the Perspective Module increased performance
in the interactive video task assessing ToM, whereas Affect led to
increased compassion ratings after watching neutral and emotionally
distressing videos. Moreover, the Presence Module was associated with
improvements in attention (50). Here, we tested whether individual dif-
ferences in training-related cortical thickness increases correlated with
those in attention (after Presence), compassion (after Affect), and ToM
(after Perspective) in the same individuals. Our analyses revealed that
improvements in attentional scores during Presence related to increased
thickness in left middle temporal regions (T0→T1; TC1, r = 0.46;
TC2, r = 0.19; Fig. 2A and table S6). Conversely, compassion increases
after Affect training were associated with thickness increases of the right
insula extending to the temporal pole, with findings consistent across all
cohorts undergoing Affect training [TC1, T1→T2 (r = 0.37); TC2,
T2→T3 (r = 0.28); TC3, T0→T1 (r = 0.31); Fig. 2A and table S6]. Last,
enhanced ToM performance after Perspective training was related to
increased thickness in left parietal regions [TC1, T2→T3 (r = 0.32);
TC2, T1→T2 (r = 0.32); Fig. 2A and table S6] and right TPJ [TC1,
T1→T2 (r = 0.44); TC2, T2→T3 (r = 0.24); Fig. 2A and table S6], with
findings again being consistent across cohorts.
To finally explore whether areas showing training-associated thick-
ness increases that were related to behavioral performance overlapped
with postulated functional networks, we overlaid a significant structural
changewithfMRI activationsat baselinein thesame participantsduring
tasks probing attention, socio-affective, or socio-cognitive processing
(8, 47). Functional networks overlapped with module-specific structure-
behavior modulations: Compassion-related AI increases overlapped with
activations during the socio-affective task, whereas ToM performance–
related increases in TPJ thickness overlapped with functional activations
observed during the socio-cognitive task (Fig. 2B). However, attention-
related thickness increases did not overlap with functional activation
during the attention task at baseline.
DISCUSSION
MRI and behavioral results derived from a 9-month longitudinal
mental training study, the ReSource Project (44), provide evidence
for structural plasticity of the social brain in healthy adults between
20 and 55 years of age. We demonstrated a training-specific change
in cortical morphology after three different mental training modules
focusing on improving mindfulness-based attention (Presence),
socio-affective skills (Affect), and socio-cognitive capacities (Perspec-
tive). Notably, module-specific thickness increases correlated with indi-
vidual improvements in attention, compassion, and ToM in respective
behavioral markers after training and, in part, overlapped with func-
tional networks obtained from tasks targeting module-specific
functions at baseline before training.
After 3 months of Presence training, our two independently
matched cohorts (that is, TC1 and TC2) showed increases in thickness
in the anterior PFC extending to ACC relative to RCC. This finding is in
accordance with meta-analytical synthesis of cross-sectional studies
reporting altered PFC/ACC morphology in expert mindfulness
meditators relative to controls (42, 64). To capture attention-related
increases after Presence training in the ReSource Project, a measure
of executive attention/conflict resolution was selected (47, 50). Con-
sistent with these findings, we observed improved attention after
Presence training. However, significant correlations between training-
related thickness changes and attentional improvements did not lie
within the functional network classically linked to executive attention,
including the lateral PFC and ACC (47, 65), but rather in inferior
temporal regions. Arguably, the applied task may not have tapped
into the full content of the Presence Module, which also encompassed
interoception and metacognitive awareness (44). Monitoring and meta-
awareness–related processing could be in line with thickening in the
medial PFC, a region suggested by cross-sectional studies to participate
in these functions (66–68).
Our results revealed evidence that two further mental training
modules focusing on socio-affective and socio-cognitive capacities
induced structural plasticity in nonoverlapping brain networks. A
priori, the Affect Module was expected to result in changes primarily in
affect-relevant cortices, such as AI, midcingulate, and orbital frontal
regions, as well as the subgenual ACC, SMG, and dlPFC (8, 9, 18–24).
For Perspective, we primarily expected changes in ToM networks
including the medial PFC, ventrolateral PFC, precuneus, temporal
neocortices, and TPJ (7–17). Contrary to mindfulness-based Presence
training, Affect training resulted in structural increases in regions
implicated in empathy and emotion regulation (8, 9, 18–24, 43). No-
tably, changes following Affect overlapped partially with functional
activations associated with empathy and compassion at baseline (8).
Affect training–related right anterior to mid-insula thickening was asso-
ciated with enhanced compassion ratings after training. This supports
a role of insular cortex in representing and integrating interoceptive and
affective signals into feeling states (21, 48) and for social emotions such
as empathy (21, 69) and compassion (18, 70). By comparing Affect-only
training (in TC3) with the 3-month Presence module in TC1 and TC2,
we observed increases in SMG and sensorimotor regions extending to
the insular cortex in the former, whereas TC1 and TC2 showed medial
PFC thickening after Presence. This raises the possibility to target socio-
affective functions without prior training in stabilizing the mind, which
is to be addressed in future work.
In contrast to Affect training, Perspective aimed at improving
metacognitive skills and perspective-taking on one’s own thoughts,
aspects of the self, and the mental states of others (ToM). Relative
to the other modules, it resulted in increased thickness of the middle
temporal gyrus, a region reliably associated with ToM (7–10), and
left ventrolateral PFC. The latter has been related to self-perspective
inhibition, an executive control process supporting the reduction of
interference arising in ToM tasks when one’s own perspective differs
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Valk et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1700489
4 October 2017
4 of 11
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 from that of another person and needs to be inhibited (71). Changes
observed in Perspective partially overlapped with functional activation
when the participants performed a ToM task at baseline (8). However,
no thickness increases were found in the dorsomedial PFC and pre-
cuneus, regions a priori associated with ToM. Notably, thickness in-
creases in the posterior parietal cortex and TPJ correlated with
individual differences in ToM performance improvements after
training and may reflect the implication of both regions in cognitive
perspective-taking processes (8–10, 17, 72). Although we observed
cortical thickness increases following Perspective relative to the other
modules, we acknowledge that unlike the direct comparison of the
3-month Affect and Presence Modules, we could not test directly for
Fig. 2. Behavioral modulation of brain change. (A) Positive modulation of brain change by increases in (i) attentional performance assessed in the cued flanker task
(47) after Presence (n = 102) (yellow; TC1, T0→T1; TC2, T0→T1), (ii) compassion ratings (8) after Affect (n = 184) (red; TC3, T0→T1; TC1, T1→T2; TC2, T2→T3), and (iii) ToM
accuracy (8) after Perspective (n = 115) (green; TC2, T1→T2; TC1, T2→T3). Scatters visualize the relation between average change in significant clusters and individual
change in the respective behavioral measure. (B) Findings in (A) superimposed on activation maps from fMRI studies using baseline data from the current sample (8, 47),
illustrating overlap with networks involved in attention, socio-affective processing, and ToM. For details on statistical thresholds, see Fig. 1.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Valk et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1700489
4 October 2017
5 of 11
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 specific effects of the 3-month Perspective training. For practical rea-
sons, we could not include another active training cohort that focused
only on perspective-taking in the first 3 months.
In addition to the reliability of effects across cohorts and analyses,
the findings were largely consistent across both subcohorts from Berlin
and Leipzig. Notably, however, training-related change (Fig. 1) did
not show close spatial correspondence to thickness correlations with
behavioral improvements (Fig. 2). Each module aimed at cultivating
broader categories of mindful attention, socio-affective, and socio-
cognitive processes but not a specific function per se. This might have
possibly resulted in a different pattern of average change as compared to
investigating the brain areas underlying specific core functions, such as
ToM or compassion. Although STS or ventrolateral PFC may have a
more general role in socio-cognitive processing, TPJ may be specifically
sensitive to mentalizing abilities, as measured in the present ToM task
(8). This view would be in line with the hypothesis of a specific role of
TPJ for false-belief attribution (15, 16). Similarly, although Affect-
related thickness increases in parietal and frontal networks might
reflect general enhancement in emotion regulation, insular morphology
may be particularly sensitive in capturing individual differences in social
emotions, such as empathy and compassion (8, 21, 73).
Training-related changes may not always follow a linear trajectory
(28, 74–76), and morphological changes have been reported to consol-
idate following an initial increase. This argument may be supported by
our results, as we found overall training-induced increases in PFC
regions, mainly driven by change in the first 3 months. In humans,
PFC is central to high-level cognition (77) and social cognition, in
particular (8–10, 17, 72, 78), and is likely targeted by all three modules.
This might also explain why we did not find a priori predicted increases
in medial PFC (for Perspective) and ACC and orbitofrontal regions (for
Affect) relative to Presence (ending at T1), as these regions support
functions already targeted in Presence. Post hoc analyses referring to
potential sequence effects of Presence on the following modules (see
the Supplementary Materials) suggest that initial changes in PFC after
Presence modulated changes in subsequent Perspective Modules. Pos-
sibly, participants learned functions associated with increases in frontal
regions during Presence training that are also needed for perspective-
taking. Consolidation processes secondary to the continued practice
and increased task skill (74) could also be the cause of observed de-
creases in cortical thickness in the training groups compared to RCC.
Although we had no a priori hypothesis for learning-dependent de-
creases of gray matter, cortical thinning may also play a role in
learning (64, 79, 80), possibly through usage-dependent selective
elimination of synapses (81, 82).
Because plasticity research based on this high-level mental training
can only be conducted in living humans with noninvasive neuroima-
ging, we can merely speculate about the neurobiological mechanisms
driving the observed structural changes. Learning-induced plasticity
might involve synaptic remodeling and changes in neuronal morphol-
ogy (27, 83), as well as non-neuronal processes such as angiogenesis and
divisions of astrocytes and oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (84). Be-
cause the focus of the current study was on the thickness of the cortical
mantle, further research should assess subcortical regions using
methods developed to probe whole-brain gray matter (85) and white
matter (86) changes.
In conclusion, our findings of structural plasticity in healthy adults
in faculties relevant to social intelligence and social interactions suggest
that the type of mental training matters. Depending on whether parti-
cipants’ daily practice focused on cultivating socio-emotional capacities
(compassion and prosocial motivation) or socio-cognitive skills
(putting oneself into the shoes of another person) gray matter increased
selectively in areas supporting these functions. Our findings suggest a
potential biological basis for how mindfulness and different aspects of
social intelligence could be nurtured. Research will be needed to eval-
uate the utility of training in individuals suffering from deficits in
social cognition, such as autism or psychopathy. In addition, it should
be investigated whether social cognitive training can contribute to
an increase in cooperation and well-being in corporate settings. In
the context of education, it may be interesting to evaluate the poten-
tial of these techniques to promote children’s soft skills and social
intelligence.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Experimental design
Participants
A total of 332 healthy adults (197 women, mean ± SD = 40.7 ± 9.2 years,
20 to 55 years), recruited in 2012/2013 and 2013/2014, participated in
the study. More than 95% of our sample was Caucasian. Participant
eligibility was determined through a multistage procedure that
involved several screening and mental health questionnaires,
together with a phone interview [for details, see the study of Singer
et al. (44)]. Subsequently, a face-to-face mental health diagnostic
interview with a trained clinical psychologist was scheduled. The
interview included a computer-assisted German version of the
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis-I disorders (SCID-I
DIA-X) (87) and a personal interview for Axis II disorders (SCID-II)
(88, 89). Participants were excluded if they fulfilled the criteria for (i)
an Axis I disorder within the past 2 years and (ii) schizophrenia, psy-
chotic disorders, bipolar disorder, substance dependency, or an Axis II
disorder at any time in their lives. No participant had a history of neuro-
logical disorders or head trauma, based on an in-house self-report ques-
tionnaire used to screen all volunteers before taking part in imaging
investigations. Participants furthermore underwent a diagnostic radi-
ological evaluation to rule out the presence of mass lesions (for example,
tumors and vascular malformations). All participants gave written and
informed consent, and the study was approved by the Research Ethics
Committees of the University of Leipzig (376/12-ff) and Humboldt
University of Berlin (2013-02, 2013-29, and 2014-10). The study was
registered at ClinicalTrials.gov under the title, “Plasticity of the Com-
passionate Brain” (NCT01833104). For details on recruitment and sam-
ple selection, see Singer et al. (44).
Study design
Our study focused on two training groups, TC1 (n = 80 at enrollment)
and TC2 (n = 81), as well as an RCC that was measured partly before
(n = 30) and partly after (n = 60) measurement of TC1 and TC2. TC3
(n = 81) underwent a 3-month Affect Module only and was included
as an active control for the Presence module. Participants were
selected from a larger pool of potential volunteers by bootstrapping
without replacement, creating cohorts not differing significantly with
respect to several demographic and self-report traits. The total train-
ing duration of TC1 and TC2 was 39 weeks (~9 months), which was
dividedinto three modules[Presence, Affect, and Perspective (see below
for details)], each lasting for 13 weeks (Fig. 1). TC3 only participated
in one 13-week Affect training. Our main cohorts of interest, TC1
and TC2, underwent Affect and Perspective Modules in different or-
der to act as active control cohorts for each other. Specifically, TC1
underwent “Presence→Affect→Perspective,” whereas TC2 underwent
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Valk et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1700489
4 October 2017
6 of 11
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 “Presence→Perspective→Affect.” TC1, TC2, and RCC underwent four
testing phases. The baseline testing phase is called T0; testing phases at
the end of the xth module are called Tx (that is, T1, T2, and T3). In RCC,
testing was carried out at similarly spaced intervals. The study had a
slightly time-shifted design, where different groups started at different
time points to simultaneously accommodate scanner and teacher avail-
ability. Because we focused on training-related effects, we did not in-
clude analysis of a follow-up measurement T4 that was carried out 4
or 10 months after the official training had ended. For details on
training andpractice setup, timeline, and measures, see Singer et al. (44).
Training modules
Each module started off with a 3-day intensive retreat, followed by
weekly group sessions with the teachers and daily home practice facili-
tated by a custom-made internet platform and smartphone applications
providing (i) audio streams for guided meditations and (ii) an interface
for dyadic exercises (Fig. 1) (44). During the retreat, participants were
introduced to topics and corresponding core exercises of the upcoming
module. Training during the subsequent 8 weeks included weekly
2-hour-long sessions with teachers that included discussion of training
challenges and effects, practice of the core exercises, and introduction to
new contemplative practices. The last 5 weeks of each module were used
to consolidate previous topics, with no new topics being introduced.
Presence Module. Core exercises, practiced repeatedly during the
retreat, in the weekly sessions, and at home (instruction was to practice
at least five times per week), were Breathing Meditation and Body Scan
(37). The basic instruction for Breathing Meditation was to focus atten-
tion on sensations of breathing and to refocus attention whenever it
wandered. The Body Scan involved focusing on various parts of the
body in a systematic fashion (for example, from toes to head) while
paying close attention to sensations occurring in these body parts. Ad-
ditional exercises of Presence, also practiced during the retreat and
weekly sessions, were walking meditation, meditations on vision, sound,
and taste, as well as an open-presence meditation. These practices
require a deliberate focus of attention on certain aspects of present
moment-to-moment experience, monitoring of distractions, and re-
orienting toward the object of attention in the meditation, be it the
breath, a sound, or a visual object.
Affect Module. Core exercises were Loving-Kindness Meditation (90)
and the so-called Affect Dyad (44, 52). For Loving-Kindness Medita-
tion, participants were first introduced to ways of connecting with the
feeling and motivation of love and care, such as imagining a baby, a cute
animal, a close benevolent other, and a place of safety and comfort or
focusing on feelings of warmth in the body. These feelings can then be
directed toward oneself and others. The typical instruction for the
Loving-Kindness Meditation was to start with imagining oneself and
then a benefactor, where these feelings might arise naturally, and then
to extend feelings of loving-kindness and good wishes to self and then
the benefactor. Over the course of several meditation sessions, parti-
cipants were asked to successively extent these feelings to others to
whom one feels neutral, people with whom one has difficulties with,
and ultimately all humans and beings. To stabilize and foster experiences
of loving-kindness, we instructed participants to mentally repeat phrases
such as “May you be happy,” “May you be healthy,” “May you be safe,”
and “May you live with ease.”
The Affect Dyad is a partner exercise performed face-to-face during
the retreat, during the weekly sessions, and via the Web- or smartphone-
basedapplication duringdaily practiceathome.During thisexercise,par-
ticipants contemplated situations that they experienced as difficult and
they experienced as difficult or for which they were grateful during the
past day. Partner A was instructed to listen attentively to what the speaker
(partner B) had to say without giving a verbal or nonverbal feedback,
cultivating empathic listening. The speaker remembered the situa-
tion and how it felt like and focused on the immediate subjective af-
fective and bodily experience without engaging in abstract reasoning
or interpretation. After a first run, roles were switched. This contempla-
tive dialog allows cultivating empathic listening in the listener, observing
difficult emotions and their effect on the body, and developing grat-
itude and positive affect in the speaker.
Additional elements of Affect were exploration of emotions in an
attitude of acceptance and care, a guided meditation that contrasts
empathy and compassion and teaches participants how to transform
an empathic response into a loving and compassionate response
when confronted with the suffering of others (23), forgiveness med-
itation, and development of self-compassion (91). Thus, all exercises
focused on developing an accepting, kind, and compassionate stance
toward oneself and others.
Perspective Module. Core exercises were Observing-Thoughts Medita-
tion and a Perspective Dyad. In the former, the objective was to observe
thoughts as mental events or natural phenomena and not as direct
representations of reality. In the initial phase of the practice, this
was supported by labeling thoughts using opposite poles such as
me/other, past/future, positive/negative, or more generic labels such
as “judging” and “thinking.” Later in the Module participants were
instructed to just observe the coming and going of thoughts without
getting involved in them.
The Perspective Dyad is a partner exercise with a structure similar to
the Affect Dyad. This exercise was, in part, based on the Internal Family
Systems approach by Schwartz and colleagues (92, 93) and on theore-
tical accounts distinguishing between affective (for example, compas-
sion and empathy) and cognitive (for example, ToM) routes of social
cognition (5, 94). For this perspective-taking exercise on self and
others, participants were first introduced to the concept of inner parts,
personality-trait–like patterns of cognition, emotion, and behavioral
tendencies that dominate in certain situations and shape experience,
as well as behavior (92). During the retreat and throughout the course,
participants were supported in identifying the inner parts. In the Per-
spective Dyad, the speaker described a situation of the last day from the
perspective of one of his/her inner parts, that is, how the experience
might have been if a certain inner part had been dominant. The other
participant listened attentively without giving a verbal or nonverbal
feedback and tried to find out from which inner part the speaker was
recounting the situation. The listener thus had to engage in cognitive
perspective-taking on the other to find out “who is speaking” and to
infer the needs, desires, and beliefs of the other. The speaker, in turn,
needed to take a metaperspective onto its own self-related aspects
and to decouple from a lived and experienced reality. Additional
elements of Perspective were exercises, in which participants needed
to take the perspective of people with whom they have difficulties with
in their daily lives, reflections on the central role that thoughts play in
our lives, how these might differ from thoughts of others, and why
understanding them differs from approving their behavior. This de-
scription of the training protocol was adapted from Singer et al. (44).
MRI markers
Image acquisition. Using a 3T Siemens Verio scanner (Siemens) with a
32-channel head coil, we acquired a T1-weighted three-dimensional
(3D) magnetization-prepared rapid gradient-echo (MP-RAGE) se-
quence [176 sagittal slices; repetition time (TR), 2300 ms; echo time
(TE), 2.98 ms; inversion time (TI), 900 ms; flip angle, 7°; field of view
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Valk et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1700489
4 October 2017
7 of 11
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 (FOV), 240 × 256 mm2; matrix, 240 × 256; 1 × 1 × 1–mm3 voxels].
Throughout the duration of our longitudinal study, imaging hardware
and console software (Syngo B17) were held constant.
Cortical thickness measurements. Each T1-weighted MRI was pro-
cessed using FreeSurfer (http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu) to gener-
ate cortical surface models and measure cortical thickness. All
processing procedures were carried out on the same 32-core computer
with the same software version (5.1.0). Because the overall ReSource
Project contains both longitudinal and cross-sectional study goals
[for example, see the study by Valk et al. (11, 66)], with data acquisition
over the course of more than 2 years, we opted for the most general
cross-sectional image processing procedure, enabling baseline data
analysis before the completion of latter time points. Furthermore, given
the variability in time points (TC3 had only two time points, and T4 was
not compulsory), we did not want to influence the analysis because of
variations in number of data points for longitudinal analyses. FreeSurfer
was validated against histological analysis (95) and manual measure-
ments (96). Processing steps are detailed elsewhere (61, 97, 98). Briefly,
MPRAGE images underwent intensity normalization, followed by skull-
stripping and tessellation of the gray/white matter cortical boundary. Af-
ter topology correction, surface deformations following intensity gradi-
ents approximated the inner (gray/white matter) and outer [gray matter/
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)] cortical interfaces, placed at the location
where the greatest shift in intensity defines the transition to the other
tissue class. Cortical thickness was calculated as the shortest distance
from the gray/white matter boundary to the gray matter/CSF boundary
at each vertex on the tessellated surface. After surface extraction, the sul-
cal and gyral features of an individual were warped to an average spheri-
cal representation, fsaverage5, which allows for the accurate matching of
thickness measurement across participants. Surfaces were visually in-
spected, and inaccuracies were manually corrected (S.L.V. and B.
C.B.). Thickness data were smoothed on tessellated surfaces using
a 20-mm FWHM Gaussian kernel, which reduces measurement
noise while preserving the capacity for anatomical localization, as
it respects cortical topological features (99).
Behavioral markers
We assessed a battery of behavioral markers developed and adapted to
target the main goals of the Presence, Affect, and Perspective Modules:
selective attention, compassion, and ToM. Behavioral changes of these
markers elicited by the different modules are reported elsewhere (50).
Attention was quantified as executive control of attention and
stimulus-driven reorienting of attention (47, 50, 65), which was as-
sessed under both isolated and concurrent demand conditions in a
cued flanker task. Specifically, reorienting was measured through in-
valid versus valid cueing of the target location (46, 100), and execu-
tive control was assessed through flanker-target conflict (101). To
assess improvements on attention comprehensively, our analysis
focused on the concurrent demand condition. For details on the task,
see the study of Trautwein et al. (50).
The measure for compassion was based on the EmpaToM task, a
recently developed and validated naturalistic video paradigm(8). Videos
showed people recounting autobiographical episodes that were either
emotionally negative (for example, loss of a loved one) or neutral (for
example, commuting to work), followed by Likert scale ratings of expe-
rienced valence and compassion. Because the conceptual understanding
ofcompassionmightchangethroughthetraining,weensuredaconsistent
understanding by defining it before each measurement as experiencing
feelings of care, warmth, and benevolence. Compassion was quantified
as mean of compassion ratings across all experimental conditions.
The EmpaToM task (8) also allowed for measurement of ToM
performance. After the ratings, multiple-choice questions requiring in-
ference of mental states (thoughts, intentions, and beliefs) of the person
in the video or factual reasoning on the video’s content (control condi-
tion) were asked. Questions had only one correct answer, which had
been validated during prestudy piloting (8). Here, we calculated parti-
cipants’ error rates during the ToM questions after the video, collapsed
across neutral and negative conditions. As for our previous assessment
of behavioral change effects (50), we ran additional analyses that also
took account of changes in response time by (i) adding response time
as a covariate to the model or (ii) using an unweighted composite score
of response time and error rate.
Functional masks
We overlaid our main brain-behavior correlative results (Fig. 2) with
functional activation maps from previously published studies (8, 47)
of the baseline data in subgroup of study participants (T0) that were also
used to assess behavioral markers (see above): For compassion, we
overlaid the EmpaToM task contrast during negative versus neutral
socio-emotional videos (8); for ToM, we overlaid the EmpaToM task
contrast between ToM versus no ToM questions (8); for Presence, we
overlaid the conjunction map of the reorienting (invalid versus validly
cued congruent targets) and executive control (validly cued incongruent
versus congruent targets) contrasts in the cued flanker task (47).
Final sample
Because of dropouts, missing MRI, or missing behavioral data, there
were small variations in the number of subjects for each analysis. Of
a possible 251 participants who started the study as TC1, TC2, and
RCC, 23 (10.9%) dropped out before T3 was completed; in TC3 (only
3 months of training) of a possible 81 participants, 3 dropped out
(3.7%), resulting in a total dropout rate of 7.8%, with high compliance
across all modules (44, 52).
To measure brain change within subjects and the relation between
brain and behavioral changes in Presence, Affect, and Perspective, we
computed difference scores for all subjects during sequential time
points, for example, [T0→T1], [T1→T2], and [T2→T3]. This resulted
in a total of 660 change scores. This left us with Presence (n = 133),
Affect (n = 195), Perspective (n = 121), and Controls (n = 211). We
excluded participants with more than 3 SD change, resulting in
Presence (n = 132; TC1, n = 68; TC2, n = 64; Berlin, n = 69; Leipzig,
n = 63) Affect (n = 193; TC1, n = 62; TC2, n = 64; TC3, n = 67; Berlin,
n = 97; Leipzig, n = 96), Perspective (n = 120; TC1, n = 57; TC2, n = 63;
Berlin, n = 61; Leipzig, n = 59), and Controls (n = 205; Berlin, n = 97;
Leipzig, n = 108). Of these participants, 102 had complete attention
change scores, 184 had complete compassion change scores, and
115 had complete ToM change scores. For further details on dropouts
and missing data in our behavioral markers, see the study of Traut-
wein et al. (50). For details regarding subject inclusion procedures,
see table S1.
Statistical analyses
Analysis was performed using SurfStat for MATLAB (102). We used
linear mixed-effects models, a flexible statistical technique that allows
for inclusion of multiple measurements per subject and irregular mea-
surement intervals (103). In all models, we controlled for baseline age
andsex, given theirestablishedeffects on brain structure (104), aswell as
time of measurement, and a random effect term of subject. Inference
was performed on subject-specific cortical thickness change maps,
DCT, which were generated by subtracting vertex-wise thickness maps
of subsequent time points for a given participant. Before change calcu-
lation, we normalized thickness data at each vertex by regressing out
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Valk et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1700489
4 October 2017
8 of 11
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 effects of global thickness to emphasize relative, region-specific change
patterns. We then assessed whole-brain modulation of DCT. Compar-
isons between modules were made directly without removing the effects
due to testing without training. Ourdesign enabled usto use the different
modules as active controls for each other, as they underwent different
types of mental training.
Assessing module-specific change. To compare the three modules
against each other, we contrasted the change of one given module
against the average of both other modules, considering the differences
in timing of measurement by controlling for time point. To evaluate
differences between two modules, we compared module A to module
B. To compare a given module against RCC, we estimated contrasts
for training cohort change relative to RCC and intersected the results
of TC1 versus RCC and TC2 versus RCC for each training module
(Presence, Perspective, and Affect).
Relation to behavioral improvements and functional networks.
To assess the relation between behavioral and brain changes, we
correlated difference scoresin behavior and brain changes in the specific
module. To visualize convergence between training-related morpholog-
ical changes and functionally relevant networks, we intersected cortical
thickness effects with previously published task-based fMRI activation
maps in the domain of social affect and ToM (8), as well as attention
(47), derived from a subset of the current sample at baseline.
Correction for multiple comparisons and assessment of robustness.
The findings were corrected for multiple comparisons using random
field theory for nonisotropic images (105). Given previous discussions
in the fMRI community on the impact of cluster-forming thresholds on
overall FWE levels and interpretability (106, 107), statistical results were
corrected for multiple comparisons by means of random field theory
using both typically used (108–111) cluster-defining thresholds for
20-mm FWHM smoothed surface-based 2D thickness data [where
higher smoothing kernels relate to more readily fulfilled assumptions
of Gaussian random field theory (106, 112)] and a more conservative
cluster-forming threshold recently recommended for the analysis of
3D voxel-based functional data smoothed with smaller, isotropic
kernels. We therefore superimposed significant findings on the basis
of a cluster-forming threshold of P = 0.025 with a more stringent
cluster-forming threshold of P = 0.001. To evaluate consistency across
the cohorts, we extracted the percentage of participants per cohort
showing change in significant clusters. Moreover, we verified consistency
across our recruitment sites (that is, Berlin and Leipzig), as well as across
the separate training cohorts.
The two trained raters (S.L.V. and B.C.B.) excluded all scans with
excessive motion and corrected surface extractions in all remaining
scans. Theoretically, the crossover design of the study and the inclusion
of number of scans since baseline as covariance controlled for test-retest
effects on motion (as participants may become calmer in scanner after
repeatedsessions). Furthermore, to addresspotentialeffectsof headmo-
tion, we performed a recently proposed analysis by additionally control-
ling for frame-wise displacement [estimated from fMRI scans acquired
in the same session as the structural scans to estimate subjects’ extent of
motion during scanning sessions (60, 113, 114)] post hoc on the signif-
icant clusters reported in our main analyses (Figs. 1 and 2).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/3/10/e1700489/DC1
Supplementary Results
fig. S1. Overall training effect.
fig. S2. Cluster-specific change.
fig. S3. Site-specific change.
fig. S4. Module-specific changes compared to RCC.
fig. S5. Affect versus Perspective from T1 to T3.
fig. S6. Presence versus Affect (TC3).
fig. S7. Differential change in each module (TC1 and TC2 only).
fig. S8. Modulation of change in Affect and Perspective by Presence increase in medial PFC.
fig. S9. Overlap with task-based functional activations at baseline and module-specific
training-related cortical thickness increases.
table S1. Participant inclusion and reason for missing data across the study duration.
table S2. Overall change.
table S3. Overall training effect.
table S4. Module-specific change compared to RCC.
table S5. Within-subject change of Affect and Perspective.
table S6. Behavioral modulation of brain change.
table S7. Presence versus Affect (TC3).
table S8. Differential change in each module (TC1 and TC2 only).
table S9. Modulation of change by mindfulness skills.
table S10. Overall change controlled for head motion.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. L. Fredman, M. M. Weissman, P. J. Leaf, M. L. Bruce, Social functioning in community
residents with depression and other psychiatric disorders: Results of the New Haven
Epidemiologic catchment area study. J. Affect. Disord. 15, 103–112 (1988).
2. A. Meyer-Lindenberg, H. Tost, Neural mechanisms of social risk for psychiatric disorders.
Nat. Neurosci. 15, 663–668 (2012).
3. J. L. Goetz, D. Keltner, E. Simon-Thomas, Compassion: An evolutionary analysis and
empirical review. Psychol. Bull. 136, 351–374 (2010).
4. F. de Vignemont, T. Singer, The empathic brain: How, when and why? Trends Cogn. Sci.
10, 435–441 (2006).
5. T. Singer, The past, present and future of social neuroscience: A European perspective.
Neuroimage 61, 437–449 (2012).
6. D. Premack, G. Woodruff, Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? Behav. Brain Sci.
1, 515–526 (1978).
7. U. Frith, C. D. Frith, Development and neurophysiology of mentalizing. Philos. Trans. R.
Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 358, 459–473 (2003).
8. P. Kanske, A. Böckler, F.-M. Trautwein, T. Singer, Dissecting the social brain: Introducing
the EmpaToM to reveal distinct neural networks and brain–behavior relations for
empathy and Theory of Mind. Neuroimage 122, 6–19 (2015).
9. D. Bzdok, L. Schilbach, K. Vogeley, K. Schneider, A. R. Laird, R. Langner, S. B. Eickhoff,
Parsing the neural correlates of moral cognition: ALE meta-analysis on morality, theory
of mind, and empathy. Brain Struct. Funct. 217, 783–796 (2012).
10. J. P. Mitchell, Inferences about mental states. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 364,
1309–1316 (2009).
11. S. L. Valk, B. C. Bernhardt, A. Böckler, F.-M. Trautwein, P. Kanske, T. Singer, Socio-
cognitive phenotypes differentially modulate large-scale structural covariance
networks. Cereb. Cortex 27, 1358–1368 (2017).
12. P. Kanske, A. Böckler, F.-M. Trautwein, F. H. Parianen Lesemann, T. Singer, Are strong
empathizers better mentalizers? Evidence for independence and interaction between the
routes of social cognition. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 11, 1383–1392 (2016).
13. S. G. Shamay-Tsoory, J. Aharon-Peretz, D. Perry, Two systems for empathy: A double
dissociation between emotional and cognitive empathy in inferior frontal gyrus versus
ventromedial prefrontal lesions. Brain 132, 617–627 (2009).
14. R. Adolphs, The social brain: Neural basis of social knowledge. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 60,
693–716 (2009).
15. R. Saxe, N. Kanwisher, People thinking about thinking people. The role of the temporo-
parietal junction in “theory of mind”. Neuroimage 19, 1835–1842 (2003).
16. R. Saxe, A. Wexler, Making sense of another mind: The role of the right temporo-parietal
junction. Neuropsychologia 43, 1391–1399 (2005).
17. C. D. Frith, U. Frith, The neural basis of mentalizing. Neuron 50, 531–534 (2006).
18. T. Singer, O. M. Klimecki, Empathy and compassion. Curr. Biol. 24, R875–R878 (2014).
19. G. Silani, C. Lamm, C. C. Ruff, T. Singer, Right supramarginal gyrus is crucial to
overcome emotional egocentricity bias in social judgments. J. Neurosci. 33,
15466–15476 (2013).
20. Y. Fan, N. W. Duncan, M. de Greck, G. Northoff, Is there a core neural network in
empathy? An fMRI based quantitative meta-analysis. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 35,
903–911 (2011).
21. C. Lamm, J. Decety, T. Singer, Meta-analytic evidence for common and distinct neural
networks associated with directly experienced pain and empathy for pain. Neuroimage
54, 2492–2502 (2011).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Valk et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1700489
4 October 2017
9 of 11
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 22. O. M. Klimecki, S. Leiberg, C. Lamm, T. Singer, Functional neural plasticity and associated
changes in positive affect after compassion training. Cereb. Cortex 23, 1552–1561 (2013).
23. O. M. Klimecki, S. Leiberg, M. Ricard, T. Singer, Differential pattern of functional brain
plasticity after compassion and empathy training. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 9, 873–879
(2014).
24. N. Steinbeis, B. C. Bernhardt, T. Singer, Age-related differences in function and structure
of rSMG and reduced functional connectivity with DLPFC explains heightened
emotional egocentricity bias in childhood. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 10, 302–310
(2015).
25. D. V. Buonomano, M. M. Merzenich, Cortical plasticity: From synapses to maps. Annu.
Rev. Neurosci. 21, 149–186 (1998).
26. M. M. Merzenich, J. H. Kaas, J. Wall, R. J. Nelson, M. Sur, D. Felleman, Topographic
reorganization of somatosensory cortical areas 3b and 1 in adult monkeys following
restricted deafferentation. Neuroscience 8, 33–55 (1983).
27. R. J. Zatorre, R. D. Fields, H. Johansen-Berg, Plasticity in gray and white: Neuroimaging
changes in brain structure during learning. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 528–536 (2012).
28. M. Taubert, B. Draganski, A. Anwander, K. Müller, A. Horstmann, A. Villringer, P. Ragert,
Dynamic properties of human brain structure: Learning-related changes in cortical areas
and associated fiber connections. J. Neurosci. 30, 11670–11677 (2010).
29. T. Elbert, C. Pantev, C. Wienbruch, B. Rockstroh, E. Taub, Increased cortical representation of
the fingers of the left hand in string players. Science 270, 305–307 (1995).
30. B. Draganski, C. Gaser, G. Kempermann, H. G. Kuhn, J. Winkler, C. Buchel, A. May,
Temporal and spatial dynamics of brain structure changes during extensive learning.
J. Neurosci. 26, 6314–6317 (2006).
31. E. A. Maguire, D. G. Gadian, I. S. Johnsrude, C. D. Good, J. Ashburner, R. S. J. Frackowiak,
C. D. Frith, Navigation-related structural change in the hippocampi of taxi drivers. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97, 4398–4403 (2000).
32. B. Draganski, C. Gaser, V. Busch, G. Schuierer, U. Bogdahn, A. May, Neuroplasticity:
Changes in grey matter induced by training. Nature 427, 311–312 (2004).
33. N. Golestani, T. Paus, R. J. Zatorre, Anatomical correlates of learning novel speech
sounds. Neuron 35, 997–1010 (2002).
34. C. J. Dahl, A. Lutz, R. J. Davidson, Reconstructing and deconstructing the self: Cognitive
mechanisms in meditation practice. Trends Cogn. Sci. 19, 515–523 (2015).
35. R. J. Davidson, Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy and the prevention of depressive
relapse: Measures, mechanisms, and mediators. JAMA Psychiatry 73, 547–548 (2016).
36. S. Paulson, R. Davidson, A. Jha, J. Kabat-Zinn, Becoming conscious: The science of
mindfulness. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1303, 87–104 (2013).
37. J. Kabat-Zinn, Full Catastrophe Living: Using the Wisdom of Your Body and Mind to Face
Stress, Pain, and Illness (Delacorte, 1990).
38. Y.-Y. Tang, B. K. Holzel, M. I. Posner, The neuroscience of mindfulness meditation. Nat.
Rev. Neurosci. 16, 213–225 (2015).
39. B. K. Hölzel, J. Carmody, M. Vangel, C. Congleton, S. M. Yerramsetti, T. Gard, S. W. Lazar,
Mindfulness practice leads to increases in regional brain gray matter density. Psychiatry Res.
191, 36–43 (2011).
40. Y.-Y. Tang, Q. Lu, X. Geng, E. A. Stein, Y. Yang, M. I. Posner, Short-term meditation
induces white matter changes in the anterior cingulate. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107,
15649–15652 (2010).
41. B. A. Pickut, W. Van Hecke, E. Kerckhofs, P. Mariën, S. Vanneste, P. Cras, P. M. Parizel,
Mindfulness based intervention in Parkinson’s disease leads to structural brain changes
on MRI: A randomized controlled longitudinal trial. Clin. Neurol. Neurosurg. 115,
2419–2425 (2013).
42. K. C. R. Fox, S. Nijeboer, M. L. Dixon, J. L. Floman, M. Ellamil, S. P. Rumak, P. Sedlmeier,
K. Christoff, Is meditation associated with altered brain structure? A systematic review
and meta-analysis of morphometric neuroimaging in meditation practitioners.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 43, 48–73 (2014).
43. K. N. Ochsner, J. A. Silvers, J. T. Buhle, Functional imaging studies of emotion regulation:
A synthetic review and evolving model of the cognitive control of emotion. Ann. N. Y.
Acad. Sci. 1251, E1–E24 (2012).
44. T. Singer, B. E. Kok, B. Bornemann, S. Zurborg, M. Bolz, C. A. Bochow, The ReSource
Project: Background, Design, Samples and Measurements (Max Planck Institute for Human
Cognitive and Brain Sciences, ed. 2, 2016).
45. B. A. Wallace, The Buddhist tradition of Samatha: Methods for refining and examining
consciousness. J. Consci. Stud. 6, 175–187 (1999).
46. M. Corbetta, G. L. Shulman, Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the
brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 201–215 (2002).
47. F.-M. Trautwein, T. Singer, P. Kanske, Stimulus-driven reorienting impairs executive
control of attention: Evidence for a common bottleneck in anterior insula. Cereb. Cortex
26, 4136–4147 (2016).
48. A. D. Craig, How do you feel—now? The anterior insula and human awareness. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 10, 59–70 (2009).
49. A. D. Craig, How do you feel? Interoception: The sense of the physiological condition of
the body. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 655–666 (2002).
50. F.-M. Trautwein, P. Kanske, A. Böckler-Raettig, T. Singer, Differential benefits of mental
training types for attention, compassion, and theory of mind. https://osf.io/x9s2h/ (2017).
51. B. K. Hölzel, S. W. Lazar, T. Gard, Z. Schuman-Olivier, D. R. Vago, U. Ott, How does
mindfulness meditation work? Proposing mechanisms of action from a conceptual and
neural perspective. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 6, 537–559 (2011).
52. B. E. Kok, T. Singer, Effects of contemplative dyads on engagement and perceived social
connectedness over 9 months of mental training: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA
Psychiatry 74, 126–134 (2017).
53. B. C. Bernhardt, S. L. Valk, G. Silani, G. Bird, U. Frith, T. Singer, Selective disruption of
sociocognitive structural brain networks in autism and alexithymia. Cereb. Cortex 24,
3258–3267 (2014).
54. S. L. Valk, A. Di Martino, M. P. Milham, B. C. Bernhardt, Multicenter mapping of structural
network alterations in autism. Hum. Brain Mapp. 36, 2364–2373 (2015).
55. A. J. W. van der Kouwe, T. Benner, A. M. Dale, Real-time rigid body motion correction
and shimming using cloverleaf navigators. Magn. Reson. Med. 56, 1019–1032 (2006).
56. T. T. Brown, J. M. Kuperman, M. Erhart, N. S. White, J. C. Roddey, A. Shankaranarayanan,
E. T. Han, D. Rettmann, A. M. Dale, Prospective motion correction of high-resolution
magnetic resonance imaging data in children. Neuroimage 53, 139–145 (2010).
57. J. M. Kuperman, T. T. Brown, M. E. Ahmadi, M. J. Erhart, N. S. White, J. C. Roddey,
J. A. Shankaranarayanan, E. T. Han, D. Rettmann, A. M. Dale, Prospective motion
correction improves diagnostic utility of pediatric MRI scans. Pediatr. Radiol. 41,
1578–1582 (2011).
58. N. White, C. Roddey, A. Shankaranarayanan, E. Han, D. Rettmann, J. Santos, J. Kuperman,
A. Dale, PROMO: Real-time prospective motion correction in MRI using image-based
tracking. Magn. Reson. Med. 63, 91–105 (2010).
59. A. Alexander-Bloch, L. Clasen, M. Stockman, L. Ronan, F. Lalonde, J. Giedd, A. Raznahan,
Subtle in-scanner motion biases automated measurement of brain anatomy from in vivo
MRI. Hum. Brain Mapp. 37, 2385–2397 (2016).
60. N. K. Savalia, P. F. Agres, M. Y. Chan, E. J. Feczko, K. M. Kennedy, G. S. Wig, Motion-related
artifacts in structural brain images revealed with independent estimates of in-scanner
head motion. Hum. Brain Mapp. 38, 472–492 (2017).
61. A. M. Dale, B. Fischl, M. I. Sereno, Cortical surface-based analysis. I. Segmentation and
surface reconstruction. Neuroimage 9, 179–194 (1999).
62. A. M. Fjell, L. McEvoy, D. Holland, A. M. Dale, K. B. Walhovd; Alzheimer’s Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative, What is normal in normal aging? Effects of aging, amyloid and
Alzheimer’s disease on the cerebral cortex and the hippocampus. Prog. Neurobiol.
117, 20–40 (2014).
63. A. B. Storsve, A. M. Fjell, C. K. Tamnas, L. T. Westlye, K. Overbye, H. W. Aasland,
K. B. Walhovd, Differential longitudinal changes in cortical thickness, surface area and
volume across the adult life span: Regions of accelerating and decelerating change.
J. Neurosci. 34, 8488–8498 (2014).
64. D.-H. Kang, H. J. Jo, W. H. Jung, S. H. Kim, Y.-H. Jung, C.-H. Choi, U. S. Lee, S. C. An,
J. H. Jang, J. S. Kwon, The effect of meditation on brain structure: Cortical thickness
mapping and diffusion tensor imaging. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 8, 27–33 (2013).
65. S. E. Petersen, M. I. Posner, The attention system of the human brain: 20 years after.
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 35, 73–89 (2012).
66. S. L. Valk, B. C. Bernhardt, A. Böckler, P. Kanske, T. Singer, Substrates of metacognition on
perception and metacognition on higher-order cognition relate to different subsystems
of the mentalizing network. Hum. Brain Mapp. 37, 3388–3399 (2016).
67. S. M. Fleming, R. J. Dolan, The neural basis of metacognitive ability. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. B Biol. Sci. 367, 1338–1349 (2012).
68. S. M. Fleming, J. Ryu, J. G. Golfinos, K. E. Blackmon, Domain-specific impairment in
metacognitive accuracy following anterior prefrontal lesions. Brain 137, 2811–2822 (2014).
69. T. Singer, H. D. Critchley, K. Preuschoff, A common role of insula in feelings, empathy
and uncertainty. Trends Cogn. Sci. 13, 334–340 (2009).
70. A. Lutz, J. Brefczynski-Lewis, T. Johnstone, R. J. Davidson, Regulation of the neural
circuitry of emotion by compassion meditation: Effects of meditative expertise.
PLOS ONE 3, e1897 (2008).
71. D. Samson, S. Houthuys, G. W. Humphreys, Self-perspective inhibition deficits cannot be
explained by general executive control difficulties. Cortex 70, 189–201 (2015).
72. M. Schurz, J. Radua, M. Aichhorn, F. Richlan, J. Perner, Fractionating theory of mind:
A meta-analysis of functional brain imaging studies. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 42,
9–34 (2014).
73. B. C. Bernhardt, T. Singer, The neural basis of empathy. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 35, 1–23
(2012).
74. E. Wenger, S. Kühn, J. Verrel, J. Mårtensson, N. C. Bodammer, U. Lindenberger, M. Lövdén,
Repeated structural imaging reveals nonlinear progression of experience-dependent
volume changes in human motor cortex. Cereb. Cortex 27, 2911–2925 (2017).
75. J. Driemeyer, J. Boyke, C. Gaser, C. Büchel, A. May, Changes in gray matter induced by
learning—Revisited. PLOS ONE 3, e2669 (2008).
76. J. Boyke, J. Driemeyer, C. Gaser, C. Büchel, A. May, Training-induced brain structure
changes in the elderly. J. Neurosci. 28, 7031–7035 (2008).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Valk et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1700489
4 October 2017
10 of 11
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 77. P. W. Burgess, I. Dumontheil, S. J. Gilbert, The gateway hypothesis of rostral prefrontal
cortex (area 10) function. Trends Cogn. Sci. 11, 290–298 (2007).
78. D. M. Amodio, C. D. Frith, Meeting of minds: The medial frontal cortex and social
cognition. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 268–277 (2006).
79. R. Kanai, G. Rees, The structural basis of inter-individual differences in human behaviour
and cognition. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 12, 231–242 (2011).
80. H. Takeuchi, Y. Taki, H. Hashizume, Y. Sassa, T. Nagase, R. Nouchi, R. Kawashima, Effects of
training of processing speed on neural systems. J. Neurosci. 31, 12139–12148 (2011).
81. F. I. M. Craik, E. Bialystok, Cognition through the lifespan: Mechanisms of change. Trends
Cogn. Sci. 10, 131–138 (2006).
82. U. Lindenberger, E. Wenger, M. Lövdén, Towards a stronger science of human plasticity.
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 261–262 (2017).
83. J. A. Kleim, J. A. Markham, K. Vij, J. L. Freese, D. H. Ballard, W. T. Greenough, Motor
learning induces astrocytic hypertrophy in the cerebellar cortex. Behav. Brain Res. 178,
244–249 (2007).
84. P. Rakic, Neurogenesis in adult primate neocortex: An evaluation of the evidence.
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 65–71 (2002).
85. B. Aubert-Broche, V. S. Fonov, D. García-Lorenzo, A. Mouiha, N. Guizard, P. Coupe,
S. F. Eskildsen, D. L. Collins, A new method for structural volume analysis of longitudinal
brain MRI data and its application in studying the growth trajectories of anatomical
brain structures in childhood. Neuroimage 82, 393–402 (2013).
86. R. D. Fields, Change in the brain’s white matter. Science 330, 768–769 (2010).
87. H.-U. Wittchen, H. Pfister, Diagnostisches Expertensystem für psychische Störungen (DIA-X)
(Swets & Zeitlinger, 1997).
88. H.-U. Wittchen, M. Zaudig, T. Fydrich, SKID-Strukturiertes Klinisches Interview für DSM-IV.
Achse I und II (Hogrefe, 1997).
89. M. B. First, M. Gibbon, R. L. Spitzer, J. B. W. Williams, L. S. Benjamin, Structured Clinical
Interview for DSM-IV Axis II Personality Disorders (SCID-II) (American Psychiatric Press Inc.,
1997).
90. S. Salzberg, Lovingkindness: The Revolutionary Art of Happiness (Shambhala, 1995).
91. K. D. Neff, C. K. Germer, A pilot study and randomized controlled trial of the mindful
self-compassion program. J. Clin. Psychol. 69, 28–44 (2013).
92. T. Holmes, Parts Word: An Illustrated Guide to Your Inner Life (Winged Heart Press, 2007).
93. R. C. Schwartz, Internal Family Systems Therapy (Guilford, 1997).
94. T. Singer, The neuronal basis and ontogeny of empathy and mind reading: Review of
literature and implications for future research. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 30, 855–863
(2006).
95. H. D. Rosas, A. K. Liu, S. Hersch, M. Glessner, R. J. Ferrante, D. H. Salat, A. van der Kouwe,
B. G. Jenkins, A. M. Dale, B. Fischl, Regional and progressive thinning of the cortical
ribbon in Huntington’s disease. Neurology 58, 695–701 (2002).
96. G. R. Kuperberg, M. R. Broome, P. K. McGuire, A. S. David, M. Eddy, F. Ozawa, D. Goff,
W. C. West, S. C. R. Williams, A. J. W. van der Kouwe, D. H. Salat, A. M. Dale, B. Fischl,
Regionally localized thinning of the cerebral cortex in schizophrenia. Arch. Gen.
Psychiatry 60, 878–888 (2003).
97. X. Han, J. Jovicich, D. Salat, A. van der Kouwe, B. Quinn, S. Czanner, E. Busa,
J. Pacheco, M. Albert, R. Killiany, P. Maguire, D. Rosas, N. Makris, A. Dale, B. Dickerson,
B. Fischl, Reliability of MRI-derived measurements of human cerebral cortical
thickness: The effects of field strength, scanner upgrade and manufacturer.
Neuroimage 32, 180–194 (2006).
98. B. Fischl, M. I. Sereno, A. M. Dale, Cortical surface-based analysis. II: Inflation, flattening,
and a surface-based coordinate system. Neuroimage 9, 195–207 (1999).
99. J. P. Lerch, A. C. Evans, Cortical thickness analysis examined through power analysis and
a population simulation. Neuroimage 24, 163–173 (2005).
100. M. Corbetta, J. M. Kincade, J. M. Ollinger, M. P. McAvoy, G. L. Shulman, Voluntary orienting
is dissociated from target detection in human posterior parietal cortex. Nat. Neurosci.
3, 292–297 (2000).
101. B. A. Eriksen, C. W. Eriksen, Effects of noise letters upon the identification of a target
letter in a nonsearch task. Percept. Psychophys. 16, 143–149 (1974).
102. K. J. Worsley, J. E. Taylor, F. Carbonell, M. K. Chung, E. Duerden, B. Bernhardt, O. Lyttelton,
M. Boucher, A. C. Evans, SurfStat: A Matlab toolbox for the statistical analysis of
univariate and multivariate surface and volumetric data using linear mixed effect
models and random field theory. Neuroimage 47, S102 (2009).
103. J. C. Pinheiro, D. M. Bates, Mixed-Effect Models in S and S-PLUS (Springer, 2000).
104. D. H. Salat, R. L. Buckner, A. Z. Snyder, D. N. Greve, R. S. R. Desikan, E. Busa, J. C. Morris,
A. M. Dale, B. Fischl, Thinning of the cerebral cortex in aging. Cereb. Cortex 14, 721–730
(2004).
105. K. J. Worsley, M. Andermann, T. Koulis, D. MacDonald, A. C. Evans, Detecting changes in
nonisotropic images. Hum. Brain Mapp. 8, 98–101 (1999).
106. A. Eklund, T. E. Nichols, H. Knutsson, Cluster failure: Why fMRI inferences for spatial
extent have inflated false-positive rates. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113, 7900–7905
(2016).
107. C.-W. Woo, A. Krishnan, T. D. Wager, Cluster-extent based thresholding in fMRI analyses:
Pitfalls and recommendations. Neuroimage 91, 412–419 (2014).
108. D. S. Andrews, T. A. Avino, M. Gudbrandsen, E. Daly, A. Marquand, C. M. Murphy,
M.-C. Lai, M. W. Lombardo, A. N. V. Ruigrok, S. C. Williams, E. T. Bullmore; MRC AIMS
Consortium, J. Suckling, S. Baron-Cohen, M. C. Craig, D. G. M. Murphy, C. Ecker, In vivo
evidence of reduced integrity of the gray-white matter boundary in autism spectrum
disorder. Cereb. Cortex 27, 877–887 (2017).
109. C. Ecker, C. Ginestet, Y. Feng, P. Johnson, M. V. Lombardo, M.-C. Lai, J. Suckling,
L. Palaniyappan, E. Daly, C. M. Murphy, S. C. Williams, E. T. Bullmore, S. Baron-Cohen,
M. Brammer, D. G. M. Murphy; MRC AIMS Consortium, Brain surface anatomy in adults
with autism: The relationship between surface area, cortical thickness, and autistic
symptoms. JAMA Psychiatry 70, 59–70 (2013).
110. S.-J. Hong, B. C. Bernhardt, D. S. Schrader, N. Bernasconi, A. Bernasconi, Whole-brain
MRI phenotyping in dysplasia-related frontal lobe epilepsy. Neurology 86, 643–650
(2016).
111. B. C. Bernhardt, H. Kim, N. Bernasconi, Patterns of subregional mesiotemporal disease
progression in temporal lobe epilepsy. Neurology 81, 1840–1847 (2013).
112. G. Flandin, K. J. Friston, Analysis of family-wise error rates in statistical parametric
mapping using random field theory. arXiv:1606.08199 (2016).
113. A. Alexander-Bloch, L. Clasen, M. Stockman, L. Ronan, F. Lalonde, J. Giedd, A. Raznahan,
Subtle in-scanner motion biases automated measurement of brain anatomy from in
vivo MRI. Hum. Brain Mapp. 37, 2385–2397 (2016).
114. J. D. Power, K. A. Barnes, A. Z. Snyder, B. L. Schlaggar, S. E. Petersen, Spurious but
systematic correlations in functional connectivity MRI networks arise from subject
motion. Neuroimage 59, 2142–2154 (2012).
Acknowledgments: We thank the study participants. We are thankful to the members
of the Social Neuroscience Department at the Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive
and Brain Sciences involved in the ReSource Project over many years and the teachers
of the ReSource intervention program: A. Ackermann, C. Bochow, M. Bolz, and S. Zurborg
for managing the large-scale longitudinal study; E. Murzik, S. Tydecks, K. Träger, and
N. Otto for the help with recruiting and data archiving; H. Grunert for the technical assistance;
and H. Niederhausen and T. Kästner for the data management. We also thank the research
assistants and students, especially M. Hofmann, S. Neubert, and N. Pampus, whose help
with the data collection was indispensable. Funding: T.S. (principal investigator) received
funding for the ReSource Project from the European Research Council (ERC) under the
European Community’s Seventh Framework Program (FP7/2007–2013) ERC grant agreement
number 205557 and the Max Planck Society. B.C.B. is now funded by a Canadian Institutes of
Health Research (CIHR)/SickKids New Investigator Research grant, a CIHR Foundation grant,
and a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada discovery grant and
receives salary support from FRQS (Fonds de recherche du Québec). Author contributions:
T.S. initiated and developed the ReSource Project and model, as well as the training protocol,
was involved in designing all measures, and secured all funding. T.S., S.L.V., and B.C.B. designed
the experiment. S.L.V. and B.C.B. were involved in data assessment and analyzed the structural
imaging data. N.G. and D.L.C. helped validate the imaging processing pipeline. F.-M.T., A.B., and
P.K. designed and analyzed the functional and behavioral data used in this study. All authors
contributed to the interpretation of data and writing of the paper and approved the final version
of the manuscript for submission. Competing interests: The authors declare that they have
no competing interests. A.B. and P.K. have moved to new affiliations after the completion
of the paper at the Max Planck Institute. Data and materials availability: All data needed to
evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary
Materials. Additional data related to this paper may be requested from the authors.
Submitted 14 February 2017
Accepted 24 August 2017
Published 4 October 2017
10.1126/sciadv.1700489
Citation: S. L. Valk, B. C. Bernhardt, F.-M. Trautwein, A. Böckler, P. Kanske, N. Guizard,
D. L. Collins, T. Singer, Structural plasticity of the social brain: Differential change after
socio-affective and cognitive mental training. Sci. Adv. 3, e1700489 (2017).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Valk et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1700489
4 October 2017
11 of 11
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 mental training
Structural plasticity of the social brain: Differential change after socio-affective and cognitive
Tania Singer
Sofie L. Valk, Boris C. Bernhardt, Fynn-Mathis Trautwein, Anne Böckler, Philipp Kanske, Nicolas Guizard, D. Louis Collins and
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.1700489
 (10), e1700489.
3
Sci Adv 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/3/10/e1700489
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/10/02/3.10.e1700489.DC1
REFERENCES
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/3/10/e1700489#BIBL
This article cites 103 articles, 11 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
registered trademark of AAAS.
is a
Science Advances 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
(ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New
Science Advances 
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
