 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
1234 
MMWR / November 11, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 44
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Investigation of the First Seven Reported Cases of Candida auris, a Globally 
Emerging Invasive, Multidrug-Resistant Fungus — United States,  
May 2013–August 2016
Snigdha Vallabhaneni, MD1; Alex Kallen, MD2; Sharon Tsay, MD1,3; Nancy Chow, PhD1; Rory Welsh, PhD1; Janna Kerins, VMD3,4; 
Sarah K. Kemble, MD4; Massimo Pacilli, MS4; Stephanie R. Black, MD4; Emily Landon, MD5; Jessica Ridgway, MD5; Tara N. Palmore, MD6; 
Adrian Zelzany, PhD6; Eleanor H. Adams, MD7; Monica Quinn, MS7; Sudha Chaturvedi, PhD7; Jane Greenko, MPH7; Rafael Fernandez, MPH7; 
Karen Southwick, MD7; E. Yoko Furuya, MD8; David P
. Calfee, MD9; Camille Hamula, PhD10; Gopi Patel, MD10; Patricia Barrett, MSD11; 
Patricia Lafaro12; Elizabeth L. Berkow, PhD1; Heather Moulton-Meissner, PhD2; Judith Noble-Wang, PhD2; Ryan P
. Fagan, MD2; 
Brendan R. Jackson, MD1; Shawn R. Lockhart, PhD1; Anastasia P
. Litvintseva, PhD1; Tom M. Chiller, MD1
On November 4, 2016, this report was posted as an MMWR 
Early Release on the MMWR website (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr). 
Candida auris, an emerging fungus that can cause invasive 
infections, is associated with high mortality and is often resis-
tant to multiple antifungal drugs. C. auris was first described in 
2009 after being isolated from external ear canal discharge of a 
patient in Japan (1). Since then, reports of C. auris infections, 
including bloodstream infections, have been published from 
several countries, including Colombia, India, Israel, Kenya, 
Kuwait, Pakistan, South Africa, South Korea, Venezuela, and 
the United Kingdom (2–7). To determine whether C. auris is 
present in the United States and to prepare for the possibility of 
transmission, CDC issued a clinical alert in June 2016 inform-
ing clinicians, laboratorians, infection control practitioners, 
and public health authorities about C. auris and requesting that 
C. auris cases be reported to state and local health departments 
and CDC (8). This report describes the first seven U.S. cases 
of C. auris infection reported to CDC as of August 31, 2016. 
Data from these cases suggest that transmission of C. auris might 
have occurred in U.S. health care facilities and demonstrate the 
need for attention to infection control measures to control the 
spread of this pathogen.
The emergence of C. auris raises several serious concerns for 
public health. First, many isolates are multidrug-resistant, with 
some strains having elevated minimum inhibitory concentra-
tions to drugs in all three major classes of antifungal medications 
(9), a feature not found in other clinically relevant Candida 
species. Second, C. auris is challenging to identify, requiring 
specialized methods such as matrix-assisted laser desorption/
ionization time-of-flight or molecular identification based on 
sequencing the D1-D2 region of the 28s ribosomal DNA. 
When using common biochemical methods such as analytical 
profile index strips or the VITEK 2, C. auris is often misidenti-
fied as other yeasts (most commonly Candida haemulonii, but 
also Candida famata, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and Rhodotorula 
glutinis). Finally, C. auris has caused outbreaks in health care 
settings (10). Multidrug resistance and health care–associated 
transmission are often found with resistant bacteria, such as 
carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae, but have been uncom-
mon among Candida spp.
To determine whether C. auris cases were occurring in the 
United States, CDC issued a clinical alert (8) in June 2016, 
requesting that laboratories report C. auris isolates to state and 
local health departments and CDC. Given the challenges of 
C. auris identification, clinical laboratories were encouraged to 
forward C. haemulonii isolates and isolates not identified beyond 
Candida spp. by conventional methods to state public health labo-
ratories and CDC for further characterization. A case was defined 
as confirmed isolation of C. auris in a specimen from a patient at a 
U.S. health care facility. For all reported cases, patient information 
and available clinical isolates were obtained for resistance testing 
and whole-genome sequencing. Among cases in patients who 
were not deceased, cultures from various patient body sites were 
obtained to seek evidence of persistent colonization. One patient 
was hospitalized at the time of the report, allowing for collection 
of environmental cultures from the hospital room.
Seven C. auris cases occurring during May 2013–August 2016 
(Table) were reported to CDC (one in 2013, one in 2015, 
and five in 2016). Six of seven cases were identified through 
retrospective review of microbiology records from reporting 
hospitals and reference laboratories. Cases were reported from 
four states: Illinois (n = 2, single hospital), Maryland (n = 1), 
New Jersey (n = 1), and New York (n = 3, three different 
hospitals). Recent travel outside the United Stated was docu-
mented for only one patient: the 2013 New York patient had 
been transferred less than 1 week earlier from a hospital in the 
Middle East. Five patients had C. auris initially isolated from 
blood, one from urine, and one from the external ear canal.
All patients had serious underlying medical conditions, 
including hematologic malignancies (n = 2), bone marrow 
transplantation (n = 1), short gut syndrome requiring total 
parenteral nutrition and corticosteroid use (n = 1), paraple-
gia with a chronic urinary catheter (n = 1), idiopathic acute 
respiratory failure requiring high-dose corticosteriods (n = 1), 
severe peripheral vascular disease and skull base osteomy-
elitis (n = 1), and brain tumor and recent villous adenoma 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / November 11, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 44 
1235
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
resection (n = 1). Median time from admission to isolation of 
C. auris was 18 days (range = 0–231). All five patients with 
C. auris bloodstream infections had central venous catheters 
at the time C. auris was identified, and all were treated with 
echinocandins, a type of antifungal medication; one patient 
also received liposomal amphotericin B. All patients with 
bloodstream infections eventually had documented clearance 
of C. auris from the bloodstream, although one patient had 
persistently positive C. auris cultures for 10 days, despite having 
an isolate that was susceptible to the treatment administered. 
Two patients had recurrent C. auris candidemia episodes 3 
and 4 months after the initial episode. C. auris was repeatedly 
isolated from the urine of a patient with a urinary catheter, 
even after treatment with fluconazole, to which the isolate was 
susceptible. The patient with the external ear canal isolate was 
not treated with an antifungal medication. As of August 31, 
2016, four of the seven patients, all of whom had bloodstream 
infections, died during the weeks to months after the identi-
fication of C. auris.
In two separate circumstances, two patients were hospital-
ized in the same hospital. The first instance included the two 
patients from Illinois who were admitted to the same hospital 
on three separate occasions but were on different floors or 
wings of the hospital. These two patients were subsequently 
also admitted to a long-term acute care hospital within days 
of one another, although their admission dates did not over-
lap. The second instance involved the patients identified in 
Maryland and New Jersey. The patient identified in Maryland 
was a resident of New Jersey and had been hospitalized at the 
same time as the New Jersey patient, in the same New Jersey 
hospital, but on a different ward. This overlapping admission 
occurred approximately 6 months before C. auris was identified 
in the Maryland hospital.
Specimens for surveillance cultures to evaluate patients 
for colonization were taken from the three living patients 
(one with C. auris in the blood, one in urine and one in the 
external ear canal). In all three cases, cultures yielded C. auris 
from at least one body site, including groin, axilla, nares, 
and rectum, 1–3 months after initial detection of C. auris. 
Environmental cultures of the hospital room were collected 
during a subsequent hospitalization of one of the Illinois 
patients who had a C. auris bloodstream infection 3 months 
earlier, and who remained persistently colonized in multiple 
body sites; samples taken from the mattress, bedside table, bed 
rail, chair, and windowsill all yielded C. auris. C. auris was not 
detected in this patient’s hospital room after terminal cleaning 
with sodium hypochlorite solution and ultraviolet light.
Five of seven reported isolates were either misidentified ini-
tially as C. haemulonii or not identified beyond Candida spp. 
at the institution’s microbiology laboratory and were later 
identified as C. auris at a reference laboratory. Five of seven 
isolates were resistant to fluconazole; one of these isolates was 
resistant to amphotericin B, and another isolate was resistant 
to echinocandins. No isolate was resistant to all three classes 
of antifungal medications.
Whole-genome sequencing was performed on isolates 
from six patients. Isolates identified in Maryland, New Jersey, 
and New York were closely related to one another (differ-
ing by approximately 70 single nucleotide polymorphisms 
[SNPs]); the isolates from Maryland and New Jersey (the 
patients admitted to the same New Jersey hospital) differed 
by <10 SNPs, which was on same order of magnitude as the 
6-SNP differences identified among multiple isolates from 
specimens obtained over a 10-day period from the Maryland 
patient. These U.S. isolates were related to isolates from South 
Asia (<60 SNPs apart). Isolates from the two Illinois patients 
were nearly identical (<10 SNPs apart) and were most closely 
related to isolates from South America (<150 SNPs apart). 
Furthermore, differences of ≤5 SNPs were identified between 
the environmental and patient isolates in Illinois. As a point 
of reference, isolates from different continents are tens of 
thousands of SNPs apart (9). None of the patients from which 
isolates were sequenced, including the patient from the 2013 
case in the Middle East, had known travel or other direct links 
to South Asia or South America.
Discussion
C. auris is an emerging cause of Candida infections in the 
United States. Although the cases of C. auris described in this 
report appear related to isolates from South Asia and South 
TABLE. Characteristics of the first seven cases of Candida auris identified in the United States—May 2013–August 2016
Patient
Isolation 
month/ year
State
Site of C. auris 
isolation
Underlying medical condition(s)
Outcome*
1
May 2013
New York
Blood
Respiratory failure requiring high-dose corticosteroids
Died
2
July 2015
New Jersey
Blood
Brain tumor and recent villous adenoma resection
Died
3
April 2016
Maryland
Blood
Hematologic malignancy and bone marrow transplant
Died
4
April 2016
New York
Blood
Hematologic malignancy
Died
5
May 2016
Illinois
Blood
Short gut syndrome requiring total parenteral nutrition and high-dose corticosteroid use
Survived
6
July 2016
Illinois
Urine
Paraplegia with long-term, indwelling Foley catheter
Survived
7
August 2016
New York
Ear
Severe peripheral vascular disease and skull base osteomyelitis
Survived
* Mortality was not necessarily attributable to C. auris infection.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
1236 
MMWR / November 11, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 44
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
America, available epidemiologic information suggests that 
most were acquired in the United States. Although transmission 
to patients in U.S. health care settings has not been defini-
tively documented, several findings suggest that transmission 
occurred. First, whole-genome sequencing results demonstrate 
that isolates from patients admitted to the same hospital in 
New Jersey were nearly identical, as were isolates from patients 
admitted to the same Illinois hospital. The number of SNPs 
differentiating isolates from the same hospital is comparable to 
that detected among the multiple isolates from same patient or 
patient and the environment. Second, patients were colonized 
with C. auris on their skin and other body sites weeks to months 
after their initial infection, which could present opportunities 
for contamination of the health care environment. Third, 
C. auris was isolated from samples taken from multiple sur-
faces in one patient’s health care environment, which further 
suggests that spread within health care settings is possible. To 
decrease the risk for transmission, health care personnel in acute 
care settings should use Standard and Contact Precautions 
(http://www.cdc.gov/hicpac/pdf/isolation/Isolation2007.pdf) 
for patients colonized or infected with C. auris. In nursing 
homes, providers should consider the level of patient care 
being provided and the presence of transmission risk factors 
when deciding on the level of precautions. If such patients are 
transferred to other health care facilities, receiving facilities 
should be notified of the presence of this multidrug-resistant 
organism to ensure appropriate precautions are continued. 
Facilities should ensure thorough daily and terminal cleaning 
of rooms of patients with C. auris infections, including use of 
an EPA-registered disinfectant with a fungal claim. Facilities 
and laboratories are requested to continue to report cases and 
forward isolates of C. haemulonii and Candida spp. that are 
not identified further after using common laboratory identifi-
cation methods to state or local health authorities and CDC, 
who can provide consultation about the need for additional 
interventions to prevent transmission.*
CDC continues to work with domestic and international 
partners to conduct epidemiologic studies on the emergence 
of this organism, risk factors for infection, and transmission 
mechanisms, and to evaluate the effectiveness of current infec-
tion control guidance to make additional recommendations.
Acknowledgments
Melvin Weinstein, Nancy Wengenack, Nathan Wiederhold.
 1Mycotic Diseases Branch, Division of Food Water and Environmental Diseases, 
CDC; 2Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, CDC; 3Epidemic 
Intelligence Service, Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology and Laboratory 
Services, CDC; 4Chicago Department of Public Health, Chicago, Illinois; 
5University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois; 6National Institutes of Health Clinical 
Center, Bethesda, Maryland; 7New York State Department of Health, New 
York; 8Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons, New York, New 
York; 9Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, New York; 10Mount Sinai Health 
System/Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York; 11New 
Jersey Department of Health, Trenton, New Jersey; 12Robert Wood Johnson 
University Hospital, New Brunswick, New Jersey.
Corresponding author: Snigdha Vallabhaneni, svallabhaneni@cdc.gov, 
404-639-3411.
References
 1. Satoh K, Makimura K, Hasumi Y, Nishiyama Y, Uchida K, Yamaguchi H. 
Candida auris sp. nov., a novel ascomycetous yeast isolated from the external 
ear canal of an inpatient in a Japanese hospital. Microbiol Immunol 
2009;53:41–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1348-0421.2008.00083.x
 2. Lee WG, Shin JH, Uh Y, et al. First three reported cases of nosocomial 
fungemia caused by Candida auris. J Clin Microbiol 2011;49:3139–42. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/JCM.00319-11
 3. Chowdhary A, Sharma C, Duggal S, et al. New clonal strain of Candida auris, 
Delhi, India. Emerg Infect Dis 2013;19:1670–3. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/
eid1910.130393
 4. Magobo RE, Corcoran C, Seetharam S, Govender NP
. Candida auris-
associated candidemia, South Africa. Emerg Infect Dis 2014;20:1250–1. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2007.131765
 5. Calvo B, Melo AS, Perozo-Mena A, et al. First report of Candida auris 
in America: Clinical and microbiological aspects of 18 episodes of 
candidemia. J Infect 2016;73:369–74. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jinf.2016.07.008
 6. Borman AM, Szekely A, Johnson EM. Comparative pathogenicity of 
United Kingdom isolates of the emerging pathogen Candida auris and 
other key pathogenic Candida species. mSphere 2016;1(4):e00189–16. 
http://www.dx.doi.org/10.1128/mSphere.00189-16
Summary
What is already known about this topic?
Candida auris is an emerging pathogenic fungus that has 
been reported from at least a dozen countries on four 
continents during 2009–2015. The organism is difficult to 
identify using traditional biochemical methods, some 
isolates have been found to be resistant to all three major 
classes of antifungal medications, and C. auris has caused 
health care–associated outbreaks.
What is added by this report?
This is the first description of C. auris cases in the United States. 
C. auris appears to have emerged in the United States only in 
the last few years, and U.S. isolates are related to isolates from 
South America and South Asia. Evidence from U.S. case 
investigations suggests likely transmission of the organism 
occurred in health care settings.
What are the implications for public health practice?
It is important that U.S. laboratories accurately identify C. auris 
and for health care facilities to implement recommended 
infection control practices to prevent the spread of C. auris. 
Local and state health departments and CDC should be notified 
of possible cases of C. auris and of isolates of C. haemulonii and 
Candida spp. that cannot be identified after routine testing.
* https://www.cdc.gov/fungal/diseases/candidiasis/recommendations.html.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / November 11, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 44 
1237
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 7. Emara M, Ahmad S, Khan Z, et al. Candida auris candidemia in Kuwait, 
2014. Emerg Infect Dis 2015;21:1091–2. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/
eid2106.150270
 8. CDC. Clinical alert to U.S. healthcare facilities—June 2016: global 
emergence of invasive infections caused by the multidrug-resistant yeast 
Candida auris. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human 
Services, CDC; 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/fungal/diseases/candidiasis/
candida-auris-alert.html
 9. Lockhart SR, Etienne K, Vallabhaneni S, et al. Simultaneous emergence 
of multidrug resistant Candida auris on three continents confirmed by 
whole genome sequencing and epidemiological analyses. Clin Infect Dis. 
E-pub October 20, 2016.
 
10. Schelenz S, Hagen F
, Rhodes JL, et al. First hospital outbreak of the globally 
emerging Candida auris in a European hospital. Antimicrob Resist Infect 
Control 2016;5:35. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s13756-016-0132-5
