 Open water swimming as a treatment for major depressive disorder 
van Tulleken, C1 ; Tipton, M2, Massey, H2*, Harper, M2,3 
1 
University College London, Division of Infection and Immunity 
2 
University of Portsmouth, Extreme Environments Laboratory, Department of Sport and 
Exercise Science 
3 
Royal Sussex County Hospital; University of Sussex, Brighton and Sussex Medical School 
*Corresponding author
 Revised September 2014 
Page 2 of 5 
TITLE OF CASE Do not include “a case report” 
Open water swimming as a treatment for major depressive disorder 
SUMMARY Up to 150 words summarising the case presentation and outcome (this will be freely 
available online) 
A 24-year old female with symptoms of major depressive disorder and anxiety had been treated for the 
condition since the age of 17.  Symptoms were resistant to Fluoxetine and then Citalopram. Following the 
birth of her daughter she wanted to be medication and symptom free. A programme of weekly open 
(cold) water swimming was trialled. This lead to an immediate improvement in mood following each 
swim and a sustained and gradual reduction in symptoms of depression and consequently reduction in, 
and then cessation of, mediation. On follow up, a year later, she remains medication free. 
BACKGROUND Why you think this case is important – why did you write it up? 
Physical activity is suggested as an alternative treatment for MDD, particularly for forms which are of 
mild and moderate severity[1]. A number of meta-analyses have demonstrated that exercise is an 
effective treatment for depression, with a pooled standardised mean deviation ranging from (-0.4 to -
1.11). [2-5] However the magnitude of effect and activity undertaken varies between individual studies 
and between meta-analyses.  
The use of open water swimming to reduce the symptoms of major depressive disorder (MDD) is a novel 
alternative therapy. Medical hypotheses have discussed the potential benefit of immersion in cold water 
to potentially reduce symptoms of MDD.[6,7] There are purported to be a range of physiological and 
social pathways through which outdoor (cold water) swimming may reduce symptoms of MDD (Video 1). 
[8] Physiological mechanisms are linked to cross-adaptation, whereby exposure and adaptation to one
stressor impacts on the response to another stressor. For instance, proinflammatory responses may be
elevated in some patients with symptoms of MDD.[9] However, reductions in cytokine responses in cold-
adapted verses non-adapted swimmers have been found,[10] thus there may be potential for patients
with elevated cytokine levels to reduce symptoms of depression by repeated  immersion or swimming in
cold water.
Other theories suggest that regular outdoor swimming also results in a post swim “high” triggered by the 
release of beta-endorphins, dopamine and serotonin,[11-13] the last of these may be inhibited by 
elevated inflammatory cytokine levels.[14] Furthermore, facial immersion in cold water stimulates the 
vagus nerve resulting in an anti-inflammatory response.[15] This anti-inflammatory effect may underlie 
the clinical benefits of vagal nerve stimulation (VNS) for MDD, with  a significant reduction in symptoms 
of MDD reported from use of VNS, when followed up 24 mouths later.[16] It is hypothesised that open 
water swimming which involves facial immersion represents a safer and cheaper means of stimulating 
the vagus. 
Other potential benefits of outdoor water swimming include a sense of achievement and community in 
participation in a challenging activity[17], as well as green[18] and blue therapies[19] (access to and use 
of outdoor space which has vegetation or a body of water). At present, all potential mechanisms remain 
hypotheses supported by anecdotes. Further empirical study is required to establish the efficacy of the 
approach and the potential mechanism(s). 
CASE PRESENTATION Presenting features, medical/social/family history 
A 24-year old female who was 8-months post-partum and otherwise healthy presented with intractable 
 Revised September 2014 
Page 3 of 5 
depression and anxiety. Her initial diagnosis was made at age 17, however symptoms (anger, anxiety, 
dark mood, misery, and self-harm) developed as a much younger teenager. Contributing factors to this 
include the deaths of her brother and father who were also both clinically depressed (father, bipolar). 
Her symptoms were not improved with antidepressant medications (Fluoxetine and then Citalopram) 
and other non-drug treatments (talking therapy). The patient reported the desire to be symptom and 
medication free, stating that the main side effect of medication made her feel like she was in a ‘chemical 
fog’ 
INVESTIGATIONS If relevant 
Depression was diagnosed in primary care and at interview met DSM-IV and ICD-10 criteria for major 
depression. In addition to symptoms of depression and anxiety the patient was found to be clinically 
overweight. Poor diet and a lack of exercise were highlighted as modifiable lifestyle factors when 
interviewed. When reassessed 3 months following the start of the intervention she no longer met the 
criteria for major depression (DSM-IV or ICD-10) and remains medication free. 
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS If relevant 
N/A 
TREATMENT If relevant 
She undertook regular (once to twice a week) accompanied outdoor swimming between the months of 
April and September. The process of acclimatising and getting used to swimming outdoor was 
challenging for her and expert support was initially provided (Extreme Environments Lab, Portsmouth 
University) to ensure that she felt safe getting into and swimming in cold outdoor water environments. 
She attended regularly, increasing the duration of swimming as the water temperature increased, by the 
end of the summer she was swimming for up to half an hour. Unfortunately, her local open water 
facilities shut for winter but she continued to swim indoors and will restart again when the lake opens 
again with the new open water swimming season.  
Within a month of open water swimming she was able to reduce her medication and no longer required 
drug treatment after 4 months.  
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP 
Initially she was very nervous and anxious about going into cold water, but felt great pride having done 
so and enjoyed the experience. Expert support was provided in the form of a coach to ensure she felt 
safe whilst swimming and she later introduced a friend to the sport. The initial anxiety she felt has gone 
and she now actively looks for opportunities to swim outdoors. She struggles to swim in the winter as the 
facilities for outdoor swimming aren’t open, but a year on she is still swimming and is medication and 
symptom free.  
DISCUSSION Include a very brief review of similar published cases 
A recently published case report indicated the remission of post-operative neuropathic pain and 
associated immobility following a cold water swim.[20] This is the first time a case has been reported 
where this therapy has been trialled repeatedly for MDD. Clearly adopting a new activity like regular 
outdoor swimming involves multiple lifestyle modifications. Additionally, the swimming itself involves 
blue and green therapy, exercise and companionship, all known to have positive effects on mood. We 
hypothesise that two specific aspects of this activity may increase the benefit conferred. First the 
physiological conditioning of adaptation to immersion in cold water. There is biologically plausible 
evidence of a cross-adaptation process that may attenuate psychological stress. Secondly the sense of 
empowerment and achievement which comes with mastery of such a challenging task. However, these 
hypotheses require empirical investigation. The present report describes a case with symptoms of MDD 
who was overweight but otherwise healthy, motivated by wanting to provide a better future for her 
young child, our case undertook a novel programme of open water swimming (Video 2)[21]. In light of 
the limited empirical evidence of positive clinical effect, this case is being documented to raise awareness 
 Revised September 2014 
Page 4 of 5 
and to stimulate further research efforts as well as to highlight potential non-drug pathways to recovery 
from major depressive disorders.  
Potential barriers to the uptake of this form of therapy include medical contraindications to immersion in 
cold water, for example patients with cardiovascular disease, or conditions triggered by exposure to cold 
such as Raynaud’s phenomena and cold water urticaria. In addition, further barriers to cold water 
swimming include a lack of safe or perceived lack of safe places to swim and the requirement of close, 
ongoing supervision. These may be addressed by the provision of structured courses which teach the 
knowledge and skills required to swim safely in open water.  This should, as it has in this case, allow the 
patient to take control of their own therapy which is both empowering and cost-effective. 
LEARNING POINTS/TAKE HOME MESSAGES 3 to 5 bullet points – this is a required field 
1.
Continued support from the clinician is required (more time intensive than medication, hence is
would be difficult to offer from a GP practice, it may lend itself more to recovery colleges with
links to community open water swimming groups)
2.
Important that candidates are confident in the water and support is given to be in and round the
water safely.
3.
The effects may be seasonal as not all facilities are available to swim all year round.
4.
Further research into the mechanisms underpinning the effect is warranted.
5.
The activity may not need to be open water swimming, but one which is stimulating, challenging,
possibly outdoors and takes place in a social group.
REFERENCES Vancouver style (Was the patient involved in a clinical trial? Please reference related 
articles) 
1. Cleare A, Pariante, C, Young A, Anderson I, Christmas D, Cowen P, et al., (2015) Evidence-based
guidelines for treating depressive disorders with antidepressants: a revision of the 2008 British
Association for Psychopharmacology guidelines. J. Psychopharmacol. 29 (5), 459-525.
2. Kvam S, Kleppe CL, Norhus IH, Hovland A (2016) Exercise as treatment for depression: A meta-analysis.
J Affective Disorders 202 67-86.
3. Schuch FB, Vancampfort D, Richards J, Rosenbaum S, Ward PB, Stubbs B (2016)Exercise as a treatment
for depression: A meta-analysis adjusting for publication bias. J Psychiatric Research 77 42-51
4. Josefsson T, Lindwall M, Archer T (2014) Physical exercise intervention in depressive disorders: meta-
analysis and systematic review. Scand J Med Sci Sports 24 : 259-272
5. Krough J, Hjorthøj C, Speyer H, Gluud C, Nordentoft M, (2017) Exercise for patients with major
depression: a systematic review with meta-analysis and trial sequential analysis. BMJ Open 7:
e014820.doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014820
6. Harper CM (2012). Extreme preconditioning: Cold adaptation through sea swimming as a means to
improving surgical outcomes Medical Hypotheses 78, 516–519.
7. Shevchuk NA (2008). Adapted cold shower as a potential treatment for depression. Medical
Hypotheses 70, 995-1001.
8. Shock to euphoria (2016) retrieved from  https://vimeo.com/277427285
9. Mohannadi, D (2015) An inflamed brain may be a hidden cause of depression. New Scientist 24 June
Page numbers
10. Dugué B & Leppänen E (2000). Adaptation related to cytokines in man: effects of regular swimming in
ice-cold water. Clinical physiology 20, 114-121.
11. Šrámek P, Šimečková M, Janský L, Šavlíková J & Vybiral S (2000). Human physiological responses to
immersion into water of different temperatures. Eur J Appl Physiol 81, 436-442.
12. Hirvonen J, Lindeman S, Joukamaa M & Huttunen P (2002). Plasma catecholamines, serotonin and
their metabolites and beta-endorphin of winter swimmers during one winter. Possible correlations to
psychological traits. International journal of circumpolar health 61, 363-372.
 Revised September 2014 
Page 5 of 5 
13. Suzuki K, Maekawa K, Minakuchi H, Yatani H, Clark GT, Matsuka Y & Kuboki T (2007). Responses of
the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis and pain threshold changes in the orofacial region upon cold
pressor stimulation in normal volunteers. Archives of Oral Biology 52, 797-802.
14. Slavic GM & Irwin MR (2014). From stress to inflammation and Major depressive disorders: A social
signal transduction theory of Depression. Psychol Bull 140, 774-815.
15. Bonaz B, Sinniger V & Pellissier S (2016). Anti-inflammatory properties of the vagus nerve: potential
therapeutic implications of vagus nerve stimulation. The Journal of physiology 594, 5781-5790.
16. Nahas Z, Marangell LB, Husain MM, Rush AJ, Sackeim HA, Lisanby SH, et al. Two-year outcome of
vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) for treatment of major depressive episodes. The Journal of clinical
psychiatry. 2005;66(9):1097-104.
17. Waters J (2016). After years of misery, I'm feeling on top fo the world. Daily Mail  September 13th.
18. Gilbert N (2016). Green space: a natural high. Nature 531, S56–S57.
19. Nutsford D, Pearson AL, Kingham S & Reitsma F (2016) Residential exposure to visible blue space (but
not green space) associated with lower psychological distress in a capital city. Health & Place 39:70-78.
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.healthplace.2016.03.002
20. Mole TB, Mackeith P. Cold forced open-water swimming: a natural intervention to improve
postoperative pain and mobilization outcomes? BMJ Case Rep doi:10.1136/bcr-2017-222236
21. A soothing swim (2016) retrieved from https://vimeo.com/277427225
FIGURE/VIDEO CAPTIONS figures should NOT be embedded in this document 
These are available to view on the University of Portsmouth  Vimeo account 
Video 1 Shock to euphoria a clip taken from the television programme ‘The doctor who gave up drugs’ 
produced by RAW TV 
https://vimeo.com/277427285 
Video 2. A soothing swim a clip taken from the television programme ‘The doctor who gave up drugs’ 
produced by RAW TV 
https://vimeo.com/277427225 
Permission has been granted by RAW TV ,the production company to use the videos and to host them on 
the Portsmouth University Vimeo website, please see the permission statements attached to this 
submission. 
PATIENT’S PERSPECTIVE Optional but strongly encouraged – this has to be written by the patient or 
next of kin 
I really did struggle with depression and anxiety and have tried everything, CBT, talking, several different 
drugs and nothing worked or I feel numb and in a chemical fog. Although I didn’t enjoy the cold to start 
with, the effect it had was like a weight being lifted off my shoulders. Open water swimming works for 
me, it gets me out and about in to the fresh air and has lifted my mood. I still feel down occasionally, but 
that is more part of what life throws my way rather than the state I was in before.  
