               
City, University of London Institutional Repository
Citation: van Erp, T. G. M., Walton, E., Hibar, D. P., Schmaal, L., Jiang, W., Glahn, D. C., 
Pearlson, G. D., Yao, N., Fukunaga, M., Hashimoto, R., Okada, N., Yamamori, H., Bustillo, J. 
R., Clark, V. P., Agartz, I., Mueller, B. A., Cahn, W., de Zwarte, S. M. C., Hulshoff Pol, H. E., 
Kahn, R. S, Ophoff, R. A., van Haren, N. E. M., Andreassen, O. A., Dale, A. M., Doan, N.T., 
Gurholt, T. P., Hartberg, C. B., Haukvik, U. K., Jørgensen, K. N., Lagerberg, T. V., Melle, I., 
Westlye, L. T., Gruber, O., Kraemer, B., Richter, A., Zilles, D., Calhoun, V. D., Crespo-
Facorro, B., Roiz-Santiañez, R., Tordesillas-Gutierrez, D., Loughland, C., Carr, V. J., Catts, 
S., Cropley, V. L., Fullerton, J. M., Green, M. J., Henskens, F. A., Jablensky, A., Lenroot, R. 
K., Mowry, B. J., Michie, P. T., Pantelis, C., Quidé, Y., Schall, U., Scott, R. J., Cairns, M. J., 
Seal, M., Tooney, P. A., Rasser, P. E., Cooper, G., Shannon Weickert, C., Weickert, T. W., 
Morris, D. W., Hong, E., Kochunov, P., Beard, L. M., Gur, R. E., Gur, R. C., Satterthwaite, T. 
D., Wolf, D. H., Belger, A., Brown, G. G., Ford, J. M., Macciardi, F., Mathalon, D. H., O'Leary, 
D. S., Potkin, S. G., Preda, A., Voyvodic, J., Lim, K. O., McEwen, S., Yang, F., Tan, Y., Tan, 
S., Wang, Z., Fan, F., Chen, J., Xiang, H., Tang, S., Guo, H., Wan, P., Wei, D., Bockholt, H. 
J., Ehrlich, S., Wolthusen, R. P. F., King, M. D., Shoemaker, J. M., Sponheim, S. R., De 
Haan, L., Koenders, L., Machielsen, M. W., van Amelsvoort, T., Veltman, D., Assogna, F., 
Banaj, N., de Rossi, P., Iorio, M., Piras, F., Spalletta, G., McKenna, P. J., Pomarol-Clotet, E., 
Salvador, R., Corvin, A., Donohoe, G., Kelly, S., Whelan, C. D., Dickie, E. W., Rotenberg, D., 
Voineskos, A. N., Ciufolini, S., Radua, J., Dazzan, P., Murray, R., Reis Marques, T., 
Simmons, A., Borgwardt, S., Egloff, L., Harrisberger, F., Riecher-Rössler, A., Smieskova, R., 
Alpert, K. I., Wang, L., Jönsson, E. G., Koops, S., Sommer, I. E. C., Bertolino, A., Bonvino, 
A., Di Giorgio, A., Neilson, E., Mayer, A. R., Stephen, J. M., Kwon, J. S., Yun, J-Y., Cannon, 
D., McDonald, C., Lebedeva, I., Tomyshev, A. S., Akhadov, T., Kaleda, V., Fatouros-
Bergman, H., Flyckt, L., Karolinska Schizophrenia Project, , Busatto, G. F., Rosa, P. G., 
Serpa, M. H., Zanetti, M. V., Hoschl, C., Skoch, A., Spaniel, F., Tomecek, D., Hagenaars, S. 
P., McIntosh, A.M., Whalley, H. C., Lawrie, S. M., Knöchel, C., Oertel-Knöchel, V., Stäblein, 
M., Howells, F. M., Stein, D.J., Temmingh, H. S., Uhlmann, A., Lopez-Jaramillo, C., Dima, D., 
McMahon, A., Faskowitz, J., Gutman, B. A., Jahanshad, N., Thompson, P. M. & Turner, J.A. 
(2018). Cortical Brain Abnormalities in 4474 Individuals With Schizophrenia and 5098 
Control Subjects via the Enhancing Neuro Imaging Genetics Through Meta Analysis 
(ENIGMA) Consortium. Biological Psychiatry, doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2018.04.023 
This is the published version of the paper. 
City Research Online
 This version of the publication may differ from the final published 
version. 
Permanent repository link:  http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/19998/
Link to published version: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2018.04.023
Copyright and reuse: City Research Online aims to make research 
outputs of City, University of London available to a wider audience. 
Copyright and Moral Rights remain with the author(s) and/or copyright 
holders. URLs from City Research Online may be freely distributed and 
linked to.
City Research Online:            http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/            publications@city.ac.uk
 Archival Report
Cortical Brain Abnormalities in 4474 Individuals
With Schizophrenia and 5098 Control Subjects via
the Enhancing Neuro Imaging Genetics Through
Meta Analysis (ENIGMA) Consortium
Theo G.M. van Erp, Esther Walton, Derrek P. Hibar, Lianne Schmaal, Wenhao Jiang,
David C. Glahn, Godfrey D. Pearlson, Nailin Yao, Masaki Fukunaga, Ryota Hashimoto,
Naohiro Okada, Hidenaga Yamamori, Juan R. Bustillo, Vincent P. Clark, Ingrid Agartz,
Bryon A. Mueller, Wiepke Cahn, Sonja M.C. de Zwarte, Hilleke E. Hulshoff Pol, René S. Kahn,
Roel A. Ophoff, Neeltje E.M. van Haren, Ole A. Andreassen, Anders M. Dale, Nhat Trung Doan,
Tiril P. Gurholt, Cecilie B. Hartberg, Unn K. Haukvik, Kjetil N. Jørgensen, Trine V. Lagerberg,
Ingrid Melle, Lars T. Westlye, Oliver Gruber, Bernd Kraemer, Anja Richter, David Zilles,
Vince D. Calhoun, Benedicto Crespo-Facorro, Roberto Roiz-Santiañez,
Diana Tordesillas-Gutiérrez, Carmel Loughland, Vaughan J. Carr, Stanley Catts,
Vanessa L. Cropley, Janice M. Fullerton, Melissa J. Green, Frans A. Henskens,
Assen Jablensky, Rhoshel K. Lenroot, Bryan J. Mowry, Patricia T. Michie, Christos Pantelis,
Yann Quidé, Ulrich Schall, Rodney J. Scott, Murray J. Cairns, Marc Seal, Paul A. Tooney,
Paul E. Rasser, Gavin Cooper, Cynthia Shannon Weickert, Thomas W. Weickert,
Derek W. Morris, Elliot Hong, Peter Kochunov, Lauren M. Beard, Raquel E. Gur, Ruben C. Gur,
Theodore D. Satterthwaite, Daniel H. Wolf, Aysenil Belger, Gregory G. Brown, Judith M. Ford,
Fabio Macciardi, Daniel H. Mathalon, Daniel S. O’Leary, Steven G. Potkin, Adrian Preda,
James Voyvodic, Kelvin O. Lim, Sarah McEwen, Fude Yang, Yunlong Tan, Shuping Tan,
Zhiren Wang, Fengmei Fan, Jingxu Chen, Hong Xiang, Shiyou Tang, Hua Guo, Ping Wan,
Dong Wei, Henry J. Bockholt, Stefan Ehrlich, Rick P.F. Wolthusen, Margaret D. King,
Jody M. Shoemaker, Scott R. Sponheim, Lieuwe De Haan, Laura Koenders,
Marise W. Machielsen, Therese van Amelsvoort, Dick J. Veltman, Francesca Assogna,
Nerisa Banaj, Pietro de Rossi, Mariangela Iorio, Fabrizio Piras, Gianfranco Spalletta,
Peter J. McKenna, Edith Pomarol-Clotet, Raymond Salvador, Aiden Corvin, Gary Donohoe,
Sinead Kelly, Christopher D. Whelan, Erin W. Dickie, David Rotenberg, Aristotle N. Voineskos,
Simone Ciufolini, Joaquim Radua, Paola Dazzan, Robin Murray, Tiago Reis Marques,
Andrew Simmons, Stefan Borgwardt, Laura Egloff, Fabienne Harrisberger,
Anita Riecher-Rössler, Renata Smieskova, Kathryn I. Alpert, Lei Wang, Erik G. Jönsson,
Sanne Koops, Iris E.C. Sommer, Alessandro Bertolino, Aurora Bonvino, Annabella Di Giorgio,
Emma Neilson, Andrew R. Mayer, Julia M. Stephen, Jun Soo Kwon, Je-Yeon Yun,
Dara M. Cannon, Colm McDonald, Irina Lebedeva, Alexander S. Tomyshev, Tolibjohn Akhadov,
Vasily Kaleda, Helena Fatouros-Bergman, Lena Flyckt, Karolinska Schizophrenia Project,
Geraldo F. Busatto, Pedro G.P. Rosa, Mauricio H. Serpa, Marcus V. Zanetti, Cyril Hoschl,
Antonin Skoch, Filip Spaniel, David Tomecek, Saskia P. Hagenaars, Andrew M. McIntosh,
Heather C. Whalley, Stephen M. Lawrie, Christian Knöchel, Viola Oertel-Knöchel,
Michael Stäblein, Fleur M. Howells, Dan J. Stein, Henk S. Temmingh, Anne Uhlmann,
Carlos Lopez-Jaramillo, Danai Dima, Agnes McMahon, Joshua I. Faskowitz, Boris A. Gutman,
Neda Jahanshad, Paul M. Thompson, and Jessica A. Turner
ª 2018 Society of Biological Psychiatry. This is an open access article under the
CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
1
ISSN: 0006-3223
Biological Psychiatry - -, 2018; -:-–- www.sobp.org/journal
Biological
Psychiatry
 ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND: The profile of cortical neuroanatomical abnormalities in schizophrenia is not fully understood,
despite hundreds of published structural brain imaging studies. This study presents the first meta-analysis of cortical
thickness and surface area abnormalities in schizophrenia conducted by the ENIGMA (Enhancing Neuro Imaging
Genetics through Meta Analysis) Schizophrenia Working Group.
METHODS: The study included data from 4474 individuals with schizophrenia (mean age, 32.3 years; range, 11–78
years; 66% male) and 5098 healthy volunteers (mean age, 32.8 years; range, 10–87 years; 53% male) assessed with
standardized methods at 39 centers worldwide.
RESULTS: Compared with healthy volunteers, individuals with schizophrenia have widespread thinner cortex (left/
right hemisphere: Cohen’s d = 20.530/20.516) and smaller surface area (left/right hemisphere: Cohen’s d = 20.251/
20.254), with the largest effect sizes for both in frontal and temporal lobe regions. Regional group differences in
cortical thickness remained significant when statistically controlling for global cortical thickness, suggesting regional
specificity. In contrast, effects for cortical surface area appear global. Case-control, negative, cortical thickness effect
sizes were two to three times larger in individuals receiving antipsychotic medication relative to unmedicated
individuals. Negative correlations between age and bilateral temporal pole thickness were stronger in individuals
with schizophrenia than in healthy volunteers. Regional cortical thickness showed significant negative correlations
with normalized medication dose, symptom severity, and duration of illness and positive correlations with age at
onset.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings indicate that the ENIGMA meta-analysis approach can achieve robust findings in
clinical neuroscience studies; also, medication effects should be taken into account in future genetic association
studies of cortical thickness in schizophrenia.
Keywords: Cortical, Imaging, Meta-analysis, Schizophrenia, Surface area, Thickness
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2018.04.023
Brain structural abnormalities are widely reported in schizo-
phrenia, but there is no published meta-analysis reporting ef-
fect sizes for cortical thickness and surface area abnormalities
and their relationships to clinical features of the disease.
Several hundred studies have reported on cortical thickness
and surface area abnormalities in schizophrenia, but it is
difficult to meta-analyze published results, as they lack a
standard format to ease comparisons and are based on atlas
(1) or vertex-wise (2) approaches using a variety of methods
(3–9). To address these issues, the Schizophrenia Working
Group within the ENIGMA (Enhancing Neuro Imaging Genetics
through
Meta
Analysis;
http://enigma.ini.usc.edu)
(10–12)
consortium brings together schizophrenia researchers from
all over the world to jointly conduct large-scale imaging and
imaging/genetics meta-analyses using standardized methods.
This meta-analysis focuses on regional cortical thickness
and surface area rather than volume, based on evidence that
they are influenced by separate sets of genes (13,14). Cortical
thickness and surface area abnormalities have been reported in
individuals with chronic (1,15–17), short- or medium-duration
(18), first-episode (19–24), child-onset (25,26), adolescent-
onset (27), and antipsychotic-naïve (28–30) schizophrenia;
individuals with nonclinical psychotic symptoms (31); and in-
dividuals at clinical high risk for psychosis (32–39).
We previously reported effect sizes for deep brain structure
volume
abnormalities
based
on
15
samples
worldwide,
including brain imaging data from 2028 individuals with
schizophrenia and 2540 healthy volunteers (40); findings were
replicated in an independent cohort using similar methods (41).
Here we report Cohen’s d effect sizes comparing regional
cortical thickness and surface area between 4474 individuals
with schizophrenia and 5098 healthy volunteers, and partial
correlation effect sizes with continuous clinical measures
based on 39 worldwide samples. Based on prior work, we
hypothesized that individuals with schizophrenia, compared
with healthy volunteers, show widespread cortical thickness
and surface abnormalities that are most prominent in frontal
and temporal lobe regions (15) and that show significant
associations with age at onset or duration of illness (42),
symptom severity (43–48), and antipsychotic medication use
(49–51).
METHODS AND MATERIALS
Study Samples
Via the ENIGMA Schizophrenia Working Group, 39 worldwide,
cross-sectional study samples totaling 9572 participants,
including 4474 individuals with schizophrenia and 5098 healthy
volunteers, contributed to the analysis (Tables S1a and S1b
and Figure S1 in Supplement 1). Sample-size weighted mean
(range) age across samples was 32.3 (21.2–43.6) years for in-
dividuals with schizophrenia and 34.5 (21.8–43.9) years for
healthy volunteers. Patient and control samples were on
average 65% (44–100) and 54% (36–100) male. Weighted
mean age at onset and duration of illness across the samples
were
23.4
(20.0–35.6)
years
and
10.5
(0.6–20.2)
years.
Weighted
mean
Positive
and Negative
Syndrome
Scale
(PANSS) (52) total, negative, and positive scores across the
samples were 68.1 (43.0–90.2), 21.9 (10.0–22.9), and 16.4
(10.6–22.6); weighted mean Scale for the Assessment of
Negative Symptoms (53) and Scale for the Assessment of
Positive Symptoms (54) scores were 20.5 (5.5–33.0) and 19.2
Meta-analysis of Cortical Brain Abnormalities in Schizophrenia
2
Biological Psychiatry - -, 2018; -:-–- www.sobp.org/journal
Biological
Psychiatry
 (9.0–32.3), respectively. For samples that recorded current
antipsychotic type and/or dose, numbers (percentages) of
patients
on
second-generation
(atypical),
first-generation
(typical), both second-generation and first-generation, or no
(unmedicated) antipsychotic medications were 2236 (66%),
447 (13%), 265 (8%), and 425 (13%), and sample-size
weighted mean chlorpromazine dose equivalent, based on
Woods’
calculations
(www.scottwilliamwoods.com/files/
Equivtext.doc), was 399 (167–643). Each study sample was
collected with participants’ written informed consent approved
by local institutional review boards.
Image Acquisition and Processing
All sites processed T1-weighted structural brain scans using
FreeSurfer (9) (http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu) and extrac-
ted cortical thickness and surface area for 70 Desikan-Killiany
(DK) atlas regions (55) (34 regions per hemisphere 1 left and
right hemisphere mean thickness or total surface area)
(Table S3 in Supplement 1). Number of scanners, vendor,
strength, sequence, acquisition parameters, and FreeSurfer
versions are provided in Table S2 in Supplement 1. ENIGMA’s
quality assurance protocol was performed at each site before
analysis and included visual checks of the cortical segmenta-
tions and region-by-region removal of values for segmenta-
tions found to be incorrect (http://enigma.usc.edu/protocols/
imaging-protocols) (Table S2 in Supplement 1). Histograms
of all regions’ values for each site were also computed for vi-
sual inspection.
Statistical Meta-analyses
Group differences for DK atlas regions within each sample
were examined using univariate linear regression (R linear
model function lm; R Foundation for Statistical Computing,
Vienna, Austria) predicting left and right DK atlas region cortical
thickness or surface area with group (individuals with schizo-
phrenia, healthy volunteers), gender, and age (model A). To
further assess whether group differences in cortical thickness
and surface area showed regional specificity, analyses were
repeated including global mean cortical thickness and total
cortical surface area as covariates, respectively (model B). To
test for differential gender or age effects between groups, we
also included models with group-by-gender (model C) or
group-by-age interaction terms (model D). Significant in-
teractions were further explored through within-group ana-
lyses. Medication effects were examined through between-
group comparisons of individuals with schizophrenia on
second-generation (atypical), first-generation (typical), both
second-generation and first-generation, or no (unmedicated)
antipsychotic medications and healthy volunteers with gender
and age included as covariates; only contrasts with a minimum
of 5 subjects per group within site were included in these an-
alyses to enable variance estimation. In patients, relationships
were examined between regional cortical measures and
several continuous variables, including age at onset; duration
of illness; chlorpromazine equivalent antipsychotic medication
dose; and total, positive, and negative symptom severity.
These partial correlation analyses included age and gender as
covariates. Analysis of multiscanner studies (ASRB, FBIRN,
MCIC, Osaka, UPENN) included binary dummy covariates for
n-1 scanners. Sites conducted analyses of their sample’s in-
dividual subject data using R code created within the ENIGMA
collaboration.
Random-effects
meta-analyses
of
Cohen’s
d and partial correlation effect sizes for each of the DK atlas
regions were performed using R (version 3.2.2) metafor pack-
age (version 1.9-7) (56). False discovery rate (FDR) (pFDR , .05)
(57) was used to control for multiple comparisons. Cortical
maps depict significant effect sizes (pFDR , .05) overlaid on
(metallic gray) cortical surface models (https://brainder.org/
research/brain-for-blender). Possible confounding effects of
differences in parental socioeconomic status on group differ-
ences were examined using subsample analyses (see Results
SR3, Figures, and Tables S8a and S9b, and S52a and S53b in
Supplement 1). Effects of FreeSurfer version and scanner field
strength were examined using meta-regressions (Supplement 1).
RESULTS
Widespread Thinner Cortex With Regional
Specificity in Schizophrenia
Individuals with schizophrenia, compared with healthy volun-
teers, showed widespread significantly thinner cortex in all DK
atlas regions except the bilateral pericalcarine region (model
A), with effect sizes between Cohen’s d = 20.536 (right fusi-
form gyrus) and Cohen’s d = 20.077 (left pericalcarine fissure)
and
marginal
(least
square)
mean
thickness
differences
between 23.33% (left parahippocampal gyrus) and 20.45%
(left pericalcarine
fissure) (Figure
1A and Table S4a
in
Supplement 1). The largest negative effect sizes (Cohen’s
d , 20.40) were observed for left/right hemisphere (Cohen’s
d = 20.530/20.516); bilateral fusiform, temporal (inferior,
Figure 1. Cortical map of regional Cohen’s d
effect sizes for schizophrenia subjects’ vs. healthy
volunteers’ cortical thickness contrast statistically
controlling for age and gender (A) and age, gender,
and global cortical thickness (B). Only regions with
pfalse discovery rate , .05 are depicted in color. In panel
(B), warm colors (yellow-red) reflect regions in which
the effect of schizophrenia is more than the mean
global cortical thinning, and cool colors (green-blue)
reflect regions where the effect of schizophrenia is
less than the mean global thinning compared with
healthy volunteers.
Meta-analysis of Cortical Brain Abnormalities in Schizophrenia
Biological Psychiatry - -, 2018; -:-–- www.sobp.org/journal
3
Biological
Psychiatry
 middle, and superior), and left superior frontal gyri; right pars
opercularis; and bilateral insula.
In the context of widespread thinner cortex in schizophrenia,
we assessed regional specificity of these cortical thickness
differences. When controlling for individual differences in global
mean cortical thickness, several regions showed significantly
thinner cortex (e.g., fusiform, parahippocampal, inferior tem-
poral gyri), whereas other regions showed significantly thicker
cortex (e.g., superior parietal cortex, precuneus, paracentral
lobule) in individuals with schizophrenia compared with healthy
volunteers (model B) (Figures 1B and Figure 2; Table S4b in
Supplement 1). These findings suggest regional specificity of
thinner cortex in schizophrenia.
Widespread Smaller Cortical Surface Area Without
Regional Specificity in Schizophrenia
Individuals with schizophrenia, compared with healthy in-
dividuals, showed widespread significantly smaller cortical
surface area in all DK atlas regions except the bilateral isthmus
cingulate region (model A), with effect sizes between Cohen’s
d = 20.254 (mean right hemisphere) and Cohen’s d = 20.040
(right isthmus cingulate) and marginal (least square) mean sur-
face area differences between 23.39% (left rostral anterior
cingulate) and 20.55% (right isthmus cingulate) (Figure 3A;
Table S5a in Supplement 1). The largest effect sizes (Cohen’s
d , 20.20) were observed for left (Cohen’s d = 20.251) and
right (Cohen’s d = 20.254) hemisphere and bilateral superior
frontal, fusiform, inferior and middle temporal, and right pre-
central gyri.
In the context of widespread smaller cortical surface area in
schizophrenia, we assessed regional specificity of these
cortical surface area differences. When controlling for individ-
ual differences in total cortical surface area, no regions showed
significantly smaller surface area, whereas three regions
showed significantly larger cortical surface area (bilateral
isthmus cingulate, precuneus, and left paracentral) in in-
dividuals with schizophrenia compared with healthy volunteers
(model B) (Figure 3B; Table S5b in Supplement 1). These
findings suggest that smaller cortical surface area is predom-
inantly global in schizophrenia except for the three regions
noted, which appear less affected.
Group-by-Gender Interactions
No significant group-by-gender interactions were detected for
either cortical thickness or surface area for any of the DK atlas
regions (Tables S6 and S7 in Supplement 1).
Group-by-Age Interactions
There were significant group-by-age interactions for both left
(pFDR = .007) and right (pFDR = .01) temporal pole thickness,
with individuals with schizophrenia showing stronger negative
correlations with age (left, r = 2.13, pFDR = 1.51E-13; right,
r = 2.12, pFDR = 1.55E-07) than healthy volunteers (left,
r = 2.05, pFDR = .02; right, r = 2.04, pFDR = .03). These in-
teractions remained significant even when controlling for
global mean cortical thickness (Figure S2 and Tables S8a, S8b,
S10, and S11 in Supplement 1). There were no significant
group-by-age interactions for cortical surface area for any of
the DK atlas regions (Table S9 in Supplement 1).
Partial Correlations With Age of Onset and Duration
of Illness
Earlier age of onset (r = .063, pFDR = .03) and longer duration of
illness (r = 2.061, pFDR = .04) were significantly correlated with
thinner right insula cortical thickness (Tables S33 and S34 and
Figure S3 in Supplement 1). There were no significant corre-
lations between age of onset or duration of illness and cortical
surface area for any of the DK atlas regions (Tables S43 and
S44 in Supplement 1).
Effects of Antipsychotic Medications on Cortical
Thickness
Effect sizes comparing left and right hemisphere cortical
thickness
from
individuals
with
schizophrenia
on
no
Figure 2. Cohen’s d effect sizes for schizophrenia
subjects’ vs. healthy volunteers’ cortical thickness
contrast statistically controlling for age, gender, and
global mean cortical thickness. Only regions with
pfalse discovery rate , .05 are depicted in color.
Meta-analysis of Cortical Brain Abnormalities in Schizophrenia
4
Biological Psychiatry - -, 2018; -:-–- www.sobp.org/journal
Biological
Psychiatry
 (unmedicated;
left/right,
Cohen’s
d
=
20.275/20.278),
second-generation (left/right, Cohen’s d = 20.536/20.516),
first-generation (left/right, Cohen’s d = 20.765/20.648), or
both
second-generation
and
first-generation
(left/right
Cohen’s d = 20.770/20.704) antipsychotic medications with
healthy volunteers were significant for all but the unmedi-
cated group (pFDR . .05) (Figure 4; Tables S12–S15 in
Supplement 1).
Groupwise
comparisons
of
left
and right
hemisphere
thickness found nominally significant effects for all medicated
versus unmedicated groups (Figure 4; Tables S16–S18 in
Supplement 1). Similarly, nominally significant effects were
found for first-generation versus second-generation and both
second-generation
and
first-generation
versus
second-
generation medication groups, but not both versus first-
generation medication groups (Figure 4; Tables S19–S21 in
Supplement 1). No significant regional effects were observed
for the last four group contrasts (pFDR . .05) (Tables S18–S21
in Supplement 1). For detailed regional effects of antipsychotic
medications on cortical thickness and surface area, see
Results SR1 in Supplement 1.
Partial Correlations With Medication Dose
Higher chlorpromazine dose equivalents were significantly
correlated with thinner cortex in almost all the DK atlas regions
except bilateral entorhinal and pericalcarine cortex; bilateral
lingual and transverse temporal gyri; left postcentral, cuneus,
and parahippocampal gyri; caudal anterior cingulate cortex;
right superior parietal and rostral anterior cingulate cortex; and
right frontal pole (Figure S6A and Table S32 in Supplement 1).
The correlations were significant for both left (r = 2.126) and
right (r = 2.126) hemisphere thickness and were strongest
(partial r , 2.10) for left (r = 2.166) and right (r = 2.148) superior
frontal, left (r = 2.113) and right (r = 2.108) middle temporal, left
(r = 2.112) and right (r = 2.106) superior temporal, right inferior
temporal (r = 2.113), right pars triangularis of inferior frontal
(r = 2.113), left (r = 20.102) and right (r = 2.108) caudal middle
frontal, and left supramarginal (r = 2.103) gyri.
Figure 3. Cortical map of regional Cohen’s d ef-
fect sizes for schizophrenia subjects vs. healthy
volunteers’ cortical surface area contrast statistically
controlling for age and gender (A) and age, gender,
and total cortical surface area (B). Only regions with
pfalse discovery rate , .05 are depicted in color. In panel
(B), warm colors (yellow-red) reflect regions in which
the effect of schizophrenia is more than the mean
lower surface area, and cool colors (green-blue)
reflect regions where the effect of schizophrenia is
less than the mean lower global surface area
compared with healthy volunteers.
Figure 4. Cohen’s d effect sizes (A) and least square mean percent difference (B) for schizophrenia subjects vs. healthy volunteers contrasts in global
cortical thickness statistically controlling for age and gender by medication group and hemisphere. Nominal one-tailed p values for left and right hemisphere
thickness group comparisons statistically controlling for age and gender were as follows: second-generation vs. unmedicated (left, p , .05; right, p , .06);
first-generation vs. unmedicated (left, p , .01; right, p , .002); both first-generation and second-generation vs. unmedicated (left, p , .02; right, p , .05);
first-generation vs. second-generation (left, p , .03; right, p , .03); both first-generation and second-generation vs. second-generation (left, p , .02; right,
p , .05); both first-generation and second-generation vs. first-generation (left, p = .50; right, p = .48) (Tables S16–S21 in Supplement 1).
Meta-analysis of Cortical Brain Abnormalities in Schizophrenia
Biological Psychiatry - -, 2018; -:-–- www.sobp.org/journal
5
Biological
Psychiatry
 Importantly, post hoc analysis showed that higher chlor-
promazine dose equivalents were significantly correlated with
thinner cortex even when controlling for negative symptom
severity (Table S41 and Figure S7 in Supplement 1). There
were no detectable correlations between chlorpromazine dose
equivalents and cortical surface area for any of the DK atlas
regions (Table S42 in Supplement 1).
Partial Correlations With Symptom Severity Scores
Higher PANSS total and positive symptom severity scores
were significantly correlated with regional thinner cortex
(Figure S6B, Table S35, Figure S6D, and Table S36 in
Supplement 1), whereas higher PANSS negative symptom
scores were significantly correlated with widespread thinner
cortex in left (r = 2.085) and right (r = 2.089) hemispheres
(Figure S6C and Table S37 in Supplement 1; see Results SR2
in Supplement 1 for details). PANSS total, positive, and
negative symptom severity scores were not significantly
correlated with regional cortical surface area for any of the DK
atlas regions (Tables S45–S47 in Supplement 1).
DISCUSSION
The main findings of this study are that individuals with
schizophrenia, compared with healthy volunteers, show the
following: 1) widespread thinner cortex (left/right, Cohen’s
d = 20.530/20.516); 2) widespread smaller cortical surface
area, about half the size of the effect observed for cortical
thickness (left/right Cohen’s d = 20.251/20.254); 3) the largest
effect sizes in frontal and temporal lobe regions for both
measures, with regional specificity for cortical thickness, but
not cortical surface area (based on the analyses controlling for
global thickness and surface area); 4) approximately two times
larger negative cortical thickness effect size when on second-
generation
antipsychotic
medications
(left/right,
Cohen’s
d = 20.536/20.516) and approximately three times larger
cortical thickness effect size when on first-generation (left/
right, Cohen’s d = 20.765/20.648) or both first-generation and
second-generation (left/right, Cohen’s d = 20.770/20.704)
antipsychotic medications relative to unmedicated individuals
with schizophrenia (left/right, Cohen’s d = 20.275/20.278);
and 5) a stronger negative correlation between age and bilat-
eral temporal pole cortical thickness (left, r = 2.13 vs. r = 2.05;
right, r = 2.12 vs. r = 2.04). With regard to partial correlations
with clinical variables, 6) earlier age at onset and longer
duration of illness were associated with thinner insula cortex; 7)
standardized medication dose (chlorpromazine dose equiva-
lent) and 8) negative symptom severity were associated with
widespread thinner cortex; and 9) total and 10) positive
symptom severity were associated with regional thinner cortex.
Most observed correlations were small (r , .2). Moreover,
despite the high power to detect small effects, medication use
and other clinical variables were not significantly associated
with cortical surface area.
These findings are consistent with the interpretation that the
thinner cortex observed in individuals with schizophrenia
shows regional specificity and is associated with the disease
(28–30), its severity (43–48), and antipsychotic medication
treatment (49–51), with a larger effect for first-generation
compared with second-generation antipsychotic medications
(16,58–60). We cannot fully exclude the possibility that
observed medication effects on cortical thickness are partially
due to group differences in age or duration of illness (61),
which also show patterns of increase across the groups.
However, such an interpretation is rendered unlikely by the
facts that 1) age was statistically controlled for in the medi-
cation type analyses; 2) duration of illness, which is highly
collinear with age, showed effects above and beyond age only
on right insula thickness; 3) there was only a group-by-age
interaction on temporal pole thickness (while medication ef-
fects were widespread); and 4) meta-regressions showed no
effects of age or duration of illness on group contrast effect
sizes (see Results SR1 in Supplement 1). Furthermore, disso-
ciating medication effects from other potentially confounding
variables requires well-powered, first-episode
longitudinal
studies, preferably with random assignment to first-generation
or second-generation antipsychotics. Two longitudinal imag-
ing studies that randomly assigned individuals to medication
treatments found significant gray matter reductions for halo-
peridol but not olanzapine (58,62); these findings are consis-
tent with our meta-analysis and with reported medication
effects on cortical thickness in rodents (63).
None of the other potential confounding variables, including
gender distribution, age at onset, medication dose, global
symptoms,
negative
symptoms,
or
positive
symptoms,
showed a pattern consistent with the observed medication
effects. These variables are therefore unlikely to explain the
differences in cortical thickness effect sizes across the anti-
psychotic medication groups on their own, although more
complex interactions could exist. In contrast to thinner cortex,
smaller cortical surface area in individuals with schizophrenia
appears to be a more global phenomenon associated with the
disease, but not with its severity or its treatment. It is possible
that more focal cortical surface area effects are obfuscated
through the averaging of measurements within DK atlas re-
gions;
vertexwise
analyses
may
have
higher
power
for
detecting and localizing such effects.
This study found significant group-by-age interactions on
cortical thickness in the bilateral temporal pole regions only,
with a stronger negative correlation between age and cortical
thickness in individuals with schizophrenia than in healthy
volunteers. In addition, this study found that earlier age at
onset and longer duration of illness were associated with
thinner cortical thickness in the insula only. These findings
corroborate reported longitudinal findings of lower cortical
volumes at illness onset as well as progressive volume decline
in the temporal pole and insula in individuals with schizo-
phrenia (64,65) and individuals at ultra-high risk for psychosis
(66). Given our results, these volume declines may reflect
cortical thinning rather than cortical surface area reduction.
While our findings may suggest that there are few differential
effects of age on cortical thickness between individuals with
schizophrenia and healthy volunteers, we must keep in mind
that age effects on thickness across a large age range are
nonlinear (67) and that this meta-analysis combines linear age
effects across multiple independent cross-sectional cohorts of
various ages. Longitudinal studies are better poised to address
the question of differential effects of age and duration of illness
on cortical
thickness
in schizophrenia,
and
some
have
observed steeper rates of cortical thinning in multiple regions
Meta-analysis of Cortical Brain Abnormalities in Schizophrenia
6
Biological Psychiatry - -, 2018; -:-–- www.sobp.org/journal
Biological
Psychiatry
 in individuals with schizophrenia and their non-ill co-twins (61).
ENIGMA Schizophrenia Working Group members are actively
working on pooling longitudinal studies for a meta-analysis to
further address these questions.
Taken together, these findings may suggest that cortical
surface area developmental trajectories in psychosis may be
predominantly
influenced
by
early
neurodevelopmental,
perhaps predominantly genetic, factors. In contrast, cortical
thickness, in addition to likely being influenced by different
genes (13,14), may be more plastic and also influenced by
additional environmental and neurodegenerative factors (e.g.,
treatment, cannabis use, age) (68).
This study found significant widespread associations be-
tween standardized medication doses (chlorpromazine equiv-
alents) and cortical thickness but not cortical surface area. This
finding is consistent with and extends a prior meta-regression
analysis, which reported that higher medication doses are
associated with smaller gray matter volume (51). Given our
results, the association with volume is likely due to cortical
thickness rather than surface area. The finding is also
consistent with the larger effect sizes for individuals with
schizophrenia
who
were
on
antipsychotic
medications
compared with individuals who were not. An alternative inter-
pretation may be that more severely ill patients receive higher
doses of medication given the observed significant associa-
tions between symptom severity and regional cortical thick-
ness. However, consistent with medication dose effects on
cortical thickness, we found that significant associations be-
tween chlorpromazine dose equivalent and cortical thickness
were still observed in post hoc partial correlation analyses that
statistically controlled for negative symptom severity. In this
analysis, we opted to control for negative rather than positive
symptom severity, as negative symptoms tend to be less
influenced by medication dose than positive symptoms.
We caution that the likelihood that antipsychotic medica-
tions are associated with thinner cortex in individuals with
schizophrenia should by no means be interpreted as a
contraindication for their use in treating patients with severe
mental illnesses, including schizophrenia. In fact, a recent
study found that medication treatment was associated with
thinner cortex and better behavioral performance on a cogni-
tive control task (26% higher d0-context score) (24). Most
importantly, antipsychotic medications tend to successfully
treat severely debilitating psychotic symptoms, reduce relapse
risk following a first-episode break (69), and reduce suicide risk
(70). As such, they play a critical role in the treatment of
psychosis.
Similar published meta-analyses in bipolar disorder and
major depressive disorder, with the same study design and
analytical methods, found thinner bilateral frontal, temporal,
and parietal lobe cortex in individuals with bipolar disorder with
evidence for divergent effects of medication treatments (71)
and thinner regional cortex in adults with major depressive
disorder and smaller total and regional cortical surface area in
adolescents
with
major
depressive
disorder
(72).
Taken
together, these very-large-scale studies suggest both similar-
ities and differences in cortical abnormalities observed among
these three major psychiatric illnesses.
To our knowledge, this is the first meta-analysis of cortical
thickness and surface area abnormalities in schizophrenia.
Only
one
other
schizophrenia
study
has
provided
a
comprehensive listing of Cohen’s d effect sizes for regional
cortical thickness abnormalities comparing individuals with
schizophrenia, non-ill first-degree relatives, and healthy vol-
unteers (1).
The major strength of the study is its large sample size,
which provides sufficient power to detect even small effects
(e.g.,
symptom
associations).
Weaknesses
include
the
following: 1) the group of unmedicated individuals with
schizophrenia does not distinguish never-medicated from un-
medicated at time of scan, leaving effect sizes for medication-
naïve subjects to be determined; 2) despite the large total
sample size, many regional thickness differences between
medication subgroups did not survive multiple comparison
correction; 3) this study does not examine possible group
differences in brain lateralization, though such analyses will be
reported on separately; and 4) the analysis of chlorpromazine
equivalents did not dissociate first-generation and second-
generation
antipsychotic
medications,
which
may
have
dissociable effects on cortical thickness (51,72). Finally, while
this meta-analysis is unique in that it standardized image
analysis methods across sites, any meta-analysis, including
this one, is limited by sources of variation inherent to the
analysis of retrospectively collected samples that cannot be
fully controlled for. Sample differences include the use of
different scanners and different assessments or processes to
arrive at diagnosis, age at onset, duration of illness, medication
dose and adherence, etc. Meta-analyses control for these
differences by summing within-site effects across sites,
providing generalized mean effect sizes. Similar to other meta-
analyses, this meta-analysis does not control for all variance in
assessments that can lower power to detect effects.
Taken together, the findings from this meta-analysis sug-
gest that thinner cortex in schizophrenia shows regional
specificity and is affected by the illness, its severity, and
treatments with antipsychotic medications, whereas smaller
cortical surface area is mainly influenced by widespread ef-
fects of the illness possibly mainly influenced by develop-
mental processes. In the context of ENIGMA, these findings
suggest
that
schizophrenia
genetic
association
studies
employing cortical thickness as a quantitative trait may need to
control for medication effects, whereas studies that employ
cortical surface area as a quantitative trait may not need to
control for medication effects.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND DISCLOSURES
The ENIGMA project is in part supported by the National Institute of
Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering of the National Institutes of Health
(Grant No. U54EB020403). The content is solely the responsibility of the
authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National
Institutes of Health. Acknowledgments for the various participating data
contributors are listed in Supplement 1.
Author contributions are as follows: protocol design, quality testing, and
meta-analysis, TGMvE, EW, DPH, LS, and WJ; data collection, processing,
analysis, and funding, TGMvE, EW, DPH, LS, WJ, DCG, GDP, NY, MF, RH,
NO, HY, JRB, VPC, IA, BAM, WC, SMCdZ, HEHP, RSK, RAO, NEMvH, OAA,
AMD, NTD, TPG, CBH, UKH, KNJ, TVL, IM, LTW, OG, BK, AR, DZ, VDC, BC-
F, RR-S, MJC, VJC, SCa, JR, VLC, JMFu, MJG, FAH, AJ, RKL, CL, BJM,
PTM, CP, YQ, PER, GC, US, RJS, MSe, PAT, CSW, TWW, DWM, EH, PK,
LMB, REG, RCG, TDS, DHW, ABel, GGB, JMFo, FM, DHM, DSO, SGP, AP,
JV, KOL, SM, FY, YT, STan, ZW, FF, JC, HX, STang, HG, PW, DW, HJB, SE,
Meta-analysis of Cortical Brain Abnormalities in Schizophrenia
Biological Psychiatry - -, 2018; -:-–- www.sobp.org/journal
7
Biological
Psychiatry
 RPFW, MDK, JMSh, SRS, LDH, LK, MWM, TvA, DJV, FA, NB, PdR, MI, FP,
GS, PJM, EP-C, JR, RSa, AC, GD, SKe, CDW, EWD, DR, ANV, SCi, PD, RM,
TRM, ASi, SB, LE, FHa, AR-R, RSm, KIA, LW, EGJ, SKo, IECS, ABer, ABo,
ADG, EN, ARM, JMSt, JSK, J-YY, DMC, CM, IL, AST, TA, VK, HF-B, LF,
GFB, PGPR, MHS, MVZ, CH, ASk, FS, DT, SPH, AMM, HCW, SML, CK, VO-
K, MSt, FMH, DJS, HST, AU, CL-J, DD, AM, JIF, BAG, NJ, PMT, and JAT;
manuscript preparation, TGMvE, JAT, and PMT. All authors contributed
edits and approved the contents of the manuscript.
TGMvE has had a research contract with Otsuka Pharmaceutical. AP has
served as a consultant for Boehringer Ingelheim. The remaining authors
report no biomedical financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
From the Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior (TGMvE, FM, SGP,
AP), University of California, Irvine, Irvine, California; Imaging Genetics and
Neuroinformatics Lab (EW, JAT), Department of Psychology (WJ), Georgia
State University, Atlanta, Georgia; Imaging Genetics Center (DPH, CDW,
AM, JIF, NJ, PMT), Mark and Mary Stevens Neuroimaging & Informatics
Institute, Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California,
Marina del Rey; Janssen Research & Development (DPH); Center for
Translational Imaging and Precision Medicine (AMD), San Diego; De-
partments of Neurosciences (AMD), Radiology (AMD), Psychiatry (AMD,
GGB), and Cognitive Science (AMD), University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, California; Department of Psychiatry (DCG, GDP, NY), Yale University,
New Haven; Olin Neuropsychiatric Research Center (DCG, GDP, NY),
Institute of Living, Hartford Hospital, Hartford, Connecticut; Department of
Psychiatry, University of New Mexico (JRB, VPC, VDC); Mind Research
Network (VPC, VDC, HJB, MDK, JMSh, ARM, JMSt, JAT), Albuquerque,
New Mexico; Department of Psychiatry (BAM, KOL, SRS), University of
Minnesota; Minneapolis VA Health Care System (SRS), Minneapolis, Min-
nesota; Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior (RAO) and
Department of Psychiatry & Biobehavioral Sciences (SM), University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California; Maryland Psychiatric
Research Center (EH, PK), University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland; Department of Psychiatry (LMB, REG, RCG, TDS,
DHW), University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Department
of Psychiatry (ABel), University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill;
Brain Imaging and Analysis Center (ABel, JV), Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina; Department of Psychiatry, Weill Institute for
Neurosciences, University of California, San Francisco (JMFo, DHM); San
Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center (JMFo, DHM), San Francisco,
California; Department of Psychiatry (DSO, HJB), University of Iowa;
Advanced Biomedical Informatics Group, LLC (HJB), Iowa City, Iowa; Social
Neuroscience
Laboratory
(RPFW),
Athinoula
A.
Martinos
Center
for
Biomedical Imaging (SE), Charlestown; Psychiatric Neuroimaging Research
Program (RPFW) and Department of Psychiatry (RPFW), Massachusetts
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School; Department of Psychiatry (SKe),
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School; Psychiatry
Neuroimaging Laboratory (SKe), Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; Beth K. and Stuart C. Yudofsky
Division of Neuropsychiatry (GS), Menninger Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; De-
partments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences (KIA, LW) and Radiology
(LW), Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine; Department of
Biomedical Engineering (BAG), Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago,
Illinois; Orygen (LS), The National Centre of Excellence in Youth Mental
Health; Centre for Youth Mental Health (LS), Neuropsychiatry Centre (VLC,
CP), and Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health (CP), University
of Melbourne; Department of Psychiatry, Monash University (VJC); Murdoch
Children’s
Research
Institute
(MSe),
Melbourne,
Victoria;
School
of
Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy (RJS, MJC, PAT), Priority Research
Centre for Health Behaviour (FAH), School of Medicine and Public Health
(FAH), School of Psychology (PTM), Priority Research Centre for Brain &
Mental Health (CL, US, PAT, PER, GC), and Grow Up Well (US), University of
Newcastle; Hunter Medical Research Institute (CL, FAH, US, RJS, MJC,
PAT); Hunter New England Local Health District (CL), Newcastle; School of
Psychiatry (VJC, MJG, RKL, YQ, CSW, TWW) and School of Medical Sci-
ences (JMFu), University of New South Wales, New South Wales;
Neuroscience Research Australia (JMFu, MJG, RKL, YQ, CSW, TWW),
Sydney, New South Wales; Queensland Brain Institute (BJM) and Queens-
land Centre for Mental Health Research (BJM), Discipline of Psychiatry,
School of Medicine, University of Queensland (SCa), Brisbane, Queensland;
School of Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, University of Western
Australia (AJ), Perth, Western Australia, Australia; Department of Psychiatry
and Neuroscience (LS), VU University Medical Center; Department of Psy-
chiatry (LDH, LK, MWM), Academic Medical Center, University of Amster-
dam; Department of Psychiatry (DJV), Vrije Universiteit Medical Center,
Amsterdam; Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry/Psychology
(NEMvH), Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam; Departments of Neurosci-
ence (IECS) and Psychiatry (IECS), University Medical Center Groningen,
Rijks Universiteit Groningen, Groningen; Department of Psychiatry and Brain
Center Rudolf Magnus (WC, SMCdZ, HEHP, NEMvH, RSK, RAO, SKo),
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht; Department of Psychiatry &
Psychology (TvA), Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands; Di-
vision of Cerebral Integration (MF), National Institute for Physiological Sci-
ences, Okazaki, Aichi; Molecular Research Center for Children’s Mental
Development (RH), United Graduate School of Child Development, Osaka
University; Department of Psychiatry (RH, HY), Osaka University Graduate
School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka; Department of Neuropsychiatry (NO),
Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo,
Japan; Institute of Clinical Medicine (IA, OAA, NTD, TPG, CBH, UKH, KNJ,
IM, EGJ), Norwegian Centre for Mental Disorders Research (NORMENT),
K.G. Jebsen Centre for Psychosis Research, and Department of Psychology
(LTW), University of Oslo; Division of Mental Health and Addiction (OAA,
UKH, TVL, IM, LTW), NORMENT, K.G. Jebsen Centre for Psychosis
Research, Oslo University Hospital; Department of Psychiatric Research (IA,
KNJ, TGP), Diakonhjemmet Hospital, Oslo, Norway; Centre for Psychiatry
Research (HF-B, LF), Department of Clinical Neuroscience (IA, JR, EGJ),
Karolinska Institutet; Stockholm Health Services (HF-B, LF), Stockholm
County Council, Stockholm, Sweden; Section for Experimental Psychopa-
thology and Neuroimaging (OG, BK, AR), Department of General Psychiatry,
Heidelberg
University
Hospital,
Heidelberg;
Center
for
Translational
Research in Systems Neuroscience and Psychiatry (OG, BK, AR, DZ),
Department of Psychiatry, Georg August University; Department of Psy-
chiatry (DZ), University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen; Division of
Psychological and Social Medicine and Developmental Neurosciences (SE,
RPFW), Faculty of Medicine, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden;
Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy
(CK, VO-K, MSt), University Hospital Frankfurt, Goethe University Frankfurt,
Frankfurt, Germany; Department of Psychiatry (BC-F, RR-S, DT-G), Uni-
versity Hospital Marqués de Valdecilla, School of Medicine; Neuroimaging
Unit (DT-G), Technological Facilities, Valdecilla Biomedical Research Insti-
tute, Marqués de Valdecilla Research Institute (IDIVAL), University of Can-
tabria; Centro Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental (BC-F,
RR-S, DT-G), Santander; Fundación para la Investigación y Docencia Maria
Angustias Giménez (FIDMAG) Germanes Hospitalaries Research Founda-
tion (PJM, EP-C, RSa, JR); Centro Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud
Mental (PJM, EP-C, RSa, JR), Barcelona, Spain; Centre for Neuroimaging &
Cognitive Genomics (DWM, GD, DMC, CM), Clinical Neuroimaging Labo-
ratory, National Centre for Biomedical Engineering (NCBES) Galway
Neuroscience Centre, College of Medicine Nursing and Health Sciences,
School of Psychology (DWM, GD), and Department of Biochemistry (DWM,
GD), National University of Ireland Galway, Galway; Neuropsychiatric Ge-
netics Research Group (DWM, AC, GD), Department of Psychiatry and
Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland;
Psychiatry Research Center (FY, YT, STan, ZW, FF, JC), Beijing Huilongguan
Hospital, Beijing; Chongqing Three Gorges Central Hospital (HX, STang),
Chongqing; Zhumadian Psychiatry Hospital (HG, PW), Henan Province,
Zhumadian; Luoyang Fifth People’s Hospital (DW), Henan Province,
Luoyang, China; Laboratory of Neuropsychiatry (FA, NB, PdR, MI, FP, GS),
Department of Clinical and Behavioral Neurology, IRCCS Santa Lucia
Foundation; Centro Fermi (FA, FP), Museo Storico della Fisica e Centro
Studi e Ricerche “Enrico Fermi”; Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Salute
Mentale e Organi di Senso (NESMOS) (PdR), Faculty of Medicine and
Psychology, and Department of Neurology and Psychiatry (PdR), Sapienza
University of Rome, Rome; Department of Basic Medical Science, Neuro-
science and Sense Organs (ABer), University of Bari “Aldo Moro,” Bari;
Meta-analysis of Cortical Brain Abnormalities in Schizophrenia
8
Biological Psychiatry - -, 2018; -:-–- www.sobp.org/journal
Biological
Psychiatry
 Istituto Di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Casa Sollievo della Sof-
ferenza (ABo, ADG), San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy; Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (EWD, DR, ANV), Toronto, Canada; Departments of Psychosis
Studies (SCi, JR, PD, RM, TRM, ASi) and Neuroimaging (DD), Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King’s College London; National
Institute for Health Research Mental Health Biomedical Research Centre at
South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust (PD), London; Depart-
ment of Psychology (DD), City, University of London, London; Division of
Psychiatry (EN, AMM, HCW, SML), Centre for Cognitive Ageing and
Cognitive Epidemiology (SPH, AMM), and Department of Psychology (SPH),
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom; University of Basel
Psychiatric Hospital (SB, LE, FHa, AR-R, RSm), Basel, Switzerland;
Department of Psychiatry (JSK) and Yeongeon Student Support Center
(J-YY), Seoul National University College of Medicine; Department of Brain &
Cognitive Sciences (JSK), College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National
University; Seoul National University Hospital (J-YY), Seoul, Republic of
Korea; Mental Health Research Center (IL, AST, VK); Children’s Clinical and
Research Institute of Emergency Surgery and Trauma (TA), Moscow, Russia;
Laboratory of Psychiatric Neuroimaging, Laboratórios de Investigação
Médica 21 (GFB, PGPR, MHS, MVZ), Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of
Medicine, and Center for Interdisciplinary Research on Applied Neurosci-
ences (GFB, PGPR, MHS, MVZ), University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil;
National Institute of Mental Health (CH, ASk, FS, DT), Klecany; MR Unit
(ASk), Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Institute for
Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic; Department of
Psychiatry (FMH, DJS, HST, AU), Groote Schuur Hospital, University of
Cape Town; Medical Research Council Unit on Risk & Resilience in Mental
Disorders (DJS), Department of Psychiatry, University of Cape Town;
Medical Research Council Unit on Risk & Resilience in Mental Disorders
(AU), Department of Psychiatry, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South
Africa; and Research Group in Psychiatry (CL-J), Department of Psychiatry,
Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellin, Colombia.
Members of the Karolinska Schizophrenia Project: Lars Farde (Centre for
Psychiatry Research, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska
Institutet, and Stockholm County Council, Stockholm, Sweden), Lena Flyckt
(Centre for Psychiatry Research, Department of Clinical Neuroscience,
Karolinska Institutet, and Stockholm County Council, Stockholm, Sweden),
Göran Engberg (Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden), Sophie Erhardt (Department of Physiology
and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden), Helena
Fatouros-Bergman (Centre for Psychiatry Research, Department of Clinical
Neuroscience,
Karolinska
Institutet,
and
Stockholm
County
Council,
Stockholm, Sweden), Simon Cervenka (Centre for Psychiatry Research,
Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, and Stockholm
County Council, Stockholm, Sweden), Lilly Schwieler (Department of
Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden),
Fredrik Piehl (Neuroimmunology Unit, Department of Clinical Neuroscience,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden), Ingrid Agartz (Centre for Psy-
chiatry Research, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet,
and Stockholm County Council, Stockholm, Sweden; NORMENT, K.G.
Jebsen Centre for Psychosis Research, Division of Mental Health and
Addiction, University of Oslo; Department of Psychiatry Research, Dia-
konhjemmet Hospital, Oslo, Norway), Karin Collste (Centre for Psychiatry
Research, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, and
Stockholm County Council, Stockholm, Sweden), Pauliina Victorsson
(Centre for Psychiatry Research, Department of Clinical Neuroscience,
Karolinska Institutet, and Stockholm County Council, Stockholm, Sweden),
Anna Malmqvist (Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden), Mikael Hedberg (Department of Physiology
and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden), and Funda
Orhan (Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden).
Address correspondence to Theo G.M. van Erp, Ph.D., Department of
Psychiatry and Human Behavior, University of California, Irvine, School of
Medicine, 5251 California Avenue, Suite 240, Irvine, CA 92617; E-mail:
tvanerp@uci.edu.
Received Sep 27, 2017; revised Apr 19, 2018; accepted Apr 20, 2018.
Supplementary material cited in this article is available online at https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2018.04.023.
REFERENCES
1.
Goghari VM, Truong W, Spilka MJ (2015): A magnetic resonance im-
aging family study of cortical thickness in schizophrenia. Am J Med
Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet 168:660–668.
2.
Kuperberg GR, Broome MR, McGuire PK, David AS, Eddy M,
Ozawa F, et al. (2003): Regionally localized thinning of the cerebral
cortex in schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 60:878–888.
3.
Thompson PM, Schwartz C, Toga AW (1996): High-resolution random
mesh algorithms for creating a probabilistic 3D surface atlas of the
human brain. Neuroimage 3:19–34.
4.
Miller MI, Massie AB, Ratnanather JT, Botteron KN, Csernansky JG
(2000): Bayesian construction of geometrically based cortical thick-
ness metrics. Neuroimage 12:676–687.
5.
Kabani N, Le Goualher G, MacDonald D, Evans AC (2001): Measure-
ment of cortical thickness using an automated 3-D algorithm: A vali-
dation study. Neuroimage 13:375–380.
6.
Zijdenbos AP, Forghani R, Evans AC (2002): Automatic “pipeline”
analysis of 3-D MRI data for clinical trials: Application to multiple
sclerosis. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 21:1280–1291.
7.
Lerch JP, Evans AC (2005): Cortical thickness analysis examined
through power analysis and a population simulation. Neuroimage
24:163–173.
8.
Ad-Dab’bagh Y, Einarson D, Lyttelton O, Muehlboeck J-S, Mok K,
Ivanov O, et al. (2006): The CIVET image-processing environment: A
fully automated comprehensive pipeline for anatomical neuroimaging
research. In: Corbetta M, editor. Proceedings of the 12th Annual
Meeting of the Organization for Human Brain Mapping. Florence, Italy:
NeuroImage.
9.
Fischl B (2012): FreeSurfer. Neuroimage 62:774–781.
10.
Stein
JL,
Medland
SE,
Vasquez
AA,
Hibar
DP,
Senstad
RE,
Winkler AM, et al. (2012): Identification of common variants associated
with human hippocampal and intracranial volumes. Nat Genet 44:
552–561.
11.
Thompson PM, Stein JL, Medland SE, Hibar DP, Vasquez AA,
Renteria ME, et al. (2014): The ENIGMA Consortium: Large-scale
collaborative analyses of neuroimaging and genetic data. Brain Im-
aging Behav 8:153–182.
12.
Thompson PM, Andreassen OA, Arias-Vasquez A, Bearden CE,
Boedhoe PS, Brouwer RM, et al. (2017): ENIGMA and the individual:
Predicting factors that affect the brain in 35 countries worldwide.
Neuroimage 145:389–408.
13.
Panizzon MS, Fennema-Notestine C, Eyler LT, Jernigan TL, Prom-
Wormley E, Neale M, et al. (2009): Distinct genetic influences on cortical
surface area and cortical thickness. Cereb Cortex 19:2728–2735.
14.
Winkler AM, Kochunov P, Blangero J, Almasy L, Zilles K, Fox PT, et al.
(2010): Cortical thickness or grey matter volume? The importance of
selecting the phenotype for imaging genetics studies. Neuroimage
53:1135–1146.
15.
Rimol LM, Hartberg CB, Nesvåg R, Fennema-Notestine C, Hagler DJ Jr,
Pung CJ, et al. (2010): Cortical thickness and subcortical volumes in
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Biol Psychiatry 68:41–50.
16.
van Haren NEM, Schnack HG, Cahn W, van den Heuvel MP,
Lepage C, Collins L, et al. (2011): Changes in cortical thickness during
the course of illness in schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 68:
871–880.
17.
Sugihara G, Oishi N, Son S, Kubota M, Takahashi H, Murai T (2017):
Distinct patterns of cerebral cortical thinning in schizophrenia: A
neuroimaging data-driven approach. Schizophr Bull 43:900–906.
18.
Schultz CC, Koch K, Wagner G, Roebel M, Nenadic I, Schachtzabel C,
et al. (2010): Complex pattern of cortical thinning in schizophrenia:
Results from an automated surface based analysis of cortical thick-
ness. Psychiatry Res 182:134–140.
19.
Narr
KL,
Toga
AW,
Szeszko
P,
Thompson
PM,
Woods
RP,
Robinson D, et al. (2005): Cortical thinning in cingulate and occipital
cortices in first episode schizophrenia. Biol Psychiatry 58:32–40.
20.
Narr KL, Bilder RM, Toga AW, Woods RP, Rex DE, Szeszko PR, et al.
(2005): Mapping cortical thickness and gray matter concentration in
first episode schizophrenia. Cereb Cortex 15:708–719.
Meta-analysis of Cortical Brain Abnormalities in Schizophrenia
Biological Psychiatry - -, 2018; -:-–- www.sobp.org/journal
9
Biological
Psychiatry
 21.
Fornito A, Yücel M, Wood SJ, Adamson C, Velakoulis D, Saling MM,
et al. (2008): Surface-based morphometry of the anterior cingulate
cortex in first episode schizophrenia. Hum Brain Mapp 29:478–489.
22.
Sun D, Stuart GW, Jenkinson M, Wood SJ, McGorry PD, Velakoulis D,
et al. (2009): Brain surface contraction mapped in first-episode
schizophrenia: A longitudinal magnetic resonance imaging study.
Mol Psychiatry 14:976–986.
23.
Crespo-Facorro B, Roiz-Santiáñez R, Pérez-Iglesias R, Rodriguez-
Sanchez JM, Mata I, Tordesillas-Gutierrez D, et al. (2011): Global and
regional
cortical
thinning
in
first-episode
psychosis
patients:
Relationships with clinical and cognitive features. Psychol Med
41:1449–1460.
24.
Lesh TA, Tanase C, Geib BR, Niendam TA, Yoon JH, Minzenberg MJ,
et al. (2015): A multimodal analysis of antipsychotic effects on brain
structure and function in first-episode schizophrenia. JAMA Psychiatry
72:226–234.
25.
Baribeau DA, Anagnostou E (2013): A comparison of neuroimaging
findings in childhood onset schizophrenia and autism spectrum dis-
order: A review of the literature. Front Psychiatry 4:175.
26.
Ordóñez AE, Luscher ZI, Gogtay N (2016): Neuroimaging findings from
childhood onset schizophrenia patients and their non-psychotic sib-
lings. Schizophr Res 173:124–131.
27.
Voets NL, Hough MG, Douaud G, Matthews PM, James A, Winmill L,
et al. (2008): Evidence for abnormalities of cortical development in
adolescent-onset schizophrenia. Neuroimage 43:665–675.
28.
Venkatasubramanian G, Jayakumar PN, Gangadhar BN, Keshavan MS
(2008): Automated MRI parcellation study of regional volume and
thickness of prefrontal cortex (PFC) in antipsychotic-naïve schizo-
phrenia. Acta Psychiatr Scand 117:420–431.
29.
Rais M, Cahn W, Schnack HG, Hulshoff Pol HE, Kahn RS, van
Haren NEM (2012): Brain volume reductions in medication-naive pa-
tients with schizophrenia in relation to intelligence quotient. Psychol
Med 42:1847–1856.
30.
Liu X, Lai Y, Wang X, Hao C, Chen L, Zhou Z, et al. (2014): A combined
DTI and structural MRI study in medicated-naïve chronic schizo-
phrenia. Magn Reson Imaging 32:1–8.
31.
van Lutterveld R, van den Heuvel MP, Diederen KMJ, de Weijer AD,
Begemann MJH, Brouwer RM, et al. (2014): Cortical thickness in in-
dividuals with non-clinical and clinical psychotic symptoms. Brain
137:2664–2669.
32.
Haller S, Borgwardt SJ, Schindler C, Aston J, Radue EW, Riecher-
Rössler
A
(2009):
Can
cortical
thickness
asymmetry
analysis
contribute to detection of at-risk mental state and first-episode psy-
chosis? A pilot study. Radiology 250:212–221.
33.
Sun D, Phillips L, Velakoulis D, Yung A, McGorry PD, Wood SJ, et al.
(2009): Progressive brain structural changes mapped as psychosis
develops in “at risk” individuals. Schizophr Res 108:85–92.
34.
Jung WH, Kim JS, Jang JH, Choi J-S, Jung MH, Park J-Y, et al. (2011):
Cortical thickness reduction in individuals at ultra-high-risk for psy-
chosis. Schizophr Bull 37:839–849.
35.
Shin KS, Jung WH, Kim JS, Jang JH, Hwang JY, Chung CK, Kwon JS
(2012): Neuromagnetic auditory response and its relation to cortical
thickness in ultra-high-risk for psychosis. Schizophr Res 140:93–98.
36.
Tognin S, Pettersson-Yeo W, Valli I, Hutton C, Woolley J, Allen P, et al.
(2013): Using structural neuroimaging to make quantitative predictions
of symptom progression in individuals at ultra-high risk for psychosis.
Front Psychiatry 4:187.
37.
Tognin S, Riecher-Rössler A, Meisenzahl EM, Wood SJ, Hutton C,
Borgwardt SJ, et al. (2014): Reduced parahippocampal cortical
thickness in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis. Psychol Med
44:489–498.
38.
Cannon TD, Chung Y, He G, Sun D, Jacobson A, van Erp TGM, et al.
(2015): Progressive reduction in cortical thickness as psychosis de-
velops: A multisite longitudinal neuroimaging study of youth at
elevated clinical risk. Biol Psychiatry 77:147–157.
39.
Buchy L, Barbato M, Makowski C, Bray S, MacMaster FP, Deighton S,
Addington J (2017): Mapping structural covariance networks of facial
emotion recognition in early psychosis: A pilot study. Schizophr Res
189:146–152.
40.
van Erp TGM, Hibar DP, Rasmussen JM, Glahn DC, Pearlson GD,
Andreassen OA, et al. (2016): Subcortical brain volume abnormalities
in 2028 individuals with schizophrenia and 2540 healthy controls via
the ENIGMA consortium. Mol Psychiatry 21:547–553.
41.
Okada N, Fukunaga M, Yamashita F, Koshiyama D, Yamamori H,
Ohi K, et al. (2016): Abnormal asymmetries in subcortical brain volume
in schizophrenia. Mol Psychiatry 21:1460–1466.
42.
Cahn W, Rais M, Stigter FP, van Haren NEM, Caspers E, Hulshoff
Pol HE, et al. (2009): Psychosis and brain volume changes during the
first five years of schizophrenia. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 19:
147–151.
43.
Gogtay N, Weisinger B, Bakalar JL, Stidd R, Fernandez de la Vega O,
Miller R, et al. (2012): Psychotic symptoms and gray matter deficits in
clinical pediatric populations. Schizophr Res 140:149–154.
44.
Oertel-Knöchel
V,
Knöchel
C,
Rotarska-Jagiela
A,
Reinke
B,
Prvulovic D, Haenschel C, et al. (2013): Association between psychotic
symptoms and cortical thickness reduction across the schizophrenia
spectrum. Cereb Cortex 23:61–70.
45.
Padmanabhan JL, Tandon N, Haller CS, Mathew IT, Eack SM,
Clementz BA, et al. (2015): Correlations between brain structure and
symptom dimensions of psychosis in schizophrenia, schizoaffective,
and psychotic bipolar I disorders. Schizophr Bull 41:154–162.
46.
Xiao Y, Lui S, Deng W, Yao L, Zhang W, Li S, et al. (2013): Altered
cortical thickness related to clinical severity but not the untreated
disease duration in schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull 41:201–210.
47.
Walton E, Hibar DP, van Erp TGM, Potkin SG, Roiz-Santiañez R,
Crespo-Facorro B, et al. (2017): Positive symptoms associate with
cortical thinning in the superior temporal gyrus via the ENIGMA
Schizophrenia consortium. Acta Psychiatr Scand 135:439–447.
48.
Walton E, Hibar DP, van Erp TGM, Potkin SG, Roiz-Santiañez R,
Crespo-Facorro B, et al. (2018): Prefrontal cortical thinning links to
negative symptoms in schizophrenia via the ENIGMA consortium.
Psychol Med 48:82–94.
49.
Navari S, Dazzan P (2009): Do antipsychotic drugs affect brain
structure? A systematic and critical review of MRI findings. Psychol
Med 39:1763–1777.
50.
Fusar-Poli P, Smieskova R, Kempton MJ, Ho BC, Andreasen NC,
Borgwardt S (2013): Progressive brain changes in schizophrenia
related to antipsychotic treatment? A meta-analysis of longitudinal
MRI studies. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 37:1680–1691.
51.
Vita A, De Peri L, Deste G, Barlati S, Sacchetti E (2015): The effect of
antipsychotic treatment on cortical gray matter changes in schizo-
phrenia: Does the class matter? A meta-analysis and meta-regression
of longitudinal magnetic resonance imaging studies. Biol Psychiatry
78:403–412.
52.
Kay SR, Fiszbein A, Opler LA (1987): The Positive and Negative Syn-
drome Scale (PANSS) for schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull 13:261–276.
53.
Andreasen NC (1984): Scale for the Assessment of Negative Symp-
toms: SANS. Iowa City: University of Iowa.
54.
Andreasen N (1984): The Scale for the Assessment of Positive
Symptoms (SAPS). Iowa City: University of Iowa.
55.
Desikan RS, Ségonne F, Fischl B, Quinn BT, Dickerson BC, Blacker D,
et al. (2006): An automated labeling system for subdividing the human
cerebral cortex on MRI scans into gyral based regions of interest.
Neuroimage 31:968–980.
56.
Viechtbauer W (2010): Conducting meta-analyses in R with the met-
afor Package. J Stat Softw 36:1–48.
57.
Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y (1995): Controlling the false discovery rate: A
practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. J R Stat Soc
Series B Stat Methodol 57:289–300.
58.
Thompson PM, Bartzokis G, Hayashi KM, Klunder AD, Lu PH,
Edwards N, et al. (2009): Time-lapse mapping of cortical changes
in
schizophrenia
with
different
treatments.
Cereb
Cortex
19:
1107–1123.
59.
Ho B-C, Andreasen NC, Ziebell S, Pierson R, Magnotta V (2011): Long-
term antipsychotic treatment and brain volumes: A longitudinal study
of first-episode schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 68:128–137.
60.
Ansell BR, Dwyer DB, Wood SJ, Bora E, Brewer WJ, Proffitt TM, et al.
(2015): Divergent effects of first-generation and second-generation
Meta-analysis of Cortical Brain Abnormalities in Schizophrenia
10
Biological Psychiatry - -, 2018; -:-–- www.sobp.org/journal
Biological
Psychiatry
 antipsychotics on cortical thickness in first-episode psychosis. Psy-
chol Med 45:515–527.
61.
Hedman AM, van Haren NEM, van Baal GCM, Brouwer RM,
Brans RGH, Schnack HG, et al. (2016): Heritability of cortical thickness
changes over time in twin pairs discordant for schizophrenia. Schiz-
ophr Res 173:192–199.
62.
Lieberman JA (2005): Antipsychotic drug effects on brain morphology
in first-episode psychosis. Arch Gen Psychiatry 62:361.
63.
Vernon AC, Crum WR, Lerch JP, Chege W, Natesan S, Modo M, et al.
(2014): Reduced cortical volume and elevated astrocyte density in rats
chronically treated with antipsychotic drugs—linking magnetic reso-
nanceimaging findingstocellularpathology.BiolPsychiatry 75:982–990.
64.
Takahashi T, Wood SJ, Soulsby B, McGorry PD, Tanino R, Suzuki M,
et al. (2009): Follow-up MRI study of the insular cortex in first-episode
psychosis and chronic schizophrenia. Schizophr Res 108:49–56.
65.
Lee
S-H,
Niznikiewicz
M,
Asami
T,
Otsuka
T,
Salisbury
DF,
Shenton ME, McCarley RW (2016): Initial and progressive gray matter
abnormalities in insular gyrus and temporal pole in first-episode
schizophrenia
contrasted
with
first-episode
affective
psychosis.
Schizophr Bull 42:790–801.
66.
Takahashi T, Wood SJ, Yung AR, Phillips LJ, Soulsby B, McGorry PD,
et al. (2009): Insular cortex gray matter changes in individuals at ultra-
high-risk of developing psychosis. Schizophr Res 111:94–102.
67.
Sowell ER, Peterson BS, Thompson PM, Welcome SE, Henkenius AL,
Toga AW (2003): Mapping cortical change across the human life span.
Nat Neurosci 6:309–315.
68.
Birnbaum R, Weinberger DR (2017): Genetic insights into the neuro-
developmental origins of schizophrenia. Nat Rev Neurosci 18:727–740.
69.
Chen EY, Hui CL, Lam MM, Chiu CP, Law CW, Chung DW, et al.
(2010): Maintenance treatment with quetiapine versus discontinuation
after one year of treatment in patients with remitted first episode
psychosis: Randomised controlled trial. BMJ 341:c4024.
70.
Tiihonen J, Walhbeck K, Lönnqvist J, Klaukka T, Ioannidis JPA,
Volavka J, Haukka J (2006): Effectiveness of antipsychotic treatments
in a nationwide cohort of patients in community care after first hos-
pitalisation
due
to
schizophrenia
and
schizoaffective
disorder:
Observational follow-up study. BMJ 333:224.
71.
Hibar DP, Westlye LT, Doan
NT, Jahanshad N,
Cheung JW,
Ching CRK, et al. (2018): Cortical abnormalities in bipolar disorder: An
MRI analysis of 6503 individuals from the ENIGMA Bipolar Disorder
Working Group. Mol Psychiatry 23:932–942.
72.
Schmaal L, Hibar DP, Sämann PG, Hall GB, Baune BT, Jahanshad N,
et al. (2017): Cortical abnormalities in adults and adolescents with
major depression based on brain scans from 20 cohorts worldwide in
the ENIGMA Major Depressive Disorder Working Group. Mol Psychi-
atry 22:900–909.
Meta-analysis of Cortical Brain Abnormalities in Schizophrenia
Biological Psychiatry - -, 2018; -:-–- www.sobp.org/journal
11
Biological
Psychiatry
