  
1 
Title  
Comparative Connectomics  
 
Authors 
Martijn P. van den Heuvel1, Edward T. Bullmore2,3, Olaf Sporns4,5 
 
Affiliations 
1. Department of Psychiatry, Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands 
2. Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 
3. ImmunoPsychiatry, Academic Discovery Performance Unit, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Cambridge, UK 
4. Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington, USA 
5. Indiana University Network Science Institute, Indiana University, Bloomington, USA 
 
Corresponding author 
Martijn van den Heuvel, Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, Department of Psychiatry, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100, 3508 GA Utrecht, PO Box 85500, 
Room: A01.126, The Netherlands; Phone: +31 88 75 58244; Fax: +31 88 75 55443; Email: 
m.p.vandenheuvel@umcutrecht.nl 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2 
Abstract 
We introduce comparative connectomics, the quantitative study of cross-species 
commonalities and variations in brain network topology that aims to discover general 
principles of network architecture of nervous systems and the identification of species-
specific features of brain connectivity. Comparing connectomes derived from simple to 
more advanced species we identify two conserved themes of wiring: The tendency to 
organize network topology into communities that serve specialized functionality and the 
general drive to enable high topological integration by means of investment of neural 
resources in short communication paths, hubs and rich clubs. Within the space of wiring 
possibilities that conform to these common principles, we argue that differences in 
connectome organization between closely related species support adaptations in cognition 
and behavior.  
 
Comparing brains 
Comparative biology and comparative neuroscience generally aim to discover common 
plans of organization while also accounting for diversity among species. A key objective of 
comparative studies of brain architecture is to achieve an understanding of the 
neurobiological basis for the emergence of complex brain structure and function. For 
example, several classic studies on the cellular composition of the primate cortex have 
addressed cross-species homologies [1-3] and contemporary comparative analyses have 
highlighted common cortical phenotypes and important roles of genetic and epigenetic 
interactions in development for creating cross-species diversity [4, 5]. Together, these and 
many other comparative studies have laid the foundations for our understanding of 
mammalian brain anatomy and function. 
 
One major focus has been on the growing size of brains from smaller to larger 
animals [6-9] and in particular the significant increase in volume required by the expansion 
  
3 
of anatomical connections [10-12]. A seminal observation is that the proportion of brain 
mass spent on cortical white matter follows an allometric scaling relationship between 
body and brain size across the entire spectrum of simpler to higher-order mammalian 
species [13, 14]. In small mammals like the mouse only around 11% of total brain volume is 
composed of white matter, in contrast to 27% in the macaque monkey, 40% in chimpanzees 
and 41% in humans (data taken from [13]). However, despite a larger volume of white 
matter, maintaining constant connection density among an increasing number of neurons 
and regions in larger brains will quickly outstrip the volume that can be allocated to long-
distance neural wiring [15-17]. Thus the scaling between brain size and white matter volume 
implies a lower proportion of directly connected neural elements in larger sized brains [15, 
17, 18], making it more and more difficult for neural elements to communicate via direct 
connections. Maintaining fast and efficient neural communication brings significant benefits 
to brain function, arguably leading to a fundamental tension or tradeoff [19] between the 
conservation of neural resources that can be spent on long-distance connectivity and the 
promotion of efficient communication to support complex neural processing. These apparent 
opposing or competitive pressures highlight the importance of the topological organization 
of nervous systems that must provide an arrangement of neural elements and connections to 
balance the amount of neural resources used for connectivity while at the same time 
enabling effective information transfer in the service of brain function.  
 
Comparative connectomics 
The examination of brain network topology is a core element of the field of ‘connectomics’ 
[20], the emerging science of structural and functional brain networks [21-24]. The 
increasing availability of connectomes of multiple animal species (Figure 1) opens up a new 
opportunity for the comparative analysis of network architecture across species. The goal of 
this review is to introduce “comparative connectomics”, defined as the comparison of the 
  
4 
topological layout of nervous systems across species, with the aim of identifying common 
principles and variations in network features. Comparative connectomics can provide insight 
into general principles of neural wiring that apply across species and examine to what extent 
variations in connectivity between species may form the basis for differences in brain 
function. As we will discuss, connectomes of different species reconstructed by a broad 
range of methodologies (see box 1) can be compared by applying a consistent set of network 
analysis measures and graph analytical tools (see box 2) to enable quantitative comparison 
of the topological architecture of the nervous systems across and between species. We begin 
with an overview of currently available systems-level connectome maps, ranging from 
invertebrates such as Caenorhabditis elegans (a nematode or roundworm) and Drosophila 
melanogaster (fruit fly), to the macroscale connectome maps of mammalian species such as 
rodents, old-world monkeys, great apes and humans (Figure 1). Using graph theory as a 
general framework to quantify topological features of network organization, we first 
identify common aspects of brain network topology. We then turn to differences in neural 
wiring and brain network organization among closely related species suggesting that 
variations in connectome topology subserve species-specific behavioral and cognitive 
adaptations. 
 
Connectomes from Simpler to More Advanced Animals 
Nearly 30 years ago, serial electron microscope reconstructions of the nervous system of the 
hermaphrodite nematode Caenorhabditis elegans [25] served as the foundation for the 
assembly of a near-complete neuronal connectivity network of 890 gap junctions, 6393 
chemical synapses and 1410 neuromuscular junctions among 279 neurons of the worm’s 
somatic nervous system [26]. This seminal work inspired later efforts to map the posterior 
nervous system of the C. elegans adult male [27], as well as the reconstruction of (partial) 
  
5 
neuronal connectomes of other worm species, including that of the roundworm Pristionchus 
pacificus [28] and the marine worm Platynereis dumerilii [29].  
Early graph theoretical analyses showed the C. elegans nervous system to exhibit a 
small-world network organization [30] with high clustering (see box 2) and short paths, 
indicating preferred connectivity into locally clustered circuits, combined with the presence 
of relatively few long-distance connections that mediate topological short-cuts and facilitate 
efficient global communication [31]. Further analyses disclosed preferential formation of 
specific local motifs [26] and a community structure of densely intra-connected and 
sparsely inter-connected sub-networks or modules [32], an organization that roughly aligns 
with a classification of neurons into sensory, motor and interneuronal categories [26](Figure 
2).  
Network analyses of the C. elegans connectome have played a prominent role in 
discussions of wiring minimization models [33, 34], which advocate that the conservation of 
wiring governs the spatial placement of neuronal elements and accounts for the formation of 
spatially localized circuits. However, these analyses have also revealed that some neurons 
and their connections deviate from optimal spatial placement as predicted by a strict 
minimization of wiring cost [33, 35, 36], which argues for other, non-geometric biological 
factors to play a role in the topology of the C. elegans nervous system. Indeed, one of the 
most prominent features of the adult worm’s connectome is the non-uniform distribution of 
synaptic connectivity (i.e. node degree) across neurons [26, 37] with the majority of 
synaptic connections maintained by a small set of highly connected neurons. These hub 
neurons maintain dense interconnectivity with each other despite being spatially distributed 
in both the anterior and posterior extremities of the worm’s body. These findings are 
indicative of a biologically expensive rich club organization of the adult C. elegans 
connectome in which high-degree elements form a densely centralized core [32]. 
Interestingly, hub neurons constituting the rich club of the adult C. elegans had previously 
  
6 
been categorized as command interneurons with known functional importance for 
information integration [26], coordinated movement and adaptive behaviors of the animal 
[32]. Furthermore, in C. elegans, these hub neurons have been noted to appear as one of the 
first elements of the nervous system [38], suggesting a central role of rich club architecture 
in nervous system development [32, 39].  
 
Other projects aiming at neuron-scale connectivity maps have focused on the 
reconstruction of the connectome of Drosophila, for example by imaging a sample of 
approximately 12,000 of the >100,000 neurons that make up the adult fly brain [40]. 
Grouping of individually imaged neurons into over 40 morphologically distinguishable 
brain areas resulted in a detailed interregional connectome map [40]. Subsequent refinement 
of this map and detailed graph theoretical analysis showed several highly connected hub 
regions as well as five network communities (modules) of densely interconnected regions 
[41]. These five communities largely correspond to known olfactory, visual, 
mechanosensory/auditory and premotor systems of the fly brain, suggesting that their 
topological structure forms the anatomical substrate for specialized functional processing 
(Figure 2). Wiring economy has been suggested to play a major role in local neuron and 
connectivity placement in the Drosophila brain [42]. However, as in C. elegans, a modular 
structure minimizing the expense of wiring is supplemented by the presence of a highly 
connected rich club [41]. Rich club regions are found distributed across all modules of the 
Drosophila nervous system and their remote geometric placement implies a high cost of 
wiring of their interconnecting pathways [41](Figure 3). Parallel mapping efforts employing 
electron microscopy serial sectioning and reconstruction of neuronal circuits in the 
Drosophila larva have provided detailed wiring diagrams of multisensory circuits that are 
similar to those of the adult fly brain in demonstrating complex patterns of convergence to 
enable multimodal information integration [43]. These and other studies establish important 
  
7 
links between the topology of neuronal circuits and the sensory/behavioral functions of the 
brain. 
 
Reconstructions of whole-brain connectome maps of more complex species 
predominantly involve the tracking of macroscale axonal projections between large-scale 
brain areas. Such reconstructions include mappings of the avian pigeon brain, revealing a 
modular network architecture and densely connected hub areas [44], as well as detailed 
mappings of the macroscale systems of several rodent and primate species. Recent 
comprehensive mapping efforts utilized a large number of injections of anterograde tracers 
combined with high-throughput serial tomography optical imaging for a detailed 
reconstruction of the mouse connectome [45]. Although such automated reconstruction 
procedures will inevitably be prone to some level of measurement error and statistical noise 
[45], standardized experimental conditions allowed tracking of an unprecedented number 
(>15,000) of directed projections between over 200 areas of the mouse brain. A parallel 
effort involved the detailed mapping of over 600 macroscale cortico-cortical pathways 
combining both anterograde and retrograde tracer experiments [46]. Network analysis of 
these mouse connectome maps revealed dense local clustering of wiring and modular 
organization, combined with the existence of topologically short pathways [45, 46]. 
Furthermore, the strength of anatomical connectivity was noted to approximate a log-normal 
distribution ranging over 5 orders of magnitude [45]. Projection strengths of anatomical 
pathways generally were strongest between spatially neighboring regions and decayed 
monotonically as a function of increasing connection distance. This argues in favor of an 
important role of geometric factors in shaping the topology of mouse wiring [45]. However, 
similar to the invertebrate species considered earlier, wiring cost of the mouse connectome 
is not strictly minimized and its modular organization is complemented by the existence of 
high-degree rich club hubs mediating biologically expensive (long distance) connections 
between modules [47, 48] (Figure 3). Generative modeling approaches proved successful in 
  
8 
reproducing the modular aspects of connectome topology of the mouse brain simply by 
minimizing wiring cost, but these models failed to account for the emergence of long-
distance connections until the penalty imposed on spatial distance was adaptively relaxed 
for higher degree hubs [47]. 
 
A different approach aiming to build a rat cortical connectome involved collating 
data across >16,000 literature reports of tract tracing experiments. Collectively, these data 
captured 1,923 cortical association macro-connections spanning 73 gray-matter areas of the 
rat cerebral cortex, together with an ordinal assessment of connection strength [49]. Graph 
theoretical examination revealed short communication paths, high clustering, connected 
communities largely coinciding with functionally specialized systems [49], and a central 
rich club [49, 50] comprising a set of highly connected, spatially distributed and multimodal 
cortical areas [49] (Figure 3). 
 
Consensus matrices obtained by collating data across large numbers of tracing 
experiments have also been built for the cat [51], ferret [52] and macaque brains [53]. One 
of the earliest mappings of a mammalian cerebral system involved the compilation of the 
macroscale cat connectome, describing 65 cortical areas and >1000 cortico-cortical 
pathways [51]. Network analysis of the cat connectome showed short length paths and 
strong clustering of anatomical wiring within functionally specialized motor, visual, 
auditory and fronto-limbic subsystems [54]. Follow-up analysis identified different types of 
hub areas in the cat cortex [55], and defined a central, reciprocally interconnected core 
module [56, 57] corresponding to a rich club of cortical hubs [58].  
 
The systematic analysis of anatomical connectivity patterns in the macaque brain 
was propelled forward by the early connectomics pioneer Rolf Kötter (1961-2010) who 
founded the open-access Collation of Connectivity Data for the Macaque (CoCoMac) 
database, which aggregated data from hundreds of macaque tract-tracing experiments [53, 
59]. Graph theoretical analyses of macaque connectome maps revealed high clustering, a 
  
9 
hierarchical ordering of wiring from primary to multimodal areas [60], short path lengths, 
pronounced modular organization [61-63], as well as the presence of spatially distributed 
but centrally connected cortical hub areas [55, 62](Figure 3). As already noted by early 
computational analyses of macaque interareal connectivity [64], inverse correlations 
between projection density and geometric length suggest an important role of spatial or 
geometric factors in shaping the topology of macaque interareal projections [65]. However, 
modeling analyses of macaque connectivity have also pointed out an important role for 
topological factors in shaping macaque connectivity, e.g. the drive to enable efficient 
communication pathways by means of the formation of high-cost long-distance projections 
[35] and the high investment of connectivity around hubs and a rich club core [55, 66, 67]. 
These network attributes are difficult to account for by purely geometric factors.  
 
The development of diffusion-weighted imaging combined with tractography has 
allowed for the assembly of the macroscale human connectome [68-72]. Despite the caveats 
and limitations regarding the interpretation of the diffusion MRI signal [73-75] and its use in 
connectome reconstruction (see for discussion [68, 76-78]), diffusion weighted imaging is 
currently one of the most widely used methods for the assessment of anatomical 
connectivity in the human brain. Several large-scale efforts, including the Human 
Connectome Project [79], are delivering unprecedented amounts of high-quality human 
connectome data, and advances in ex vivo imaging techniques might provide even more 
detailed maps of post mortem animal and human wiring in the future (see Box 1). 
Paralleling key features of connectome topology already reviewed for other animals, 
network analysis of the human connectome has shown an organization of densely connected 
communities that form the anatomical wiring skeleton of known functional domains [80-
85](Figure 2). This modular structure is complemented by anatomically long-distance 
projections that support topologically short-distance global communication paths [68, 69], 
  
10 
combined with densely connected and topologically central communication hubs [68, 71, 
86-88] that form a central rich club in the human brain [39, 89-92] (Figure 3).  
 
Having surveyed our current knowledge of connectome topology across a range of species, 
we are now in a position to examine the potential principles that may drive common themes 
in wiring patterns, as well the important roles of cross-species variations in differentiating 
behavioral and cognitive adaptations. 
 
Common Principles of Connectome Wiring  
We first discuss which general principles may underlie common themes of connectome 
organization observed across species. Across the range of species studied so far, we observe 
a strong tendency at both micro and macro scales of network organization for neurons 
(micro) or brain regions (macro) to connect to their spatial and topological neighbors, 
favoring the formation of spatially co-localized, topologically clustered cliques or 
communities [80] (Figure 2). This community architecture largely coincides with the 
formation of physiologically specialized functional domains in nervous systems, consistent 
with the idea that anatomical wiring plays an important role in the functional differentiation 
of cortical areas [93-95]. Cross-species comparison shows a high level of consistency of 
functional domains across species, with human, macaque and rodents showing several 
homologous primary and higher-order associative limbic and cognitive networks [96-99]. 
The conservation of wiring has long been proposed as a fundamental rule governing the 
local layout of circuits [34, 47, 64, 65, 100-102]. Geometric constraints promote the 
emergence of functionally specialized network communities in nervous systems. Across 
species, it has been hypothesized that the growth of brain volume across species favors the 
existence of local modules [103, 104] while penalizing the formation of long-range 
connectivity as such connections become more and more expensive in terms of neural 
  
11 
resources. Support for such notions come from studies examining the volume of white 
matter connectivity tracts across a wide range of primate species, revealing long-distance 
(and thus costly) connectivity in the corpus callosum to be lower in larger primate brains, 
while intra-hemispheric white matter volume is enlarged [105]. A more local organization 
of cortical wiring in larger brains may promote the emergence of specialized brain 
functionality in larger animals [103, 104, 106-108]. For example, a stronger modularity 
structure of connectome wiring may have played a role in the formation of more spatially 
localized cortical fields for visual, sensory and motor information processing in larger 
mammalian brains [109], as well as increased brain lateralization, preferred hand-use, and 
the development of specialized traits like language processing in humans [110-112].  
 
A second general theme of connectome topology includes the drive of nervous 
systems to invest resources in network attributes that bring topological integration (Figure 
3). Across the range of examined species, all nervous systems show topologically short and 
efficient paths, regardless of increasing brain network size. Although modeling studies have 
generally succeeded in accounting for parsimonious local wiring and cost-controlled 
community structure, they have difficulty explaining the formation of long-distance 
pathways (essential for efficient communication paths) unless constraints on wiring cost are 
relaxed [47, 101, 102, 113]. Across species, the consistent presence of long-distance 
connections that violate strict minimization of wiring suggests a general drive of neural 
systems to invest neural resources in network attributes that maintain short communication 
relays.  
The strong drive to invest costly resources in network attributes that bring 
topological integration may become even more apparent from the consistent allocation of 
neural assets to the formation of a densely connected core or rich club [32, 87, 114]. This 
general tendency to centralize connectivity appears to be ubiquitous: it is observed across 
spatial scales (e.g. from patterns of information flow in microcircuits [115-117] to whole-
  
12 
brain systems), as well as across small and large nervous systems of vastly different species 
(see also Box 3).  
Communication in nervous systems goes beyond the simple relaying of messages 
along shortest paths and involves continual processing of information at each neural step. 
The centralization of neural connectivity into a connective core may thus bring important 
benefits with regard to information integration [32, 87, 118, 119], potentially facilitating 
higher-order brain functionality that thrives on integrated information, such as coordinated 
movement in the worm [32] and/or executive functioning in humans [120]. Due to their 
central embedding in network topology, hubs and their connections can attract and 
disseminate a large proportion of all neural communication [89, 119], forming an 
anatomical substrate for the exchange of information between otherwise segregated 
domains. This has led to the theoretical idea that hubs and rich clubs provide an anatomical 
infrastructure [87] for the formation of a “global workspace” [121-123] or “connective core” 
[124], a functional construct in which information from different parts of the system is 
integrated. These ideas are supported by observations demonstrating that hub regions in 
mammalian species tend to overlap with multimodal association cortex [125, 126], display 
an intricate neuronal architecture with heavily branched pyramidal neurons [127-131], pose 
high energy demands [19, 90, 132], and form convergence zones between different 
functional networks [133-135].  
The common theme across nervous systems to invest neural resources in network 
attributes that bring topological integration argues for a more diverse set of principles than 
strict conservation of neural resources to shape the connectivity layout of nervous systems 
[136, 137]. Rather, the drive to invest neural resources in dense connectivity around an 
integrative core appears to favor the emergence of connectome attributes that are 
advantageous for enabling short pathways and transmodal communication. Offsetting their 
greater biological cost in terms of neural and metabolic resources, these topological features 
  
13 
may bring strong potential benefits for integrative neural processing and cognitive brain 
function and behavior. 
 
Variations Support Behavioral and Cognitive Adaptations 
Although we argue for common cross-species themes in connectome organization, a 
proposed tradeoff between pressures to conserve wiring cost and pressures to maximize 
topological integration [19, 138] cannot, by itself, account for the abundant diversity in 
brain connectivity and nervous system organization across species. Multiple factors, 
including variations in environmental factors, genes and genetic regulatory networks 
operating during development combine to generate a diverse set of brain networks even 
across closely related species. A natural next question, then, is how differences in 
connectome wiring between species relate to species-specific differences in behavior and 
information processing. This question is most productively explored by comparing 
connectomes of relatively closely related species that share a basic anatomical plan and an 
overlapping behavioral repertoire. 
 
One example is offered by comparative studies of the nervous systems of 
roundworms. Comparison between reconstructions of microscale neural networks of the 
pharyngeal systems of C. elegans and P. pacificus  showed significant differences in neural 
connectivity that could be linked to their distinct feeding behaviors [28]. P. pacificus, in 
contrast to the bacterial feeder C. elegans, is a predator with a distinct anatomy of its mouth 
areas. Side-by-side comparison of the layout of synaptic connectivity of the pharyngeal 
systems of the two species revealed significant differences [28] (Figure 4), with P. pacificus 
showing increased connectivity around neural elements controlling tooth-like denticles. 
Comparative network centrality analysis further showed that presumptive communication 
paths and information flow in P. pacificus are much more tuned towards the control of 
pharyngeal motor neurons. Thus, differences in connectome topology appear to constitute at 
  
14 
least part of the biological basis for the substantial divergence in feeding behavior between 
the two worm species [28]. In addition, a second comparative example in the roundworm 
(not across species but gender) is provided by dimorphic differences in neural wiring of the 
reproductive system of C. elegans. Male worms include 383 neurons (in comparison to 302 
of hermaphrodites) with dimorphic changes in neurons and connectivity mostly focused 
around the formation of circuits related to mating and reproduction [25, 27]. Male worms, 
but not hermaphrodites, are capable of sexual adaptive learning that facilitates effective 
mate finding and, interestingly, a recent study revealed a key role of specific neurons and 
their wiring in the emergence of this behavior [139]. Detailed reconstruction of synaptic 
connectivity revealed two newly discovered neurons to be incorporated in existing circuits 
during late development, with the newly added connectivity and accompanying change in 
network structure allowing the male worm to add sex-specific learning plasticity to its 
functional repertoire [139]. 
 
Comparative connectivity analyses between primate species have similarly argued 
for a relationship between subtle differences in connectome wiring and divergent behavior 
[140]. For example, bonobos and chimpanzees share a recent common ancestor but they 
show quite distinct social interactive behavior, with bonobos showing less aggression and 
higher social tolerance as compared to chimpanzees (see [140, 141] for a discussion). 
Comparative analysis of MRI-derived reconstructions of brain connectivity between the two 
species shows anatomical connectivity between the amygdala and anterior cingulate regions, 
a network of subcortical and cortical areas involved in the modulation of social and 
emotional behavior [142, 143], to be stronger in bonobo apes than in chimpanzees [140]. 
Furthermore, comparative MRI studies between macaques, chimpanzees and humans [110], 
have linked elaboration of anatomical connectivity of the arcuate fasciculus connecting 
temporal and frontal cortical areas to the development of language and speech processing in 
humans (Figure 4) [110, 144]. 
  
15 
 
In addition to evidence for behaviorally-related connectivity differences in specific 
circuits, comparative connectome examinations between primates and humans have further 
offered support for a role of variations in system level connectivity patterns in the 
evolutionary emergence of specific advanced brain functions. Although studies have 
reported a general homology of connectome organization across macaque, chimpanzee and 
human, there is evidence for significant species-specific differences in the wiring of parietal 
and medial prefrontal regions [67, 145]. Comparative connectome analyses suggest that 
areas of the frontal cortex in humans exhibit a less central position as compared to 
homologous areas in macaques and chimpanzees [67, 104]. In addition, functional 
connectivity hubs in the human brain have been argued to exhibit a more spatially 
distributed organization compared to non-human primates [146], differences that may 
contribute to the increasing functional specialization of frontal cortical areas [104]. 
Potentially more, and more centrally connected hubs in other parts of the cortex may confer 
higher robustness and bring greater support for the functional involvement of other areas in 
global processing [146]. These thoughts are supported by recent comparisons between 
chimpanzees and humans, which revealed strong expansion of the precuneus in humans 
[147]. Indeed, the precuneus is one of the most central and most connected hub areas of the 
human brain [68, 114]. These ideas parallel observations that variations in connectome 
organization and hub wiring relate to individual variation in cognitive processing in humans 
[120, 148-152].  
 
Concluding remarks and future directions 
The central idea of this review is that nervous systems of different species exhibit both 
common themes and important variations in connectome organization. We argue that 
connectome architecture may follow general principles of wiring, shaped by forces that 
minimize the expenditure of biological resources and forces that favor functionally 
  
16 
important topological attributes that benefit efficient communication and global integration. 
A competition and trade-off between these opposing forces can account for the ubiquity of 
connectomes that are generally parsimoniously wired while allowing for features that can 
promote topological integration. We further argue that, within the envelope of wiring 
solutions that conform to these general principles, subtle variations in connectome 
organization support species-specific adaptations in behavior and cognitive functioning.  
 
The ideas put forth in this review, in particular our thoughts on adaptive changes of 
network attributes to form biological underpinnings of variations in brain function, of course 
need thorough empirical testing. Comparative studies that employ uniform acquisition 
methodology to map (see box 1) and study (see box 2) connectomes across species are 
needed to rigorously map commonalities and differences of connectivity patterns. 
Furthermore, investments in studies that explicitly address the diversity of brain 
architectures are needed to draw more secure inferences about the putatively universal 
principles shaping connectome evolution. This would require examinations across a much 
wider range of species than currently available. For example, besides the work of 
reconstructing connectomes of nematode, insect, avian and mammalian species, as 
summarized in this review, comparative connectomics could be extended further to 
encompass the nervous systems of animals with a completely different body plan but who 
may nevertheless share universal attributes of connectome organization (see box 3). In 
addition to the collection of more comprehensive and consistent empirical data, this 
burgeoning field would benefit from computational modeling studies that simulate 
generative mechanisms behind cross-species network evolution and test the roles of network 
attributes with respect to functional diversity [118], dynamics [83, 153], resilience and 
integration [154, 155]. 
 
In focusing on patterns of brain connectivity, comparative connectomics is subject to 
several important limitations. First, today’s comparative connectomics is constrained by the 
  
17 
divergent methodologies used to assess connectivity at different scales and in different 
species (e.g. electron microscopy, tract-tracing, MRI, see box 1). This limitation underscores 
the importance of finding ways to reconstruct connectomes more uniformly across different 
nervous systems. Second, it is important to note that the architecture of a nervous system 
must be considered in the context of the overall structural anatomy, physiology and 
ecological embedding of the organism [156]. Among many other factors, an organism’s 
body plan, the arrangement and physiology of its sensory apparatus, and the geometry of its 
musculoskeletal system, are obviously important factors that shape, constrain and enable 
behavioral (and cognitive) function, as well as the layout of the nervous system. The 
common themes of connectome organization highlighted in this review cut across vast 
differences in body plan and “evolutionary complexity”. This suggests that the observed 
principles of wiring reflect universal features of efficient and effective network organization 
that cause common connectome patterns to be found across a wide range of species.  
Viewed from another perspective, they may define hard limitations to connectome 
formation that cannot easily be contravened by natural selection. The competitive pressures 
of parsimonious wiring and topological integration impose general trajectories and 
boundaries that define the space of network topologies that are geometrically and 
functionally possible. This space is embedded within a “theoretical morphospace” of 
biological forms [157] and defines the realm within which connectome topologies can vary, 
at least in principle, and contribute to adaptations that support different behavioral and 
cognitive specialization. The size and shape of this common morphospace, how it constrains 
the possible behavioral and cognitive repertoire [158-160], and how it compares to the total 
morphospace of natural and human-engineered networks (see box 4) all remain important 
open questions.  
 
  
18 
We hope that, with growing access to connectome data from a range of species, comparative 
connectomics may become a useful addition to the spectrum of approaches aiming to 
account for cross-species commonalities and differences in brain structure and function. 
 
 
 
 
  
19 
Box 1. Connectome reconstruction methods 
Different methodologies can be applied for the reconstruction of connectome maps. Electron 
microscopy techniques have enabled reconstruction of the C. elegans nervous system at the 
synaptic level [25]. Tracer injection techniques combined with high-throughput serial tomography 
optical imaging have enabled a high-resolution reconstruction of the mouse connectome [45] and 
systematic collations of data across high numbers of tracing experiments have resulted in grouped 
consensus matrices of the cat, macaque and rat brains. Advances in in vivo diffusion MRI 
techniques have made it increasingly feasible to reconstruct macroscale connectomes of individual 
brains of great apes [145] and humans. The development of techniques like CLARITY [161] and 
3D Polarized Light Imaging (3D-PLI) may bring unprecedented high resolution reconstructions of 
animal and human connectome wiring in the near future.  
 
Today, the field of comparative connectomics is limited by the fact that connectome maps of 
different species are being acquired with different types of methodology, restricting direct 
comparison of connectomes across a wide range of species. For example, the C. elegans 
connectome describes neuron-to-neuron interactions at the microscale, while the macaque and cat 
connectome describe region-to-region connections at the macroscale level of nervous system 
organization. In addition, while electron microscopy, tract-tracing and MRI-derived connectome 
reconstructions can provide information on the strength of connections (in graph theoretical 
analysis often referred to as ‘weighted networks’), connectome maps derived from cumulative 
collation of data across published literature are often limited in only providing information on the 
presence or absence of connections (referred to in connectome literature as ‘binary networks’) or 
coarse categorization of the magnitude of pathways. 
We thus argue that there are two aspects that are critical for enabling comparative studies in 
the future. First, it is crucial to establish ways to interpolate across different methodologies, ideally 
by directly comparing brain connectivity patterns derived by multiple techniques in the same 
organism, for example tract tracing and noninvasive neuroimaging [76, 162, 163]. Second, the 
  
20 
application of the same technique to multiple species (e.g., [28, 145]) facilitates cross-species 
comparisons.  
 
 
Box 2. Graph theory. The connectomes of different species can be compared by applying a 
consistent set of network analysis methods. These methods are principally drawn from the 
mathematical field of graph theory, enabling quantitative comparison between species using the 
same mathematical language. Within this approach a nervous system is described as a graph, 
consisting of a collection of nodes (e.g. neurons, brain areas) and a collection of edges describing 
the pairwise relationships between nodes (e.g. synaptic connections, macroscopic axonal 
projections)(Figure I). Once such a mathematical description of a network is made, graph 
theoretical metrics can be used to describe –and, across species, compare– topological properties of 
the network. The metric of degree represents the number of connections attached to a node of the 
network. Clustering describes the tendency of nodes to form closed triangles, such that the nearest 
neighbors of a node are also directly connected to each other. The metric of clustering reflects the 
tendency of a network to form topologically local circuits, and is often interpreted as a metric of 
information segregation in networks. A path describes a route of information transfer between two 
nodes in a network, with the metric of path length describing the number of steps (comprising 
unique edges) crossed when traveling from one node to another node in a network. The shortest 
path length expresses the minimal number of steps needed to travel between nodes, and is often 
interpret as a metric of the efficiency of information transfer between nodes of a network. Hubs are 
nodes with a high degree and a topologically central position in the overall network, with the core 
of a network describing a set of highly connected nodes that are mutually densely connected. The 
related concept of rich club organization describes the propensity of highly connected nodes to be 
more densely connected to each other than expected based on the individual degree of the nodes. A 
network’s community structure refers to the tendency of a network to form densely connected 
subgraphs or modules, corresponding to a subset of nodes that are densely connected to each other 
  
21 
and sparsely connected to nodes in other modules. In nervous systems, anatomical modules often 
overlap with known functional systems. 
 
Box 3. Nerve nets 
The nematode, insect, avian and mammalian species discussed in this review all describe species 
that display a central brain system. Others, like jellyfish, hydra and starfish do not have a 
centralized brain. Instead, their nervous system comprises as a ‘nerve net’ (Figure IIA) with 
neurons distributed across most parts of the animal, a type of system organization reflecting their 
distinct body plan [164, 165]. The nervous systems of jellyfish and hydra are often described as a 
simple network in which neurons are only connected to their spatial neighbors (in network terms 
this would make a simple ‘regular graph’ or spatial ‘grid’ with no modules, short paths or hubs).  
Recent studies have however suggested that the nervous systems of adult jellyfish and hydra 
may exhibit a much more diverse architecture, including potential concentration of neural elements 
into complex structures facilitating information integrative processes [165-167]. The nervous 
systems of adult jellyfish consist of multiple components (see [164] for an introduction on jellyfish 
nervous systems), including sensory structures (rhopalia, Figure IIB) that are connected via an 
interconnecting nerve ring(s) system running around the bell (Figure IIB). This nerve ring is 
involved in integrating the swimming, visual and tentacle system [165] and argued to represent a 
rudimentary central nervous system [168, 169].  
Thus although the basic plan of the nerve nets of species like jellyfish and hydra may be laid 
out quite differently from the nervous systems of the species discussed in this review, we argue that 
there may be common topological attributes, for example a centralized system of interconnected 
neuronal structures. This suggestion calls for further expansion of the currently available set of 
connectomes beyond those discussed in this review, and emphasizes the need for comparative 
connectomics to examine commonalities and differences in nervous system architecture across a 
(much) wider range of species.  
  
22 
 
Box 4. Comparative analysis of different classes of networks 
Going beyond the examination of shared topological features across nervous systems, the 
generalized mathematical language of graph theory also offers tools for the comparison of the 
organization of brain networks to other classes of networks studied by very different scientific 
disciplines. Many real-world systems operate as some sort of interaction or communication 
network, including for example social networks, gene regulatory networks, computer networks and 
transportation networks. Similar to brain networks, many of these real-world networks display an 
efficient small-world organization, a pronounced community structure with densely connected 
modules, as well as the formation of hubs and rich clubs [30, 37, 170]. Going beyond the 
comparison of networks within the class of nervous systems, the field of ‘comparative network 
analysis’ examines commonalities and differences across a broad range of network classes.  
A core concept in this context is that of network morphospace [157], which examines 
underlying morphological characteristics of networks by describing common and differentiating 
aspects across networks compared to the total space of possible networks. Applications of 
morphospace analysis include examinations of the capacity of brain networks to diffuse and route 
signals in comparison to social, gene regulatory and email networks [171]. A complementary 
approach is based on applications of spectral graph theory [172], with the spectrum describing the 
multiset of eigenvalues of a network’s adjacency matrix.  Networks showing overlapping spectra 
display common organizational and functional features. For example, spectral examinations have 
shown similar features between nervous systems and the organization of ecological networks, an 
observation that may provide clues to selection pressures playing a role in the evolution of both 
systems [173].  
Comparative network analysis allows for the examination of commonalities and differences 
between classes of networks. In particular, it provides a powerful approach to answer the question 
of which topological network attributes are specific to nervous systems and which represent more 
  
23 
universal properties of network organization [174]. As such, it provides a unique tool to examine 
which network properties are unique to brain networks, and which properties are shared with other 
types of communication and interaction networks.   
 
Glossary 
Allometric scaling: relationship between body size and shape, morphometry and function 
of brain parts across species where one or more of these measures change exponentially or 
nonlinearly 
Adjacency matrix: A systematic description of the absence or presence of a connection or 
edge between all pairs of nodes of a network, represented in the form of a square matrix. 
Association matrix: A summary of the absence or presence (potentially including 
information on the strength of an association) of all pairwise associations of network nodes, 
represented in the form of a square matrix. 
Brain network: Any set of structural or functional relations among brain elements. 
Connectivity: Description of the anatomical projections (e.g. synaptic connections, axonal 
tracts) between brain network nodes (e.g. neurons, cortical areas). 
Connectome: Comprehensive network map of the neural connections of a nervous system. 
Connectomics: A subfield of neuroscience that studies the reconstruction and analysis of 
connectomes   
Comparative connectomics: the quantitative study of cross-species commonalities and 
variations in brain network topology 
Functional connectivity: statistical relationship between time-series of physiological 
activity (e.g. fMRI, spike trains) of neural elements (e.g. neurons, brain regions). 
Graph: A mathematical description of a network, consisting of a collection of nodes (e.g. 
neurons, brain areas) and a collection of edges describing the pairwise relationships between 
nodes (e.g. synaptic connections, macroscopic axonal projections) (see Box 2).  
  
24 
Homology: Properties of nervous system organization (e.g. cellular architecture, wiring 
organization) that are shared between species 
Morphospace: Originally defined in evolutionary theory as the space of all possible body 
shapes or morphologies for a given group of organisms 
Network: In nervous systems, a network describes the set of neural elements (e.g. neurons, 
brain regions) and their relationships (e.g. synaptic connections, macroscale pathways, 
functional interactions). 
Rich club organization: the property of a network to display an increasing level of 
connectivity between subsets of highly connected nodes, a level of connectivity higher than 
would be expected on the basis of the individual degree of the subset of nodes alone. 
Scale-free organization: A class of networks with a degree distribution that follows a 
power law, or, more generally, a type of broad-scale or fat-tailed degree distribution. 
Small-world organization: A class of networks that shows both a high level of clustering 
(like a regular lattice) and short characteristic paths (like a random graph). 
Spectral graph theory: A branch of graph theory that studies networks by examining the 
spectrum of eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the network’s adjacency matrix 
Topology: The topological structure of a network describes the arrangement of connections 
in a network and is invariant to any continuous spatial deformation of the system. 
 
 
  
25 
 
 
 
 
  
26 
Figures 
Figure 1. Connectomes across species. The Figure displays reconstructed connectomes of 
eight different species, including (upper row from left to right, and lower row from left to 
right) Caenorhabditis elegans (roundworm) [26], Drosophila (fruit fly) [40], pigeon [44], 
mouse [45], rat [49], cat [51], rhesus monkey (macaque, FE91 atlas) [53, 175] and human 
(Human Connectome Project data, 220 cortical regions, [129]). Connectomes are 
represented as connectivity matrices with rows and columns depicting source and target 
regions (grouping regions participating in the same community together) and with the 
elements of the connectivity matrices showing the reconstructed projections. Pathways are 
grouped into weak (blue), medium (yellow) and strong (orange). 
 
Figure 2. Community structure. Studies have shown consistent community organization 
of nervous systems across species, including (A) the C. elegans neuronal network, and (B) 
Drosophila, (C) macaque and (D) human connectomes. Anatomical communities obtained 
by graph theoretical analysis often with known functional domains, as for example the 
olfactory (yellow), visual (purple and orange, left and right), auditory/mechanosensory 
(magenta) and pre-motor (red) functional systems of the fly brain (panel B) [41]. Modular 
decomposition of the human connectome as derived from diffusion weighted imaging 
revealed the formation of at least six anatomical communities overlapping spatial domains 
of the human brain. A, C and D reprinted under the creative Commons Attribution License 
from [26], [62] and [68], B adapted and reproduced with permission from [41].  
 
Figure 3. Hubs and rich club organization across species. Connectome studies have 
shown hub and rich club organization for (A) the microscale C. elegans nervous system, as 
well as for the macroscale brain networks of (B) mouse, (C) rat, (D) macaque and (E) 
human. Analysis of the C. elegans connectome has revealed a small set of highly connected 
  
27 
rich club hub neurons distributed across anterior (red nodes) and posterior (yellow nodes) 
parts of the animal. (B) Network analysis of the mouse connectome has shown the existence 
of highly connected and highly central connector hubs (red nodes), which mediated most of 
the inter-modular connections between functionally specialized modules of the community 
structure (nodes are color-coded by modular affiliation). (C) Network analysis of the rat 
connectome has shown the rich club (red line) to participate across multiple functional 
domains (depicted as colored blocks). (D) Connectome analysis of the macaque brain has 
revealed rich club members (red nodes) to be spatially distributed across the cortex. (E) 
Network studies of the human connectome have similarly shown the existence of highly 
connected hubs in the human brain (depicted as red, yellow, blue and green regions). These 
hub areas are distributed across multiple functional domains and show strong rich club 
organization. A and E adapted and reproduced from [32] and [72] under the Creative 
Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-Share License, B adapted and reproduced with 
permission from [47], C adapted and reproduced with permission from [49], D reprinted 
under the Creative Commons License from [66].  
 
Figure 4. Connectivity comparison across species. (A) A side-by-side comparison of the neuronal 
organization (upper panel) and wiring (graphs in the lower panel) of the pharyngeal system across 
two worm species, P. pacificus (right) and C. elegans (left). A comparison between the two systems 
(consisting of the same number and same types of neurons) reveals wiring differences: the predator 
P. pacificus shows higher complexity of connectivity around neural elements controlling the tooth-
like denticles as compared to C. elegans [28]. (B) Comparison of macroscale connectivity between 
macaque (top), chimpanzees (middle) and humans (bottom) revealed more elaborate connectivity of 
the arcuate fasciculus in humans, a tract important for complex language processing [110]. (C) 
Comparison of whole-brain functional connectivity patterns between macaques and humans 
revealed areas of both weaker (blue areas) and stronger functional connectivity across the cortex 
  
28 
(red areas) in humans as compared to macaques, as well as overall more spatially diffuse hub 
structure in humans [146]. A adapted and reproduced with permission from [28], B adapted and 
reproduced with permission from [110], C adapted and reproduced under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share License from [146]. 
 
Figure Box 2. Graph metrics. Figure illustrates (from left to right) the mathematical description of 
a network as a graph consisting of nodes and edges, the metric of degree, a communication path, 
the metric of clustering, the formation of a densely connected rich club or core and the community 
structure of a network, reflecting the formation of densely connected subgraphs or modules within 
the network. 
 
Figure Box 3. Jellyfish nerve net. (A) The nervous system of a jellyfish involves a nerve net. (B) 
Sensory structures (rhopolia) in several jellyfish species include concentrated neural structures that 
are interconnected by an organized nerve ring (RN in B and also shown in panel C), potentially 
supporting multiple communication pathways. A adapted and reproduced with permission from 
[165], B adapted and reproduced with permission from B [164] (RN depicts nerve ring). 
 
Acknowledgements 
We thank Lianne Scholtens, Jim Rilling, Tom Schoenemann for discussions and comments. 
MPvdH was supported by a VENI (# 451-12-001) grant from the Netherlands Organization for 
Scientific Research (NWO) and a Fellowship of MQ.  
 
References 
1 Campbell, A.W. (1905) Cytoarchitectonic maps of the human brain. Histological studies on the 
localisation of cerebral function. Cambridge: University Press 
2 Brodmann, K. (1909) Vergleichende Lokalisationslehre der Grosshirnrinde. Johann Ambrosius 
Barth 
3 von Bonin, G. and Bailey, P. (1947) The neocortex of Macaca mulatta Univ. of Illinois Press  
  
29 
4 Northcutt, R.G. and Kaas, J.H. (1995) The emergence and evolution of mammalian neocortex. 
Trends in neurosciences 18, 373-379 
5 Krubitzer, L. (2007) The magnificent compromise: Cortical field evolution in mammals. Neuron 
56, 201-208 
6 Jerison, H.J. (1973) Evolution of the Brain and Intelligence. Academic Press 
7 Herculano-Houzel, S., et al. (2007) Cellular scaling rules for primate brains. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 104, 3562-3567 
8 Deaner, R.O., et al. (2007) Overall brain size, and not encephalization quotient, best predicts 
cognitive ability across non-human primates. Brain Behav Evolut 70, 115-124 
9 Schoenemann, P.T. (2013) Hominid Brain Evolution. In A Companion to Paleoanthropology 
(Begun, D.R., ed), Blackwell Publishing 
10 Schoenemann, P.T. (2006) Evolution of the size and functional areas of the human brain. Annu 
Rev Anthropol 35, 379-406 
11 Rilling, J.K. and Seligman, R.A. (2002) A quantitative morphometric comparative analysis of 
the primate temporal lobe. J Hum Evol 42, 505-533 
12 Schoenemann, P.T., et al. (2005) Prefrontal white matter volume is disproportionately larger in 
humans than in other primates. Nature neuroscience 8, 242-252 
13 Zhang, K. and Sejnowski, T.J. (2000) A universal scaling law between gray matter and white 
matter of cerebral cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America 97, 5621-5626 
14 Hofman, M.A. (1988) Size and shape of the cerebral cortex in mammals. II. The cortical 
volume. Brain, behavior and evolution 32, 17-26 
15 Hoffman, M.A. (2014) Evolution of the human brain: when bigger is better. Frontiers of 
Neuroanatomy 8 
16 Wang, S.S., et al. (2008) Functional trade-offs in white matter axonal scaling. J Neurosci 28, 
4047-4056 
17 Ringo, J.L. (1991) Neuronal interconnection as a function of brain size. Brain, behavior and 
evolution 38, 1-6 
18 Herculano-Houzel, S., et al. (2010) Connectivity-driven white matter scaling and folding in 
primate cerebral cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America 107, 19008-19013 
19 Bullmore, E. and Sporns, O. (2012) The economy of brain network organization. Nature reviews 
13, 336-349 
20 Sporns, O., et al. (2005) The human connectome: A structural description of the human brain. 
PLoS computational biology 1, e42 
21 Sporns, O. (2011) Networks of the Brain  MIT Press, Cambridge 
22 Bullmore, E. and Sporns, O. (2009) Complex brain networks: graph theoretical analysis of 
structural and functional systems. Nature reviews 10, 186-198 
23 van den Heuvel, M.P. and Hulshoff Pol, H.E. (2010) Exploring the brain network: a review on 
resting-state fMRI functional connectivity. European neuropsychopharmacology : the journal of 
the European College of Neuropsychopharmacology 20, 519-534 
24 Fornito A, Z.A., Bullmore ET (2016) Fundamentals of Brain Network Analysis. Academic 
Press, San Diego 
25 White, J.G., et al. (1986) The structure of the nervous system of the nematode Caenorhabditis 
elegans. Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological sciences 
314, 1-340 
26 Varshney, L.R., et al. (2010) Structural properties of the Caenorhabditis elegans neuronal 
network. PLoS computational biology 7, e1001066 
27 Jarrell, T.A., et al. (2012) The connectome of a decision-making neural network. Science 337, 
437-444 
28 Bumbarger, D.J., et al. (2013) System-wide rewiring underlies behavioral differences in 
predatory and bacterial-feeding nematodes. Cell 152, 109-119 
  
30 
29 Randel, N., et al. (2014) Neuronal connectome of a sensory-motor circuit for visual navigation. 
Elife 3 
30 Watts, D.J. and Strogatz, S.H. (1998) Collective dynamics of 'small-world' networks. Nature 
393, 440-442 
31 Latora, V. and Marchiori, M. (2001) Efficient behavior of small-world networks. Phys Rev Lett 
87 
32 Towlson, E.K., et al. (2013) The rich club of the C. elegans neuronal connectome. J Neurosci 
33, 6380-6387 
33 Chen, B.L., et al. (2006) Wiring optimization can relate neuronal structure and function. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 103, 4723-4728 
34 Cherniak, C. (1994) Component Placement Optimization in the Brain. Journal of Neuroscience 
14, 2418-2427 
35 Kaiser, M. and Hilgetag, C.C. (2006) Nonoptimal component placement, but short processing 
paths, due to long-distance projections in neural systems. PLoS computational biology 2, e95 
36 Ahn, Y.Y., et al. (2006) Wiring cost in the organization of a biological neuronal network. 
Physica A 367, 531-537 
37 Barabasi, A.L. and Albert, R. (1999) Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science 286, 
509-512 
38 Varier, S. and Kaiser, M. (2011) Neural development features: spatio-temporal development of 
the Caenorhabditis elegans neuronal network. PLoS computational biology 7, e1001044 
39 van den Heuvel, M.P., et al. (2015) The Neonatal Connectome During Preterm Brain 
Development. Cerebral Cortex 25, 3000-3013 
40 Chiang, A.S., et al. (2011) Three-dimensional reconstruction of brain-wide wiring networks in 
Drosophila at single-cell resolution. Current biology : CB 21, 1-11 
41 Shih, C.T., et al. (2015) Connectomics-based analysis of information flow in the Drosophila 
brain. Current biology : CB 25, 1249-1258 
42 Rivera-Alba, M., et al. (2011) Wiring Economy and Volume Exclusion Determine Neuronal 
Placement in the Drosophila Brain. Current Biology 21, 2000-2005 
43 Ohyama, T., et al. (2015) A multilevel multimodal circuit enhances action selection in 
Drosophila. Nature 520, 633-U107 
44 Shanahan, M., et al. (2013) Large-scale network organization in the avian forebrain: a 
connectivity matrix and theoretical analysis. Frontiers in computational neuroscience 7 
45 Oh, S.W., et al. (2014) A mesoscale connectome of the mouse brain. Nature 508, 207-214 
46 Zingg, B., et al. (2014) Neural networks of the mouse neocortex. Cell 156, 1096-1111 
47 Rubinov, M., et al. (2015) Wiring cost and topological participation of the mouse brain 
connectome. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 112, 
10032-10037 
48 van den Heuvel, M.P. and de Reus, M.A. (2014) Chasing the dreams of early connectionists. 
ACS chemical neuroscience 5, 491-493 
49 Bota, M., et al. (2015) Architecture of the cerebral cortical association connectome underlying 
cognition. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 112, 
E2093-2101 
50 van den Heuvel, M.P., et al. (2015) Topological organization of connectivity strength in the rat 
connectome. Brain structure & function Epub ahead of print 
51 Scannell, J.W., et al. (1995) Analysis of connectivity in the cat cerebral cortex. J Neurosci 15, 
1463-1483 
52 Sukhinin, D.I., et al. (2015) Building the Ferretome. bioxiv http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/014134 
53 Stephan, K.E., et al. (2001) Advanced database methodology for the Collation of Connectivity 
data on the Macaque brain (CoCoMac). Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London. 
Series B, Biological sciences 356, 1159-1186 
  
31 
54 Hilgetag, C.C., et al. (2000) Hierarchical organization of macaque and cat cortical sensory 
systems explored with a novel network processor. Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society 
of London. Series B, Biological sciences 355, 71-89 
55 Sporns, O., et al. (2007) Identification and classification of hubs in brain networks. PloS one 2, 
e1049 
56 Zamora-Lopez, G., et al. (2009) Graph analysis of cortical networks reveals complex anatomical 
communication substrate. Chaos (Woodbury, N.Y 19, 015117 
57 Zamora-Lopez, G., et al. (2011) Exploring brain function from anatomical connectivity. 
Frontiers in neuroscience 5, 83 
58 de Reus, M.A. and van den Heuvel, M.P. (2013) Rich Club Organization and Intermodule 
Communication in the Cat Connectome. Journal of Neuroscience 33, 12929-12939 
59 Bakker, R., et al. (2012) CoCoMac 2.0 and the future of tract-tracing databases. Frontiers in 
neuroinformatics 6, 30 
60 Felleman, D.J. and Van Essen, D.C. (1991) Distributed hierarchical processing in the primate 
cerebral cortex. Cereb Cortex 1, 1-47 
61 Sporns, O., et al. (2000) Theoretical neuroanatomy: relating anatomical and functional 
connectivity in graphs and cortical connection matrices. Cereb Cortex 10, 127-141 
62 Modha, D.S. and Singh, R. (2010) Network architecture of the long-distance pathways in the 
macaque brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
107, 13485-13490 
63 Shen, K., et al. (2012) Information processing architecture of functionally defined clusters in the 
macaque cortex. J Neurosci 32, 17465-17476 
64 Young, M.P. (1992) Objective Analysis of the Topological Organization of the Primate Cortical 
Visual-System. Nature 358, 152-155 
65 Ercsey-Ravasz, M., et al. (2013) A Predictive Network Model of Cerebral Cortical Connectivity 
Based on a Distance Rule. Neuron 80, 184-197 
66 Harriger, L., et al. (2012) Rich club organization of macaque cerebral cortex and its role in 
network communication. PloS one 7, e46497 
67 Goulas, A., et al. (2014) Comparative analysis of the macroscale structural connectivity in the 
macaque and human brain. PLoS computational biology 10, e1003529 
68 Hagmann, P., et al. (2008) Mapping the structural core of human cerebral cortex. PLoS biology 
6, e159 
69 Iturria-Medina, Y., et al. (2008) Studying the human brain anatomical network via diffusion-
weighted MRI and Graph Theory. NeuroImage 40, 1064-1076 
70 Zalesky, A., et al. (2010) Whole-brain anatomical networks: does the choice of nodes matter? 
NeuroImage 50, 970-983 
71 Gong, G., et al. (2009) Mapping anatomical connectivity patterns of human cerebral cortex 
using in vivo diffusion tensor imaging tractography. Cereb Cortex 19, 524-536 
72 van den Heuvel, M.P., et al. (2010) Aberrant frontal and temporal complex network structure in 
schizophrenia: a graph theoretical analysis. J Neurosci 30, 15915-15926 
73 Jones, D.K. (2010) Challenges and limitations of   quantifying brain connectivity in vivo  with 
diffusion MRI. Imaging Medicine 2, 14 
74 Jbabdi, S. and Johansen-Berg, H. (2011) Tractography: where do we go from here? Brain 
connectivity 1, 169-183 
75 Thomas, C., et al. (2014) Anatomical accuracy of brain connections derived from diffusion MRI 
tractography is inherently limited. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America 111, 16574-16579 
76 van den Heuvel, M.P., et al. (2015) Comparison of diffusion tractography and tract-tracing 
measures of connectivity strength in rhesus macaque connectome. Human brain mapping 36, 3064-
3075 
77 Fornito, A., et al. (2013) Graph analysis of the human connectome: promise, progress, and 
pitfalls. NeuroImage 80, 426-444 
  
32 
78 de Reus, M.A. and van den Heuvel, M.P. (2013) The parcellation-based connectome: 
Limitations and extensions. NeuroImage 80, 397-404 
79 Van Essen, D.C., et al. (2012) The Human Connectome Project: a data acquisition perspective. 
NeuroImage 62, 2222-2231 
80 Sporns, O. and Betzel, R.F. (2015) Modular Brain Networks. Annual review of psychology  
81 Smith, S.M., et al. (2009) Correspondence of the brain's functional architecture during activation 
and rest. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106, 
13040-13045 
82 Greicius, M.D., et al. (2009) Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity 
in the default mode network. Cereb Cortex 19, 72-78 
83 Honey, C.J., et al. (2009) Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural 
connectivity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106, 
2035-2040 
84 van den Heuvel, M., et al. (2008) Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the 
level of default mode functional connectivity. J Neurosci 28, 10844-10851 
85 van den Heuvel, M.P., et al. (2009) Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the 
underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain. Human brain mapping 30, 3127-
3141 
86 Nijhuis, E.H., et al. (2013) Topographic hub maps of the human structural neocortical network. 
PloS one 8, e65511 
87 van den Heuvel, M.P. and Sporns, O. (2013) Network hubs in the human brain. Trends in 
cognitive sciences 17, 683-696 
88 Hinne, M., et al. (2015) Probabilistic clustering of the human connectome identifies 
communities and hubs. PloS one 10, e0117179 
89 van den Heuvel, M.P., et al. (2012) High-cost, high-capacity backbone for global brain 
communication. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
109, 11372-11377 
90 Collin, G., et al. (2014) Structural and Functional Aspects Relating to Cost and Benefit of Rich 
Club Organization in the Human Cerebral Cortex. Cerebral Cortex 24, 2258-2267 
91 Grayson, D.S., et al. (2014) Structural and Functional Rich Club Organization of the Brain in 
Children and Adults. PloS one 9 
92 Crossley, N.A., et al. (2014) The hubs of the human connectome are generally implicated in the 
anatomy of brain disorders. Brain 137, 2382-2395 
93 Passingham, R.E., et al. (2002) The anatomical basis of functional localization in the cortex. 
Nature reviews 3, 606-616 
94 Schuz, A. (2002) Cortical Areas: Unity and Diversity. Taylor & Francis 
95 Fodor, J.A. (1983) Modularity of Mind: An Essay on Faculty Pscyhology. MIT Press 
96 Gozzi, A. and Schwarz, A.J. (2016) Large-scale functional connectivity networks in the rodent 
brain. NeuroImage 127, 496-509 
97 Stafford, J.M., et al. (2014) Large-scale topology and the default mode network in the mouse 
connectome. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 111, 
18745-18750 
98 Hutchison, R.M. and Everling, S. (2012) Monkey in the middle: why non-human primates are 
needed to bridge the gap in resting-state investigations. Frontiers in neuroanatomy 6, 29 
99 Lu, H.B., et al. (2012) Rat brains also have a default mode network. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 109, 3979-3984 
100 Markov, N.T., et al. (2014) A Weighted and Directed Interareal Connectivity Matrix for 
Macaque Cerebral Cortex. Cerebral Cortex 24, 17-36 
101 Betzel, R.F., et al. (2016) Generative models of the human connectome. NeuroImage 124, 
1054-1064 
102 Vertes, P.E., et al. (2012) Simple models of human brain functional networks. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 109, 5868-5873 
  
33 
103 Preuss, T.M. (2011) The human brain: rewired and running hot. Ann Ny Acad Sci 1225, E182-
E191 
104 Rilling, J.K. (2014) Comparative primate neuroimaging: insights into human brain evolution. 
Trends in cognitive sciences 18, 46-55 
105 Rilling, J.K. and Insel, T.R. (1999) Differential expansion of neural projection systems in 
primate brain evolution. Neuroreport 10, 1453-1459 
106 Hopkins, W.D. and Rilling, J.K. (2000) A comparative MRI study of the relationship between 
neuroanatomical asymmetry and interhemispheric connectivity in primates: Implication for the 
evolution of functional asymmetries. Behav Neurosci 114, 739-748 
107 Krubitzer, L.A. and Seelke, A.M.H. (2012) Cortical evolution in mammals: The bane and 
beauty of phenotypic variability. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America 109, 10647-10654 
108 Barett, H.C. (2013) A Hierarchical Model of the Evolution of Human Brain Specializations. In 
In the Light of Evolution:  
Volume VI: Brain and Behavior (2013) (Striedter, G.F., et al., eds), National Academy of Sciences 
109 Krubitzer, L. (2007) The magnificent compromise: cortical field evolution in mammals. 
Neuron 56, 201-208 
110 Rilling, J.K., et al. (2008) The evolution of the arcuate fasciculus revealed with comparative 
DTI. Nature neuroscience 11, 426-428 
111 Gotts, S.J., et al. (2013) Two distinct forms of functional lateralization in the human brain. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 110, E3435-3444 
112 Hopkins, W.D., et al. (2007) The association between handedness, brain asymmetries, and 
corpus callosum size in chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). Cerebral Cortex 17, 1757-1765 
113 Nicosia, V., et al. (2013) Phase transition in the economically modeled growth of a cellular 
nervous system. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
110, 7880-7885 
114 van den Heuvel, M.P. and Sporns, O. (2011) Rich-club organization of the human connectome. 
J Neurosci 31, 15775-15786 
115 Nigam, S., et al. (2016) Rich-Club Organization in Effective Connectivity among Cortical 
Neurons. Journal of Neuroscience 36, 670-684 
116 Schroeter, M.S., et al. (2015) Emergence of Rich-Club Topology and Coordinated Dynamics in 
Development of Hippocampal Functional Networks In Vitro. Journal of Neuroscience 35, 5459-
5470 
117 Binicewicz, F.Z., et al. (2015) Graph analysis of the anatomical network organization of the 
hippocampal formation and parahippocampal region in the rat. Brain structure & function Epub 
ahead of print 
118 Senden, M., et al. (2014) Rich club organization supports a diverse set of functional network 
configurations. NeuroImage 96, 174-182 
119 de Reus, M.A. and van den Heuvel, M.P. (2014) Simulated rich club lesioning in brain 
networks: a scaffold for communication and integration? Frontiers in human neuroscience 8, 647 
120 Baggio, H.C., et al. (2015) Rich Club Organization and Cognitive Performance in Healthy 
Older Participants. Journal of cognitive neuroscience 27, 1801-1810 
121 Dehaene, S., et al. (1998) A neuronal model of a global workspace in effortful cognitive tasks. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 95, 14529-14534 
122 Dehaene, S. and Naccache, L. (2001) Towards a cognitive neuroscience of consciousness: basic 
evidence and a workspace framework. Cognition 79, 1-37 
123 Kitzbichler, M.G., et al. (2011) Cognitive Effort Drives Workspace Configuration of Human 
Brain Functional Networks. Journal of Neuroscience 31, 8259-8270 
124 Shanahan, M. (2012) The brain's connective core and its role in animal cognition. 
Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological sciences 367, 2704-
2714 
  
34 
125 Bassett, D.S., et al. (2008) Hierarchical organization of human cortical networks in health and 
schizophrenia. J Neurosci 28, 9239-9248 
126 Mesulam, M.M. (1998) From sensation to cognition. Brain 121 ( Pt 6), 1013-1052 
127 Wylie, K.P., et al. (2015) Between-network connectivity occurs in brain regions lacking layer 
IV input. NeuroImage 116, 50-58 
128 van den Heuvel, M.P., et al. (2015) Associated Microscale Spine Density and Macroscale 
Connectivity Disruptions in Schizophrenia. Biological psychiatry  
129 van den Heuvel, M.P., et al. (2015) Bridging Cytoarchitectonics and Connectomics in Human 
Cerebral Cortex. J Neurosci 35, 13943-13948 
130 Beul, S.F., et al. (2015) A predictive model of the cat cortical connectome based on 
cytoarchitecture and distance. Brain structure & function 220, 3167-3184 
131 Elston, G.N. (2003) Cortex, cognition and the cell: new insights into the pyramidal neuron and 
prefrontal function. Cereb Cortex 13, 1124-1138 
132 Tomasi, D., et al. (2013) Energetic cost of brain functional connectivity. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 110, 13642-13647 
133 Power, J.D., et al. (2011) Functional network organization of the human brain. Neuron 72, 665-
678 
134 van den Heuvel, M.P. and Sporns, O. (2013) An anatomical infrastructure for integration 
between functional networks in human cerebral cortex. J Neurosci 33, 11 
135 Crossley, N.A., et al. (2013) Cognitive relevance of the community structure of the human 
brain functional coactivation network. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America 110, 11583-11588 
136 Samu, D., et al. (2014) Influence of wiring cost on the large-scale architecture of human 
cortical connectivity. PLoS computational biology 10, e1003557 
137 Roberts, J.A., et al. (2016) The contribution of geometry to the human connectome. 
NeuroImage 124, 379-393 
138 Budd, J.M. and Kisvarday, Z.F. (2012) Communication and wiring in the cortical connectome. 
Frontiers in neuroanatomy 6, 42 
139 Sammut, M., et al. (2015) Glia-derived neurons are required for sex-specific learning in C. 
elegans. Nature 526, 385-390 
140 Rilling, J.K., et al. (2012) Differences between chimpanzees and bonobos in neural systems 
supporting social cognition. Social cognitive and affective neuroscience 7, 369-379 
141 Parish, A.R. and De Waal, F.B. (2000) The other "closest living relative". How bonobos (Pan 
paniscus) challenge traditional assumptions about females, dominance, intra- and intersexual 
interactions, and hominid evolution. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 907, 97-113 
142 Bickart, K.C., et al. (2011) Amygdala volume and social network size in humans. Nature 
neuroscience 14, 163-164 
143 Adolphs, R. (2010) What does the amygdala contribute to social cognition? Year in Cognitive 
Neuroscience 2010 1191, 42-61 
144 Friederici, A.D. (2009) Pathways to language: fiber tracts in the human brain. Trends in 
cognitive sciences 13, 175-181 
145 Li, L., et al. (2013) Mapping putative hubs in human, chimpanzee and rhesus macaque 
connectomes via diffusion tractography. NeuroImage 80, 462-474 
146 Miranda-Dominguez, O., et al. (2014) Bridging the gap between the human and macaque 
connectome: a quantitative comparison of global interspecies structure-function relationships and 
network topology. J Neurosci 34, 5552-5563 
147 Bruner, E., et al. (2016) Evidence for expansion of the precuneus in human evolution. Brain 
structure & function  
148 Zalesky, A., et al. (2011) Disrupted axonal fiber connectivity in schizophrenia. Biological 
psychiatry 69, 80-89 
149 Ryman, S.G., et al. (2014) Sex differences in the relationship between white matter 
connectivity and creativity. NeuroImage 101, 380-389 
  
35 
150 Li, Y., et al. (2009) Brain anatomical network and intelligence. PLoS computational biology 5, 
e1000395 
151 van den Heuvel, M.P., et al. (2009) Efficiency of functional brain networks and intellectual 
performance. J Neurosci 29, 7619-7624 
152 Giessing, C., et al. (2013) Human Brain Functional Network Changes Associated with 
Enhanced and Impaired Attentional Task Performance. Journal of Neuroscience 33, 5903-5914 
153 Deco, G., et al. (2015) Rethinking segregation and integration: contributions of whole-brain 
modelling. Nature reviews 16, 430-439 
154 Zamora-Lopez, G., et al. (2010) Cortical hubs form a module for multisensory integration on 
top of the hierarchy of cortical networks. Frontiers in neuroinformatics 4, 1 
155 Schmidt, R., et al. (2015) Kuramoto model simulation of neural hubs and dynamic synchrony 
in the human cerebral connectome. BMC neuroscience 16, 54 
156 Swanson, L.W. (2011) Brain Architecture. Oxford University Press 
157 Avena-Koenigsberger, A., et al. (2015) Network morphospace. J R Soc Interface 12 
158 Roth, G. and Dicke, U. (2005) Evolution of the brain and intelligence. Trends in cognitive 
sciences 9, 250-257 
159 Fox, D. (2011) The Limits of Intelligence. Scientific American 37 
160 Krubitzer, L. and Stolzenberg, D.S. (2014) The evolutionary masquerade: genetic and 
epigenetic contributions to the neocortex. Current opinion in neurobiology 24, 157-165 
161 Chung, K. and Deisseroth, K. (2013) CLARITY for mapping the nervous system. Nat Methods 
10, 508-513 
162 Reid, A.T., et al. (2016) A cross-modal, cross-species comparison of connectivity measures in 
the primate brain. NeuroImage 125, 311-331 
163 Azadbakht, H., et al. (2015) Validation of High-Resolution Tractography Against In Vivo 
Tracing in the Macaque Visual Cortex. Cereb Cortex 25, 4299-4309 
164 Katsuki, T. and Greenspan, R.J. (2013) Jellyfish nervous systems. Current Biology 23, R592-
R594 
165 Satterlie, R.A. (2011) Do jellyfish have central nervous systems? J Exp Biol 214, 1215-1223 
166 Garm, A., et al. (2007) The ring nerve of the box jellyfish Tripedalia cystophora. Cell Tissue 
Res 329, 147-157 
167 Dunne, J.F., et al. (1985) A subset of cells in the nerve net of Hydra oligactis defined by a 
monoclonal antibody: its arrangement and development. Developmental biology 109, 41-53 
168 Garm, A., et al. (2006) Rhopalia are integrated parts of the central nervous system in box 
jellyfish. Cell Tissue Res 325, 333-343 
169 Koizumi, O., et al. (2015) The nerve ring in cnidarians: its presence and structure in hydrozoan 
medusae. Zoology 118, 79-88 
170 Colizza, V., et al. (2006) Detecting rich-club ordering in complex networks. Nature Physics 2, 
110-115 
171 Goni, J., et al. (2013) Exploring the Morphospace of Communication Efficiency in Complex 
Networks. PloS one 8 
172 Banerjee, A. and Jost, J. (2009) Graph spectra as a systematic tool in computational biology. 
Discrete Appl Math 157, 2425-2431 
173 de Lange, S.C., et al. (2014) The Laplacian spectrum of neural networks. Frontiers in 
computational neuroscience 7, 189 
174 Sole, R. and Valverde, S. (2004) Information Theory of Complex Networks: On Evolution and 
Architec- tural Constraints. Lect. Notes Phys. 650, 18 
175 Scholtens, L.H., et al. (2014) Linking macroscale graph analytical organization to microscale 
neuroarchitectonics in the macaque connectome. J Neurosci 34, 12192-12205 
 
 
  
36 
 
 
 
 
 
  
37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
40 
 
 
 
  
41 
 
