 October 17, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525
e232
ABSTRACT: Cardiogenic shock is a high-acuity, potentially complex, 
and hemodynamically diverse state of end-organ hypoperfusion that is 
frequently associated with multisystem organ failure. Despite improving 
survival in recent years, patient morbidity and mortality remain high, and 
there are few evidence-based therapeutic interventions known to clearly 
improve patient outcomes. This scientific statement on cardiogenic shock 
summarizes the epidemiology, pathophysiology, causes, and outcomes 
of cardiogenic shock; reviews contemporary best medical, surgical, 
mechanical circulatory support, and palliative care practices; advocates 
for the development of regionalized systems of care; and outlines future 
research priorities.
C
ardiogenic shock (CS) is a low-cardiac-output state resulting in life-threat-
ening end-organ hypoperfusion and hypoxia.1,2 Acute myocardial infarction 
(MI) with left ventricular (LV) dysfunction remains the most frequent cause of 
CS.1,3 Advances in reperfusion therapy have been associated with improvements 
in survival, but significant regional disparities in evidence-based care have been 
reported, and in-hospital mortality remains high (27%–51%).1,4–9 Management 
recommendations are distributed between disease-specific statements and guide-
lines, and a dedicated and comprehensive clinical resource in this area is lacking. 
Thus, consolidating the evidence to define contemporary best medical and surgical 
CS practices for both MI-associated CS and other types of CS may be an important 
step in knowledge translation to help attenuate disparities in evidence-based care.
Regional systems of care coupled with treatment algorithms have improved sur-
vival in high-acuity time-sensitive conditions such as MI, out-of-hospital cardiac arrest 
(OHCA), and trauma.10–12 Applying a similar framework to CS management may lead 
to similar improvements in survival, and CS systems of care are emerging within ex-
isting regional cardiovascular emergency care networks; however, guidance from a 
national expert group on structure and systems of care has not been available.13,14 Ac-
cordingly, the purposes of this American Heart Association (AHA) scientific statement 
on CS are to summarize our contemporary understanding of the epidemiology, patho-
physiology, and in-hospital best care practices into a single clinical resource document; 
to suggest a stepwise management algorithm that integrates medical, surgical, and 
mechanical circulatory support (MCS) therapies; and to propose a Mission: Lifeline–
supported pathway for the development of integrated regionalized CS systems of care.
DEFINITION OF CS
Acute cardiac hemodynamic instability may result from disorders that impair func-
tion of the myocardium, valves, conduction system, or pericardium, either in isolation 
Sean van Diepen, MD, 
MSc, FAHA, Chair
Jason N. Katz, MD, MHS, 
Vice Chair
Nancy M. Albert, RN, PhD, 
FAHA
Timothy D. Henry, MD, 
FAHA
Alice K. Jacobs, MD, FAHA
Navin K. Kapur, MD
Ahmet Kilic, MD
Venu Menon, MD, FAHA
E. Magnus Ohman, MD
Nancy K. Sweitzer, MD, 
PhD, FAHA
Holger Thiele, MD
Jeffrey B. Washam, 
PharmD, FAHA
Mauricio G. Cohen, MD
On behalf of the Ameri-
can Heart Association 
Council on Clinical 
Cardiology; Council 
on Cardiovascular and 
Stroke Nursing; Council 
on Quality of Care and 
Outcomes Research; 
and Mission: Lifeline
Contemporary Management of 
Cardiogenic Shock
A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association
© 2017 American Heart 
Association, Inc.
Key Words: AHA Scientific 
Statements ◼ delivery of health 
care ◼ disease management  
◼ shock, cardiogenic
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Contemporary Management of Cardiogenic Shock
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525 
October 17, 2017
e233
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
or in combination. CS is pragmatically defined as a state 
in which ineffective cardiac output caused by a primary 
cardiac disorder results in both clinical and biochemi-
cal manifestations of inadequate tissue perfusion. The 
clinical presentation is typically characterized by persis-
tent hypotension unresponsive to volume replacement 
and is accompanied by clinical features of end-organ 
hypoperfusion requiring intervention with pharmaco-
logical or mechanical support. Although not mandat-
ed, objective hemodynamic parameters for CS can help 
confirm the diagnosis and enable comparison across 
cohorts and clinical trials. Definitions in clinical practice 
guidelines and operationalized definitions used in the 
SHOCK (Should We Emergently Revascularize Occluded 
Coronaries for Cardiogenic Shock) and IABP-SHOCK II 
(Intraaortic Balloon Pump in Cardiogenic Shock II) trials 
are presented in Table 1.1,9,15
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES
Before the routine use of early revascularization, MI-
associated CS had an in-hospital mortality exceeding 
80%. A registry trial of 250 patients with acute MI de-
scribed the association between bedside physical ex-
amination (Killip classification) for the assessment of 
heart failure (HF) and the risk of mortality.16 Patients 
with Killip class IV (CS) had a mortality of 81%. Sub-
sequently, the Diamond and Forrester classification us-
ing right-sided heart catheterization described the role 
of cardiac hemodynamics in stratifying risk after acute 
MI in the prereperfusion era.17 Patients in Diamond 
and Forrester subgroup IV with a pulmonary capillary 
wedge pressure (PCWP) >18 mm Hg and a cardiac in-
dex (CI) <2.2 L·min−1·m−2, indicative of CS, had a mor-
tality of 51%.
Treatment efforts to reduce mortality initially focused 
on improvement of hemodynamic parameters by me-
chanical devices. The intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP), 
introduced in a registry cooperative trial, decreased 
systolic blood pressure (SBP), increased diastolic blood 
pressure, and modestly but significantly increased CI.18 
Nevertheless, mortality remained virtually unchanged, 
with only 15 survivors among 87 patients (83% mortal-
ity).18 The early reperfusion era did not affect outcomes 
for shock complicating acute MI. Fibrinolysis was effec-
tive for patients with ST-segment–elevation MI (STEMI) 
in general, but it is less clear if fibrinolysis reduces mor-
tality in those with CS.19,20
The first major breakthrough in CS treatment was 
achieved by the randomized SHOCK trial. Although an 
early invasive strategy coupled with percutaneous coro-
nary intervention (PCI) or coronary artery bypass graft-
ing (CABG) did not reduce 30-day mortality (the primary 
outcome of the trial), a significant mortality reduction 
emerged at 6 and 12 months that persisted at longer-
term follow-up.9,21,22 Subsequent registries confirmed 
the survival advantage of early revascularization.5,6,8
Further efforts to reduce CS mortality have been di-
rected toward improvements in MCS devices. The larg-
est randomized trial in patients with acute MI compli-
cated by CS did not show a benefit with routine IABP 
placement in addition to revascularization.1 As a result, 
there has been a decrease in the use of IABPs in clinical 
practice and a downgrading in guideline recommenda-
tions.23,24 Recently, other percutaneous MCS devices 
have shown promise in the treatment of CS, but more 
data from randomized clinical trials are needed.25
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Our understanding of the complexity and pathophysi-
ology of MI-associated CS in particular has evolved 
over the past 2 decades.2,3,25–27 In general, there is a 
profound depression of myocardial contractility re-
sulting in a potentially deleterious spiral of reduced 
cardiac output, low blood pressure, and further cor-
onary ischemia, followed by additional reductions in 
contractility (Figure 1). This cycle may lead to death. 
This classic paradigm also includes compensatory, al-
though pathological, systemic vasoconstriction that 
Table 1. Pragmatic and Clinical Trial Definitions of CS
Clinical Definition
SHOCK Trial9*
IABP-SHOCK II1†
ESC HF Guidelines15
Cardiac disorder that 
results in both clinical 
and biochemical 
evidence of tissue 
hypoperfusion
Clinical criteria:  
SBP <90 mm 
Hg for ≥30 min OR  
Support to maintain SBP ≥90 mm 
Hg  
AND  
End-organ hypoperfusion (urine output 
<30 mL/h or cool extremities)
Hemodynamic criteria: 
CI of ≤2.2 L·min−1·m−2 AND  
PCWP ≥15 mm 
Hg
Clinical criteria: 
SBP <90 mm 
Hg for ≥30 min OR  
Catecholamines to maintain SBP >90 mm 
Hg 
 
AND  
Clinical pulmonary congestion  
AND  
Impaired end-organ perfusion (altered 
mental status, cold/clammy skin and 
extremities, urine output <30 mL/h, or 
lactate >2.0 mmol/L)
SBP <90 mm 
Hg with adequate volume 
and clinical or laboratory signs of 
hypoperfusion
Clinical hypoperfusion:  
Cold extremities, oliguria, mental 
confusion, dizziness, narrow pulse pressure
Laboratory hypoperfusion:  
Metabolic acidosis, elevated serum lactate, 
elevated serum creatinine
CI indicates cardiac index; CS, cardiogenic shock; ESC, European Society of Cardiology; HF, heart failure; IABP-SHOCK II, Intraaortic Balloon Pump in Cardiogenic 
Shock II; LV, left ventricular; MI, myocardial infarction; PCWP
, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure; SBP
, systolic blood pressure; and SHOCK, Should We Emergently 
Revascularize Occluded Coronaries for Cardiogenic Shock.
*In setting of MI complicated by predominantly LV dysfunction.
†In setting of acute MI.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 van Diepen et al
October 17, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525
e234
results from acute cardiac injury and ineffective stroke 
volume.3 Emerging evidence has also shown that im-
pairment of tissue microcirculation is associated with 
30-day mortality and temporal changes in SOFA (Sepsis- 
Related Organ Failure Assessment) scores and may be 
improved with MCS.28,29
In fact, it is now well established that CS can result 
in both acute and subacute derangements to the entire 
circulatory system, including the peripheral vasculature. 
Extremity and vital organ hypoperfusion remains a clini-
cal hallmark. Although ineffective stroke volume is the 
inciting event, inadequate circulatory compensation 
may also contribute to shock. Peripheral vasoconstric-
tion may improve coronary and peripheral perfusion at 
the cost of increased afterload. Alternatively, systemic 
inflammation triggered by acute cardiac injury may 
induce pathological vasodilatation. Endothelial and 
inducible nitric oxide (NO) synthase may play a major 
role in the production of high NO levels, along with 
peroxynitrite, which has a negative inotropic effect and 
is cardiotoxic.26 Other inflammatory mediators such as 
interleukins and tumor necrosis factor can also contrib-
ute to systemic vasodilation and have been associated 
with mortality in CS.30 In addition, bleeding and transfu-
sions may be associated with mortality.31,32 Alterations 
in erythrocyte NO biology of stored blood can lead to 
vasoconstriction, platelet aggregation, and ineffective 
oxygen delivery, whereas transfusion of stored blood 
may also contribute to inflammation.33
HEMODYNAMIC PHENOTYPES
Early reports of CS described patients with HF and 
elevated central venous pressures (CVPs).34 With the 
advent of invasive hemodynamic measurements, pa-
tients with CS were further characterized by a low CI, 
an elevated systemic vascular resistance, and a high 
PCWP.35 This classic “cold and wet” (Figure 2) profile is 
the most frequent CS phenotype, accounting for near-
ly two thirds of patients with MI-associated CS.36 Al-
though some teaching and reference materials contin-
ue to describe a singular CS presentation, SHOCK trial 
ancillary studies have helped to identify an expanded 
spectrum of CS hemodynamics.37 The common physio-
logical characteristic among all phenotypes is a low CI, 
but ventricular preload (PCWP or CVP), volume, and 
systemic vascular resistance may vary. Notably, whereas 
CI thresholds <1.8 to 2.2 L·min−1·m−2 have been pro-
Figure 1. The pathophysiological concept of the expanded cardiogenic shock spiral.  
eNOS indicates endothelial nitric oxide synthase; iNOS, inducible nitric oxide synthase; LVEDP, left ventricular end-diastolic 
pressure; NO, nitric oxide; SIRS, systemic inflammatory response syndrome; SVR, systemic vascular resistance; and TNF-α, 
tumor necrosis factor-α. Adapted from Hollenberg et al3 with the permission of American College of Physicians, Inc, copyright 
© 1999, American College of Physicians, all rights reserved; from Hochman,26 copyright © 2003, American Heart Association, 
Inc; from Reynolds and Hochman,2 copyright © 2008, American Heart Association, Inc; and from Thiele et al27 by permission 
of the European Society of Cardiology, copyright © 2010, The Author.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Contemporary Management of Cardiogenic Shock
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525 
October 17, 2017
e235
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
posed for CS, absolute cutoffs are likely impractical 
given that end-organ hypoperfusion with higher CIs 
has been documented.2,38,39 Euvolemic or “cold and 
dry” CS typically describes a diuretic-responsive patient 
with chronic HF with a subacute decompensation but 
also represents a reported 28% of patients with MI-
associated CS.36,40 Compared with patients with classic 
CS, those with euvolemic CS were less likely to have 
had a previous MI or chronic kidney disease and had 
significantly lower PCWPs.36
There is growing recognition of the cytokine cascade, 
chemokine response, and inducible NO synthase ex-
pression associated with coronary plaque rupture.26,41–46 
As previously described, putative mechanisms also are 
associated with a “wet and warm” CS presentation 
wherein a systemic inflammatory response syndrome 
and vasodilation can occur after an MI.26,47 This pheno-
type is characterized by systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome features, lower systemic vascular resistance, 
and a higher risk of sepsis and mortality.48,49
Overlaid on this framework are 2 uncommon but 
hemodynamically distinct entities of normotensive CS 
and right ventricular (RV) CS. In the SHOCK trial regis-
try, 5.2% of patients were normotensive with periph-
eral hypoperfusion despite an SBP >90 mm Hg.50 This 
group had comparable CIs, PWCPs, and LV ejection 
fractions but higher systemic vascular resistance com-
pared with hypotensive patients with CS, thus high-
lighting the risk of relative hypotension and the poten-
tial for hypoperfusion without profound hypotension. 
The reported prevalence of RV CS is 5.3% among 
patients with MI-induced CS. For these patients, the 
severity of shock may depend on the degree of both 
RV and LV ischemia, given a shared septum and the 
importance of ventricular interdependence on RV 
function.51–53 Hemodynamically, this cohort is charac-
terized by relatively higher CVPs, LV ejection fractions, 
and lower pulmonary artery systolic pressures, with no 
differences in CI or PCWP. Only 71% of patients with 
an RV infarct in the SHOCK registry met the classic 
hemodynamic definition of RV infarction (CVP:PCWP 
≥0.8); however, other studies have shown that fluid 
challenges increased the prevalence of this hemody-
namic definition.51,54
PATHOGENESIS
After hemodynamic resuscitation and stabilization 
of a patient presenting with CS, identification of the 
underlying cause (Supplemental Table 1) can permit 
the initiation of specific pharmacological or mechani-
cal therapies. A contemporary registry has reported 
that as many as 81% of patients presenting with CS 
had an underlying acute coronary syndrome (ACS).55 
Thus, among patients with CS within the appropriate 
demographic or with risk factors for coronary artery 
disease, ACS should be the focus of initial diagnostic 
testing, and this testing should include an ECG within 
10 minutes of presentation.56 Although 5% to 12% 
of ACS cases are complicated by CS, this presentation 
is often associated with a large degree of at-risk myo-
cardium.4,57 In patients with a recent ACS, mechanical 
complications (including papillary muscle rupture, ven-
tricular septal defect, or free wall rupture) were his-
torically thought to be late complications but most fre-
quently present within 24 hours of hospitalization.58,59 
An index of suspicion and rapid echocardiography are 
required for such diagnoses.
Chronic HF can present in an acute decompensated 
state and may account for up to 30% of CS cases.60 
These patients have often experienced a decline in 
disease stability or have poor adherence to guideline-
based therapies that may trigger an acute worsening 
of their chronic disease. Treatment of patients with 
chronic HF presenting in CS can differ substantially 
from the treatment of other types of CS because the 
hemodynamic condition and neurohormonal milieu 
are often strikingly different. Patients with HF often 
have profound upregulation of vasoconstrictor sub-
stances such as angiotensin II, endothelin-1, and nor-
epinephrine.61,62 Among patients who had cardiac sur-
gery, 2% to 6% of patients develop postcardiotomy 
shock.63,64 This state may be attributable to low car-
diac output (a result in part of myocardial hibernation, 
stunning, or inadequate cardioprotection), systemic 
vasodilation, or both.63–65
If these common causes of CS are not consistent 
with the presentation, then less common causes listed 
in Supplemental Table 1 should be considered. In acute 
Figure 2. Potential hemodynamic 
presentations of cardiogenic 
shock.  
CI indicates cardiac index; PCWP
, 
pulmonary capillary wedge pressure; 
and SVRI, systemic vascular resis-
tance index.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 van Diepen et al
October 17, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525
e236
myocarditis, paradoxically, the sickest patients on pre-
sentation have the best odds of recovery, particularly in 
younger age groups.66,67 Survival may depend on rapid 
recognition of the clinical syndrome and early institu-
tion of aggressive hemodynamic support.67–70 Stress-
induced cardiomyopathy is increasingly recognized, 
and although it often presents with mild cardiovascular 
compromise, it has been associated with CS and may 
require MCS. Patients with stress-induced cardiomy-
opathy typically recover.71–73 Advanced valvular heart 
disease and prosthetic dysfunction, especially when 
previously undetected or inadequately monitored, may 
present as CS, although this has become less common 
as echocardiographic techniques and surveillance have 
improved.74–76 Thyroid disorders, both hyperthyroid-
ism and hypothyroidism, can also cause circulatory 
collapse.77,78 Pregnancy-associated cardiac conditions, 
including both peripartum cardiomyopathy and acute 
coronary dissection, may present as CS. Numerous ad-
ditional causes of CS have been reported, but they typi-
cally occur in <1% of patients.79,80
LABORATORY EVALUATION, 
NONINVASIVE TESTING, AND 
HEMODYNAMIC MONITORING
Laboratory Evaluation
Biomarkers of cardiac myonecrosis are useful to gauge 
the severity of acute underlying myocardial injury in 
conditions such as fulminant myocarditis. In ACS, car-
diac troponin is noted to be elevated and has a rise-
and-fall pattern consistent with acute ischemic injury.81 
A mismatch between the degree of segmental dysfunc-
tion on imaging and troponin release may be noted 
in the setting of stunned/hibernating myocardium or 
when presentation is significantly delayed after the 
ischemic insult. Myocardial necrosis biomarker levels 
may provide an idea of the extent of myocardial injury, 
whereas serial measurements are useful in assessing 
early washout after successful reperfusion and in esti-
mating the amount of cardiac necrosis. Natriuretic pep-
tides are significantly elevated in the setting of acute HF 
culminating in CS and are associated with mortality in 
MI-associated CS.82,83
Oxygen-carrying capacity is the product of cardiac 
output and the oxygen content of blood. Thus, an in-
effective CI will result in inadequate peripheral tissue 
oxygen delivery. Elevated arterial lactic acid levels are 
nonspecifically indicative of tissue hypoxia but are asso-
ciated with mortality in CS.84,85 The pathogenesis of lac-
tate production in CS is uncertain, although impaired 
oxygen delivery, stress-induced hyperlactatemia, and 
impaired clearance are likely contributors.86 A peripher-
al oxygen demand-delivery mismatch will result in low 
central venous oxygen measurements. A mixed venous 
oxygen saturation sample is ideally obtained from the 
distal port of a pulmonary artery catheter (PAC) and is a 
reflection of oxygen saturation from blood returning to 
the heart via the superior and inferior vena cava, as well 
as the coronary sinus. Serial measurements of arterial 
lactate and mixed venous oxygen saturation levels may 
be helpful to temporally monitor responses to thera-
peutic interventions. Arterial blood gas measurements 
also permit the assessment of arterial oxygenation and 
ventilation, as well as metabolic and respiratory acid-
base disorders.
Acute kidney injury, which is reflected by a rise in 
serum creatinine and a potential reduction in urinary 
output, in the setting of CS may indicate renal hypo-
perfusion and is associated with poor outcomes.87,88 It 
should be noted that novel renal biomarkers such as 
neutrophil gelatinase–associated lipocalcin, kidney in-
jury molecule 1, and cystatin C were not more effec-
tive than standard evaluation with serum creatinine 
for assessing risk.87 Acute ischemic or congestive liver 
injury can occur in the setting of CS and manifests as a 
marked elevation in serum aspartate aminotransferase, 
alanine aminotransferase, serum bilirubin, and lactate 
dehydrogenase levels, often accompanied by an in-
crease in prothrombin time with a peak at 24 to 72 
hours that subsequently recovers to baseline within 5 
to 10 days, and a ratio of alanine aminotransferase to 
lactate dehydrogenase of <1.5.89,90 This should be dif-
ferentiated from chronic to subacute elevation of liver 
function abnormalities in the setting of venous conges-
tion resulting from right-sided HF.
Noninvasive Testing
Despite its limitations, the chest x-ray provides informa-
tion on cardiac size and pulmonary congestion and may 
suggest alternative pathogeneses such as aortic dissec-
tion, pericardial effusion, pneumothorax, esophageal 
perforation, or pulmonary embolism. The test enables 
clinicians to confirm the position of the endotracheal 
tube and the position of supportive devices, including 
temporary pacing wires and MCS. The resting 12-lead 
ECG is diagnostic in patients with STEMI but can pro-
vide evidence for other clinical conditions, including 
non–ST-segment–elevation ACS, pulmonary embolism, 
acute myocarditis, electrolyte imbalances, and drug tox-
icity. A comprehensive transthoracic echocardiogram is 
suggested. It can provide additional hemodynamic in-
formation, exclude mechanical complications, and help 
to guide medical and mechanical therapeutic decisions 
(Supplemental Table 2). When images are inadequate 
or the diagnosis remains uncertain, a transesophageal 
echocardiogram should be considered. An overview of 
invasive hemodynamic testing and monitoring is pro-
vided later in Management of CS.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Contemporary Management of Cardiogenic Shock
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525 
October 17, 2017
e237
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Suggestions for Clinical Practice
We suggest that all patients with CS be evaluated with 
an ECG, chest x-ray, and comprehensive echocardio-
gram with the specific purpose of understanding the 
dominant mechanism responsible for acute hemody-
namic instability. In the absence of contraindications, 
additional imaging with a computed tomography scan 
or transesophageal echocardiogram (as appropriate) 
if an acute aortic syndrome or pulmonary embolism is 
suspected is appropriate. Suggested laboratory tests in-
clude a complete blood count, electrolytes, creatinine, 
hepatic function tests, arterial blood gas and lactate, 
and serial cardiac troponin levels.
CONTEMPORARY OUTCOMES, 
PROGNOSIS, AND RESOURCE USE
Trends in Outcomes and Therapies
CS remains the most common cause of in-hospital mor-
tality in the setting of an acute MI, and most longitu-
dinal studies and registries have reported a decline in 
MI-associated CS mortality.4,57,91–93 An analysis of the 
Nationwide Inpatient Sample Database between 2003 
and 2010 reported an increase in the prevalence of CS 
from 6% to 10% in the overall population and from 
7% to 12% among patients >75 years of age present-
ing with STEMI.4 In-hospital mortality decreased from 
45% to 34% over the same time frame, although mor-
tality rates remained high (55%) in patients >75 years 
of age. The provision of angiography (64% to 74%), 
early PCI (26% to 54%), and IABP (45% to 54%) in-
creased, whereas PAC use (10% to 6%) decreased over 
time. The declining rates of in-hospital mortality may be 
partly attributed to more aggressive early revasculariza-
tion, although this improvement was not supported by 
a more contemporary analysis of patients with MI-asso-
ciated CS undergoing PCI between 2005 and 2013.57 
Those authors reported that despite an overall increase 
in PCI, in-hospital mortality increased from 27% to 
30% and deaths occurring in the catheterization labo-
ratory increased from 15% to 20%. In addition, pa-
tient complexity increased over the same time frame 
with more delayed presentations (>6 hours after symp-
tom onset), multivessel coronary disease, and complex 
(type C) coronary lesions. Furthermore, the percentage 
of patients with MI-associated CS undergoing PCI at 
low-volume (<500 PCIs a year) centers increased from 
30% to 48%. Collectively, these data identify several 
concerning trends in the field: a potential increase in 
mortality, an increase in patient complexity and use of 
MCS, and a geographic shift toward care being deliv-
ered by lower-volume centers that may have less expe-
rience dealing with complex hemodynamic and coro-
nary patient subsets. In addition, confounding related 
to changes in hospital-based coding of CS cannot be 
excluded. In the non-ACS CS population, a contempo-
rary registry (limited to 42 patients with non-ACS CS) 
reported an in-hospital mortality rate of 24% and that 
non-ACS pathogenesis was independently associated 
with better survival.55
Prognostic Models and Variables
Multiple scoring systems to predict clinical outcomes in 
CS have been proposed. Several models were derived 
in the general intensive care unit (ICU) population and 
include the APACHE (Acute Physiology and Chronic 
Health Evaluation)-II score and SAPS (Simplified Acute 
Physiology Score)-II scoring systems.94–97 APACHE-II in-
cludes 13 physiological variables and was designed to 
be measured during the first 24 hours after ICU ad-
mission for patients >16 years of age. The APACHE-III 
scoring system adds variables such as pathogenesis of 
shock, sex, race, and comorbidities to the APACHE-II 
system and was validated in >17 
000 ICU patients in the 
United States. The SAPS-II includes 12 physiological and 
3 disease-related variables, was validated in 12 
997 pa-
tients from 12 countries, and is used to predict in-hos-
pital mortality. A small study comparing the APACHE-II, 
APACHE-III, SAPS-II, and SOFA scoring systems in CS re-
ported that APACHE-III and SAPS-II had the best mortal-
ity discrimination.98 The CardShock study was a series of 
219 patients with all-cause CS and identified 7 variables 
associated with in-hospital mortality (c index 0.85), but 
it lacked external validation.55 Among patients with an 
ACS complicated by CS, the GRACE (Global Registry of 
Acute Coronary Events) score has good discrimination 
and calibration for in-hospital and long-term mortality 
among all patients presenting with ACS, but it is not 
applicable to non-ACS presentations.99 Additional pub-
lished clinical, imaging, and hemodynamic variables as-
sociated with in-hospital mortality in the CS population 
include anoxic brain damage, end-organ hypoperfu-
sion, elevated lactate, prior CABG, ACS pathogenesis, 
LV ejection fraction, RV function, pulmonary artery pul-
satility index (defined as the ratio of pulmonary artery 
pulse pressure to right atrial pressure), mitral regurgita-
tion, LV stroke work, cardiac power output, SBP
, num-
ber of vasopressors, systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome, and TIMI (Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarc-
tion) flow.39,48,100–105 Limitations of available models in-
cluded the lack of a CS-specific derivation population, 
external validation, dynamic application (ie, single point 
in time only), applicability to all CS types, and capture 
of all potentially prognostic clinical, laboratory, hemo-
dynamic, imaging, and biomarker data.
Resource Use and Costs
The economic impact of CS remains poorly understood. 
The median reported ICU length of stay is 6 days and 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 van Diepen et al
October 17, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525
e238
hospital length of stay is 8.9±11.8 days in the United 
States and a median of 12 days (7–25 days) in Eu-
rope.1,4,55 A recent analysis of patients with STEMI com-
plicated by CS in the United States reported that the 
average total hospital cost was $41 
774±45 
252.4 In the 
contemporary IABP-SHOCK II trial, there were higher 
average costs in the IABP arm (€33 
155±14 
593) than 
in the control arm (€32 
538±14 
031).106 In summary, CS 
treatment incurs substantial resource use and costs.
Long-Term Outcomes
Among patients with ACS-associated CS who had re-
vascularization and who survived to hospital discharge, 
long-term follow-up of the SHOCK trial suggests that the 
majority (62%) were alive 6 years later.21 In comparison, 
a contemporary study of patients ≥65 years of age with 
MI-associated CS who survived to hospital discharge re-
ported an increased risk of mortality in the first 60 days 
after discharge and then a mortality rate comparable 
to that of patients without shock thereafter. The 1-year 
survival was 87.6%.107 Despite favorable longer-term 
survival, CS may be associated with considerable mor-
bidity. Registry data have reported 1-year all-cause and 
HF rehospitalization rates of 59% and 33%, respective-
ly.107 The SHOCK and IABP-SHOCK II trials have reported 
modest quality of life among 1-year survivors, with New 
York Heart Association class II to IV symptoms in 43% 
and self-care, physical, or psychological impairments in 
≈20% to 30%.108,109 Considerably less is known about 
the long-term outcomes in the non-ACS CS population. 
These data further support the need for new in-hospital 
and postdischarge therapeutic approaches to improve 
outcomes for patients with CS and the need for more 
analyses in the non-ACS CS population.
REGIONALIZED SYSTEMS OF CARE
Clinical Volume and Patient Outcomes
Hospital and medical provider volumes have been 
consistently and positively associated with survival in 
medical and surgical care. Luft and colleagues110 ini-
tially described this relationship in 1979, demonstrating 
25% to 41% lower postoperative mortality in hospitals 
performing >200 annual surgical procedures. In subse-
quent studies, investigators demonstrated a direct re-
lationship between volumes and outcomes at both the 
operator and institutional level for surgery and PCI.111–
114 A meta-analysis of 15 PCI studies and 7 CABG stud-
ies, including >1 million patients from >2000 hospitals, 
reported lower in-hospital mortality in large-volume 
(>600 cases) PCI and CABG centers.115 Multiple studies 
have also reported improved survival after primary PCI 
for acute MI in high-volume centers and by high-vol-
ume operators.116–118 On the basis of these relationships, 
professional associations, including the AHA, American 
College of Cardiology, and Society for Cardiac Angiog-
raphy and Interventions, have recommended minimum 
procedural volumes for hospitals and operators for the 
maintenance of accreditation and competency.119 Simi-
lar volume-outcome relationships have been reported 
for other common conditions, including HF and pneu-
monia, and for medical ICU patients requiring mechani-
cal ventilation (MV).120,121 In CS, a complex acute condi-
tion that requires a multidisciplinary treatment team to 
provide procedural, surgical, and medical care, clinical 
volume has also been associated with survival. A study 
from the Nationwide Inpatient Sample reported that 
hospitals treating >107 cases per year more frequently 
provided early revascularization, ventricular assist de-
vices, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), 
and hemodialysis. There was a direct relationship be-
tween adjusted in-hospital mortality and hospital vol-
ume. Mortality was 37%, 39.3%, 40.7%, and 42% in 
hospitals that treated ≥107, 59 to 106, 28 to 58, and 
<27 cases per year (P<0.05).122 Of note, large-volume 
sites were more likely to be academic, located in urban 
areas, and serve as referral hubs. Reasons underpinning 
this finding have not been clearly elucidated, although 
we hypothesize that patients treated at high-volume 
hospitals may be more likely to receive evidence-based 
care and prompt revascularization by high-volume op-
erators and that high-volume hospitals may include 
a multidisciplinary team who more frequently imple-
ments MCS and cares for patients with multisystem 
organ failure. Accordingly, establishing systems of care 
with high-volume hospitals used as hubs integrated 
with emergency medical systems and spoke centers 
with clearly defined protocols for early recognition, 
management, and transfer has the potential to improve 
patient outcomes.
Existing Regional Systems for 
Coordination of Care
Regionalized care systems have been successfully imple-
mented for time-sensitive conditions, including STEMI, 
stroke, trauma, aortic dissection, and OHCA.107,123–130 In 
trauma care, mortality has been reduced by 15% to 
20% with patient triage and transport to designated 
American College of Surgeons Level 1 trauma cen-
ters.124 In stroke care, integrated systems of care have 
been associated with higher rates of fibrinolytic therapy 
use and improved survival.123,131 In OHCA, wherein pre-
hospital and hospital management are mutually criti-
cal for improved survival, regional systems of care have 
been successfully implemented.125,130,132,133 In Arizona, 
hospital bypass by emergency medical services to desig-
nated OHCA centers equipped to provide best-practice 
in-hospital care was associated with improved overall 
survival from 8.9% to 14.4%.134 The management of 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Contemporary Management of Cardiogenic Shock
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525 
October 17, 2017
e239
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
STEMI represents the paradigm for integrated systems 
of care with coordinated emergency medical services, 
community, and tertiary care centers, coupled with 
standardized hub-and-spoke transfer protocols, quality 
assurance, real-time feedback, and healthcare provider 
education.128,135–138 The AHA has endorsed and certified 
STEMI referral and receiving hospitals as part of its Mis-
sion: Lifeline initiative, which also implements continu-
ous review and quality improvement.135
Regional Systems for the Management 
of CS
One of the earliest CS regional care systems was imple-
mented by cardiothoracic surgeons in New York City in 
the 1990s for the management of refractory postcar-
diotomy shock requiring temporary surgical left-sided 
MCS as bridge to transplantation (BTT) or recovery.139 
The program consisted of a network of spoke hospitals 
located within a 250-mile radius of a hub institution. 
The authors emphasized the need for an early dialogue 
(within 12 hours of shock) between the referring and 
accepting centers to determine the viability of the can-
didate and the suitability for transfer and developed a 
management algorithm. Implementation of this net-
work was associated with a 66% survival rate, higher 
than the 25% historical survival rate.
The feasibility of a traveling CS team within a re-
gional hub-and-spoke model was demonstrated in the 
cardiac-RESCUE pilot study.13 In this French study, the 
investigators developed a network of 22 tertiary and 53 
nontertiary centers that transferred patients with CS to 
3 designated centers using a mobile ECMO team. A call 
from the spoke institution requesting assistance initi-
ated the departure of the mobile team, consisting of a 
surgeon, a perfusionist, and a nurse, within 30 minutes. 
Stabilized patients were subsequently transferred to the 
hub institution. There were no adverse events during 
transfer among 75 stabilized patients; 32 patients were 
discharged alive; and 30 patients were alive at 1 year. 
In addition, the Arizona Mayo clinic traveling team re-
ported an initial experience with 27 patients from 18 
community hospitals, among whom 56% survived to 
hospital discharge.14 Taken together, these studies dem-
onstrated the feasibility of mobile CS teams who can 
successfully facilitate early support and treatment in pa-
tients with CS within a hub-and-spoke model.
Proposed Shock Center Characteristics
The writing group proposes that all CS regional referral 
centers should meet minimum Level 1 unit organiza-
tional and staffing criteria as outlined by international 
scientific statements.140–142 CS centers should have the 
onsite monitoring, medical services, and therapeu-
tic technologies to coordinate and deliver care for all 
causes of CS from the resuscitation phase to recovery, 
durable supportive therapy, or palliation. Examples of 
coordination and delivery of care have already been 
implemented in some tertiary care centers with the 
creation of multidisciplinary shock teams of cardiotho-
racic surgeons, interventional cardiologists, advanced 
HF specialists, critical care specialists, and allied health 
professionals. Although there is no evidence suggesting 
that these teams improve outcomes, they can central-
ize medical, surgical, and MCS care and conduct daily 
rounds on patients with CS in coordination with the 
primary team caring for the patient.143
Tertiary high-volume cardiovascular centers should 
be designated as CS receiving (or hub) centers. Within 
each cardiovascular system of care, these centers would 
accept transfers of appropriately selected patients with 
CS from lower-acuity sites for further evaluation and 
treatment.15,144,145 Moreover, to consolidate clinical vol-
umes and professional experience, we advocate that a 
single cardiac ICU (CICU) or ICUs within each CS center 
be designated to receive all CS admissions before the 
initiation of MCS. We recognize that after the initiation 
of some MCS therapies, patients may need to be trans-
ferred to surgical ICUs. 
The suggested hospital, care unit, professional, tech-
nological, and academic capabilities of CS centers are 
outlined in Table 2.
CICU Versus ICU Admission
Many contemporary tertiary care center CICUs have 
evolved into critical care environments for patients with 
a primary cardiovascular diagnosis, with an acuity and 
therapeutic technologies that mirror those of many 
ICUs.146,147 Although the CICU environment may be best 
suited to centralize cardiac care of patients with CS, at-
tending cardiologists and teams may not have the dedi-
cated training to address the ancillary multisystem organ 
failure often associated with CS.142 Conversely, although 
the ICU may be well suited to manage noncardiac organ 
failure, surveys have reported that ICU trainees may be 
unprepared to manage cardiovascular illness and to per-
form common cardiovascular procedures.148 ICU-based 
observational studies have reported improved outcomes 
in a closed unit staffing model.149 In addition, in the CICU, 
there is emerging evidence from a before-and-after study 
that transition from an open low-intensity care model 
to a closed unit model with care led by a dual-trained 
cardiologist-intensivist may improve outcomes; however, 
further studies are required to evaluate the independent 
influence of staffing and physician training.150 
Suggestions for Systems Development
We do not preferentially advocate for either a CICU or 
ICU as a designated CS unit. Rather, we suggest that 
each tertiary hub center develop care pathways to de-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 van Diepen et al
October 17, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525
e240
liver the comprehensive, collaborative, and multidisci-
plinary care outlined in Table 2.
Regionalization of CS Care
The development and implementation of systems to 
streamline care and to optimize outcomes of patients 
with CS have challenges associated with triage deci-
sions, need for expertise with MCS, identification of 
tertiary care centers to serve as hubs, team training, 
and resource allocation for mobile transport teams. Al-
though many of the lessons learned during the imple-
mentation of OHCA and STEMI systems of care can be 
applied in a regionalized system for CS, the develop-
ment and coordination required for CS care will have 
unique challenges. Potential barriers and solutions are 
displayed in Supplemental Table 3.
A proposed model for CS regional care is provided 
in Figure 3. Leadership of national and regional or-
ganizations will be required to spearhead the imple-
mentation of hub-and-spoke CS systems of care. Hub 
centers would be required to create mobile multidis-
ciplinary CS teams available 24 hours a day, 7 days a 
week for onsite or offsite consultation, referral, and 
ECMO/MCS insertion. In addition, hub centers would 
be required to identify the CS units with the expertise 
and resources outlined above. Because spoke hospi-
tals would have variable patient acuity and therapeu-
tic technologies, including PCI and temporary MCS, 
individual hospitals would have to develop CS treat-
ment algorithms according to onsite capabilities and 
expertise. Regional protocols should standardize man-
agement practices, provide futility parameters, and 
determine the timing of transfer once the diagnosis of 
refractory CS is established.
Public Reporting
Although public reporting may improve accountability 
and promote better care, it may have had the unin-
tended consequence of encouraging risk-averse be-
haviors among physicians and a reluctance to treat 
CS (a condition that historically has had a higher risk 
of procedural mortality). The unfortunate sequela for 
patients with CS is that this has also been associated 
with an increased risk of mortality resulting from un-
dertreatment. A solution that has been undertaken in 
New York State is to exclude all patients with CS from 
public reporting.151
Considerations for Public Reporting
Therefore, in an effort to improve patient outcomes, we 
suggest that either patients with CS be excluded from 
 
public reporting, or reporting should be implemented 
only after all process, outcome, safety, and economic 
measures are clearly identified and risk-adjusted.
Knowledge Translation: Mission: Lifeline
In March 2006, in response to a call to action to in-
crease the number of patients with STEMI with timely 
access to primary PCI, the AHA convened a conference 
Table 2. CS Center Characteristics
Hospital
Critical Care Unit
Medical and 
Technological 
Capabilities
Onsite Medical Consultants
Professional 
Consultants
Academic 
Characteristics
Tertiary care 
center
CICU or ICU
24-h/7-d Primary PCI
Cardiology: interventionalists, 
echocardiographers, advanced 
HF/transplantation specialists 
Electrophysiology
Pharmacy
CS research or 
participation in national 
registries
Palliative care
Neurology
High-volume 
cardiovascular 
center
24-h/7-d In-house unit 
coverage by MD, PA, NP
, 
or resident
Cardiac surgery
Cardiologist-intensivists or 
intensive care
Social work
Quality improvement 
and auditing
1:1 Nurse-to-patient ratio
IABP
Cardiac surgery
Respiratory therapist
Trainee education
Vasoactive infusions
Percutaneous VAD
Nephrology
Physical therapy
Mechanical ventilation
Implantable VAD
Palliative care
Occupational therapy
Invasive cardiac and 
hemodynamic monitoring
ECMO: mobile 
ECMO team and 
eCPR capabilities
Dietician
CRRT
Echocardiography 
Pharmacy
Temporary transvenous 
pacing
Social work
CICU indicates cardiac intensive care unit; CRRT, continuous renal replacement therapy; CS, cardiogenic shock; ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; 
eCPR, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation–facilitated cardiopulmonary resuscitation; HF, heart failure; IABP
, intra-aortic balloon pump; ICU, intensive care unit; 
MD, medical doctor, NP
, nurse practitioner; PA, physician assistant; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; and VAD, ventricular assist device.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Contemporary Management of Cardiogenic Shock
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525 
October 17, 2017
e241
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
on the development of STEMI systems of care with in-
put from noninvasive and interventional cardiologists, 
cardiovascular surgeons, emergency care and critical 
care physicians, emergency medical services person-
nel, nurses, hospital administrators, payers, govern-
ment officials, outcomes experts, and patients.152 The 
attendees, representing 25 organizations involved in 
the care of patients with STEMI, were charged with 
defining the gaps and barriers between existing and 
ideal systems of care and proposing research, pro-
grams, and services that formed the foundation of the 
AHA Mission: Lifeline Program that was introduced in 
2007.135 An online survey of existing STEMI systems 
revealed that the principal barriers to success included 
hospital and cardiology group competition and emer-
gency medical services transport and finances. Lack of 
data collection and feedback, infrastructure support, 
funding, and bed availability were also frequent chal-
lenges. Predominant funding sources for STEMI sys-
tems were PCI hospitals in 84% and cardiovascular 
practices in 23%.137
A preliminary and unpublished analysis of the initial 
5-year experience, which included 1 
047 
466 patients 
with STEMI from 485 STEMI systems registered with 
Mission: Lifeline, revealed that the use of primary PCI, 
prehospital ECGs, time from first medical contact, and 
first door–to–primary device time all significantly im-
proved. In addition, the number of eligible patients not 
treated with reperfusion therapy declined by >50%, 
and adjustment for OHCA suggested that mortality had 
decreased from 5.3% to 3.7%.
On the basis of the initial success of the Mission: 
Lifeline Program and other STEMI systems of care in 
the United States, the development of STEMI systems 
became a Class I recommendation in 2013.144 In view 
of the commonalities in the care of patients with other 
time-sensitive cardiovascular disorders, Mission: Lifeline 
was expanded to include patients with OHCA in Janu-
ary 2013 and stroke in July 2015. Because roughly 10% 
of patients with STEMI and 40% to 50% of patients 
with OHCA have CS, the natural extension of the Mis-
sion: Lifeline program is to include CS. Currently, data 
Figure 3. Proposed regional system of care for cardiogenic shock.  
(A) A patient with CS diagnosed in the field by EMS can be transported directly to the hub CS center, bypassing the nearest 
spoke facility. (B) CS pathogenesis, travel time, and spoke center capabilities should factor into the decision to bypass spoke 
hospitals; STEMI patients can be transferred to a PCI facility for revascularization and stabilization. Patients with unclassified 
shock should be transferred to the nearest emergency department. (C) For patients presenting to spoke PCI-capable hospitals, 
revascularization and stabilization can be initiated. Physician-to-physician dialogue with the hub center shock team should 
occur as soon as possible. (D) A mobile unit from the hub center can be deployed to the spoke hospital to stabilize and 
initiate transfer to the hub CS center for definitive management. Patients presenting to smaller spoke centers without PCI 
capabilities should be immediately transferred to the nearest PCI facility, or a shock mobile unit should be requested from 
the hub CS center, depending on the patient’s clinical status and anticipated travel time. CS indicates cardiogenic shock; 
EMS, emergency medical services; MD, medical doctor; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; and STEMI, ST-elevation 
myocardial infarction.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 van Diepen et al
October 17, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525
e242
are collected through ACTION (Acute Coronary Treat-
ment and Intervention Outcomes Network Registry)–
Get With The Guidelines, although many systems use 
their own local registries. Baseline requirements for 
STEMI could serve as the foundation for an advanced 
CS program, including data collection and quality im-
provement programs.
The Mission: Lifeline experience indicates that there 
is a considerable variation in the successful develop-
ment of STEMI systems that depends on geography 
(rural versus urban), regional resources, state lines, and 
legislation/regulations, and the program recommends 
consideration of local issues while national recommen-
dations are implemented.137 Many of the most success-
ful STEMI systems actively include OHCA and advanced 
CS protocols, as well as protocols for other cardiovas-
cular emergencies.125
For CS, metrics that can potentially serve as bench-
marks to improve performance need to be developed 
and measured at the spoke-and-hub institutions with 
the use of standardized CS definitions. Examples of 
such metrics include the performance of coronary an-
giography, time to reperfusion, time to support with 
percutaneous or surgical MCS, decision to transfer to a 
hub center, timing of transfer, stabilization at the spoke 
hospital, and use of mobile shock units. These met-
rics would facilitate implementation of robust quality 
assurance processes and would be used for reporting 
to national registries. Registries could then provide the 
research structure necessary to identify areas for im-
provement and further understanding of disease and 
care processes.
MANAGEMENT OF CS
Reperfusion and Revascularization in CS
Coronary reperfusion is the mainstay evidence-based 
therapeutic intervention for patients with acute MI 
presenting with CS.5,153,154 In this section, reperfusion 
and revascularization techniques and other adjunctive 
therapies used in the management of CS are reviewed 
(Supplemental Table 4). A proposed integrated CS care 
pathway is outlined in Figure 4.
Fibrinolytic Therapy
Very few placebo-controlled studies of fibrinolysis have 
included patients with CS.155 Initial studies showed no 
survival benefit of streptokinase over placebo, whereas 
mixed results comparing streptokinase with tissue plas-
minogen activator have been reported in small patient 
cohorts.156 Although the large GUSTO-1 trial (Global 
Utilization of Tissue Plasminogen Activator and Strep-
tokinase for Occluded Coronary Arteries) showed tis-
sue plasminogen activator to be superior to streptoki-
nase in the overall population, no substantial mortality 
benefit was observed between fibrinolytic strategies 
among the nearly 3000 patients with CS.157 In addi-
tion, tissue plasminogen activator–treated patients 
Figure 4. Potential cardiogenic shock 
care pathway, care location, and care 
providers.  
ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome; 
CABG, coronary artery bypass graft; 
ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygen-
ation; IABP
, intra-aortic balloon pump; 
MCS, mechanical circulatory support; PCI, 
percutaneous coronary intervention; and 
VAD, ventricular assist device. *Consider 
temporary MCS before reperfusion in 
cases of refractory cardiac arrest or shock.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Contemporary Management of Cardiogenic Shock
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525 
October 17, 2017
e243
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
were less likely to develop CS, highlighting the need 
for timely reperfusion in CS prevention. Animal studies 
have suggested that the effectiveness of thrombolytic 
therapies may be dependent on a higher systemic per-
fusion pressure.158 Although nonrandomized observa-
tions from the SHOCK trial and registry among patients 
treated with fibrinolysis and an IABP would support 
this finding, an invasive approach to coronary reperfu-
sion remains the best practice in MI complicated by 
CS.159,160 The writing group recognizes both the lack of 
evidence to support fibrinolytic therapy and that timely 
access to an early invasive approach will not be avail-
able to all patients with CS. 
Suggestions/Considerations for Clinical Practice
We suggest that when an early invasive approach can-
not be completed in a timely fashion, fibrinolysis can be 
considered in CS associated with STEMI. The decision to 
administer fibrinolysis should be individualized on the 
basis of perceived reperfusion benefit, bleeding risks, 
and the anticipated time delay to angiography.
Early Invasive Strategy in CS
Two randomized trials evaluated whether early invasive 
therapy with cardiac catheterization followed by PCI 
or CABG could improve survival in CS. SMASH (Swiss 
Multicenter Trial of Angioplasty for Shock), published 
in 1999, randomized only 55 patients and reported 
no significant reduction in the 30-day death rate.161 
The SHOCK trial randomized 302 patients to either an 
early invasive strategy with intended emergency revas-
cularization (within 12 hours of shock onset) or initial 
medical stabilization.9 As previously noted, the pri-
mary end point of 30-day all-cause mortality was non-
significantly lower in the invasive arm (46.7% versus 
56.0%; P=0.11); however, mortality was significantly 
lower at 6 months, at 12 months (13% absolute dif-
ference; P=0.03), and through long-term follow-up 
(6 years).21,22 Patients screened but not randomized 
into the SHOCK trial were entered into a prospective 
registry that facilitated validation of the trial findings 
and additional important subgroup analyses. First, 
the SHOCK trial reported an age-treatment interac-
tion wherein elderly (>75 years) patients with CS had 
worse outcomes (P=0.01).9 A SHOCK registry analysis 
and a pooled analysis of the SMASH and SHOCK trials 
showed no age-treatment interaction with 12-month 
mortality.162,163 Second, women with MI-associated CS 
were more frequently older. The SHOCK trial and ob-
servational studies reported no sex-related outcome 
differences.21,164–166 Third, an early invasive treatment 
approach had consistent benefits across multiple racial 
and ethnic subgroups.167 Fourth, diabetes mellitus was 
an adverse prognostic indicator among patients hos-
pitalized with MI and was more frequently associated 
with multivessel disease. Diabetic and nondiabetic pa-
tients had similar mortality benefits in the SHOCK trial 
despite a greater prevalence of 3-vessel coronary artery 
disease and higher rates of surgical revascularization 
among diabetics.168 Finally, it has been well established 
that rapid reperfusion is essential in the effective man-
agement of STEMI. In the SHOCK trial, however, there 
was no significant interaction between the time from 
CS onset to revascularization and mortality. Conversely, 
other registry data have suggested a strong correlation 
between time and outcome.169,170
Suggestions for Clinical Practice
We support guidelines that recommend an early inva-
sive strategy with appropriate revascularization for all 
suitable patients with suspected ACS-associated CS, 
including patients with uncertain neurological status or 
those who have received prior fibrinolysis, regardless of 
the time delay from MI onset.
PCI Strategy
Patients in the SHOCK trial who had successful and 
unsuccessful PCIs had a 35% and 80% mortality rate, 
respectively.9 The majority of participants had multi-
vessel disease and were revascularized with balloon 
angioplasty.171,172 Only 34% of patients received a 
stent (none with drug-eluting stents [DES]). Notably, 
PCI was more successful when stents were used (93% 
vs 67%; P=0.013), suggesting superior outcomes with 
stent use in a CS population. The choice of bare metal 
stent versus DES has not been rigorously studied. A 
large Swiss registry compared patients with CS treated 
with a bare metal stent or DES in a propensity-matched 
analysis and reported lower long-term all-cause mor-
tality among patients treated with DES.173 In another 
large Dutch series, no significant differences in stent 
thrombosis rates were observed in a comparison of 
stent platforms in a CS population.174 In a recent sub-
analysis of the IABP-SHOCK II trial, no differences in 
outcomes between DES and bare metal stent were 
observed.175
The outcome differences associated with complete 
revascularization versus culprit-only PCI remain unclear. 
In stable patients with STEMI undergoing primary PCI, 
treatment of culprit and nonculprit vessels appears to 
be safe and may be associated with improved out-
comes.176 Some observational studies have reported 
potential benefits with multivessel PCI in CS, whereas 
clinical practice guidelines recommend nonculprit PCI 
for “critical (≥90% diameter) stenoses or highly unsta-
ble lesions.”145,177–181 The CULPRIT-SHOCK trial (Culprit 
Lesion Only PCI Versus Multivessel PCI in Cardiogenic 
Shock), designed to be the largest CS trial ever, is cur-
rently enrolling patients to test this question in a pro-
spective, randomized fashion.182
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 van Diepen et al
October 17, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525
e244
Historically, diagnostic angiography and PCI have 
been performed with a femoral arterial access site, 
although radial access has been more recently advo-
cated as a safer alternative for arterial access. There is 
a relatively limited experience with radial access in CS, 
and even those higher-volume radial access centers are 
using a radial approach only half of the time for their 
patients with CS.183,184 A meta-analysis of observational 
studies including 8131 patients reported that radial ac-
cess was associated with lower all-cause mortality and 
major adverse cardiac and cerebral events at the 30-day 
follow-up in CS.185 Observational series have also de-
scribed lower bleeding rates.183,184,186 When femoral ar-
terial access is considered, fluoroscopic and ultrasound 
guidance may decrease vascular complications and 
access-related bleeding.176 Radial arterial access may 
be challenging in hypotensive patients with CS, and al-
though ultrasound guidance can improve radial access 
success and decrease crossover to femoral access in the 
hemodynamically stable population, radial ultrasound 
has not been well studied in the CS population.187
Suggestions for Clinical Practice
In summary, evidence continues to support the early 
revascularization of patients with CS after ACS, with 
either PCI or CABG used as indicated. Until the results 
of CULPRIT-SHOCK are available, revascularization of 
both the culprit and hemodynamically significant non-
culprit stenoses is reasonable. We support the prefer-
ential use of radial arterial access for angiography and 
PCI when feasible.
Antithrombotic Pharmacotherapy 
Adjuncts to PCI
There are limited data to support the use of antiplate-
let agents, including aspirin, in the setting of CS, and 
data are largely inferred from more stable MI popu-
lations. In addition, studies have demonstrated poor 
gastrointestinal absorption of these medications in the 
setting of MI, a problem that may be exacerbated in 
CS.188 The ISAR-SHOCK (Efficacy Study of LV Assist De-
vice to Treat Patients With Cardiogenic Shock) regis-
try, which included patients with CS undergoing PCI 
who had a platelet function assessment after receiv-
ing an oral P2Y12 inhibitor, reported that prasugrel was 
associated with a nonsignificant reduction in 30-day 
mortality.188 In a secondary analysis of the IABP-SHOCK 
II trial, there was no difference in mortality or bleed-
ing events in a comparison of clopidogrel, prasugrel, 
and ticagrelor in patients with acute MI complicated 
by CS.189 In addition, each of these P2Y12 inhibitors is 
metabolized by ≥1 isoenzymes in the cytochrome P450 
pathway. In patients with CS who likely already have 
decreased absorption of oral medications, coadminis-
tration of strong inducers or inhibitors of these isoen-
zymes or agents that might further impair absorption 
might have the potential to reduce drug efficacy or to 
increase bleeding; however, no data are available in 
the CS population.190 The glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor 
abciximab is the most studied antiplatelet agent in pa-
tients with CS undergoing PCI. Observational studies 
have reported better postprocedural coronary blood 
flow and lower hospital mortality, particularly when 
combined with stent placement.191–194 A small random-
ized trial of 80 patients with CS who received prepro-
cedural abciximab found no difference in mortality 
with up-front versus provisional use, but early adminis-
tration increased bleeding.195 
Unfractionated heparin is a commonly used anti-
coagulant in MI and CS, yet little is known about the 
appropriate anticoagulant agent for this population. 
Low-molecular-weight heparin and fondaparinux in the 
post-PCI setting may be less ideal because of the high 
prevalence of acute kidney injury in CS. Bivalirudin use 
in a series of 86 patients with CS was associated with 
lower in-hospital mortality and similar rates of major 
bleeding compared with heparin, but the observational 
nature precludes causal inferences.196 
Suggestions for Clinical Practice
We suggest that all patients with CS without serious 
bleeding complications be continued on dual antiplate-
let therapy without interruption after PCI. In situations 
when oral agents cannot be administered or there are 
concerns about absorption, the use of an intravenous 
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor or the recently available in-
travenous P2Y12 inhibitor cangrelor can be considered. 
No high-quality data are available to support the effica-
cy or safety of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in patients 
with MCS.
Considerations for Clinical Practice
Overall, the optimal anticoagulation management 
choice in the setting of PCI for CS remains unclear, 
and we support following recommendations in the PCI 
guidelines for patients without CS.176 In patients requir-
ing continued anticoagulation after PCI, we suggest the 
preferential use of intravenous unfractionated heparin 
given the high prevalence of acute kidney injury and 
acute liver injury in the CS population.
Coronary Artery Bypass
In the SHOCK trial, the majority of patients were found 
to have multivessel disease: ≈1 in 5 had left main coro-
nary artery stenosis, but only 37% underwent CABG.197 
The mortality rate at 1 year was similar among those 
treated with PCI (48%) and those treated with CABG 
(53%) when randomized to an early revascularization 
strategy. Most patients treated with CABG were con-
sidered completely revascularized, whereas only 15% in 
the PCI group ultimately underwent multivessel stent-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Contemporary Management of Cardiogenic Shock
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525 
October 17, 2017
e245
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
ing.197 In contemporary practice, however, the major-
ity of patients presenting to the hospital with CS com-
plicating MI are treated with early PCI.4 From 2003 to 
2010, the rate of early PCI in CS rose from 26% to 
54%, whereas CABG rates remained relatively stable at 
5% to 6%.4 These epidemiological data suggest that 
many patients with CS may be incompletely revascu-
larized at the time of presentation, but the associated 
outcomes of this practice remain unclear. 
Suggestions for Clinical Practice
We suggest that in patients with MI-associated CS who 
have multivessel or left main disease, PCI or CABG re-
vascularization decisions should be made collaborative-
ly between cardiologists and surgeons by incorporation 
of the patient’s medical information, coronary anatomy, 
procedural risks, potential treatment-related delays, 
and expressed preferences.
Medical Management of the Patient  
With CS
Once the patient is admitted to the hospital, manage-
ment of CS frequently requires the primary care team 
to coordinate the multidisciplinary delivery of patient 
monitoring, pharmacological therapies, and mechani-
cal technologies.
Critical Care Unit Monitoring and 
Hemodynamic Goals
Relatively few data are available to guide appropriate 
monitoring decisions for patients with CS. An over-
view of suggested tools is provided in Table 3. The 
inherent hemodynamic instability and high preva-
lence of vasopressor use in CS merit invasive arte-
rial blood pressure monitoring to guide drug titra-
tion. Central venous catheter insertion should also 
be considered to support the administration of va-
soactive medications and to facilitate monitoring of 
CVP and mixed central venous oxygen saturation, 
which may be helpful in determining the adequacy 
of tissue oxygen delivery. Clinical examination and 
laboratory testing are also necessary for monitor-
ing end-organ perfusion and function. Repeated 
assessments of plasma lactate, for instance, can be 
informative with respect to the persistence of shock 
Table 3. Considerations for Initial Critical Care Monitoring in Patients With CS
Monitoring Parameter
Frequency
Comment/Rationale
Noninvasive monitoring
  
Telemetry, pulse oximetry, 
respiratory rate
Continuous
High incidence of arrhythmias, ventilator failure, and pulmonary edema
 Critical care unit monitoring
1:1 Nurse-to-patient ratio
High incidence of hemodynamic deterioration and multisystem organ failure
Invasive monitoring
 Arterial BP monitoring
Continuous
Consider continuing until vasoactive medications have been discontinued for 12–24 h
 CVP
Continuous
A central line is required for delivery of vasoactive medications; single-point-in-time CVP 
measurements may be unreliable measures of fluid status, but longitudinal CVP trends may 
provide information on trends in fluid status
  
Central venous oxygen 
saturation
Every 4 h
Trends in central venous oxygen saturation in patients with a central line can be used to help 
monitor trends in cardiac output
 Urine output
Every hour
Urine output and serum creatinine monitoring are markers of renal perfusion and acute kidney 
injury
  
PAC or noninvasive cardiac 
output monitor
Selected use
Consider using early in the treatment course in patients not responsive to initial therapy or in 
cases of diagnostic or therapeutic uncertainty
Laboratory investigations
 Complete blood counts
Every 12–24 h
Consider more frequently in patients with CS with, or at high risk for, bleeding
 Serum electrolytes
Every 6–12 h
Frequency should be tailored to risks or presence of renal failure and electrolyte dyscrasias
 Serum creatinine
Every 12–24 h
Urine output and serum creatinine monitoring are markers of renal perfusion and acute kidney 
injury
 Liver function tests
Daily
Monitoring for congestive hepatopathy and hypoperfusion
 Lactate
Every 1–4 h
Lactate clearance is a marker of resolving end-organ hypoperfusion, and lack of clearance is 
associated with a higher risk of mortality
 Coagulation laboratories
Every 4–6 h for those 
on anticoagulants until 
therapeutically stable, 
every 24 h if patient is 
not on anticoagulants
Altered drug elimination and frequent use of mechanical support devices often necessitate 
antithrombotic monitoring
BP indicates blood pressure; CS, cardiogenic shock; CVP
, central venous pressure; and PAC, pulmonary artery catheter.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 van Diepen et al
October 17, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525
e246
and has been shown to be prognostically important 
 
in patients with CS.198 Lastly, although clinical trials 
have shown no benefit with the routine use of PAC 
hemodynamic monitoring, observational studies in CS 
populations have been mixed, and the PAC remains 
a potentially important diagnostic and management 
tool for these individuals.199–202 Hemodynamic data 
provided by a PAC can confirm the presence and se-
verity of CS, involvement of the RV, pulmonary artery 
pressures and transpulmonary gradient, and vascular 
resistance of the pulmonary and systemic arterial beds. 
In addition, a PAC may provide CS prognostic informa-
tion such as CI and cardiac power and enables clinicians 
to monitor responses to therapeutic interventions.39,203 
Although noninvasive devices may be used, their reli-
ability in this setting has not been well studied. 
Although the aforementioned measurements are 
important for the diagnosis and monitoring of CS, 
treatment targets are considerably less well established. 
In general, goals of therapy should focus instead on re-
storing and maintaining satisfactory tissue perfusion.204 
For many patients, the adequacy of end-organ blood 
flow roughly correlates with blood pressure, with low 
blood pressures associated with an increased risk of 
mortality.100 Unfortunately, no clear SBP or mean arte-
rial pressure (MAP) suggestions can be made because 
MAP targets are often extrapolated from non-CS popu-
lations in whom a value of 65 mm 
Hg has been consid-
ered a reasonable target.205 CS is a hemodynamically 
heterogeneous disorder, and hemodynamic variables 
may not necessarily reflect differential patterns of end-
organ blood flow or tissue perfusion. Microcirculatory 
dysfunction may persist despite improvements in these 
hemodynamic measurements.206 
Suggestions for Clinical Practice
We suggest the use of PACs in cases of diagnostic or CS 
management uncertainty or in patients with moderate 
to severe CS who are unresponsive to initial therapy.
Hemodynamic monitoring should complement (and 
not replace) other markers of end-organ perfusion in CS. 
The optimal MAP likely differs from patient to patient, 
and the risks of hypoperfusion with lower MAPs must 
be balanced (and individualized) with the potentially del-
eterious impact of vasoactive agents on myocardial oxy-
gen demand, ischemia, and arrhythmia associated with 
higher MAP targets. We suggest that clinicians assess the 
adequacy of end-organ and tissue perfusion in response 
to individualized targets by integrating serial markers of 
systemic perfusion, including (but not limited to) arterial 
lactate, mixed or central venous oxygen saturations, urine 
output, creatinine, liver function tests, mental status, 
temperature, and other invasive hemodynamic variables.
Nonvasoactive Pharmacological 
Management
An analysis from the TRIUMPH trial (Effect of Acetate in 
Patients With Acute Myocardial Infarction and Cardio-
genic Shock) reported that approximately one quarter 
of patients with CS were administered β-blockers or re-
nin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) antagonists 
within the first 24 hours after CS diagnosis.207 Com-
pared with patients not receiving these early therapies, 
patients receiving them had higher 30-day mortality. 
Table 4. Mechanism of Action and Hemodynamic Effects of Common Vasoactive Medications in CS
Medication
Usual Infusion Dose
Receptor Binding
Hemodynamic 
Effects
α1
β1
β2
Dopamine
Vasopressor/inotropes
 Dopamine
0.5–2 μg·kg−1·min−1
−
+
−
+++
↑CO
 
5–10 μg·kg−1·min−1
+
+++
+
++
↑↑CO, ↑SVR
 
10–20 μg·kg−1·min−1
+++
++
−
++
↑↑SVR, ↑CO
 Norepinephrine
0.05–0.4 μg·kg−1·min−1
++++
++
+
−
↑↑SVR, ↑CO
 Epinephrine
0.01–0.5 μg·kg−1·min−1
++++
++++
+++
−
↑↑CO, ↑↑SVR
 Phenylephrine
0.1–10 μg·kg−1·min−1
+++
−
−
−
↑↑SVR
 Vasopressin
0.02–0.04 U/min
Stimulates V1 receptors in vascular smooth muscle
↑↑SVR, ↔PVR
Inodilators
 Dobutamine
2.5–20 μg·kg−1·min−1
+
++++
++
−
↑↑CO, ↓SVR, ↓PVR
 Isoproterenol
2.0–20 μg/min
−
++++
+++
−
↑↑CO, ↓SVR, ↓PVR
 Milrinone
0.125–0.75 μg·kg−1·min−1
PD-3 inhibitor
↑CO, ↓SVR, ↓PVR
 Enoximone
2–10 μg·kg−1·min−1
PD-3 inhibitor
↑CO, ↓SVR, ↓PVR
 Levosimendan
0.05–0.2 μg·kg−1·min−1
Myofilament Ca2+ sensitizer, PD-3 inhibitor
↑CO, ↓SVR, ↓PVR
CO indicates cardiac output; CS, cardiogenic shock; PD-3, phosphodiesterase-3; PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance; and SVR, systemic 
vascular resistance.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Contemporary Management of Cardiogenic Shock
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525 
October 17, 2017
e247
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Table 5. Initial Vasoactive Management Considerations in Types of CS
Cause or Presentation 
of CS
Vasoactive Management 
Considerations
Hemodynamic Rationale
Classic wet and cold
Norepinephrine or dopamine144
Inotropic agent210,211*
This subtype has low CI and high SVR. Consider hemodynamic stabilization with 
norepinephrine (preferred in ↑HR or arrhythmias) or dopamine (↓HR preferred but 
associated with higher risk of arrhythmias)
Consider addition of inotropic agent when stabilized and after revascularization  
(MI only)
Euvolemic cold and dry
Norepinephrine or dopamine144
Inotropic agent210,211
Small fluid boluses
Consider hemodynamic stabilization with norepinephrine (preferred in ↑HR or 
arrhythmias) or dopamine (↓HR preferred but associated with higher risk of arrhythmias)
Consider addition of inotropic agent when stabilized and after revascularization  
(MI only)
LVEDP may be low, and patients may tolerate fluid boluses
Vasodilatory warm and 
wet or mixed cardiogenic 
and vasodilatory
Norepinephrine
Consider hemodynamics-guided therapy
This subtype has low SVR
RV shock
Fluid boluses144,145
Norepinephrine, dopamine, or 
vasopressin144,212,213
Inotropic agents144*
Inhaled pulmonary vasodilators214
Hemodynamic goals include maintaining preload, lowering RV afterload (PVR), treating 
absolute or relative bradycardias, and maintaining atrioventricular synchrony
Dopamine (↓HR preferred but associated with arrhythmia risk)
Vasopressin may raise SVR and have neutral effect on PVR
Consider adding or transitioning to inotrope after initial hemodynamic stabilization and 
revascularization
Normotensive shock
Inotropic agent or vasopressor
Initial inotropic therapy may be appropriate given that this subtype has SBP >90 mm 
Hg 
and relatively high SVR
Aortic stenosis
Phenylephrine or vasopressin
In patients with reduced LVEF, 
echocardiography- or PAC-guided 
dobutamine titration
Shock caused by aortic stenosis is an afterload-dependent state
Inotropy may not improve hemodynamics if LVEF is preserved
Definitive therapies will be defined by underlying cause and may include surgical 
aortic valve replacement or balloon valvuloplasty and/or transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement
Aortic regurgitation
Dopamine
Temporary pacing
Maintaining an elevated HR may shorten diastolic filling time and reduce LVEDP
Definitive therapies will be defined by underlying cause and may include surgical aortic 
valve replacement
Mitral stenosis
Phenylephrine or vasopressin
Esmolol or amiodarone
Shock resulting from mitral stenosis is a preload-dependent state
Avoiding chronotropic agents, slowing the HR (and thereby increasing diastolic filling 
time), and maintaining atrioventricular synchrony may improve preload
Definitive therapies will be defined by underlying cause and may include surgical mitral 
valve replacement or balloon valvuloplasty
Mitral regurgitation
Norepinephrine or dopamine
Inotropic agents*
Temporary MCS, including IABP144
After hemodynamic stabilization with vasopressor, consider addition of inotropic agent
Afterload reduction may help reduce LVEDP
IABP may reduce regurgitation fraction by reducing afterload and increasing CI
Definitive therapies will be defined by underlying cause and may include surgical mitral 
valve replacement/repair and percutaneous edge-to-edge repair
Postinfarction ventricular 
septal defect
See classic wet and cold considerations
Temporary MCS, including IABP144
IABP may reduce shunt fraction by reducing afterload and increasing CI
Cardiac surgical referral for repair or percutaneous interventional umbrella closure
Dynamic LVOT 
obstruction
Fluid boluses215,216
Phenylephrine or vasopressin215,216
Avoid inotropic agents215,216
Avoid vasodilating agents215,216
Esmolol or amiodarone215
RV pacing
Dynamic gradients may be reduced by increasing preload and afterload, reducing 
inotropy and ectopy, maintaining atrioventricular synchrony, and inducing ventricular 
dyssynchrony
Bradycardia
Chronotropic agents or
Temporary pacing
Treatment should also focus on identifying and treating underlying cause of bradycardia
Chronotropic agents may include atropine, isoproterenol, dopamine, dobutamine, and 
epinephrine
Pericardial tamponade
Fluid bolus
Norepinephrine
Pericardiocentesis or surgical pericardial window required for definitive therapy
CI indicates cardiac index; CS, cardiogenic shock; HR, heart rate; IABP
, intra-aortic balloon pump; LVEDP
, left ventricular end-diastolic pressure; LVEF, left 
ventricular ejection fraction; LVOT, left ventricular outflow tract; MCS, mechanical circulatory support; MI, myocardial infarction; PAC, pulmonary artery catheter; 
PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance; RV, right ventricular; SBP
, systolic blood pressure; and SVR, systemic vascular resistance.
*Inotrope choice considerations may include HR, SVR, cause of CS, renal function, prior β-blocker treatment, and inotrope half-life.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 van Diepen et al
October 17, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525
e248
Finally, the association of early statin use with out-
comes in patients with CS and MI undergoing revascu-
larization was reported in an analysis from the Korean 
Acute Myocardial Infarction Registry.208 After adjust-
ment, early statin administration was associated with a 
lower risk of death at 30 days. 
Considerations for Clinical Practice
We support guideline recommendations for the man-
agement of patients with STEMI that suggest avoidance 
of β-blockers in patients with signs of HF or low-output 
states and the avoidance of RAAS antagonists in pa-
tients with hypotension.144 It may be reasonable to initi-
ate β-blockers when the patient is euvolemic and off 
inotropes and vasopressors for at least 24 hours. RAAS 
inhibitor therapy initiation can be considered when the 
patient has been off vasopressors for 24 hours, provid-
ed that the patient’s renal function has returned nearly 
to baseline levels and the risk of RAAS-associated hy-
perkalemia or hypotension is low. RAAS inhibitors may 
be started in patients with pulmonary edema and in 
conjunction with an inodilator. 
We suggest that it is reasonable to administer statin 
in patients with MI-associated CS.
Vasopressors and Inotropes
Vasoactive medications are often used in the manage-
ment of patients with CS. An overview of the cardiac 
and vascular receptors, along with the hemodynamic 
effects of commonly used vasoactive medications in CS, 
is provided in Table 4.
Despite their frequent use, few clinical outcome data 
are available to guide the initial selection of vasoactive 
therapies in patients with CS. The SOAP II trial (Sepsis 
Occurrence in Acutely Ill Patients) evaluated first-line 
vasopressor selection in patients with generalized shock 
and included a prespecified CS subgroup.209 Dopamine 
was associated with a higher rate of arrhythmias in the 
CS and overall populations and was associated with 
higher risk of mortality in the CS subgroup. Although 
this was the largest study of its kind, clinical and meth-
odological concerns have raised questions about the 
external validity and applicability of the findings in 
patients with CS.209 The SOAP II trial did not have an 
operationalized definition of CS; included obstructive, 
valvular, and postcardiotomy shock states (which may 
have different hemodynamic profiles); did not evaluate 
treatment-related differences across the various hemo-
dynamic phenotypes of CS; and did not report prog-
nostically important MI or HF variables or their relevant 
antecedent time- or treatment-related differences, all of 
which potentially confounded the results of the study. 
Suggestions for Clinical Practice
Norepinephrine is associated with fewer arrhythmias 
and may be the vasopressor of choice in many patients 
with CS; however, in light of the aforementioned major 
study limitations, the optimal first-line vasoactive medi-
cation in CS remains unclear. Pragmatic initial vasoac-
tive considerations are provided in Table 5.
Care Bundles and the Prevention of 
Critical Care Complications
Critically ill patients are at risk of developing complica-
tions such as ventilator-associated pneumonia, delirium, 
ICU-acquired weakness, central line–associated blood-
stream infection, stress ulcers, and venous thromboem-
bolism. These complications are associated with an in-
creased risk of morbidity, mortality, and length of stay.217 
Bundles of best-practice prevention strategies have 
been implemented with increasing frequency to reduce 
complications and to improve outcomes in critically ill 
patients. Although none have been specifically validated 
among CS cohorts, organizations such as the Institute 
of Healthcare Improvement recommend the universal 
use of several of these bundles in every ICU.218
Table 6. Critical Care Complication Prevention Bundles 
in Patients With CS
Bundle
Target
Components
ABCDE bundle219
Delirium, 
weakness, and 
ventilation 
liberation
Daily awakening and 
spontaneous breathing trials
Assessment and management 
of delirium
Early and progressive mobility
Ventilator 
bundle220–222
Ventilator-
associated 
pneumonia
Head of bed elevation
Sedation protocols targeting light 
sedation with RASS or SAS scores
Daily sedation vacation if light 
sedation contraindicated
Chlorhexidine oral rinse
Endotracheal tube with 
subglottic secretion drainage
Central line 
bundle223,224
Central 
line–associated 
bloodstream 
infection
Hand hygiene
Maximal barrier precautions
Chlorhexidine skin antisepsis
Optimal catheter site selection 
(avoidance of femoral approach)
Ultrasound-guided central line 
placement
Daily review of line necessity
Stress ulcer 
prophylaxis225,226
Stress ulcer
Proton pump inhibitor or H2 
blocker in patients without 
enteral nutrition
In enterally fed patients, the 
risks of prophylaxis should be 
balanced with risk of ventilator-
associated pneumonia
Deep vein 
thrombosis 
prophylaxis226
Venous 
thromboembolism
Routine venous 
thromboembolism prophylaxis in 
patients not on anticoagulants
ABCDE indicates awakening and breathing coordination, delirium 
monitoring/management, and early exercise mobility; CS, cardiogenic shock; 
RASS, Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale; and SAS, Sedation-Agitation Scale.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Contemporary Management of Cardiogenic Shock
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525 
October 17, 2017
e249
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Suggestions for Clinical Practice
Table 6 highlights key care bundles and prevention prac-
tices that should be considered for patients with CS.
Mechanical Ventilation
The reported prevalence of MV is 78% to 88% in pa-
tients with CS, and it is often required for the manage-
ment of acute hypoxemia, increased work of breathing, 
airway protection, and hemodynamic or electric instabil-
ity.9,42,227 Very few studies have addressed the ideal MV 
mode for the CS population. In nonshock HF cohorts, 
noninvasive MV is often used to treat respiratory failure 
resulting from pulmonary edema.228 Although nonin-
vasive MV can improve dyspnea and hypoxemia, along 
with their associated metabolic derangements, its influ-
ence on mortality is unclear.228 The majority of patients 
with CS, however, will require invasive MV. There is in-
sufficient evidence to recommend specific ventilation 
modes, strategies (including lung protective ventilation), 
or physiological end points in the CS population. 
Although a comprehensive review of the cardiopul-
monary interactions associated with MV in patients with 
CS is beyond the scope of this review, clinicians should 
be aware of a few basic physiological interactions. Posi-
tive end-expiratory pressure is the airway (and alveolar) 
pressure above atmospheric pressure at the conclusion 
of the expiratory phase. It has beneficial effects on gas 
exchange, lung recruitment, and airway patency.229 It can 
also counterbalance hydrostatic forces that lead to pul-
monary edema, shifting fluid from the alveoli back to 
the interstitial space and circulation.230 In patients with 
reduced LV function, positive end-expiratory pressure 
can also reduce LV afterload by decreasing transthoracic 
pulmonary pressures, diminish preload, improve work of 
breathing, and optimize oxygen delivery to the stressed 
myocardium.231–233 In patients with reduced RV function, 
positive end-expiratory pressure (along with high mean 
airway pressures) can reduce pulmonary vascular resis-
tance, and thereby increase CI, by attenuating hypoxic 
pulmonary vasoconstriction and reducing pulmonary 
edema. Higher pressures, however, may compromise 
RV preload and increase RV afterload in part through 
intra-alveolar vessel compression.234 There are no stud-
ies to support one mode of invasive MV over another, 
and the ideal positive end-expiratory pressure level in 
patients with CS may depend on the complex cardiopul-
monary interplay between RV and LV function, vascular 
resistance, and fluid status, along with the presence and 
cause of hypoxemia. Lastly, the ideal oxygenation targets 
remain undefined, but emerging evidence highlights the 
potential deleterious effect of hyperoxia in patients with 
ACS, HF, and OHCA and in general ICU patients.235–238 
Suggestions for Clinical Practice
The decision to intubate patients with CS should be 
based on standard critical care criteria; however, clini-
cians should be both aware of and prepared for the 
potential hemodynamic deterioration associated with 
induction therapies (eg, sedatives and analgesics), in-
appropriate ventilation settings, the transition from 
spontaneous breathing to positive-pressure ventilation, 
and vagal stimulation association with endotracheal 
tube placement.
In the absence of high-quality data in the CS popula-
tion, we suggest that MV modes and settings be adjust-
ed to prevent hypoxemia and hyperoxia, to minimize 
patient discomfort and ventilator dyssynchrony, and to 
optimize hemodynamics.
Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy
Among patients with CS, a reported 13% to 28% de-
velop acute kidney injury and up to 20% require renal 
replacement therapy.1,9,239,240 Patients needing renal re-
placement therapy were less likely to survive to hospital 
discharge and had a higher risk of long-term dialysis 
and mortality.88,240 Patients with CS often do not he-
modynamically tolerate fluid shifts that can occur with 
intermittent hemodialysis. Instead, continuous renal re-
placement therapy, which applies a veno-venous driv-
ing force with an external pump to gradually removal 
fluid and toxins, is more commonly used for those with 
CS. A detailed review of the definition and diagnostic 
approach to acute kidney injury and indications, mo-
dalities, and complications of continuous renal replace-
ment therapy in critically ill patients is beyond the scope 
of this document and is available elsewhere.241 
Summary of Clinical Considerations
We concur with KDIGO (Kidney Disease Improving 
Global Outcomes) guidelines that continuous renal 
replacement therapy can be considered with stage 2 
acute kidney injury (defined as an increase in serum 
creatinine ≥2.0 times baseline and urine output <0.5 
mL·kg−1·h−1 for ≥12 hours or when “life threatening 
changes in fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base balance” 
exist).241
MCS and Cardiac Transplantation
A discussion and detailed review of MCS and cardiac 
transplantation history, indications, and contraindica-
tions, along with device differences, are given elsewhere 
and are beyond the scope of this document.242,243 The 
focus of this scientific statement instead is on MCS de-
vice selection and timing and pathways specific to those 
with CS. MCS can be broadly classified into temporary 
or durable devices. Temporary MCS devices are inserted 
either percutaneously or surgically and can be used as a 
bridge to recovery, in which case the MCS is removed af-
ter improvement in cardiac contractile function; a bridge 
to a bridge, in which case patients have a temporary de-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 van Diepen et al
October 17, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525
e250
vice inserted and a provisional plan to transition to du-
rable MCS after clinical stabilization; a BTT; or a bridge 
to decision. In the last case, hemodynamic instability or 
medical sequelae of CS such as neurological uncertainty 
or multisystem organ failure may preclude a compre-
hensive assessment for durable MCS or transplantation. 
Insertion of a temporary MCS as a bridge to decision 
can permit hemodynamic optimization, allow the po-
tential reversal of CS-mediated end-organ failure, and 
provide additional time for complete medical and social 
assessment to occur before moving to definitive thera-
pies or a palliative care approach. Durable MCS devices, 
which are surgically implanted, can be used as a bridge 
to recovery, as a BTT, or as destination therapy.
Patient Selection
In the CS population, there is a paucity of high-quality 
evidence to support the routine use of MCS devices 
as a therapeutic adjunct. Supporting data are derived 
largely from small randomized trials with hemodynamic 
end points, observational or registry studies with sur-
vival rates better than historical controls, and clinician 
experience.60,244,245 Among patients with CS, the INTER-
MACS (Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted 
Circulatory Support) registry has reported a 38% 30-
day mortality among INTERMACS clinical profiles 1 
and 2 (CS and progressive decline on inotrope support, 
respectfully) compared with an 11% 30-day mortality 
rate among lower-acuity INTERMACS clinical profile 3 
and 4 individuals (Supplemental Table 5).246 More con-
temporary observational studies and registries suggest 
an ≈75% 1-year survival rate; however, INTERMACS 
profile 1 and 2 patients remain at very high risk for early 
mortality after MCS implantation.247,248
Summary and Suggestions for Clinical Practice
There is little evidence to guide the timing or selection 
of patients with CS who are suitable for MCS. Thus, 
we concur with both the AHA and International Soci-
ety for Heart and Lung Transplantation guidelines rec-
ommending that patients with persistent CS, with or 
without end-organ hypoperfusion, should be evaluated 
for MCS candidacy by a multidisciplinary team with ex-
pertise in the selection, implantation, and management 
of MCS devices.242,243 We suggest that the multidisci-
plinary assessment team include a palliative care phy-
sician, regardless of MCS candidacy, given the risk of 
peri-implantation death.242 We concur with published 
contraindications to MCS implantation.242,243 We sug-
gest that temporary MCS devices can be inserted in 
patients who are not expected to recover as early as 
possible in the course of CS as a bridge to recovery, 
bridge to a bridge, BTT, or bridge to decision strategy in 
appropriately selected patients with CS.
Device Selection in CS
Although the INTERMACS registry has reported an over-
all increase in MCS use, there has been a temporal de-
cline in durable MCS implantation among INTERMACS 
clinical profile 1 and 2 patients. This may be influenced 
by the historically lower survival rates reported after 
durable MCS implantation in these high-risk individu-
als.246,249–252 Consequently, the use of temporary MCS 
devices as first-line therapies has increased, although 
it is noteworthy that this practice change has not been 
associated with a demonstrable change in survival.248 
The AHA (Class IIa, Level of Evidence C) and the In-
ternational Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation 
(Class 1C) both recommend temporary MCS implanta-
tion for the management of patients with multiorgan 
system failure or relative contraindications to durable 
MCS or heart transplantation to allow neurologic as-
sessment and clinical optimization before the consider-
ation of a longer-term device.242,243 
Suggestions for Clinical Practice/Care
We suggest that temporary over durable MCS as a 
first-line device should be considered when immediate 
stabilization is needed to enable recovery of the heart 
and other organ systems, when surgical risk is prohibi-
tive but may be attenuated by such stabilization, when 
support is required to facilitate a definitive procedure 
or intervention (such as revascularization or arrhythmia 
ablation), or when time is required to allow a full trans-
plantation or durable MCS evaluation.
Temporary MCS
Summary of Clinical Considerations
We concur with clinical practice recommendations that 
temporary MCS selection should be based on device 
availability, multidisciplinary team familiarity, and patient-
specific needs.243 Temporary MCS options include the 
following.
Intra-Aortic Balloon Pump
The IABP is still the most widely used MCS device in 
CS. Made of a polyurethane membrane mounted on a 
vascular 7F to 8F catheter, the IABP is positioned in the 
descending thoracic aorta just distal to the left subcla-
vian artery. The device is timed to inflate and deflate in 
concert with the cardiac cycle, thereby increasing the 
diastolic blood pressure and reducing the SBP
. Regis-
try studies have reported only minimal improvement 
in MAP
, CI, serum lactate, and catecholamine require-
ments with IABP counterpulsation.1,253
Before 2012, American and European guidelines 
supported IABP use for CS with a Class I recommenda-
tion. The IABP-SHOCK II, which enrolled patients with 
MI-associated CS, found no differences in the primary 
end point of 30-day mortality, prespecified secondary 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Contemporary Management of Cardiogenic Shock
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525 
October 17, 2017
e251
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
end points, or 1-year outcomes between those with 
and those without IABP support.1,108 These results led to 
the IABP being downgraded to a Class IIIA recommen-
dation for routine use in CS in the most recent Euro-
pean revascularization and non–ST-segment–elevation 
ACS guidelines.23,254 IABP use rates have subsequently 
declined.24 
Suggestions for Clinical Practice
We suggest that IABP can be considered in patients 
with CS with acute mitral regurgitation or a ventricu-
lar septal defect, and it can be considered in select pa-
tients with profound CS when other MCS devices are 
not available, are contraindicated, or cannot be placed.
Percutaneous MCS
Currently established and available percutaneous MCS 
devices include the TandemHeart (Cardiac Assist, Inc, 
Pittsburgh, PA) and the micro-axial Impella 2.5, CP
, and 
5.0 systems (Abiomed Europe, Aachen, Germany). In-
vestigational devices include the paracorporeal pulsa-
tile iVAC 2L (PulseCath BV, Arnhem, the Netherlands) 
and the HeartMate Percutaneous Heart Pump (St. Jude 
Medical, Pleasanton, CA). Data on percutaneous MCS 
devices in CS are still quite limited. One meta-analysis, 
published in 2009, aggregated the results of 3 random-
ized trials comparing several of these devices (2 with 
TandemHeart, 1 with Impella 2.5) with IABP
. Patients 
treated with percutaneous MCS had higher CI, higher 
MAP
, lower PCWPs, and more frequent bleeding com-
plications, with no difference in mortality.245 In a recent 
randomized trial of 48 patients comparing the Impella 
CP with IABP
, no differences in mortality or secondary 
end points were observed.255 In the USpella registry of 
patients with CS treated with Impella devices before 
PCI, MCS placement resulted in improved survival to 
hospital discharge, even after adjustment for potential 
confounding variables.256 For the iVAC and HeartMate 
Percutaneous Heart Pump, trial results are not currently 
available. More complete descriptions of commonly 
used percutaneous MCS devices can be found in Sup-
plemental Table 6.
Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation
Patients may require ECMO because of cardiac failure, 
respiratory failure, or a combination thereof. Appropri-
ately selected patients with isolated respiratory failure 
despite MV and no significant cardiac dysfunction are 
often treated with veno-venous ECMO. Veno-arterial 
ECMO, on the other hand, is used to support both the 
cardiovascular and respiratory systems and is frequently 
used in CS. Relative contraindications to ECMO include 
advanced age (>75 years), life expectancy <1 year, severe 
peripheral vascular disease, advanced liver disease, con-
traindications to systemic anticoagulation, and neuro-
logical injury. A detailed description of the veno-arterial 
ECMO circuit is provided in Supplemental Appendix 1. 
Potential complications of veno-arterial ECMO include 
distal limb ischemia, thromboembolism, stroke, bleed-
ing, hemolysis, infection, and aortic valve insufficien-
cy.256,257 A common issue related to peripheral insertion is 
the resulting increase in LV afterload, which may lead to 
inadequate unloading of the LV. In these cases, combin-
ing veno-arterial ECMO with IABP
, Impella support, atrial 
septostomy, or other venting maneuvers may help to 
achieve more complete LV unloading.258 If veno-arterial 
ECMO is placed centrally, a vent can be placed directly 
into the left atrium to optimize LV decompression.
In general, there has been a gradual increase in rates 
of ECMO use for CS over the past decade.259 A report 
from the ELSO (Extracorporeal Life Support Organiza-
tion) registry showed that 56% of patients survived 
to decannulation from ECMO, whereas 41% survived 
to discharge when ECMO was used for a cardiac rea-
son.260 For patients with a potentially reversible cause 
of their CS (eg, acute fulminant myocarditis), outcomes 
are even better, whereas those with postcardiotomy CS 
do considerably worse.261,262 There are no randomized 
trials assessing the effectiveness of ECMO systems. 
Suggestions for Clinical Practice/Care
We suggest that veno-arterial ECMO may be the pre-
ferred temporary MCS option when there is poor oxy-
genation that is not expected to rapidly improve with 
an alternative temporary MCS device or during cardio-
pulmonary resuscitation.
RV Support
MCS options for the temporary management of RV 
failure (including RV infarction) are currently being de-
veloped and studied. The Impella RP (Abiomed Europe) 
is an intracardiac microaxial blood pump that can be in-
serted percutaneously though the femoral vein. When 
properly positioned, this catheter can deliver blood 
from the inlet area (in the inferior vena cava), through 
the cannula, and into the pulmonary artery with an 
intent to restore right-sided heart hemodynamics, to 
reduce RV workload, and to allow cardiac recovery. It 
is currently approved for use through a humanitarian 
device exemption on the basis of the early results of 
the multicenter RECOVER RIGHT study.263 The Tandem-
Heart device has also been previously used in an RV 
support configuration, although data are largely limited 
to small case series.264 Future prospective randomized 
studies are required to evaluate whether these devices 
can improve clinical outcomes.
Other Mechanical Therapies
The CentriMag (St. Jude Medical) ventricular assist sys-
tem can be used in either a univentricular or biventricu-
lar configuration. Central cannulation is performed via 
median sternotomy. The device includes a magnetically 
levitated rotor with the ability to deliver flows up to 10 
L/min. When CentriMag is serving as an LV assist device, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 van Diepen et al
October 17, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525
e252
the inflow cannula is placed either in the left atrium 
or directly into the LV apex, and the outflow cannula 
is sutured into the ascending aorta. When it is serving 
as an RV assist device, the inflow cannula is placed in 
the right atrium, and the outflow cannula is positioned 
in the main pulmonary artery. Although approved only 
for short-term use, there are reports of more prolonged 
support with the CentriMag device.265 There are no 
randomized trials using the CentriMag, but small case 
series have reported modest success.266,267
The Abiomed (Abiomed, Inc, Danvers, MA) ventricu-
lar assist system can also be used as a univentricular or 
biventricular device. It also is placed via sternotomy but 
instead uses a pulsatile pump that can generate up to 
6 L/min blood flow. Similar to the CentriMag device, 
there are no randomized trials assessing the effective-
ness of the Abiomed system.
Durable MCS
Long-term MCS as a BTT was first approved by the 
US Food and Drug Administration in 1998.268 Subse-
quently, the REMATCH trial (Randomized Evaluation of 
Mechanical Assistance for the Treatment of Congestive 
Heart Failure) established the utility of durable, long-
term MCS in the treatment of patients with advanced 
HF and reported improved 2-year survival over optimal 
medical therapy.269 All currently used durable MCS de-
vices are continuous-flow devices, include an inflow 
cannula placed directly into the LV cavity and an out-
flow graft sutured into the ascending aorta, and can 
provide hemodynamic support with flow rates ranging 
from 5 to 10 L/min. The HeartMate II (St. Jude Medi-
cal) is approved for BTT and destination therapy and 
uses an axial-flow pump, whereas the HeartWare HVAD 
(HeartWare, Framingham, MA), which is approved as a 
BTT device, uses only a centrifugal-flow, hydrodynami-
cally levitated pump. The HeartMate II and HVAD make 
up >95% of all US Food and Drug Administration–ap-
proved durable MCS devices currently being implant-
ed.252 Other devices under investigation include the 
magnetically levitated, centrifugal-flow HeartMate 3 
LV assist device (St. Jude Medical), the axial-flow Jarvik 
2000 (Jarvik Heart Inc, New York, NY), and the Reliant 
HeartAssist 5 (ReliantHeart, Inc, Houston, TX). The pro-
portion of patients receiving MCS with CS (INTERMACS 
1) has remained stable at ≈15%.252 As previously de-
scribed, implantation of durable MCS in patients with 
INTERMACS clinical profile 1 or 2 is associated with a 
substantially higher mortality compared with lower-
acuity patients. Hence, durable MCS implantation in 
patients with CS (INTERMACS 1) declined from 40% 
in 2006 to 12% in 2010. Currently, there is insufficient 
evidence to guide decisions on which patients with CS 
should have durable MCS as a first-line device strategy; 
however, the use of durable MCS devices in a bridge to 
a bridge strategy is becoming more commonplace and 
is supported by practice guidelines.242,243,247,248,270
Suggestions for Clinical Practice/Care
We suggest that durable MCS can be implanted in a 
bridge to recovery, bridge to a bridge, BTT, or destina-
tion therapy strategy in appropriately selected patients 
with CS. Durable MCS devices can be considered pri-
mary devices in patients with CS who are not likely to 
recover without long-term MCS support, have the ca-
pacity for meaningful recovery, and do not have irre-
versible end-organ dysfunction, systemic infections, or 
relative contraindications to durable MCS implantation.
Heart Transplantation
Cardiac transplantation, particularly for patients requir-
ing biventricular MCS, often represents the only hope for 
meaningful, long-term recovery. Unfortunately, the low 
number of available organs, coupled with unpredictable 
donor availability, makes heart transplantation in the acute 
setting of CS an unreliable primary therapy. Registry data 
suggest that up to 44% of MCS device implantations in 
INTERMACS profile 1 and 2 patients are performed with 
a BTT strategy.250,271 In addition, the use of ECMO before 
heart transplantation remains low. Between 2006 and 
2012, 1.1% of heart transplantations were performed 
on patients receiving ECMO.272 Many institutions have 
instead adopted the strategy of durable MCS in patients 
with CS, and the use of an LV assist device before heart 
transplantation has increased in recent years.272
Suggestions for Clinical Practice/Care
We suggest that all patients being evaluated for MCS 
implantation should concurrently be assessed for trans-
plantation. Heart transplantation may be performed 
after temporary or durable MCS device implantation in 
suitable candidates in whom heart function is not ex-
pected to recover.
Novel Therapies and Opportunities
There are currently only a few novel drug, device-based, 
or interventional therapies on the horizon with the po-
tential to improve outcomes for patients with CS. Ther-
apeutic hypothermia is widely available and has become 
a standard component of treatment for OHCA. Hypo-
thermia has wide-ranging systemic and hemodynamic 
effects that might be particularly advantageous in the 
systemic manifestations of CS (especially in the postin-
farction setting).273 Animal studies and human registry 
trials have reported positive hemodynamic changes and 
have suggested the possibility of improved clinical out-
comes.274 Unfortunately, a recently presented, but un-
published, randomized pilot trial did not show a benefit 
on the surrogate end point of cardiac power index or 
with other secondary end points.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Contemporary Management of Cardiogenic Shock
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525 
October 17, 2017
e253
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Inotropic agents are theoretically appealing in CS 
treatment, but the current evidence is scarce and has 
recently been summarized in a meta-analysis.275 In this 
systematic review, only 1 small trial enrolling 32 patients 
comparing levosimendan with enoximone in refractory 
CS could be included. From these limited data, levosi-
mendan may be appealing. However, this agent is not 
approved in the United States and requires additional 
validation with larger studies.275 Furthermore, the effect 
of other medications that have shown positive results 
in acute, nonshock HF populations such as seralaxin re-
quires examination in CS cohorts.276
Finally, as previously mentioned, percutaneous MCS 
devices can be useful tools for managing refractory 
shock. The newly introduced HeartMate Percutaneous 
Heart Pump features a novel design with a collapsible 
elastomeric impeller and nitinol cannula, which gives 
this device a low profile but high flow rate. Once placed 
in a retrograde fashion across the aortic valve, the can-
nula can expand to 24F and support a continuous mean 
blood flow of >4 L/min. Although current data for this 
device are limited, ongoing trials should help to clarify 
its role in the treatment of CS.
PALLIATIVE CARE IN CS
Palliative care can reduce physical and emotional dis-
tress, improve quality of life, and complement curative 
therapy in advanced HF.277,278 However, the timing of 
palliative care initiation, its assessment, and its manage-
ment are not well studied in patients with CS. In the 
2016 palliative care and cardiovascular disease policy 
statement from the AHA, advanced HF and critical ill-
ness were referral triggers for palliative care, but CS 
was not discussed.277,279
Palliative Care Use and Perceptions in 
Cardiovascular Practice
In patients with advanced HF without CS, despite bur-
densome symptoms and multiple comorbidities, only 
6% to 8% are referred for palliative care services dur-
ing hospitalization, and referral rates have increased to 
as high 10% in contemporary studies.280–283 Among pa-
tients hospitalized with an ACS, palliative care use de-
clined from 6% in 1997 to 2% in 2013.284 The reasons 
underpinning these low referral rates remain unclear, 
but provider misperceptions about palliative services are 
a likely contributor. When multidisciplinary HF provid-
ers were interviewed to assess knowledge, attitudes, 
and perceptions about palliative care, they reported 
limited palliative care knowledge, confused palliative 
and hospice care, and were uncertain about differences 
between standard HF therapy and palliative care.285 A 
survey of HF nurses found that 67% felt it was a physi-
cian’s role to initiate discussions about end-of-life care 
with patients, and 91% reported a need for more pal-
liative training.286 Additional barriers to the provision of 
palliative care services identified by healthcare provid-
ers included uncertainty about end of life because of 
its unpredictable trajectory, lack of need for end-of-life 
discussions in patients in New York Heart Association 
class II to III HF, and lack of time and resources to ini-
tiate discussions.286–288 In qualitative reports, patients 
and families had misperceptions about being separated 
from familiar, trusted healthcare providers and not be-
ing hospitalized once they committed to palliative care. 
Accordingly, it has been suggested that healthcare pro-
viders need to introduce palliative care as a philosophy 
of care rather than a strategy used at end of life.289 
Considerations for Patient Care Communication
We suggest that healthcare providers openly discuss 
barriers to and benefits of initiating palliative care in 
patients with CS.
Initiation of Palliative Care Consultation 
in CS
In the 2016 European and 2013 American HF guide-
lines, palliative care was discussed as a consideration 
of treatment for HF, and the 2013 International Soci-
ety for Heart and Lung Transplantation MCS guidelines 
recommend that palliative care should be part of the 
multidisciplinary inpatient team.15,242,290 However, re-
search and consensus-guideline literature that provide 
guidance to providers on the timing of palliative care in 
CS are limited, and objective criteria have largely been 
extrapolated from the HF and ACS literature (Supple-
mental Table 7). In the advanced HF population, pre-
dictors of all-cause death include low ejection fraction, 
low SBP, low hemoglobin and serum sodium levels, 
high serum creatinine and N-terminal pro–B-type natri-
uretic peptide, high New York Heart Association class, 
inpatient status, history of ischemic heart disease, atrial 
fibrillation, HF ≥6 months, heart rate >70 bpm, and 
not being treated with an RAAS and β-blocker.282,291 
Two randomized intervention trials of palliative care 
consultation in advanced HF have been performed and 
suggest possible benefits at an earlier stage in HF care. 
In 1 trial, the proportion of patients who selected com-
fort-oriented care did not increase over 3 to 6 months, 
and in the second, symptom burden was reduced and 
quality of life improved at 1 month with no difference 
in early rehospitalization, hospice use, or death.292,293 
Characteristics of patients hospitalized with ACS who 
received palliative care services are provided in Supple-
mental Table 8.284 Of note, palliative treatment was 
associated with the development of CS during hospi-
talization and a 4-fold higher in-hospital mortality rate 
than in patients who received conservative or reperfu-
sion treatments.284
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 van Diepen et al
October 17, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525
e254
The CS population has a unique set of challenges 
pertaining to the timing of palliative care consulta-
tion. First, the acute nature of CS provides little time 
for patients, families, and healthcare professionals to 
prepare for discussions about advance directives, care 
transitions, quality of life, and treatments aimed at 
preventing and managing distressing symptoms. Sec-
ond, the lack of validated prognostic tools and vari-
ability in treatment course may be perceived as an ini-
tiation barrier. For example, patients may transiently 
improve after MCS device implantation, coronary re-
vascularization, or intravenous vasoactive therapies. 
However, as highlighted previously in this statement, 
the prognosis of patients with CS who receive MCS 
Table 7. Suggestions for Global Palliative Care Management in CS
Management Domains
Patient-Focused Supportive Care Recommendations
Consultation services
Discuss advanced care decisions, personal goals, emotional/practical/spiritual support, symptom control and care, and 
illness understanding and trajectory in preparation for supportive care decision making
 Palliative care specialists
  
Cardiology team member 
trained in coordinating health 
services (psychologists, chaplains, 
physicians, and nurses) and 
providing psychosocial support
Ensure palliative care interventions are parallel with curative treatment care, are holistic, and are tailored to patients’ 
values and preferences
Address fears and concerns; maintain open, trusting dialogue
Use direct, simple messages and everyday language
Provide ongoing services/support for readdressing goals, symptoms, treatment preferences, and self-determination in 
end-of-life care choices (which may change over time)
Considerations for CS-specific 
preparedness plan
Prepare for artificial nutrition, hemodialysis, mechanical ventilation, and postdischarge rehabilitation
Consider alarm fatigue associated with multiple intravenous drug infusions and hemodynamic monitoring
Assess for potential mechanical circulatory support device application311: chronic infection and long-term antibiotic use, 
perioperative morbidity and mortality, stroke or intracranial hemorrhage, recurrent gastrointestinal bleeding, device 
malfunction/pump failure, financial burden, postoperative complications, and postemergency cardiac surgery
Preparedness for withdrawal  
of life-sustaining measures312
Assess and consider each patient’s desire
Discuss the withdrawal process, what to expect, and how to address distressing factors
Ensure the presence of an experienced physician, nurse, and respiratory therapist at the time of extubation
Respond quickly if patient experiences distress during the withdrawal process
Conduct rounds at the bedside regularly, and ensure emotional and psychological support of patients, families, and 
healthcare providers
Place patients in private rooms whenever possible or maintain privacy with curtains and signage
Offer family members a private, quiet, comfortable space, separate from the patient’s room, and immediate grief 
support and referral to community bereavement support services
Allow family members to be present at the bedside during withdrawal procedures and to participate in patient care
When possible, discontinue paralytic medications to be better able to assess distressing signs before withdrawal of life-
sustaining measures
Continue opioid medication during withdrawal processes and titrate on the basis of signs or symptoms of distress; if patient 
was not previously on an opioid, morphine is the medication of choice for pain or dyspnea during withdrawal processes
Use sedative medications after effectively treating pain and dyspnea with opioids; combination opioid and sedative 
medications can be used during withdrawal processes
ICU staff should develop protocols for withdrawal of life-sustaining treatments and devices (implantable cardioverter-
defibrillator, ventilator, ventricular assist device, inotropic or vasopressor infusions, continuous renal replacement 
therapies, enteral or parenteral tube feedings, and intravenous fluids)
Individualize the pace of withdrawal of life-sustaining measures; use a step-wise approach and ensure that distressing 
signs and symptoms are managed at each step
In MV withdrawal, extubate to room air whenever possible and not to noninvasive mechanical ventilation
Remove all monitoring (obtaining blood or urine samples, telemetry or hemodynamic monitoring, weight measurement, 
intake and output, etc) that is not comfort related
Physical symptoms
Assess for pain, dyspnea, insomnia, anorexia, fatigue, and agitation; document findings and treatment (including 
rationale); include pharmacist, nutritionist, and physical and occupational therapists in treatment decisions; consider 
complementary and alternative medicine (acupuncturist, art or music therapist, massage therapist); use valid, reliable 
tools when available (see Supplemental Table 7 suggestions) to assess symptoms
Emotions (anxiety and depression) 
and spiritual challenges
Identify emotions, show empathy, and communicate using a shared decision-making framework
Involve psychiatrist or psychologist, chaplain, pharmacist, social worker, and case management
Consider spirituality, insurance, financial concerns, and social support
General measures
Consider comorbid conditions, including frailty, delirium, and dementia, in the palliative care plan
Establish a supportive relationship with family members and support teams
Discuss deactivation of an implantable-cardioverter defibrillator when present
Learn usual care behaviors and maintain whenever possible, especially after transfer from intensive care
CS indicates cardiogenic shock; ICU, intensive care unit; and MV, mechanical ventilation.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Contemporary Management of Cardiogenic Shock
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525 
October 17, 2017
e255
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
remains guarded. In light of our collective inability to 
accurately identify which patients with CS will require 
palliative treatment, curative care therapies may need 
to be blended with palliative care early in the course 
of care.294
Suggestions for Clinical Care
We suggest that regardless of where it is initiated, ob-
jective, subjective, and patient-centered assessment 
criteria and tools should be used to guide palliative 
care. Supplemental Table 6 provides criteria from mul-
tiple acute HF, global HF, and non-HF sources to aid in 
determining the timing of consultation in CS.15,278,295–
310 We suggest that the multidisciplinary assessment 
team include a palliative care physician, regardless of 
MCS candidacy, given the risk of peri-implantation 
death.242
Palliative Care Delivery and Management
Little is known about the optimal delivery of palliative 
care in the CS population. In addition, most palliative 
care interventions in advanced HF, including consulta-
tion services, were derived from the success of cancer-
related palliative care, and we believe more knowledge 
is needed to better understand best palliative care clini-
cal practices.
Suggestions for Care Delivery
Suggestions for global palliative care delivery in patients 
with CS are provided in Table 7.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
CS remains the most common cause of in-hospital 
death in patients with MI, and only a few treatment 
strategies are based on randomized trial evidence. To 
improve patient outcomes, timely research focused on 
addressing important clinical knowledge–treatment 
gaps is required (Table 8). For example, there is broad 
variation in CS outcomes that may be mediated in part 
by differences in the severity of CS. The development 
of accurate risk stratification tools that can be used to 
aid in treatment (eg, MCS or palliation) decision mak-
ing would be an important clinical resource provided 
that it is simple, applicable to clinical practice, and vali-
Table 8. Potential Priorities for Future CS Research
Research 
Domain
Specific Research Need
Proposed Study Design
Prognosis
Generating and validating a contemporary and easy-to-use CS score
Prospective registry trial with external validation cohort
Validating currently available and new prognostic biomarkers
Prospective registry trial
Monitoring
Defining the potential role and therapeutic targets for pulmonary artery catheter, other 
invasive or noninvasive cardiac output, or pulmonary fluid monitoring
Prospective registry or randomized trial
Systems of 
care
Studying whether integrated regional hub-and-spoke care systems with dedicated CS 
centers improve survival
Prospective registry
Management
Evaluating the optimal revascularization strategy in acute MI with multivessel coronary 
artery disease
Randomized trial
Defining access site for invasive angiography (radial vs femoral)
Randomized trial
Studying antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapy in primary PCI in acute MI
Randomized trial
Studying the utility, timing, and comparative efficacy of percutaneous or durable 
mechanical support devices vs no mechanical support
Randomized trial
Identifying the optimal inotropic and vasopressor regimens across common causes of 
and hemodynamic phenotypes of CS
Randomized trial
Determining adrenergic or nonadrenergic pharmacological treatment of stress-induced 
cardiomyopathy-associated CS
Prospective registry or randomized trial
Defining the timing, efficacy, and safety of adjunctive critical care technologies and 
treatments, including MV modes, pressures, and physiological targets; timing and dose 
of renal replacement therapy; and critical care bundles
Randomized trial
Studying the optimal fluid management targets
Prospective registry or randomized trial
Evaluating whether therapeutic hypothermia or targeted temperature management 
can improve survival
Randomized trial
Palliative care
Assessing patient, family, hospital, and healthcare provider characteristics in CS when 
palliative care is selected, not offered, or offered but refused to better understand 
predictors and timing of palliative care use and treatments
Prospective registry or randomized trial
Evaluating clinical outcomes when palliative care is discussed early or late in the course of CS
Prospective registry or randomized trial
Studying hospitalization resources used and cost of care when palliative care specialists 
coordinate nonpharmacological and device care
Prospective registry or randomized trial
CS indicates cardiogenic shock; MI, myocardial infarction; MV, mechanical ventilation; and PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 van Diepen et al
October 17, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525
e256
dated in multiple clinical settings and pathogeneses. 
Currently, there is no well-established, simple, contem-
porary, and broadly validated CS prediction score. The 
development of such a tool that incorporates clinical 
and biomarker parameters could potentially serve as a 
cornerstone to improve outcomes by identifying when 
invasive, medical, or palliative therapies may be the 
most appropriate or futile.
Revascularization rates in patients with CS with MI 
remain low (50%–70%) in registries studies. Improv-
ing adherence to practice guidelines or available thera-
peutic technologies may increase CS survival. This may 
be accomplished through provider education of the 
benefits of early revascularization or public reporting 
changes wherein the CS population is analyzed sepa-
rately to mitigate clinician or institutional aversion to 
adverse outcomes.313,314 Because the majority of pa-
tients present with multivessel coronary artery disease, 
more research is also warranted on the optimal revascu-
larization strategy for these patients.182 In addition, the 
outcomes of treatment in specialized CS centers offer-
ing all treatment options should be evaluated further. 
MCS is currently used in <10% of patients, which may 
be influenced by the scarce evidence for these devices. 
Currently, when, how, and which MCS device should 
be used remain unclear.25
Randomized clinical trials in CS are difficult to per-
form, and few randomized clinical trials powered to 
detect differences in clinical outcome completed en-
rollment with the required number of patients.1,9 The 
SHOCK trial was a milestone, and the subsequent 
widespread application of early revascularization led to 
a significant reduction in CS mortality. The failure of 
IABP in the IABP-SHOCK II trial should not be consid-
ered the end of percutaneous MCS. Rather, it should 
set the stage for a seminal trial using contemporary 
MCS strategies.1 Historical barriers to cardiovascular 
research in the CS population include difficulty in ob-
taining informed consent and the exclusion of critically 
ill patients from contemporary trials.315 Recognizing 
the timely need for studies evaluating novel and avail-
able pharmacological, interventional, systems of care, 
and MCS device management strategies, new tradi-
tional randomized trials, together with pragmatic trial 
designs, dedicated CS registries, inclusion of CS sub-
populations in MI and HF trials, and novel enrollment 
methods, are needed to generate new CS knowledge 
and to bridge the evidence gaps that we encounter in 
daily clinical practice.
CONCLUSIONS
CS is a multifactorial and hemodynamically diverse high-
acuity illness that is frequently associated with multi-
system organ failure. The complexity of CS requires a 
widespread application of best-care practice standards 
and a coordinated regionalized approach to CS with 
multidisciplinary care in designated tertiary care centers 
that have the expertise, clinical volume, and resourc-
es necessary to centralize the delivery of the medical, 
surgical, and mechanical therapies highlighted in this 
document. Despite its prevalence, few trials have been 
performed, and CS remains a relatively understudied 
cardiovascular disease state. The pathophysiology of CS 
remains poorly elucidated; many routine CS therapeu-
tic practices have not been rigorously tested; and new 
medical treatment options are urgently needed to re-
duce the significant patient morbidity and mortality as-
sociated with this condition. To address the knowledge 
gap, we advocate for coordinated international efforts 
to identify CS research priorities, to conduct clinical tri-
als, and to create large population-based registries to 
generate quality improvement opportunities. These en-
deavors could form the basis for future scientific dis-
covery, guideline development, and improved patient 
outcomes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The writing group gratefully acknowledges the contributions 
of Anne Leonard, AHA science and medicine advisor.
FOOTNOTES
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid 
any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise 
as a result of an outside relationship or a personal, profes-
sional, or business interest of a member of the writing panel. 
Specifically, all members of the writing group are required to 
complete and submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all 
such relationships that might be perceived as real or potential 
conflicts of interest.
This statement was approved by the American Heart As-
sociation Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee on 
April 13, 2017, and the American Heart Association Execu-
tive Committee on June 8, 2017. A copy of the document is 
available at http://professional.heart.org/statements by using 
either “Search for Guidelines & Statements” or the “Browse 
by Topic” area. To purchase additional reprints, call 843-216-
2533 or e-mail kelle.ramsay@wolterskluwer.com.
The online-only Data Supplement is available with this ar-
ticle at http://circ.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000525/-/DC1.
The American Heart Association requests that this docu-
ment be cited as follows: van Diepen S, Katz JN, Albert NM, 
Henry TD, Jacobs AK, Kapur NK, Kilic A, Menon V, Ohman 
EM, Sweitzer NK, Thiele H, Washam JB, Cohen MG; on be-
half of the American Heart Association Council on Clinical 
Cardiology; Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing; 
Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research; and 
Mission: Lifeline. Contemporary management of cardiogenic 
shock: a scientific statement from the American Heart As-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Contemporary Management of Cardiogenic Shock
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525 
October 17, 2017
e257
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
sociation. Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000525.
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is 
conducted by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For 
more on AHA statements and guidelines development, 
visit http://professional.heart.org/statements. Select the 
“Guidelines & Statements” drop-down menu, then click 
“Publication Development.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, en-
hancement, and/or distribution of this document are not permit-
ted without the express permission of the American Heart Asso-
ciation. Instructions for obtaining permission are located at http://
www.heart.org/HEARTORG/General/Copyright-Permission-
Guidelines_UCM_300404_Article.jsp. A link to the “Copyright 
Permissions Request Form” appears on the right side of the page.
Circulation is available at http://circ.ahajournals.org.
DISCLOSURES
Writing Group Disclosures
Writing 
Group 
Member
Employment
Research Grant
Other Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory Board
Other
Sean van 
Diepen
University of 
Alberta (Canada)
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Jason N. Katz
University of North 
Carolina
St. Jude Medical*
None
None
None
None
None
None
Nancy M. 
Albert
Cleveland Clinic
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Mauricio G. 
Cohen
University of Miami, 
Miller School of 
Medicine
None
None
Abiomed*
None
None
Abiomed*; 
Medtronic†; Merit 
Medical†; Terumo 
Medical*
None
Timothy D. 
Henry
Cedars-Sinai Heart 
Institute
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Alice K. Jacobs
Boston Medical 
Center
Abbott Vascular†; 
AstraZeneca†
None
None
None
None
None
None
Navin K. Kapur
Tufts Medical 
Center
None
Abiomed†; 
St. Jude†; 
Cardiac Assist†; 
Maquet†
Abiomed†; 
Maquet†; 
St. Jude*; 
Heartware*
None
None
None
None
Ahmet Kilic
The Ohio State 
University
None
None
St. Jude 
Medical*
None
None
None
None
Venu Menon
Cleveland Clinic
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
E. Magnus 
Ohman
Duke University 
Medical Center
Daiichi Sankyo†; 
Gilead Sciences†; 
Janssen 
Pharmaceuticals†
None
None
None
None
Abbott Vascular*; 
Abiomed†; 
AstraZeneca*; 
Biotie*; Boehringer 
Ingelheim*; Daiichi 
Sankyo*; Faculty 
Connection†; 
Merck*; Medscape*; 
St. Jude Medical*; 
Stealth Peptides*; The 
Medicines Company*
None
Nancy K. 
Sweitzer
University of 
Arizona, Sarver 
Heart Center
AHA*; Novartis*; 
Merck*
None
None
None
None
Medtronic*
None
Holger Thiele
University Heart 
Center Lübeck, 
Germany
European Union† 
(funding for CULPRIT
-
SHOCK trial)
None
None
None
None
None
None
Jeffrey B. 
Washam
Duke University 
Medical Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on 
the Disclosure Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if 
(a) the person receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the 
voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than 
“significant” under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 van Diepen et al
October 17, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525
e258
REFERENCES
 1. Thiele H, Zeymer U, Neumann FJ, Ferenc M, Olbrich HG, Hausleiter J, Rich-
ardt G, Hennersdorf M, Empen K, Fuernau G, Desch S, Eitel I, Hambrecht 
R, Fuhrmann J, Böhm M, Ebelt H, Schneider S, Schuler G, Werdan K; IABP-
SHOCK II Trial Investigators. Intraaortic balloon support for myocardial in-
farction with cardiogenic shock. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:1287–1296. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa1208410.
 2. Reynolds HR, Hochman JS. Cardiogenic shock: current concepts and 
improving outcomes. Circulation. 2008;117:686–697. doi: 10.1161/ 
CIRCULATIONAHA.106.613596.
 3. Hollenberg SM, Kavinsky CJ, Parrillo JE. Cardiogenic shock. Ann Intern 
Med. 1999;131:47–59.
 4. Kolte D, Khera S, Aronow WS, Mujib M, Palaniswamy C, Sule S, Jain D, 
Gotsis W, Ahmed A, Frishman WH, Fonarow GC. Trends in incidence, 
management, and outcomes of cardiogenic shock complicating ST-
elevation myocardial infarction in the United States. J Am Heart Assoc. 
2014;3:e000590. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.113.000590.
 5. Goldberg RJ, Spencer FA, Gore JM, Lessard D, Yarzebski J. Thirty-year 
trends (1975 to 2005) in the magnitude of, management of, and hos-
pital death rates associated with cardiogenic shock in patients with 
acute myocardial infarction: a population-based perspective. Circulation. 
2009;119:1211–1219. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.814947.
 6. Jeger RV, Radovanovic D, Hunziker PR, Pfisterer ME, Stauffer JC, 
Erne P, Urban P; AMIS Plus Registry Investigators. Ten-year trends in 
the incidence and treatment of cardiogenic shock. Ann Intern Med. 
2008;149:618–626.
 7. Goldberg RJ, Makam RC, Yarzebski J, McManus DD, Lessard D, Gore JM. 
Decade-long trends (2001-2011) in the incidence and hospital death rates 
associated with the in-hospital development of cardiogenic shock after 
acute myocardial infarction. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2016;9:117–
125. doi: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.115.002359.
 8. Aissaoui N, Puymirat E, Tabone X, Charbonnier B, Schiele F, Lefèvre 
T, Durand E, Blanchard D, Simon T, Cambou JP, Danchin N. Improved 
outcome of cardiogenic shock at the acute stage of myocardial infarc-
tion: a report from the USIK 1995, USIC 2000, and FAST-MI French 
nationwide registries. Eur Heart J. 2012;33:2535–2543. doi: 10.1093/
eurheartj/ehs264.
 9. Hochman JS, Sleeper LA, Webb JG, Sanborn TA, White HD, Talley JD, 
Buller CE, Jacobs AK, Slater JN, Col J, McKinlay SM, LeJemtel TH. Early re-
vascularization in acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic 
shock: SHOCK Investigators: Should We Emergently Revascularize Occlud-
ed Coronaries for Cardiogenic Shock. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:625–634. 
doi: 10.1056/NEJM199908263410901.
 10. Le May MR, Wells GA, So DY, Glover CA, Froeschl M, Maloney J, Di-
onne R, Marquis JF, O’Brien ER, Dick A, Sherrard HL, Trickett J, Poirier P
, 
Blondeau M, Bernick J, Labinaz M. Reduction in mortality as a result of 
direct transport from the field to a receiving center for primary percutane-
ous coronary intervention. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;60:1223–1230. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2012.07.008.
 11. Malta Hansen C, Kragholm K, Pearson DA, Tyson C, Monk L, Myers B, 
Nelson D, Dupre ME, Fosbøl EL, Jollis JG, Strauss B, Anderson ML, McNally 
B, Granger CB. Association of bystander and first-responder intervention 
with survival after out-of-hospital cardiac arrest in North Carolina, 2010-
2013. JAMA. 2015;314:255–264. doi: 10.1001/jama.2015.7938.
 12. Moore L, Evans D, Hameed SM, Yanchar NL, Stelfox HT, Simons R, Kort-
beek J, Bourgeois G, Clément J, Lauzier F, Nathens A, Turgeon AF. Mortal-
ity in Canadian trauma systems: a multicenter cohort study. Ann Surg. 
2017;265:212–217. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0000000000001614.
 13. Beurtheret S, Mordant P
, Paoletti X, Marijon E, Celermajer DS, Léger P
, 
Pavie A, Combes A, Leprince P
. Emergency circulatory support in refrac-
tory cardiogenic shock patients in remote institutions: a pilot study (the 
cardiac-RESCUE program). Eur Heart J. 2013;34:112–120. doi: 10.1093/
eurheartj/ehs081.
 14. Jaroszewski DE, Kleisli T, Staley L, Pierce C, Scott R, Steidley DE, DeVale-
ria P
, Arabia FA. A traveling team concept to expedite the transfer and 
management of unstable patients in cardiopulmonary shock. J Heart Lung 
Transplant. 2011;30:618–623. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2010.11.018.
 15. Ponikowski P
, Voors AA, Anker SD, Bueno H, Cleland JG, Coats AJ, Falk 
V, González-Juanatey JR, Harjola VP
, Jankowska EA, Jessup M, Linde C, 
Nihoyannopoulos P
, Parissis JT, Pieske B, Riley JP
, Rosano GM, Ruilope LM, 
Ruschitzka F, Rutten FH, van der Meer P
. 2016 ESC guidelines for the 
diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure: the Task Force 
for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute and Chronic Heart Failure of 
the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) [published correction appears 
in Eur Heart J. 2016;38:ehw383]. Eur Heart J. 2016;37:2129–2200. doi: 
10.1093/eurheartj/ehw128.
 16. Killip T 3rd, Kimball JT. Treatment of myocardial infarction in a coro-
nary care unit: a two year experience with 250 patients. Am J Cardiol. 
1967;20:457–464.
 17. Forrester JS, Diamond G, Chatterjee K, Swan HJ. Medical therapy of 
acute myocardial infarction by application of hemodynamic subsets (sec-
ond of two parts). N Engl J Med. 1976;295:1404–1413. doi: 10.1056/
NEJM197612162952505.
Reviewer Disclosures
Reviewer
Employment
Research Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory Board
Other
Christopher B. 
Granger
Duke University
Novartis†; 
Medtronic 
Foundation†; 
Pfizer†; Bristol 
Myers Squibb†; 
AstraZeneca†; 
Daiichi Sankyo†
None
Novartis*; 
Medtronic*; 
Pfizer†; Bristol 
Myers Squibb†; 
AstraZeneca*; 
Daiichi Sankyo*
None
None
Novartis*; 
Medtronic*; 
Pfizer†; Bristol 
Myers Squibb†; 
AstraZeneca*; 
Daiichi Sankyo*
None
David E. 
Kandzari
Piedmont Heart 
Institute
St. Jude Medical*
None
None
None
None
St. Jude Medical*; 
Medtronic*; 
Boston Scientific*
None
Neal S. 
Kleiman
Methodist DeBakey 
Heart Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Karl Werdan
Martin Luther 
University Halle-
Wittenberg 
(Germany)
None
None
None
None
None
Novartis (heart 
failure think tank)†
None
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure 
Questionnaire, which all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives $10 
000 or more 
during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns 
$10 
000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Contemporary Management of Cardiogenic Shock
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525 
October 17, 2017
e259
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 18. Scheidt S, Wilner G, Mueller H, Summers D, Lesch M, Wolff G, Krakauer 
J, Rubenfire M, Fleming P
, Noon G, Oldham N, Killip T, Kantrowitz A. 
Intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation in cardiogenic shock: report of a co-
operative clinical trial. N Engl J Med. 1973;288:979–984. doi: 10.1056/
NEJM197305102881901.
 19. Menon V, Hochman JS, Stebbins A, Pfisterer M, Col J, Anderson RD, Has-
dai D, Holmes DR, Bates ER, Topol EJ, Califf RM, Ohman EM. Lack of 
progress in cardiogenic shock: lessons from the GUSTO trials. Eur Heart J. 
2000;21:1928–1936. doi: 10.1053/euhj.2000.2240.
 20. Goldberg RJ, Gore JM, Alpert JS, Osganian V, de Groot J, Bade J, Chen 
Z, Frid D, Dalen JE. Cardiogenic shock after acute myocardial infarc-
tion. Incidence and mortality from a community-wide perspective, 
1975 to 1988. N Engl J Med. 1991;325:1117–1122. doi: 10.1056/
NEJM199110173251601.
 21. Hochman JS, Sleeper LA, Webb JG, Dzavik V, Buller CE, Aylward P
, Col 
J, White HD; SHOCK Investigators. Early revascularization and long-term 
survival in cardiogenic shock complicating acute myocardial infarction. 
JAMA. 2006;295:2511–2515.
 22. Hochman JS, Sleeper LA, White HD, Dzavik V, Wong SC, Menon V, 
Webb JG, Steingart R, Picard MH, Menegus MA, Boland J, Sanborn T, 
Buller CE, Modur S, Forman R, Desvigne-Nickens P, Jacobs AK, Slater 
JN, LeJemtel TH; SHOCK Investigators; Should We Emergently Revas-
cularize Occluded Coronaries for Cardiogenic Shock. One-year sur-
vival following early revascularization for cardiogenic shock. JAMA. 
2001;285:190–192.
 23. Windecker S, Kolh P
, Alfonso F, Collet JP
, Cremer J, Falk V, Filippatos G, 
Hamm C, Head SJ, Juni P
, Kappetein AP
, Kastrati A, Knuuti J, Landmesser 
U, Laufer G, Neumann FJ, Richter DJ, Schauerte P
, Sousa Uva M, Stefanini 
GG, Taggart DP
, Torracca L, Valgimigli M, Wijns W, Witkowski A. 2014 
ESC/EACTS guidelines on myocardial revascularization: the Task Force on 
Myocardial Revascularization of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) 
and the European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS) devel-
oped with the special contribution of the European Association of Percu-
taneous Cardiovascular Interventions (EAPCI). Eur Heart J. 2014;35:2541–
2619. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehu278.
 24. Sandhu A, McCoy LA, Negi SI, Hameed I, Atri P
, Al’Aref SJ, Curtis J, Mc-
Nulty E, Anderson HV, Shroff A, Menegus M, Swaminathan RV, Gurm H, 
Messenger J, Wang T, Bradley SM. Use of mechanical circulatory support 
in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention: Insights from 
the National Cardiovascular Data Registry. Circulation. 2015;132:1243–
1251. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.014451.
 25. Thiele H, Ohman EM, Desch S, Eitel I, de Waha S. Management of car-
diogenic shock. Eur Heart J. 2015;36:1223–1230. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/
ehv051.
 26. Hochman JS. Cardiogenic shock complicating acute myocardial infarc-
tion: expanding the paradigm. Circulation. 2003;107:2998–3002. doi: 
10.1161/01.CIR.0000075927.67673.F2.
 27. Thiele H, Allam B, Chatellier G, Schuler G, Lafont A. Shock in acute myo-
cardial infarction: the Cape Horn for trials? Eur Heart J. 2010;31:1828–
1835. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq220.
 28. den Uil CA, Lagrand WK, van der Ent M, Jewbali LS, Cheng JM, Spronk 
PE, Simoons ML. Impaired microcirculation predicts poor outcome 
of patients with acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardio-
genic shock. Eur Heart J. 2010;31:3032–3039. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/
ehq324.
 29. den Uil CA, Maat AP
, Lagrand WK, van der Ent M, Jewbali LS, van Thiel 
RJ, Spronk PE, Simoons ML. Mechanical circulatory support devices im-
prove tissue perfusion in patients with end-stage heart failure or cardio-
genic shock. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2009;28:906–911. doi: 10.1016/j.
healun.2009.05.010.
 30. Prondzinsky R, Unverzagt S, Lemm H, Wegener NA, Schlitt A, Heinroth 
KM, Dietz S, Buerke U, Kellner P
, Loppnow H, Fiedler MG, Thiery J, Wer-
dan K, Buerke M. Interleukin-6, -7, -8 and -10 predict outcome in acute 
myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock. Clin Res Cardiol. 
2012;101:375–384. doi: 10.1007/s00392-011-0403-3.
 31. Eikelboom JW, Mehta SR, Anand SS, Xie C, Fox KA, Yusuf S. Ad-
verse impact of bleeding on prognosis in patients with acute coronary 
 
syndromes. Circulation. 2006;114:774–782. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
106.612812.
 32. Ndrepepa G, Berger PB, Mehilli J, Seyfarth M, Neumann FJ, Schömig A, 
Kastrati A. Periprocedural bleeding and 1-year outcome after percutane-
ous coronary interventions: appropriateness of including bleeding as a 
component of a quadruple end point. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;51:690–
697. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2007.10.040.
 33. Rao SV, Jollis JG, Harrington RA, Granger CB, Newby LK, Armstrong 
PW, Moliterno DJ, Lindblad L, Pieper K, Topol EJ, Stamler JS, Califf RM.  
Relationship of blood transfusion and clinical outcomes in patients with 
acute coronary syndromes. JAMA. 2004;292:1555–1562. doi: 10.1001/
jama.292.13.1555.
 34. Boyer NH. Cardiogenic shock. N Engl J Med. 1944;230:226–229.
 35. Freis ED, Schnaper HW, Johnson RL, Schreiner GE. Hemodynamic altera-
tions in acute myocardial infarction, I: cardiac output, mean arterial pres-
sure, total peripheral resistance, central and total blood volumes, venous 
pressure and average circulation time. J Clin Invest. 1952;31:131–140.
 36. Menon V, White H, LeJemtel T, Webb JG, Sleeper LA, Hochman JS. The 
clinical profile of patients with suspected cardiogenic shock due to pre-
dominant left ventricular failure: a report from the SHOCK Trial Registry: 
Should we emergently revascularize Occluded Coronaries in cardiogenic 
shock? J Am Coll Cardiol. 2000;36(suppl A):1071–1076.
 37. Wood LDH. The pathophysiology of the circulation in critical illness. In: 
Hall JB, Schmidt GA, Wood LDH, eds. Principles of Critical Care. 3rd ed. 
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Medical Publishing, 2005:231–248.
 38. Tsagalou EP
, Kanakakis J, Anastasiou-Nana MI, Drakos SG, Ntalianis AS, 
Malliaras K, Lazaris N, Katsaros F, Nanas JN. Hemodynamic effects of levo-
simendan in acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock 
and high systemic vascular resistance. Acute Card Care. 2009;11:99–106. 
doi: 10.1080/17482940902807286.
 39. Fincke R, Hochman JS, Lowe AM, Menon V, Slater JN, Webb JG, LeJemtel 
TH, Cotter G; SHOCK Investigators. Cardiac power is the strongest he-
modynamic correlate of mortality in cardiogenic shock: a report from the 
SHOCK trial registry. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;44:340–348. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2004.03.060.
 40. Stevenson LW, Pagani FD, Young JB, Jessup M, Miller L, Kormos RL, Naf-
tel DC, Ulisney K, Desvigne-Nickens P
, Kirklin JK. INTERMACS profiles 
of advanced heart failure: the current picture. J Heart Lung Transplant. 
2009;28:535–541. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2009.02.015.
 41. Akiyama K, Suzuki H, Grant P
, Bing RJ. Oxidation products of nitric oxide, 
NO2 and NO3, in plasma after experimental myocardial infarction. J Mol 
Cell Cardiol. 1997;29:1–9. doi: 10.1006/jmcc.1996.9998.
 42. TRIUMPH Investigators; Alexander JH, Reynolds HR, Stebbins AL, Dzavik 
V, Harrington RA, Van de Werf F, Hochman JS. Effect of tilarginine acetate 
in patients with acute myocardial infarction and cardiogenic shock: the 
TRIUMPH randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2007;297:1657–1666.
 43. Wildhirt SM, Dudek RR, Suzuki H, Bing RJ. Involvement of inducible nitric 
oxide synthase in the inflammatory process of myocardial infarction. Int J 
Cardiol. 1995;50:253–261.
 44. Frangogiannis NG, Smith CW, Entman ML. The inflammatory response in 
myocardial infarction. Cardiovasc Res. 2002;53:31–47.
 45. Nian M, Lee P
, Khaper N, Liu P
. Inflammatory cytokines and postmyocardial 
infarction remodeling. Circ Res. 2004;94:1543–1553. doi: 10.1161/01.
RES.0000130526.20854.fa.
 46. van Diepen S, Alemayehu WG, Zheng Y, Theroux P
, Newby LK, Mahaffey 
KW, Granger CB, Armstrong PW. Temporal changes in biomarkers and 
their relationships to reperfusion and to clinical outcomes among patients 
with ST segment elevation myocardial infarction. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 
2016;42:376–385. doi: 10.1007/s11239-016-1390-z.
 47. van Diepen S, Vavalle JP
, Newby LK, Clare R, Pieper KS, Ezekowitz JA, 
Hochman JS, Mahaffey KW, Armstrong PW, Granger CB. The systemic 
inflammatory response syndrome in patients with ST-segment elevation 
myocardial infarction. Crit Care Med. 2013;41:2080–2087. doi: 10.1097/
CCM.0b013e31828a67b2.
 48. Kohsaka S, Menon V, Lowe AM, Lange M, Dzavik V, Sleeper LA, Hochman 
JS; SHOCK Investigators. Systemic inflammatory response syndrome after 
acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock. Arch Intern 
Med. 2005;165:1643–1650. doi: 10.1001/archinte.165.14.1643.
 49. Lim N, Dubois MJ, De Backer D, Vincent JL. Do all nonsurvivors of 
cardiogenic shock die with a low cardiac index? Chest. 2003;124: 
1885–1891.
 50. Menon V, Slater JN, White HD, Sleeper LA, Cocke T, Hochman JS. Acute 
myocardial infarction complicated by systemic hypoperfusion without 
 
hypotension: report of the SHOCK trial registry. Am J Med. 2000;108: 
374–380.
 51. Jacobs AK, Leopold JA, Bates E, Mendes LA, Sleeper LA, White H, Davidoff 
R, Boland J, Modur S, Forman R, Hochman JS. Cardiogenic shock caused 
by right ventricular infarction: a report from the SHOCK registry. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2003;41:1273–1279.
 52. Goldstein JA, Tweddell JS, Barzilai B, Yagi Y, Jaffe AS, Cox JL. Importance 
of left ventricular function and systolic ventricular interaction to right ven-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 van Diepen et al
October 17, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525
e260
tricular performance during acute right heart ischemia. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1992;19:704–711.
 53. Goldstein JA, Barzilai B, Rosamond TL, Eisenberg PR, Jaffe AS. Determi-
nants of hemodynamic compromise with severe right ventricular infarc-
tion. Circulation. 1990;82:359–368.
 54. Dell’Italia LJ, Starling MR, Crawford MH, Boros BL, Chaudhuri TK, 
O’Rourke RA. Right ventricular infarction: identification by hemodynamic 
measurements before and after volume loading and correlation with non-
invasive techniques. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1984;4:931–939.
 55. Harjola VP
, Lassus J, Sionis A, Køber L, Tarvasmäki T, Spinar J, Parissis J, 
Banaszewski M, Silva-Cardoso J, Carubelli V, Di Somma S, Tolppanen H, 
Zeymer U, Thiele H, Nieminen MS, Mebazaa A; CardShock Study Investi-
gators; GREAT Network. Clinical picture and risk prediction of short-term 
mortality in cardiogenic shock [published correction appears in Eur J Heart 
Fail. 2015;17:984]. Eur J Heart Fail. 2015;17:501–509. doi: 10.1002/
ejhf.260.
 56. Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, Casey DE Jr, Ganiats TG, Holmes 
DR Jr, Jaffe AS, Jneid H, Kelly RF, Kontos MC, Levine GN, Liebson PR, 
Mukherjee D, Peterson ED, Sabatine MS, Smalling RW, Zieman SJ. 2014 
AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patients with non-ST-ele-
vation acute coronary syndromes: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines 
[published correction appears in Circulation. 2014;130:e433–e434]. Cir-
culation. 2014;130:e344–e426.
 57. Wayangankar SA, Bangalore S, McCoy LA, Jneid H, Latif F, Karrowni W, 
Charitakis K, Feldman DN, Dakik HA, Mauri L, Peterson ED, Messenger J, 
Roe M, Mukherjee D, Klein A. Temporal trends and outcomes of patients 
undergoing percutaneous coronary interventions for cardiogenic shock 
in the setting of acute myocardial infarction: a report from the Cath-
PCI Registry. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2016;9:341–351. doi: 10.1016/j.
jcin.2015.10.039.
 58. Kutty RS, Jones N, Moorjani N. Mechanical complications of acute myo-
cardial infarction. Cardiol Clin. 2013;31:519–531, vii. doi: 10.1016/j.
ccl.2013.07.004.
 59. Menon V, Webb JG, Hillis LD, Sleeper LA, Abboud R, Dzavik V, Slater JN, 
Forman R, Monrad ES, Talley JD, Hochman JS. Outcome and profile of 
ventricular septal rupture with cardiogenic shock after myocardial infarc-
tion: a report from the SHOCK Trial Registry: SHould we emergently re-
vascularize Occluded Coronaries in cardiogenic shocK? J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2000;36(suppl A):1110–1116.
 60. Kar B, Gregoric ID, Basra SS, Idelchik GM, Loyalka P
. The percutaneous 
ventricular assist device in severe refractory cardiogenic shock. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2011;57:688–696. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2010.08.613.
 61. Milo-Cotter O, Cotter-Davison B, Lombardi C, Sun H, Bettari L, Bugatti 
S, Rund M, Metra M, Kaluski E, Kobrin I, Frey A, Rainisio M, McMur-
ray JJ, Teerlink JR, Cotter-Davison G. Neurohormonal activation in acute 
heart failure: results from VERITAS. Cardiology. 2011;119:96–105. doi: 
10.1159/000330409.
 62. Shah M, Ali V, Lamba S, Abraham WT. Pathophysiology and clinical spec-
trum of acute congestive heart failure. Rev Cardiovasc Med. 2001;2(suppl 
2):S2–S6.
 63. Hausmann H, Potapov EV, Koster A, Krabatsch T, Stein J, Yeter R, Kukucka 
M, Sodian R, Kuppe H, Hetzer R. Prognosis after the implantation of an 
intra-aortic balloon pump in cardiac surgery calculated with a new score. 
Circulation. 2002;106(suppl 1):I203–I206.
 64. Mohite PN, Sabashnikov A, Patil NP
, Sáez DG, Zych B, Popov AF, Wey-
mann A, Wahlers T, Marczin N, DeRobertis F, Bahrami T, Amrani M, Simon 
AR. Short-term ventricular assist device in post-cardiotomy cardiogenic 
shock: factors influencing survival. J Artif Organs. 2014;17:228–235. doi: 
10.1007/s10047-014-0773-1.
 65. Torchiana DF, Hirsch G, Buckley MJ, Hahn C, Allyn JW, Akins CW, Drake JF, 
Newell JB, Austen WG. Intraaortic balloon pumping for cardiac support: 
trends in practice and outcome, 1968 to 1995. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
1997;113:758–764. doi: 10.1016/S0022-5223(97)70235-6.
 66. McCarthy RE 3rd, Boehmer JP
, Hruban RH, Hutchins GM, Kasper EK, 
Hare JM, Baughman KL. Long-term outcome of fulminant myocardi-
tis as compared with acute (nonfulminant) myocarditis. N Engl J Med. 
2000;342:690–695. doi: 10.1056/NEJM200003093421003.
 67. Mody KP
, Takayama H, Landes E, Yuzefpolskaya M, Colombo PC, Naka 
Y, Jorde UP
, Uriel N. Acute mechanical circulatory support for fulminant 
myocarditis complicated by cardiogenic shock. J Cardiovasc Transl Res. 
2014;7:156–164. doi: 10.1007/s12265-013-9521-9.
 68. Rockman HA, Adamson RM, Dembitsky WP
, Bonar JW, Jaski BE. Acute 
fulminant myocarditis: long-term follow-up after circulatory support with 
left ventricular assist device. Am Heart J. 1991;121(pt 1):922–926.
 69. Chen YS, Yu HY, Huang SC, Chiu KM, Lin TY, Lai LP
, Lin FY, Wang SS, Chu 
SH, Ko WJ. Experience and result of extracorporeal membrane oxygen-
ation in treating fulminant myocarditis with shock: what mechanical sup-
port should be considered first? J Heart Lung Transplant. 2005;24:81–87. 
doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2003.09.038.
 70. Mirabel M, Luyt CE, Leprince P
, Trouillet JL, Léger P
, Pavie A, Chastre J, Combes A. 
Outcomes, long-term quality of life, and psychologic assessment of fulminant 
myocarditis patients rescued by mechanical circulatory support. Crit Care Med. 
2011;39:1029–1035. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e31820ead45.
 71. Elesber AA, Prasad A, Lennon RJ, Wright RS, Lerman A, Rihal CS. Four-
year recurrence rate and prognosis of the apical ballooning syndrome. 
 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;50:448–452. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2007.03.050.
 72. Sharkey SW, Windenburg DC, Lesser JR, Maron MS, Hauser RG, Lesser 
JN, Haas TS, Hodges JS, Maron BJ. Natural history and expansive clini-
cal profile of stress (tako-tsubo) cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2010;55:333–341. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2009.08.057.
 73. Parodi G, Bellandi B, Del Pace S, Barchielli A, Zampini L, Velluzzi S, Car-
rabba N, Gensini GF, Antoniucci D; Tuscany Registry of Tako-Tsubo Car-
diomyopathy. Natural history of tako-tsubo cardiomyopathy. Chest. 
2011;139:887–892. doi: 10.1378/chest.10-1041.
 74. Otto CM. Calcific aortic valve disease: new concepts. Semin Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg. 2010;22:276–284. doi: 10.1053/j.semtcvs.2011.01.009.
 75. Wilson N. Rheumatic heart disease in indigenous populations: New Zea-
land experience. Heart Lung Circ. 2010;19:282–288. doi: 10.1016/j.
hlc.2010.02.021.
 76. De Bonis M, Maisano F, La Canna G, Alfieri O. Treatment and manage-
ment of mitral regurgitation. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2011;9:133–146. doi: 
10.1038/nrcardio.2011.169.
 77. Mathew V, Misgar RA, Ghosh S, Mukhopadhyay P
, Roychowdhury P
, Pandit 
K, Mukhopadhyay S, Chowdhury S. Myxedema coma: a new look into an 
old crisis. J Thyroid Res. 2011;2011:493462. doi: 10.4061/2011/493462.
 78. Ertek S, Cicero AF. Hyperthyroidism and cardiovascular complications: 
a narrative review on the basis of pathophysiology. Arch Med Sci. 
2013;9:944–952. doi: 10.5114/aoms.2013.38685.
 79. Haghikia A, Podewski E, Libhaber E, Labidi S, Fischer D, Roentgen P
, Tsi-
kas D, Jordan J, Lichtinghagen R, von Kaisenberg CS, Struman I, Bovy N, 
Sliwa K, Bauersachs J, Hilfiker-Kleiner D. Phenotyping and outcome on 
contemporary management in a German cohort of patients with peri-
partum cardiomyopathy. Basic Res Cardiol. 2013;108:366. doi: 10.1007/
s00395-013-0366-9.
 80. Huffman C, Wagman G, Fudim M, Zolty R, Vittorio T. Reversible cardiomy-
opathies: a review. Transplant Proc. 2010;42:3673–3678. doi: 10.1016/j.
transproceed.2010.08.034.
 81. Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, Simoons ML, Chaitman BR, White HD; the 
Writing Group on behalf of the Joint ESC/ACFF/AHA/WHF Task Force for 
the Universal Definition of Myocardial Infarction. Third universal definition 
of myocardial infarction. Circulation. 2012;126:2020–2035. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0b013e31826e1058.
 82. Lemm H, Prondzinsky R, Geppert A, Russ M, Huber K, Werdan K, Buerke 
M. BNP and NT-proBNP in patients with acute myocardial infarction com-
plicated by cardiogenic shock: results from the IABP Shock trial. Crit Care. 
2010;14(suppl 1):P14. doi: 10.1186/cc8378.
 83. Shah NR, Bieniarz MC, Basra SS, Paisley RD, Loyalka P
, Gregoric ID, Mann 
DL, Kar B. Serum biomarkers in severe refractory cardiogenic shock. JACC 
Heart Fail. 2013;1:200–206. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2013.03.002.
 84. Attanà P
, Lazzeri C, Chiostri M, Picariello C, Gensini GF, Valente S. 
Strong-ion gap approach in patients with cardiogenic shock following 
ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Acute Card Care. 2013;15:58–62. doi: 
10.3109/17482941.2013.776691.
 85. Valente S, Lazzeri C, Vecchio S, Giglioli C, Margheri M, Bernardo P
, 
Comeglio M, Chiocchini S, Gensini GF. Predictors of in-hospital mortal-
ity after percutaneous coronary intervention for cardiogenic shock. Int J 
Cardiol. 2007;114:176–182. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2006.01.024.
 86. Lazzeri C, Valente S, Chiostri M, Gensini GF. Clinical significance of lactate 
in acute cardiac patients. World J Cardiol. 2015;7:483–489. doi: 10.4330/
wjc.v7.i8.483.
 87. Fuernau G, Poenisch C, Eitel I, Denks D, de Waha S, Pöss J, Heine GH, Desch 
S, Schuler G, Adams V, Werdan K, Zeymer U, Thiele H. Prognostic impact 
of established and novel renal function biomarkers in myocardial infarction 
with cardiogenic shock: a biomarker substudy of the IABP-SHOCK II-trial. Int 
J Cardiol. 2015;191:159–166. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.04.242.
 88. Koreny M, Karth GD, Geppert A, Neunteufl T, Priglinger U, Heinz G, Sio-
strzonek P
. Prognosis of patients who develop acute renal failure during 
the first 24 hours of cardiogenic shock after myocardial infarction. Am J 
Med. 2002;112:115–119.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Contemporary Management of Cardiogenic Shock
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525 
October 17, 2017
e261
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 89. Gitlin N, Serio KM. Ischemic hepatitis: widening horizons. Am J 
Gastroenterol. 1992;87:831–836.
 90. Cassidy WM, Reynolds TB. Serum lactic dehydrogenase in the dif-
ferential diagnosis of acute hepatocellular injury. J Clin Gastroenterol. 
1994;19:118–121.
 91. Aissaoui N, Puymirat E, Juilliere Y, Jourdain P
, Blanchard D, Schiele F, 
Guéret P
, Popovic B, Ferrieres J, Simon T, Danchin N. Fifteen-year trends 
in the management of cardiogenic shock and associated 1-year mortal-
ity in elderly patients with acute myocardial infarction: the FAST-MI pro-
gramme. Eur J Heart Fail. 2016;18:1144–1152. doi: 10.1002/ejhf.585.
 92. Redfors B, Angerås O, Råmunddal T, Dworeck C, Haraldsson I, Ioanes 
D, Petursson P
, Libungan B, Odenstedt J, Stewart J, Lodin E, Wahlin 
M, Albertsson P
, Matejka G, Omerovic E. 17-Year trends in incidence 
and prognosis of cardiogenic shock in patients with acute myocardial 
infarction in western Sweden. Int J Cardiol. 2015;185:256–262. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.03.106.
 93. Babaev A, Frederick PD, Pasta DJ, Every N, Sichrovsky T, Hochman JS; 
NRMI Investigators. Trends in management and outcomes of patients 
with acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock. 
JAMA. 2005;294:448–454. doi: 10.1001/jama.294.4.448.
 94. Knaus WA, Draper EA, Wagner DP
, Zimmerman JE. APACHE II: a severity 
of disease classification system. Crit Care Med. 1985;13:818–829.
 95. Knaus WA, Wagner DP
, Draper EA, Zimmerman JE, Bergner M, Bastos 
PG, Sirio CA, Murphy DJ, Lotring T, Damiano A,Harrell FE. The APACHE 
III prognostic system: risk prediction of hospital mortality for critically ill 
hospitalized adults. Chest. 1991;100:1619–1636.
 96. Knaus WA, Zimmerman JE, Wagner DP
, Draper EA, Lawrence DE. 
APACHE-acute physiology and chronic health evaluation: a physiologi-
cally based classification system. Crit Care Med. 1981;9:591–597.
 97. Le Gall JR, Lemeshow S, Saulnier F. A new Simplified Acute Physiology 
Score (SAPS II) based on a European/North American multicenter 
study [published correction appears in JAMA. 1994;271:1321]. JAMA. 
1993;270:2957–2963.
 98. Kellner P
, Prondzinsky R, Pallmann L, Siegmann S, Unverzagt S, Lemm H, 
Dietz S, Soukup J, Werdan K, Buerke M. Predictive value of outcome scores 
in patients suffering from cardiogenic shock complicating AMI: APACHE 
II, APACHE III, Elebute-Stoner, SOFA, and SAPS II. Med Klin Intensivmed 
Notfmed. 2013;108:666–674. doi: 10.1007/s00063-013-0234-2.
 99. Granger CB, Goldberg RJ, Dabbous O, Pieper KS, Eagle KA, Cannon CP
, 
Van De Werf F, Avezum A, Goodman SG, Flather MD, Fox KA; Global 
Registry of Acute Coronary Events Investigators. Predictors of hospital 
mortality in the Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events. Arch Intern 
Med. 2003;163:2345–2353. doi: 10.1001/archinte.163.19.2345.
 100. Katz JN, Stebbins AL, Alexander JH, Reynolds HR, Pieper KS, Ruzyllo W, 
Werdan K, Geppert A, Dzavik V, Van de Werf F, Hochman JS; TRIUMPH 
Investigators. Predictors of 30-day mortality in patients with refrac-
tory cardiogenic shock following acute myocardial infarction despite a 
patent infarct artery. Am Heart J. 2009;158:680–687. doi: 10.1016/j.
ahj.2009.08.005.
 101. Hamon M, Agostini D, Le Page O, Riddell JW, Hamon M. Prognostic 
impact of right ventricular involvement in patients with acute myocar-
dial infarction: meta-analysis. Crit Care Med. 2008;36:2023–2033. doi: 
10.1097/CCM.0b013e31817d213d.
 102. Picard MH, Davidoff R, Sleeper LA, Mendes LA, Thompson CR, Dzavik 
V, Steingart R, Gin K, White HD, Hochman JS; for the SHOCK Trial. 
Echocardiographic predictors of survival and response to early revascular-
ization in cardiogenic shock. Circulation. 2003;107:279–284.
 103. Sleeper LA, Reynolds HR, White HD, Webb JG, Dzavík V, Hochman JS. 
A severity scoring system for risk assessment of patients with cardio-
genic shock: a report from the SHOCK Trial and Registry. Am Heart J. 
2010;160:443–450. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2010.06.024.
 104. Sanborn TA, Sleeper LA, Webb JG, French JK, Bergman G, Parikh M, 
Wong SC, Boland J, Pfisterer M, Slater JN, Sharma S, Hochman JS; 
SHOCK Investigators. Correlates of one-year survival in patients with car-
diogenic shock complicating acute myocardial infarction: angiographic 
findings from the SHOCK trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;42:1373–1379.
 105. Korabathina R, Heffernan KS, Paruchuri V, Patel AR, Mudd JO, Prutkin 
JM, Orr NM, Weintraub A, Kimmelstiel CD, Kapur NK. The pulmo-
nary artery pulsatility index identifies severe right ventricular dysfunc-
tion in acute inferior myocardial infarction. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 
2012;80:593–600. doi: 10.1002/ccd.23309.
 106. Schuster A, Faulkner M, Zeymer U, Ouarrak T, Eitel I, Desch S, Hasenfuß 
G, Thiele H. Economic implications of intra-aortic balloon support for 
myocardial infarction with cardiogenic shock: an analysis from the 
IABP-SHOCK II-trial. Clin Res Cardiol. 2015;104:566–573. doi: 10.1007/
s00392-015-0819-2.
 107. Shah RU, de Lemos JA, Wang TY, Chen AY, Thomas L, Sutton NR, Fang 
JC, Scirica BM, Henry TD, Granger CB. Post-hospital outcomes of pa-
tients with acute myocardial infarction with cardiogenic shock: findings 
from the NCDR. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67:739–747. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2015.11.048.
 108. Thiele H, Zeymer U, Neumann FJ, Ferenc M, Olbrich HG, Hausleiter 
J, de Waha A, Richardt G, Hennersdorf M, Empen K, Fuernau G, 
Desch S, Eitel I, Hambrecht R, Lauer B, Böhm M, Ebelt H, Schneider S, 
Werdan K, Schuler G; Intraaortic Balloon Pump in Cardiogenic Shock 
II (IABP-SHOCK II) Trial Investigators. Intra-aortic balloon counter-
pulsation in acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogen-
ic shock (IABP-SHOCK II): final 12 month results of a randomised, 
open-label trial. Lancet. 2013;382:1638–1645. doi: 10.1016/S0140- 
6736(13)61783-3.
 109. Sleeper LA, Ramanathan K, Picard MH, Lejemtel TH, White HD, Dzavik 
V, Tormey D, Avis NE, Hochman JS; SHOCK Investigators. Functional 
status and quality of life after emergency revascularization for cardio-
genic shock complicating acute myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2005;46:266–273. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2005.01.061.
 110. Luft HS, Bunker JP
, Enthoven AC. Should operations be regionalized? The 
empirical relation between surgical volume and mortality. N Engl J Med. 
1979;301:1364–1369. doi: 10.1056/NEJM197912203012503.
 111. Hannan EL, Wu C, Walford G, King SB 3rd, Holmes DR Jr, Ambrose JA, 
Sharma S, Katz S, Clark LT, Jones RH. Volume-outcome relationships 
for percutaneous coronary interventions in the stent era. Circulation. 
2005;112:1171–1179. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.104.528455.
 112. Jollis JG, Peterson ED, Delong ER, Mark DB, Collins SR, Muhlbaier LH, 
Pryor DB. The relation between the volume of coronary angioplasty pro-
cedures at hospitals treating Medicare beneficiaries and short-term mor-
tality. N Engl J Med. 1994;331:1625–1629.
 113. Sollano JA, Gelijns AC, Moskowitz AJ, Heitjan DF, Cullinane S, Saha T, 
Chen JM, Roohan PJ, Reemtsma K, Shields EP
. Volume-outcome relation-
ships in cardiovascular operations: New York State, 1990–1995. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 1999;117:419–428.
 114. Wen HC, Tang CH, Lin HC, Tsai CS, Chen CS, Li CY. Association between 
surgeon and hospital volume in coronary artery bypass graft surgery out-
comes: a population-based study. Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;81:835–842. 
doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2005.09.031.
 115. Post PN, Kuijpers M, Ebels T, Zijlstra F. The relation between volume and 
outcome of coronary interventions: a systematic review and meta-analy-
sis. Eur Heart J. 2010;31:1985–1992. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq151.
 116. Badheka AO, Patel NJ, Grover P
, Singh V, Patel N, Arora S, Chothani A, 
Mehta K, Deshmukh A, Savani GT, Patel A, Panaich SS, Shah N, Rathod 
A, Brown M, Mohamad T, Tamburrino FV, Kar S, Makkar R, O’Neill WW, 
De Marchena E, Schreiber T, Grines CL, Rihal CS, Cohen MG. Impact 
of annual operator and institutional volume on percutaneous coronary 
intervention outcomes: a 5-year United States experience (2005–2009). 
Circulation. 2014;130:1392–1406.
 117. Srinivas VS, Hailpern SM, Koss E, Monrad ES, Alderman MH. Effect of 
physician volume on the relationship between hospital volume and mor-
tality during primary angioplasty. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;53:574–579. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2008.09.056.
 118. Zahn R, Gottwik M, Hochadel M, Senges J, Zeymer U, Vogt A, Meinertz 
T, Dietz R, Hauptmann KE, Grube E, Kerber S, Sechtem U; Registry 
of Percutaneous Coronary Interventions of the Arbeitsgemeinschaft 
Leitende Kardiologische Krankenhausarzte (ALKK). Volume-outcome 
relation for contemporary percutaneous coronary interventions (PCI) 
in daily clinical practice: is it limited to high-risk patients? Results 
from the Registry of Percutaneous Coronary Interventions of the 
Arbeitsgemeinschaft Leitende Kardiologische Krankenhausarzte (ALKK). 
Heart. 2008;94:329–335. doi: 10.1136/hrt.2007.118737.
 119. Harold JG, Bass TA, Bashore TM, Brindis RG, Brush JE Jr, Burke JA, 
Dehmer GJ, Deychak YA, Jneid H, Jollis JG, Landzberg JS, Levine GN, 
McClurken JB, Messenger JC, Moussa ID, Muhlestein JB, Pomerantz RM, 
Sanborn TA, Sivaram CA, White CJ, Williams ES. ACCF/AHA/SCAI 2013 
update of the clinical competence statement on coronary artery inter-
ventional procedures: a report of the American College of Cardiology 
Foundation/American Heart Association/American College of Physicians 
Task Force on Clinical Competence and Training (Writing Committee 
to Revise the 2007 Clinical Competence Statement on Cardiac Inter-
ventional Procedures). Circulation. 2013;128:436–472. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0b013e318299cd8a.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 van Diepen et al
October 17, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525
e262
 120. Kahn JM, Goss CH, Heagerty PJ, Kramer AA, O’Brien CR, Rubenfeld GD. 
Hospital volume and the outcomes of mechanical ventilation. N Engl J 
Med. 2006;355:41–50. doi: 10.1056/NEJMsa053993.
 121. Ross JS, Normand SL, Wang Y, Ko DT, Chen J, Drye EE, Keenan PS, 
Lichtman JH, Bueno H, Schreiner GC, Krumholz HM. Hospital volume 
and 30-day mortality for three common medical conditions. N Engl J 
Med. 2010;362:1110–1118. doi: 10.1056/NEJMsa0907130.
 122. Shaefi S, O’Gara B, Kociol RD, Joynt K, Mueller A, Nizamuddin J, 
Mahmood E, Talmor D, Shahul S. Effect of cardiogenic shock hospital vol-
ume on mortality in patients with cardiogenic shock. J Am Heart Assoc. 
2015;4:e001462. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001462.
 123. Alberts MJ, Latchaw RE, Selman WR, Shephard T, Hadley MN, Brass 
LM, Koroshetz W, Marler JR, Booss J, Zorowitz RD, Croft JB, Magnis 
E, Mulligan D, Jagoda A, O’Connor R, Cawley CM, Connors JJ, Rose-
DeRenzy JA, Emr M, Warren M, Walker MD; Brain Attack Coalition. 
Recommendations for comprehensive stroke centers: a consensus state-
ment from the Brain Attack Coalition. Stroke. 2005;36:1597–1616. doi: 
10.1161/01.STR.0000170622.07210.b4.
 124. Celso B, Tepas J, Langland-Orban B, Pracht E, Papa L, Lottenberg L, Flint 
L. A systematic review and meta-analysis comparing outcome of severely 
injured patients treated in trauma centers following the establishment 
of trauma systems. J Trauma. 2006;60:371–378. doi: 10.1097/01.
ta.0000197916.99629.eb.
 125. Graham KJ, Strauss CE, Boland LL, Mooney MR, Harris KM, Unger BT, 
Tretinyak AS, Satterlee PA, Larson DM, Burke MN, Henry TD. Has the time 
come for a national cardiovascular emergency care system? Circulation. 
2012;125:2035–2044. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.084509.
 126. Granger CB, Henry TD, Bates WE, Cercek B, Weaver WD, Williams DO. 
Development of systems of care for ST-elevation myocardial infarction 
patients: the primary percutaneous coronary intervention (ST-elevation 
myocardial 
infarction-receiving) 
hospital 
perspective. 
Circulation. 
2007;116:e55–e59. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.184049.
 127. Harris KM, Strauss CE, Duval S, Unger BT, Kroshus TJ, Inampudi S, Cohen 
JD, Kapsner C, Boland LL, Eales F, Rohman E, Orlandi QG, Flavin TF, 
Kshettry VR, Graham KJ, Hirsch AT, Henry TD. Multidisciplinary standard-
ized care for acute aortic dissection: design and initial outcomes of a 
regional care model. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2010;3:424–430. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.109.920140.
 128. Henry TD, Sharkey SW, Burke MN, Chavez IJ, Graham KJ, Henry CR, Lips 
DL, Madison JD, Menssen KM, Mooney MR, Newell MC, Pedersen WR, 
Poulose AK, Traverse JH, Unger BT, Wang YL, Larson DM. A regional sys-
tem to provide timely access to percutaneous coronary intervention for 
ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Circulation. 2007;116:721–728. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.694141.
 129. MacKenzie EJ, Rivara FP
, Jurkovich GJ, Nathens AB, Frey KP
, Egleston 
BL, Salkever DS, Scharfstein DO. A national evaluation of the effect of 
trauma-center care on mortality. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:366–378. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMsa052049.
 130. Mooney MR, Unger BT, Boland LL, Burke MN, Kebed KY, Graham KJ, 
Henry TD, Katsiyiannis WT, Satterlee PA, Sendelbach S, Hodges JS, Parham 
WM. Therapeutic hypothermia after out-of-hospital cardiac arrest: eval-
uation of a regional system to increase access to cooling. Circulation. 
2011;124:206–214. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.986257.
 131. Ganesh A, Lindsay P
, Fang J, Kapral MK, Côté R, Joiner I, Hakim AM, Hill 
MD. Integrated systems of stroke care and reduction in 30-day mortal-
ity: a retrospective analysis. Neurology. 2016;86:898–904. doi: 10.1212/
WNL.0000000000002443.
 132. Nichol G, Aufderheide TP
, Eigel B, Neumar RW, Lurie KG, Bufalino VJ, 
Callaway CW, Menon V, Bass RR, Abella BS, Sayre M, Dougherty CM, 
Racht EM, Kleinman ME, O’Connor RE, Reilly JP
, Ossmann EW, Peterson E; 
on behalf of the American Heart Association Emergency Cardiovascular 
Care Committee; Council on Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular 
Biology; Council on Cardiopulmonary, Critical Care, Perioperative and 
Resuscitation; Council on Cardiovascular Nursing; Council on Clinical 
Cardiology; Advocacy Committee; Council on Quality of Care and 
Outcomes Research. Regional systems of care for out-of-hospital cardiac 
arrest: a policy statement from the American Heart Association [pub-
lished correction appears in Circulation. 2010;122:e439]. Circulation. 
2010;121:709–729. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e3181cdb7db.
 133. Rab T, Kern KB, Tamis-Holland JE, Henry TD, McDaniel M, Dickert NW, 
Cigarroa JE, Keadey M, Ramee S; Interventional Council, American 
College of Cardiology. Cardiac arrest: a treatment algorithm for emer-
gent invasive cardiac procedures in the resuscitated comatose patient. 
 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;66:62–73. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2015.05.009.
 134. Spaite DW, Bobrow BJ, Stolz U, Berg RA, Sanders AB, Kern KB, Chikani 
V, Humble W, Mullins T, Stapczynski JS, Ewy GA; Arizona Cardiac 
Receiving Center Consortium. Statewide regionalization of postarrest 
care for out-of-hospital cardiac arrest: association with survival and neu-
rologic outcome. Ann Emerg Med. 2014;64:496–506.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.
annemergmed.2014.05.028.
 135. Jacobs AK, Antman EM, Faxon DP
, Gregory T, Solis P
. Development 
of systems of care for ST-elevation myocardial infarction patients: 
executive summary [published correction appears in Circulation. 
2007;116:e77]. 
Circulation. 
2007;116:217–230. 
doi: 
10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.107.184043.
 136. Jollis JG, Al-Khalidi HR, Roettig ML, Berger PB, Corbett CC, Dauerman 
HL, Fordyce CB, Fox K, Garvey JL, Gregory T, Henry TD, Rokos IC, 
Sherwood MW, Suter RE, Wilson BH, Granger CB; for the Mission: 
Lifeline STEMI Systems Accelerator Project. Regional systems of care 
demonstration project: American Heart Association Mission: Lifeline 
STEMI Systems Accelerator. Circulation. 2016;134:365–374. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.019474.
 137. Jollis JG, Granger CB, Henry TD, Antman EM, Berger PB, Moyer PH, Pratt 
FD, Rokos IC, Acuña AR, Roettig ML, Jacobs AK. Systems of care for 
ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction: a report From the American 
Heart Association’s Mission: Lifeline. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 
2012;5:423–428. doi: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.111.964668.
 138. Jollis JG, Roettig ML, Aluko AO, Anstrom KJ, Applegate RJ, Babb JD, 
Berger PB, Bohle DJ, Fletcher SM, Garvey JL, Hathaway WR, Hoekstra 
JW, Kelly RV, Maddox WT Jr, Shiber JR, Valeri FS, Watling BA, Wilson 
BH, Granger CB; Reperfusion of Acute Myocardial Infarction in North 
Carolina Emergency Departments (RACE) Investigators. Implementation 
of a statewide system for coronary reperfusion for ST-segment eleva-
tion myocardial infarction. JAMA. 2007;298:2371–2380. doi: 10.1001/
jama.298.20.joc70124.
 139. Helman DN, Morales DL, Edwards NM, Mancini DM, Chen JM, Rose 
EA, Oz MC. Left ventricular assist device bridge-to-transplant net-
work improves survival after failed cardiotomy. Ann Thorac Surg. 
1999;68:1187–1194.
 140. Hasin Y, Danchin N, Filippatos GS, Heras M, Janssens U, Leor J, Nahir M, 
Parkhomenko A, Thygesen K, Tubaro M, Wallentin LC, Zakke I; Working 
Group on Acute Cardiac Care of the European Society of Cardiology. 
Recommendations for the structure, organization, and operation of 
intensive cardiac care units. Eur Heart J. 2005;26:1676–1682. doi: 
10.1093/eurheartj/ehi202.
 141. Le May M, van Diepen S, Liszkowski M, Schnell G, Tanguay JF, Granger 
CB, Ainsworth C, Diodati JG, Fam N, Haichin R, Jassal D, Overgaard C, 
Tymchak W, Tyrrell B, Osborne C, Wong G. From coronary care units 
to cardiac intensive care units: recommendations for organizational, 
staffing, and educational transformation. Can J Cardiol. 2016;32:1204–
1213. doi: 10.1016/j.cjca.2015.11.021.
 142. Morrow DA, Fang JC, Fintel DJ, Granger CB, Katz JN, Kushner FG, 
Kuvin JT, Lopez-Sendon J, McAreavey D, Nallamothu B, Page RL 2nd, 
Parrillo JE, Peterson PN, Winkelman C; on behalf of the American Heart 
Association Council on Cardiopulmonary, Critical Care, Perioperative and 
Resuscitation, Council on Clinical Cardiology, Council on Cardiovascular 
Nursing, and Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research. 
Evolution of critical care cardiology: transformation of the cardiovascu-
lar intensive care unit and the emerging need for new medical staff-
ing and training models: a scientific statement from the American 
Heart Association. Circulation. 2012;126:1408–1428. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0b013e31826890b0.
 143. Garan AR, Kirtane A, Takayama H. Redesigning care for patients 
with acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock: 
the “shock team.” JAMA Surg. 2016;151:684–685. doi: 10.1001/
jamasurg.2015.5514.
 144. O’Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, Casey DE Jr, Chung MK, de Lemos 
JA, Ettinger SM, Fang JC, Fesmire FM, Franklin BA, Granger CB, Krumholz 
HM, Linderbaum JA, Morrow DA, Newby LK, Ornato JP
, Ou N, Radford 
MJ, Tamis-Holland JE, Tommaso CL, Tracy CM, Woo YJ, Zhao DX. 2013 
ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-elevation myocardial 
infarction: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines [pub-
lished correction appears in Circulation. 2013;128:e481]. Circulation. 
2013;127:e362–e425. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e3182742cf6.
 145. Task Force on the Management of ST-Segment Elevation Acute 
Myocardial Infarction of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC), Steg 
PG, James SK, Atar D, Badano LP
, Blomstrom-Lundqvist C, Borger MA, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Contemporary Management of Cardiogenic Shock
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525 
October 17, 2017
e263
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Di Mario C, Dickstein K, Ducrocq G, Fernandez-Aviles F, Gershlick AH, 
Giannuzzi P
, Halvorsen S, Huber K, Juni P
, Kastrati A, Knuuti J, Lenzen 
MJ, Mahaffey KW, Valgimigli M, van ‘t Hof A, Widimsky P
, Zahger D. ESC 
guidelines for the management of acute myocardial infarction in patients 
presenting with ST-segment elevation. Eur Heart J. 2012;33:2569–619.
 146. Katz JN, Turer AT, Becker RC. Cardiology and the critical care crisis: a 
perspective. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;49:1279–1282. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2006.11.036.
 147. Katz JN, Minder M, Olenchock B, Price S, Goldfarb M, Washam JB, 
Barnett CF, Newby LK, van Diepen S. The genesis, maturation, and fu-
ture of critical care cardiology. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;68:67–79. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2016.04.036.
 148. Hill T, Means G, van Diepen S, Paul T, Katz JN. Cardiovascular criti-
cal care: a perceived deficiency among U.S. trainees. Crit Care Med. 
2015;43:1853–1858. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000001074.
 149. Pronovost PJ, Angus DC, Dorman T, Robinson KA, Dremsizov TT, Young 
TL. Physician staffing patterns and clinical outcomes in critically ill pa-
tients: a systematic review. JAMA. 2002;288:2151–2162.
 150. Na SJ, Chung CR, Jeon K, Park CM, Suh GY, Ahn JH, Carriere KC, Song 
YB, Choi JO, Hahn JY, Choi JH, Choi SH, On YK, Gwon HC, Jeon ES, Kim 
DK, Yang JH. Association between presence of a cardiac intensivist and 
mortality in an adult cardiac care unit. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;68:2637–
2648. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2016.09.947.
 151. Dehmer GJ, Drozda JP Jr, Brindis RG, Masoudi FA, Rumsfeld JS, Slattery 
LE, Oetgen WJ. Public reporting of clinical quality data: an update for 
cardiovascular specialists. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:1239–1245. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2013.11.050.
 152. Jacobs AK, Antman EM, Ellrodt G, Faxon DP
, Gregory T, Mensah GA, 
Moyer P
, Ornato J, Peterson ED, Sadwin L, Smith SC; American Heart 
Association's Acute Myocardial Infarction Advisory Working Group. 
Recommendation to develop strategies to increase the number of 
ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction patients with timely ac-
cess to primary percutaneous coronary intervention. Circulation. 
2006;113:2152–2163.
 153. Bangalore S, Gupta N, Guo Y, Lala A, Balsam L, Roswell RO, Reyentovich 
A, Hochman JS. Outcomes with invasive vs conservative management of 
cardiogenic shock complicating acute myocardial infarction. Am J Med. 
2015;128:601–608. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2014.12.009.
 154. Lee L, Erbel R, Brown TM, Laufer N, Meyer J, O’Neill WW. Multicenter 
registry of angioplasty therapy of cardiogenic shock: initial and long-term 
survival. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1991;17:599–603.
 155. Yusuf S, Collins R, Peto R, Furberg C, Stampfer MJ, Goldhaber SZ, 
Hennekens CH. Intravenous and intracoronary fibrinolytic therapy in 
acute myocardial infarction: overview of results on mortality, reinfarc-
tion and side-effects from 33 randomized controlled trials. Eur Heart J. 
1985;6:556–585.
 156. Col NF, Gurwitz JH, Alpert JS, Goldberg RJ. Frequency of inclusion of 
patients with cardiogenic shock in trials of thrombolytic therapy. Am J 
Cardiol. 1994;73:149–157.
 157. Holmes DR Jr, Bates ER, Kleiman NS, Sadowski Z, Horgan JH, Morris DC, 
Califf RM, Berger PB, Topol EJ. Contemporary reperfusion therapy for car-
diogenic shock: the GUSTO-I trial experience. The GUSTO-I Investigators. 
Global Utilization of Streptokinase and Tissue Plasminogen Activator for 
Occluded Coronary Arteries. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1995;26:668–674.
 158. Prewitt RM, Gu S, Schick U, Ducas J. Effect of a mechanical vs a phar-
macologic increase in aortic pressure on coronary blood flow and throm-
bolysis induced by IV administration of a thrombolytic agent. Chest. 
1997;111:449–453.
 159. Ohman EM, Nanas J, Stomel RJ, Leesar MA, Nielsen DW, O’Dea D, Rogers 
FJ, Harber D, Hudson MP
, Fraulo E, Shaw LK, Lee KL; TACTICS Trial. 
Thrombolysis and counterpulsation to improve survival in myocardial in-
farction complicated by hypotension and suspected cardiogenic shock 
or heart failure: results of the TACTICS Trial. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 
2005;19:33–39. doi: 10.1007/s11239-005-0938-0.
 160. Sanborn TA, Sleeper LA, Bates ER, Jacobs AK, Boland J, French JK, Dens 
J, Dzavik V, Palmeri ST, Webb JG, Goldberger M, Hochman JS. Impact of 
thrombolysis, intra-aortic balloon pump counterpulsation, and their com-
bination in cardiogenic shock complicating acute myocardial infarction: 
a report from the SHOCK Trial Registry. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2000;36(suppl 
A):1123–1129.
 161. Urban P
, Stauffer JC, Bleed D, Khatchatrian N, Amann W, Bertel O, van 
den Brand M, Danchin N, Kaufmann U, Meier B, Machecourt J, Pfisterer 
M. A randomized evaluation of early revascularization to treat shock 
complicating acute myocardial infarction: the (Swiss) Multicenter Trial of 
Angioplasty for Shock-(S)MASH. Eur Heart J. 1999;20:1030–1038. doi: 
10.1053/euhj.1998.1353.
 162. Dzavik V, Sleeper LA, Cocke TP
, Moscucci M, Saucedo J, Hosat S, Jiang X, 
Slater J, LeJemtel T, Hochman JS; SHOCK Investigators. Early revascular-
ization is associated with improved survival in elderly patients with acute 
myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock: a report from 
the SHOCK Trial Registry. Eur Heart J. 2003;24:828–837.
 163. Jeger RV, Urban P
, Harkness SM, Tseng CH, Stauffer JC, Lejemtel TH, 
Sleeper LA, Pfisterer ME, Hochman JS. Early revascularization is bene-
ficial across all ages and a wide spectrum of cardiogenic shock sever-
ity: a pooled analysis of trials. Acute Card Care. 2011;13:14–20. doi: 
10.3109/17482941.2010.538696.
 164. Antoniucci D, Valenti R, Migliorini A, Moschi G, Parodi G, Dovellini EV, 
Bolognese L, Santoro GM. Comparison of impact of emergency percuta-
neous revascularization on outcome of patients > or =75 to those < 75 
years of age with acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic 
shock. Am J Cardiol. 2003;91:1458–1461, A6.
 165. Kunadian V, Qiu W, Bawamia B, Veerasamy M, Jamieson S, Zaman A. 
Gender comparisons in cardiogenic shock during ST elevation myocardial 
infarction treated by primary percutaneous coronary intervention. Am J 
Cardiol. 2013;112:636–641. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2013.04.038.
 166. Lim HS, Farouque O, Andrianopoulos N, Yan BP
, Lim CC, Brennan AL, 
Reid CM, Freeman M, Charter K, Black A, New G, Ajani AE, Duffy SJ, 
Clark DJ; Melbourne Interventional Group. Survival of elderly patients 
undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention for acute myocardial 
infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 
2009;2:146–152. doi: 10.1016/j.jcin.2008.11.006.
 167. Palmeri ST, Lowe AM, Sleeper LA, Saucedo JF, Desvigne-Nickens P
, 
Hochman JS; SHOCK Investigators. Racial and ethnic differences in the 
treatment and outcome of cardiogenic shock following acute myo-
cardial infarction. Am J Cardiol. 2005;96:1042–1049. doi: 10.1016/j.
amjcard.2005.06.033.
 168. Farkouh ME, Ramanathan K, Aymong ED, Webb JG, Harkness SM, 
Sleeper LA, Hochman JS. An early revascularization strategy is associated 
with a survival benefit for diabetic patients in cardiogenic shock after 
acute myocardial infarction. Clin Cardiol. 2006;29:204–210.
 169. Jeger RV, Harkness SM, Ramanathan K, Buller CE, Pfisterer ME, Sleeper 
LA, Hochman JS; SHOCK Investigators. Emergency revascularization in 
patients with cardiogenic shock on admission: a report from the SHOCK 
trial and registry. Eur Heart J. 2006;27:664–670. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/
ehi729.
 170. Zeymer U, Vogt A, Zahn R, Weber MA, Tebbe U, Gottwik M, Bonzel 
T, Senges J, Neuhaus KL; Arbeitsgemeinschaft Leitende Kardiologische 
Krankenhausärzte (ALKK). Predictors of in-hospital mortality in 1333 
patients with acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic 
shock treated with primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI): 
results of the primary PCI registry of the Arbeitsgemeinschaft Leitende 
Kardiologische Krankenhausärzte (ALKK). Eur Heart J. 2004;25:322–328. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ehj.2003.12.008.
 171. Webb JG, Lowe AM, Sanborn TA, White HD, Sleeper LA, Carere RG, 
Buller CE, Wong SC, Boland J, Dzavik V, Porway M, Pate G, Bergman 
G, Hochman JS; SHOCK Investigators. Percutaneous coronary inter-
vention for cardiogenic shock in the SHOCK trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2003;42:1380–1386.
 172. Webb JG, Sanborn TA, Sleeper LA, Carere RG, Buller CE, Slater JN, Baran 
KW, Koller PT, Talley JD, Porway M, Hochman JS; SHOCK Investigators. 
Percutaneous coronary intervention for cardiogenic shock in the 
SHOCK Trial Registry. Am Heart J. 2001;141:964–970. doi: 10.1067/
mhj.2001.115294.
 173. Jaguszewski M, Ghadri JR, Seifert B, Hiestand T, Herrera P
, Gaemperli 
O, Landmesser U, Maier W, Nallamothu BK, Windecker S, Lüscher 
TF, Templin C. Drug-eluting stents vs. bare metal stents in patients 
with cardiogenic shock: a comparison by propensity score analysis. 
J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2015;16:220–229. doi: 10.2459/
JCM.0000000000000106.
 174. Marcolino MS, Simsek C, de Boer SP
, van Domburg RT, van Geuns RJ, de 
Jaegere P
, Akkerhuis KM, Daemen J, Serruys PW, Boersma E. Short- and 
long-term major adverse cardiac events in patients undergoing percuta-
neous coronary intervention with stenting for acute myocardial infarction 
complicated by cardiogenic shock. Cardiology. 2012;121:47–55. doi: 
10.1159/000336154.
 175. Ledwoch J, Fuernau G, Desch S, Eitel I, Jung C, de Waha S, Pöss J, Schneider 
S, Schuler G, Werdan K, Zeymer U, Theile HT. Drug-eluting stents ver-
sus bare-metal stents in acute myocardial infarction with cardiogenic 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 van Diepen et al
October 17, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525
e264
shock [published online ahead of print February 7, 2017]. Heart. doi: 
10.1136/heartjnl-2016-310403. 
http://heart.bmj.com/content/early/ 
2017/02/06/heartjnl-2016-310403.long.
 176. Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, Bailey SR, Bittl JA, Cercek B, 
Chambers CE, Ellis SG, Guyton RA, Hollenberg SM, Khot UN, Lange 
RA, Mauri L, Mehran R, Moussa ID, Mukherjee D, Ting HH, O’Gara 
PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, Brindis RG, Casey DE Jr, Chung MK, de 
Lemos JA, Diercks DB, Fang JC, Franklin BA, Granger CB, Krumholz HM, 
Linderbaum JA, Morrow DA, Newby LK, Ornato JP
, Ou N, Radford MJ, 
Tamis-Holland JE, Tommaso CL, Tracy CM, Woo YJ, Zhao DX. 2015 ACC/
AHA/SCAI focused update on primary percutaneous coronary interven-
tion for patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction: an update of the 
2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI guideline for percutaneous coronary intervention 
and the 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-elevation 
myocardial infarction: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and 
the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions [published 
correction appears in Circulation. 2016;133:e442–443]. Circulation. 
2016;133:1135–1147. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000336.
 177. Mehta RH, Lopes RD, Ballotta A, Frigiola A, Sketch MH Jr, Bossone E, 
Bates ER. Percutaneous coronary intervention or coronary artery bypass 
surgery for cardiogenic shock and multivessel coronary artery disease? 
Am Heart J. 2010;159:141–147. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2009.10.035.
 178. Mylotte D, Morice MC, Eltchaninoff H, Garot J, Louvard Y, Lefèvre T, 
Garot P
. Primary percutaneous coronary intervention in patients with 
acute myocardial infarction, resuscitated cardiac arrest, and cardiogenic 
shock: the role of primary multivessel revascularization. JACC Cardiovasc 
Interv. 2013;6:115–125. doi: 10.1016/j.jcin.2012.10.006.
 179. Bauer T, Zeymer U, Hochadel M, Möllmann H, Weidinger F, Zahn R, Nef 
HM, Hamm CW, Marco J, Gitt AK. Use and outcomes of multivessel per-
cutaneous coronary intervention in patients with acute myocardial infarc-
tion complicated by cardiogenic shock (from the EHS-PCI Registry). Am J 
Cardiol. 2012;109:941–946. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2011.11.020.
 180. Park JS, Cha KS, Lee DS, Shin D, Lee HW, Oh JH, Kim JS, Choi JH, Park 
YH, Lee HC, Kim JH, Chun KJ, Hong TJ, Jeong MH, Ahn Y, Chae SC, Kim 
YJ; Korean Acute Myocardial Infarction Registry Investigators. Culprit 
or multivessel revascularisation in ST-elevation myocardial infarction 
with cardiogenic shock. Heart. 2015;101:1225–1232. doi: 10.1136/
heartjnl-2014-307220.
 181. Hussain F, Philipp RK, Ducas RA, Elliott J, Džavík V, Jassal DS, Tam JW, 
Roberts D, Garber PJ, Ducas J. The ability to achieve complete revas-
cularization is associated with improved in-hospital survival in cardio-
genic shock due to myocardial infarction: Manitoba Cardiogenic SHOCK 
Registry Investigators. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2011;78:540–548. 
doi: 10.1002/ccd.23006.
 182. Thiele H, Desch S, Piek JJ, Stepinska J, Oldroyd K, Serpytis P
, Montalescot 
G, Noc M, Huber K, Fuernau G, de Waha S, Meyer-Saraei R, Schneider 
S, Windecker S, Savonitto S, Briggs A, Torremante P
, Vrints C, Schuler G, 
Ceglarek U, Thiery J, Zeymer U; CULPRIT-SHOCK Investigators. Multivessel 
versus culprit lesion only percutaneous revascularization plus potential 
staged revascularization in patients with acute myocardial infarction com-
plicated by cardiogenic shock: design and rationale of CULPRIT-SHOCK trial. 
Am Heart J. 2016;172:160–169. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2015.11.006.
 183. Bernat I, Abdelaal E, Plourde G, Bataille Y, Cech J, Pesek J, Koza J, Jirous 
S, Machaalany J, Déry JP
, Costerousse O, Rokyta R, Bertrand OF. Early and 
late outcomes after primary percutaneous coronary intervention by radial 
or femoral approach in patients presenting in acute ST-elevation myocar-
dial infarction and cardiogenic shock. Am Heart J. 2013;165:338–343. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2013.01.012.
 184. Rodriguez-Leor O, Fernandez-Nofrerias E, Carrillo X, Mauri J, Oliete C, 
Rivas Mdel C, Bayes-Genis A. Transradial percutaneous coronary inter-
vention in cardiogenic shock: a single-center experience. Am Heart J. 
2013;165:280–285. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2012.08.011.
 185. Pancholy SB, Palamaner Subash Shantha G, Romagnoli E, Kedev S, 
Bernat I, Rao SV, Jolly S, Bertrand OF, Patel TM. Impact of access site 
choice on outcomes of patients with cardiogenic shock undergoing per-
cutaneous coronary intervention: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Am Heart J. 2015;170:353–361. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2015.05.001.
 186. Mamas MA, Anderson SG, Ratib K, Routledge H, Neyses L, Fraser DG, 
Buchan I, de Belder MA, Ludman P
, Nolan J; British Cardiovascular 
Intervention Society; National Institute for Cardiovascular Outcomes 
Research. Arterial access site utilization in cardiogenic shock in the United 
Kingdom: is radial access feasible? Am Heart J. 2014;167:900–908.e1. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2014.03.007.
 187. Seto AH, Roberts JS, Abu-Fadel MS, Czak SJ, Latif F, Jain SP
, Raza JA, 
Mangla A, Panagopoulos G, Patel PM, Kern MJ, Lasic Z. Real-time ul-
trasound guidance facilitates transradial access: RAUST (Radial Artery 
access with Ultrasound Trial). JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2015;8:283–291. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jcin.2014.05.036.
 188. Orban M, Mayer K, Morath T, Bernlochner I, Hadamitzky M, Braun S, 
Schulz S, Hoppmann P
, Hausleiter J, Tiroch K, Mehilli J, Schunkert H, 
Massberg S, Laugwitz KL, Sibbing D, Kastrati A. Prasugrel vs clopidogrel 
in cardiogenic shock patients undergoing primary PCI for acute myo-
cardial infarction: results of the ISAR-SHOCK registry. Thromb Haemost. 
2014;112:1190–1197. doi: 10.1160/TH14-06-0489.
 189. Orban M, Limbourg T, Neumann FJ, Ferenc M, Olbrich HG, Richardt G, 
Hennersdorf M, Empen K, Fuernau G, Desch S, Eitel I, Hambrecht R, Pöss 
J, Schneider S, Schuler G, Werdan K, Zeymer U, Thiele H, Hausleiter J. 
ADP receptor antagonists in patients with acute myocardial infarction 
complicated by cardiogenic shock: a post hoc IABP-SHOCK II trial sub-
group analysis. EuroIntervention. 2016;12:e1395–e1403. doi: 10.4244/
EIJY15M12_04.
 190. Siller-Matula JM, Trenk D, Krähenbühl S, Michelson AD, Delle-Karth G. 
Clinical implications of drug-drug interactions with P2Y12 receptor in-
hibitors. J Thromb Haemost. 2014;12:2–13. doi: 10.1111/jth.12445.
 191. Antoniucci D, Valenti R, Migliorini A, Moschi G, Trapani M, Dovellini 
EV, Bolognese L, Santoro GM. Abciximab therapy improves survival in 
patients with acute myocardial infarction complicated by early cardio-
genic shock undergoing coronary artery stent implantation. Am J Cardiol. 
2002;90:353–357.
 192. Chan AW, Chew DP
, Bhatt DL, Moliterno DJ, Topol EJ, Ellis SG. Long-term 
mortality benefit with the combination of stents and abciximab for car-
diogenic shock complicating acute myocardial infarction. Am J Cardiol. 
2002;89:132–136.
 193. Giri S, Mitchel J, Azar RR, Kiernan FJ, Fram DB, McKay RG, Mennett 
R, Clive J, Hirst JA. Results of primary percutaneous transluminal coro-
nary angioplasty plus abciximab with or without stenting for acute 
myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock. Am J Cardiol. 
2002;89:126–131.
 194. Huang R, Sacks J, Thai H, Goldman S, Morrison DA, Barbiere C, Ohm 
J. Impact of stents and abciximab on survival from cardiogenic shock 
treated with percutaneous coronary intervention. Catheter Cardiovasc 
Interv. 2005;65:25–33. doi: 10.1002/ccd.20334.
 195. Tousek P
, Rokyta R, Tesarova J, Pudil R, Belohlavek J, Stasek J, Rohac 
F, Widimsky P
. Routine upfront abciximab versus standard periproce-
dural therapy in patients undergoing primary percutaneous coronary 
intervention for cardiogenic shock: the PRAGUE-7 Study: an open ran-
domized multicentre study. Acute Card Care. 2011;13:116–122. doi: 
10.3109/17482941.2011.567282.
 196. Bonello L, De Labriolle A, Roy P
, Steinberg DH, Pinto Slottow TL, Xue 
Z, Smith K, Torguson R, Suddath WO, Satler LF, Kent KM, Pichard AD, 
Waksman R. Bivalirudin with provisional glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibi-
tors in patients undergoing primary angioplasty in the setting of car-
diogenic shock. Am J Cardiol. 2008;102:287–291. doi: 10.1016/j.
amjcard.2008.03.052.
 197. Wong SC, Sanborn T, Sleeper LA, Webb JG, Pilchik R, Hart D, 
Mejnartowicz S, Antonelli TA, Lange R, French JK, Bergman G, LeJemtel 
T, Hochman JS. Angiographic findings and clinical correlates in patients 
with cardiogenic shock complicating acute myocardial infarction: a 
report from the SHOCK Trial Registry. SHould we emergently revascu-
larize Occluded Coronaries for cardiogenic shocK? J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2000;36(suppl A):1077–1083.
 198. Vincent JL, Quintairos E Silva A, Couto L Jr, Taccone FS. The value of 
blood lactate kinetics in critically ill patients: a systematic review. Crit 
Care. 2016;20:257. doi: 10.1186/s13054-016-1403-5.
 199. Richard C, Warszawski J, Anguel N, Deye N, Combes A, Barnoud D, 
Boulain T, Lefort Y, Fartoukh M, Baud F, Boyer A, Brochard L, Teboul JL; 
French Pulmonary Artery Catheter Study Group. Early use of the pul-
monary artery catheter and outcomes in patients with shock and acute 
respiratory distress syndrome: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 
2003;290:2713–2720. doi: 10.1001/jama.290.20.2713.
 200. Sandham JD, Hull RD, Brant RF, Knox L, Pineo GF, Doig CJ, Laporta 
DP
, Viner S, Passerini L, Devitt H, Kirby A, Jacka M; Canadian Critical 
Care Clinical Trials Group. A randomized, controlled trial of the use of 
pulmonary-artery catheters in high-risk surgical patients. N Engl J Med. 
2003;348:5–14. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa021108.
 201. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Acute Respiratory Distress 
Syndrome (ARDS) Clinical Trials Network, Wheeler AP
, Bernard GR, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Contemporary Management of Cardiogenic Shock
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525 
October 17, 2017
e265
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Thompson BT, Schoenfeld D, Wiedemann HP
, deBoisblanc B, Connors 
AF Jr, Hite RD, Harabin AL. Pulmonary-artery versus central ve-
nous catheter to guide treatment of acute lung injury. N Engl J Med. 
2006;354:2213–2224.
 202. Rossello X, Vila M, Rivas-Lasarte M, Ferrero-Gregori A, Sans-Roselló J, 
Duran-Cambra A, Sionis A. Impact of pulmonary artery catheter use 
on short- and long-term mortality in patients with cardiogenic shock. 
Cardiology. 2017;136:61–69. doi: 10.1159/000448110.
 203. Hasdai D, Holmes DR Jr, Califf RM, Thompson TD, Hochman JS, Pfisterer 
M, Topol EJ. Cardiogenic shock complicating acute myocardial infarction: 
predictors of death. Am Heart J. 1999;138(pt 1):21–31.
 204. Petersen JW, Felker GM. Inotropes in the management of acute heart 
failure. Crit Care Med. 2008;36(suppl):S106–S111. doi: 10.1097/01.
CCM.0000296273.72952.39.
 205. Werdan K, Ruß M, Buerke M, Delle-Karth G, Geppert A, Schöndube 
FA; German Cardiac Society; German Society of Intensive Care and 
Emergency Medicine; German Society for Thoracic and Cardiovascular 
Surgery; Austrian Society of Internal and General Intensive Care 
Medicine; German Interdisciplinary Association of Intensive Care and 
Emergency Medicine; Austrian Society of Cardiology; German Society 
of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine; German Society of 
Preventive Medicine and Rehabilitation. Cardiogenic shock due to 
myocardial infarction: diagnosis, monitoring and treatment: a German-
Austrian S3 Guideline. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2012;109:343–351. doi: 
10.3238/arztebl.2012.0343.
 206. den Uil CA, Lagrand WK, van der Ent M, Nieman K, Struijs A, Jewbali LS, 
Constantinescu AA, Spronk PE, Simoons ML. Conventional hemodynam-
ic resuscitation may fail to optimize tissue perfusion: an observational 
study on the effects of dobutamine, enoximone, and norepinephrine 
in patients with acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic 
shock. PLoS One. 2014;9:e103978. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103978.
 207. van Diepen S, Reynolds HR, Stebbins A, Lopes RD, Džavík V, Ruzyllo W, 
Geppert A, Widimsky P
, Ohman EM, Parrillo JE, Dauerman HL, Baran 
DA, Hochman JS, Alexander JH. Incidence and outcomes associated 
with early heart failure pharmacotherapy in patients with ongoing 
cardiogenic shock. Crit Care Med. 2014;42:281–288. doi: 10.1097/
CCM.0b013e31829f6242.
 208. Sim DS, Jeong MH, Cho KH, Ahn Y, Kim YJ, Chae SC, Hong TJ, Seong 
IW, Chae JK, Kim CJ, Cho MC, Rha SW, Bae JH, Seung KB, Park SJ; 
Korea Acute Myocardial Infarction Registry (KAMIR) Investigators. Effect 
of early statin treatment in patients with cardiogenic shock complicat-
ing acute myocardial infarction. Korean Circ J. 2013;43:100–109. doi: 
10.4070/kcj.2013.43.2.100.
 209. De Backer D, Biston P
, Devriendt J, Madl C, Chochrad D, Aldecoa C, 
Brasseur A, Defrance P
, Gottignies P
, Vincent JL; SOAP II Investigators. 
Comparison of dopamine and norepinephrine in the treatment of shock. 
N Engl J Med. 2010;362:779–789. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0907118.
 210. Fuhrmann JT, Schmeisser A, Schulze MR, Wunderlich C, Schoen SP
, 
Rauwolf T, Weinbrenner C, Strasser RH. Levosimendan is superior to 
enoximone in refractory cardiogenic shock complicating acute myo-
cardial infarction [published correction appears in Crit Care Med. 
2008;36:2966]. Crit Care Med. 2008;36:2257–2266. doi: 10.1097/
CCM.0b013e3181809846.
 211. Pirracchio R, Parenica J, Resche Rigon M, Chevret S, Spinar J, Jarkovsky 
J, Zannad F, Alla F, Mebazaa A; GREAT Network. The effectiveness of 
inodilators in reducing short term mortality among patient with severe 
cardiogenic shock: a propensity-based analysis [published correction ap-
pears in PLoS One. 2013;8]. PLoS One. 2013;8:e71659. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0071659.
 212. Jeon Y, Ryu JH, Lim YJ, Kim CS, Bahk JH, Yoon SZ, Choi JY. Comparative 
hemodynamic effects of vasopressin and norepinephrine after milrinone- 
induced hypotension in off-pump coronary artery bypass surgical 
patients. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2006;29:952–956. doi: 10.1016/j.
ejcts.2006.02.032.
 213. Wallace AW, Tunin CM, Shoukas AA. Effects of vasopressin on pul-
monary and systemic vascular mechanics. Am J Physiol. 1989;257(pt 
2):H1228–H1234.
 214. Inglessis I, Shin JT, Lepore JJ, Palacios IF, Zapol WM, Bloch KD, Semigran 
MJ. Hemodynamic effects of inhaled nitric oxide in right ventricular myo-
cardial infarction and cardiogenic shock. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;44:793–
798. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2004.05.047.
 215. Elliott PM, Anastasakis A, Borger MA, Borggrefe M, Cecchi F, Charron 
P
, Hagege AA, Lafont A, Limongelli G, Mahrholdt H, McKenna WJ, 
Mogensen J, Nihoyannopoulos P
, Nistri S, Pieper PG, Pieske B, Rapezzi 
C, Rutten FH, Tillmanns C, Watkins H. 2014 ESC guidelines on 
diagnosis and management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Eur Heart J. 
2014;35:2733–2779. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehu284. 
 216. Gersh BJ, Maron BJ, Bonow RO, Dearani JA, Fifer MA, Link MS, Naidu SS, 
Nishimura RA, Ommen SR, Rakowski H, Seidman CE, Towbin JA, Udelson 
JE, Yancy CW. 2011 ACCF/AHA guideline for the diagnosis and treat-
ment of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a report of the American College 
of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2011;124:e783–e831. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0b013e318223e2bd.
 217. van Diepen S, Sligl WI, Washam JB, Gilchrist IC, Arora RC, Katz JN. 
Prevention of critical care complications in the coronary intensive care 
unit: protocols, bundles, and insights from intensive care studies. Can J 
Cardiol. 2017;33:101–109. doi: 10.1016/j.cjca.2016.06.011.
 218. Resar R, Pronovost P
, Haraden C, Simmonds T, Rainey T, Nolan T. 
Using a bundle approach to improve ventilator care processes and re-
duce ventilator-associated pneumonia. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf. 
2005;31:243–248.
 219. Pandharipande P
, Banerjee A, McGrane S, Ely EW. Liberation and anima-
tion for ventilated ICU patients: the ABCDE bundle for the back-end of 
critical care. Crit Care. 2010;14:157. doi: 10.1186/cc8999.
 220. American Thoracic Society; Infectious Diseases Society of America. 
Guidelines for the management of adults with hospital-acquired, venti-
lator-associated, and healthcare-associated pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med. 2005;171:388–416.
 221. Barr J, Fraser GL, Puntillo K, Ely EW, Gélinas C, Dasta JF, Davidson JE, 
Devlin JW, Kress JP
, Joffe AM, Coursin DB, Herr DL, Tung A, Robinson 
BR, Fontaine DK, Ramsay MA, Riker RR, Sessler CN, Pun B, Skrobik Y, 
Jaeschke R; American College of Critical Care Medicine. Clinical practice 
guidelines for the management of pain, agitation, and delirium in adult 
patients in the intensive care unit. Crit Care Med. 2013;41:263–306. doi: 
10.1097/CCM.0b013e3182783b72.
 222. Morris AC, Hay AW, Swann DG, Everingham K, McCulloch C, 
McNulty J, Brooks O, Laurenson IF, Cook B, Walsh TS. Reducing ven-
tilator-associated pneumonia in intensive care: impact of implement-
ing a care bundle. Crit Care Med. 2011;39:2218–2224. doi: 10.1097/
CCM.0b013e3182227d52.
 223. O’Grady NP, Alexander M, Burns LA, Dellinger EP, Garland J, Heard 
SO, Lipsett PA, Masur H, Mermel LA, Pearson ML, Raad II, Randolph 
AG, Rupp ME, Saint S; Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory 
Committee (HICPAC). Guidelines for the prevention of intravascular 
catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis. 2011;52:e162–e193. doi: 
10.1093/cid/cir257.
 224. Ling ML, Apisarnthanarak A, Jaggi N, Harrington G, Morikane K, Thu 
le TA, Ching P
, Villanueva V, Zong Z, Jeong JS, Lee CM. APSIC guide 
for prevention of central line associated bloodstream infections 
(CLABSI). Antimicrob Resist Infect Contro. 2016;5:16. doi: 10.1186/
s13756-016-0116-5. 
 225. Marik PE, Vasu T, Hirani A, Pachinburavan M. Stress ulcer prophylaxis in 
the new millennium: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care 
Med. 2010;38:2222–2228. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e3181f17adf.
 226. Dellinger RP
, Levy MM, Carlet JM, Bion J, Parker MM, Jaeschke R, 
Reinhart K, Angus DC, Brun-Buisson C, Beale R, Calandra T, Dhainaut 
JF, Gerlach H, Harvey M, Marini JJ, Marshall J, Ranieri M, Ramsay G, 
Sevransky J, Thompson BT, Townsend S, Vender JS, Zimmerman JL, 
Vincent JL. Surviving Sepsis Campaign: international guidelines for man-
agement of severe sepsis and septic shock: 2008 [published correction 
appears in Intensive Care Med. 2008;34:783–785]. Intensive Care Med. 
2008;34:17–60. doi: 10.1007/s00134-007-0934-2.
 227. Weir RA, McMurray JJ, Velazquez EJ. Epidemiology of heart failure and 
left ventricular systolic dysfunction after acute myocardial infarction: 
prevalence, clinical characteristics, and prognostic importance. Am J 
Cardiol. 2006;97:13F–25F. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2006.03.005.
 228. Gray A, Goodacre S, Newby DE, Masson M, Sampson F, Nicholl J; 3CPO 
Trialists. Noninvasive ventilation in acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema. 
N Engl J Med. 2008;359:142–151. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0707992.
 229. Tobin MJ. Mechanical ventilation. N Engl J Med. 1994;330:1056–1061. 
doi: 10.1056/NEJM199404143301507.
 230. Smith TC, Marini JJ. Impact of PEEP on lung mechanics and work 
of breathing in severe airflow obstruction. J Appl Physiol (1985). 
1988;65:1488–1499.
 231. Fessler HE, Brower RG, Wise RA, Permutt S. Mechanism of reduced LV 
afterload by systolic and diastolic positive pleural pressure. J Appl Physiol 
(1985). 1988;65:1244–1250.
 232. Grace MP
, Greenbaum DM. Cardiac performance in response to PEEP in 
patients with cardiac dysfunction. Crit Care Med. 1982;10:358–360.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 van Diepen et al
October 17, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525
e266
 233. Peters J. Mechanical ventilation with PEEP: a unique therapy for failing 
hearts. Intensive Care Med. 1999;25:778–780.
 234. Luecke T, Pelosi P
. Clinical review: positive end-expiratory pressure and 
cardiac output. Crit Care. 2005;9:607–621. doi: 10.1186/cc3877.
 235. Girardis M, Busani S, Damiani E, Donati A, Rinaldi L, Marudi A, Morelli 
A, Antonelli M, Singer M. Effect of conservative vs conventional oxy-
gen therapy on mortality among patients in an intensive care unit: the 
Oxygen-ICU randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2016;316:1583–1589. doi: 
10.1001/jama.2016.11993.
 236. Stub D, Smith K, Bernard S, Nehme Z, Stephenson M, Bray JE, Cameron 
P
, Barger B, Ellims AH, Taylor AJ, Meredith IT, Kaye DM; on behalf of 
the AVOID Investigators. Air versus oxygen in ST-segment-elevation 
myocardial infarction. Circulation. 2015;131:2143–2150. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.114.014494.
 237. Sepehrvand N, Ezekowitz JA. Oxygen therapy in patients with acute heart 
failure: friend or foe? JACC Heart Fail. 2016;4:783–790. doi: 10.1016/j.
jchf.2016.03.026.
 238. Kilgannon JH, Jones AE, Shapiro NI, Angelos MG, Milcarek B, Hunter 
K, Parrillo JE, Trzeciak S; Emergency Medicine Shock Research Network 
(EMShockNet) Investigators. Association between arterial hyperoxia fol-
lowing resuscitation from cardiac arrest and in-hospital mortality. JAMA. 
2010;303:2165–2171. doi: 10.1001/jama.2010.707.
 239. Adler C, Reuter H, Seck C, Hellmich M, Zobel C. Fluid therapy and acute 
kidney injury in cardiogenic shock after cardiac arrest. Resuscitation. 
2013;84:194–199. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2012.06.013.
 240. Lauridsen MD, Gammelager H, Schmidt M, Rasmussen TB, Shaw 
RE, Bøtker HE, Sørensen HT, Christiansen CF. Acute kidney injury 
treated with renal replacement therapy and 5-year mortality after 
myocardial infarction-related cardiogenic shock: a nationwide pop-
ulation-based cohort study. Crit Care. 2015;19:452. doi: 10.1186/
s13054-015-1170-8.
 241. Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Acute Kidney Injury 
Work Group. KDIGO clinical practice guideline for acute kidney injury. 
Kidney Int Suppl. 2012;2:1–138.
 242. Feldman D, Pamboukian SV, Teuteberg JJ, Birks E, Lietz K, Moore SA, 
Morgan JA, Arabia F, Bauman ME, Buchholz HW, Deng M, Dickstein ML, 
El-Banayosy A, Elliot T, Goldstein DJ, Grady KL, Jones K, Hryniewicz K, 
John R, Kaan A, Kusne S, Loebe M, Massicotte MP
, Moazami N, Mohacsi 
P
, Mooney M, Nelson T, Pagani F, Perry W, Potapov EV, Eduardo Rame 
J, Russell SD, Sorensen EN, Sun B, Strueber M, Mangi AA, Petty MG, 
Rogers J; International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation. The 
2013 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation guidelines 
for mechanical circulatory support: executive summary. J Heart Lung 
Transplant. 2013;32:157–187. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2012.09.013.
 243. Peura JL, Colvin-Adams M, Francis GS, Grady KL, Hoffman TM, Jessup 
M, John R, Kiernan MS, Mitchell JE, O’Connell JB, Pagani FD, Petty M, 
Ravichandran P
, Rogers JG, Semigran MJ, Toole JM; on behalf of the 
American Heart Association Heart Failure and Transplantation Committee 
of the Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council on Cardiopulmonary, 
Critical Care, Perioperative and Resuscitation; Council on Cardiovascular 
Disease in the Young; Council on Cardiovascular Nursing; Council 
on Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention, and Council on 
Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia. Recommendations for the use of 
mechanical circulatory support: device strategies and patient selection: 
a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2012;126:2648–2667. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e3182769a54.
 244. Smedira NG, Moazami N, Golding CM, McCarthy PM, Apperson-Hansen 
C, Blackstone EH, Cosgrove DM 3rd. Clinical experience with 202 adults 
receiving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for cardiac failure: 
survival at five years. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2001;122:92–102. doi: 
10.1067/mtc.2001.114351.
 245. Cheng JM, den Uil CA, Hoeks SE, van der Ent M, Jewbali LS, van Domburg 
RT, Serruys PW. Percutaneous left ventricular assist devices vs. intra-aortic 
balloon pump counterpulsation for treatment of cardiogenic shock: a 
meta-analysis of controlled trials. Eur Heart J. 2009;30:2102–2108. doi: 
10.1093/eurheartj/ehp292.
 246. Alba AC, Rao V, Ivanov J, Ross HJ, Delgado DH. Usefulness of the 
INTERMACS scale to predict outcomes after mechanical assist device im-
plantation. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2009;28:827–833. doi: 10.1016/j.
healun.2009.04.033.
 247. Lima B, Kale P
, Gonzalez-Stawinski GV, Kuiper JJ, Carey S, Hall SA. 
Effectiveness and safety of the Impella 5.0 as a bridge to cardiac 
transplantation or durable left ventricular assist device. Am J Cardiol. 
2016;117:1622–1628. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2016.02.038.
 248. Kirklin JK, Naftel DC, Kormos RL, Stevenson LW, Pagani FD, Miller MA, 
Baldwin JT, Young JB. The Fourth INTERMACS Annual Report: 4,000 im-
plants and counting. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2012;31:117–126. doi: 
10.1016/j.healun.2011.12.001.
 249. Kirklin JK, Naftel DC, Kormos RL, Stevenson LW, Pagani FD, Miller 
MA, Baldwin JT, Timothy Baldwin J, Young JB. Fifth INTERMACS an-
nual report: risk factor analysis from more than 6,000 mechanical cir-
culatory support patients [published correction appears in J Heart Lung 
Transplant. 2015;34:1345]. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2013;32:141–156. 
doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2012.12.004.
 250. Kirklin JK, Naftel DC, Kormos RL, Stevenson LW, Pagani FD, Miller MA, 
Ulisney KL, Baldwin JT, Young JB. Second INTERMACS annual report: 
more than 1,000 primary left ventricular assist device implants. J Heart 
Lung Transplant. 2010;29:1–10. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2009.10.009.
 251. Kirklin JK, Naftel DC, Pagani FD, Kormos RL, Stevenson LW, Blume ED, 
Miller MA, Baldwin JT, Young JB. Sixth INTERMACS annual report: A 
10,000-patient database [published correction appears in J Heart Lung 
Transplant. 2015;34:1356]. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2014;33:555–564.
 252. Kirklin JK, Naftel DC, Pagani FD, Kormos RL, Stevenson LW, Blume 
ED, Myers SL, Miller MA, Baldwin JT, Young JB. Seventh INTERMACS 
annual report: 15,000 patients and counting. J Heart Lung Transplant. 
2015;34:1495–1504.
 253. Prondzinsky R, Unverzagt S, Russ M, Lemm H, Swyter M, Wegener N, 
Buerke U, Raaz U, Ebelt H, Schlitt A, Heinroth K, Haerting J, Werdan 
K, Buerke M. Hemodynamic effects of intra-aortic balloon counterpul-
sation in patients with acute myocardial infarction complicated by car-
diogenic shock: the prospective, randomized IABP shock trial. Shock. 
2012;37:378–384. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e31824a67af.
 254. Roffi M, Patrono C, Collet JP, Mueller C, Valgimigli M, Andreotti F, Bax 
JJ, Borger MA, Brotons C, Chew DP, Gencer B, Hasenfuss G, Kjeldsen 
K, Lancellotti P, Landmesser U, Mehilli J, Mukherjee D, Storey RF, 
Windecker S, Baumgartner H, Gaemperli O, Achenbach S, Agewall S, 
Badimon L, Baigent C, Bueno H, Bugiardini R, Carerj S, Casselman F, 
Cuisset T, Erol Ç, Fitzsimons D, Halle M, Hamm C, Hildick-Smith D, 
Huber K, Iliodromitis E, James S, Lewis BS, Lip GY, Piepoli MF, Richter 
D, Rosemann T, Sechtem U, Steg PG, Vrints C, Luis Zamorano J; 
Management of Acute Coronary Syndromes in Patients Presenting 
without Persistent ST-Segment Elevation of the European Society of 
Cardiology. 2015 ESC guidelines for the management of acute coronary 
syndromes in patients presenting without persistent ST-segment eleva-
tion: Task Force for the Management of Acute Coronary Syndromes 
in Patients Presenting without Persistent ST-Segment Elevation of the 
European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2016;37:267–315. 
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehv320.
 255. Ouweneel DM, Eriksen E, Sjauw KD, van Dongen IM, Hirsch A, Packer 
EJS, Vis MM, Wykrzykowska JJ, Koch KT, Baan J, de Winter RJ, Piek JJ, 
Lagrand WK, de Mol BA, Tijssen JG, Henriques JP
. Percutaneous mechan-
ical circulatory support versus intra-aortic balloon pump in cardiogenic 
shock after acute myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:278–
287. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2016.10.022. 
 256. O’Neill WW, Schreiber T, Wohns DH, Rihal C, Naidu SS, Civitello AB, 
Dixon SR, Massaro JM, Maini B, Ohman EM. The current use of Impella 
2.5 in acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock: 
results from the USpella Registry. J Interv Cardiol. 2014;27:1–11. doi: 
10.1111/joic.12080.
 257. Kawashima D, Gojo S, Nishimura T, Itoda Y, Kitahori K, Motomura N, 
Morota T, Murakami A, Takamoto S, Kyo S, Ono M. Left ventricular 
mechanical support with Impella provides more ventricular unloading 
in heart failure than extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. ASAIO J. 
2011;57:169–176. doi: 10.1097/MAT.0b013e31820e121c.
 258. Koeckert MS, Jorde UP
, Naka Y, Moses JW, Takayama H. Impella LP 
2.5 for left ventricular unloading during venoarterial extracorporeal 
membrane oxygenation support. J Card Surg. 2011;26:666–668. doi: 
10.1111/j.1540-8191.2011.01338.x.
 259. Paden ML, Conrad SA, Rycus PT, Thiagarajan RR; ELSO Registry. 
Extracorporeal Life Support Organization Registry report 2012. ASAIO J. 
2013;59:202–210. doi: 10.1097/MAT.0b013e3182904a52.
 260. Extracorporeal Life Support Organization. ECLS Registry report. 
 
https://www.elso.org/Registry/Statistics/InternationalSummary.aspx. 
Accessed August 20,2016.
 261. Elsharkawy HA, Li L, Esa WA, Sessler DI, Bashour CA. Outcome in pa-
tients who require venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 
support after cardiac surgery. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2010;24:946–
951. doi: 10.1053/j.jvca.2010.03.020.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Contemporary Management of Cardiogenic Shock
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525 
October 17, 2017
e267
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 262. Lorusso R, Centofanti P
, Gelsomino S, Barili F, Di Mauro M, Orlando P
, 
Botta L, Milazzo F, Actis Dato G, Casabona R, Casali G, Musumeci F, 
De Bonis M, Zangrillo A, Alfieri O, Pellegrini C, Mazzola S, Coletti G, 
Vizzardi E, Bianco R, Gerosa G, Massetti M, Caldaroni F, Pilato E, Pacini 
D, Di Bartolomeo R, Marinelli G, Sponga S, Livi U, Mauro R, Mariscalco 
G, Beghi C, Miceli A, Glauber M, Pappalardo F, Russo CF; GIROC 
Investigators. Venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for 
acute fulminant myocarditis in adult patients: a 5-year multi-institution-
al experience. Ann Thorac Surg. 2016;101:919–926. doi: 10.1016/j.
athoracsur.2015.08.014.
 263. Anderson MB, Goldstein J, Milano C, Morris LD, Kormos RL, Bhama J, 
Kapur NK, Bansal A, Garcia J, Baker JN, Silvestry S, Holman WL, Douglas 
PS, O’Neill W. Benefits of a novel percutaneous ventricular assist device 
for right heart failure: the prospective RECOVER RIGHT study of the 
Impella RP device. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2015;34:1549–1560. doi: 
10.1016/j.healun.2015.08.018.
 264. Atiemo AD, Conte JV, Heldman AW. Resuscitation and recovery from 
acute right ventricular failure using a percutaneous right ventricular as-
sist device. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2006;68:78–82. doi: 10.1002/
ccd.20691.
 265. Slaughter MS, Tsui SS, El-Banayosy A, Sun BC, Kormos RL, Mueller DK, 
Massey HT, Icenogle TB, Farrar DJ, Hill JD; IVAD Study Group. Results 
of a multicenter clinical trial with the Thoratec implantable ventricular 
assist device [published correction appears in J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2007;134:A34]. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2007;133:1573–1580. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2006.11.050.
 266. John R, Long JW, Massey HT, Griffith BP, Sun BC, Tector AJ, Frazier 
OH, Joyce LD. Outcomes of a multicenter trial of the Levitronix 
CentriMag ventricular assist system for short-term circulatory sup-
port. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011;141:932–939. doi: 10.1016/j.
jtcvs.2010.03.046.
 267. Zeriouh M, Mohite P, Raj B, Sabashnikov A, Fatullayev J, Saez DG, Zych 
B, Ghodsizad A, Rahmanian P, Choi YH, Wahlers T, Simon AR, Popov 
AF, Koch A. Short-term ventricular assist device as a bridge to deci-
sion in cardiogenic shock: is it a justified strategy? Int J Artif Organs. 
2016;39:114–120. doi: 10.5301/ijao.5000488.
 268. Frazier OH, Rose EA, Oz MC, Dembitsky W, McCarthy P
, Radovancevic 
B, Poirier VL, Dasse KA; HeartMate LVAS Investigators; Left Ventricular 
Assist System. Multicenter clinical evaluation of the HeartMate vented 
electric left ventricular assist system in patients awaiting heart transplan-
tation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2001;122:1186–1195. doi: 10.1067/
mtc.2001.118274.
 269. Rose EA, Gelijns AC, Moskowitz AJ, Heitjan DF, Stevenson LW, Dembitsky 
W, Long JW, Ascheim DD, Tierney AR, Levitan RG, Watson JT, Meier 
P
, Ronan NS, Shapiro PA, Lazar RM, Miller LW, Gupta L, Frazier OH, 
Desvigne-Nickens P
, Oz MC, Poirier VL; Randomized Evaluation of 
Mechanical Assistance for the Treatment of Congestive Heart Failure 
(REMATCH) Study Group. Long-term use of a left ventricular assist device 
for end-stage heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:1435–1443. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa012175.
 270. Chou J, Bermudez C, Kormos R, Teuteberg J. Permanent continuous flow 
left ventricular assist devices use after acute stabilization for cardiogenic 
shock in acute myocardial infarction. ASAIO J. 2017;63:e13–e17. doi: 
10.1097/MAT.0000000000000398
 271. Kirklin JK, Naftel DC, Stevenson LW, Kormos RL, Pagani FD, Miller MA, 
Ulisney K, Young JB. INTERMACS database for durable devices for circula-
tory support: first annual report. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2008;27:1065–
1072. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2008.07.021.
 272. Lund LH, Edwards LB, Kucheryavaya AY, Dipchand AI, Benden C, Christie 
JD, Dobbels F, Kirk R, Rahmel AO, Yusen RD, Stehlik J; International Society 
for Heart and Lung Transplantation. The Registry of the International 
Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation: Thirtieth Official Adult Heart 
Transplant Report–2013: focus theme: age. J Heart Lung Transplant. 
2013;32:951–964. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2013.08.006.
 273. Stegman BM, Newby LK, Hochman JS, Ohman EM. Post-myocardial in-
farction cardiogenic shock is a systemic illness in need of systemic treat-
ment: is therapeutic hypothermia one possibility? J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2012;59:644–647. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2011.11.010.
 274. Zobel C, Adler C, Kranz A, Seck C, Pfister R, Hellmich M, Kochanek 
M, Reuter H. Mild therapeutic hypothermia in cardiogenic shock 
syndrome. Crit Care Med. 2012;40:1715–1723. doi: 10.1097/
CCM.0b013e318246b820.
 275. Unverzagt S, Wachsmuth L, Hirsch K, Thiele H, Buerke M, Haerting J, 
Werdan K, Prondzinsky R. Inotropic agents and vasodilator strategies for 
acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock or low car-
diac output syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014:CD009669. 
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD009669.pub2
 276. Teerlink JR, Cotter G, Davison BA, Felker GM, Filippatos G, Greenberg 
BH, Ponikowski P
, Unemori E, Voors AA, Adams KF Jr, Dorobantu 
MI, Grinfeld LR, Jondeau G, Marmor A, Masip J, Pang PS, Werdan K, 
Teichman SL, Trapani A, Bush CA, Saini R, Schumacher C, Severin TM, 
Metra M; RELAXin in Acute Heart Failure (RELAX-AHF) Investigators. 
Serelaxin, recombinant human relaxin-2, for treatment of acute heart 
failure (RELAX-AHF): a randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 
2013;381:29–39. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61855-8.
 277. Braun LT, Grady KL, Kutner JS, Adler E, Berlinger N, Boss R, Butler J, 
Enguidanos S, Friebert S, Gardner TJ, Higgins P
, Holloway R, Konig M, 
Meier D, Morrissey MB, Quest TE, Wiegand DL, Coombs-Lee B, Fitchett 
G, Gupta C, Roach WH Jr; on behalf of the American Heart Association 
Advocacy Coordinating Committee. Palliative care and cardiovascu-
lar disease and stroke: a policy statement from the American Heart 
Association/American Stroke Association. Circulation. 2016;134:e198–
e225. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000438.
 278. Meyers DE, Goodlin SJ. End-of-life decisions and palliative care in ad-
vanced heart failure. Can J Cardiol. 2016;32:1148–1156. doi: 10.1016/j.
cjca.2016.04.015.
 279. Aslakson RA, Curtis JR, Nelson JE. The changing role of palliative 
care in the ICU. Crit Care Med. 2014;42:2418–2428. doi: 10.1097/
CCM.0000000000000573.
 280. Greener DT, Quill T, Amir O, Szydlowski J, Gramling RE. Palliative care 
referral among patients hospitalized with advanced heart failure. J Palliat 
Med. 2014;17:1115–1120. doi: 10.1089/jpm.2013.0658.
 281. Albert N, Trochelman K, Li J, Lin S. Signs and symptoms of heart failure: 
are you asking the right questions? Am J Crit Care. 2010;19:443–452. 
doi: 10.4037/ajcc2009314.
 282. Gavazzi A, De Maria R, Manzoli L, Bocconcelli P
, Di Leonardo A, Frigerio 
M, Gasparini S, Humar F, Perna G, Pozzi R, Svanoni F, Ugolini M, Deales 
A. Palliative needs for heart failure or chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease: results of a multicenter observational registry. Int J Cardiol. 
2015;184:552–558. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.03.056.
 283. Mandawat A, Heidenreich PA, Mandawat A, Bhatt DL. Trends in palliative 
care use in veterans with severe heart failure using a large national cohort. 
JAMA Cardiol. 2016;1:617–619. doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.2016.1687.
 284. Erne P
, Radovanovic D, Seifert B, Bertel O, Urban P; AMIS Plus 
Investigators. Outcome of patients admitted with acute coronary syn-
drome on palliative treatment: insights from the nationwide AMIS 
Plus Registry 1997-2014. BMJ Open. 2015;5:e006218. doi: 10.1136/
bmjopen-2014-006218.
 285. Kavalieratos D, Mitchell EM, Carey TS, Dev S, Biddle AK, Reeve BB, 
Abernethy AP
, Weinberger M. “Not the ‘grim reaper service’”: an as-
sessment of provider knowledge, attitudes, and perceptions regard-
ing palliative care referral barriers in heart failure. J Am Heart Assoc. 
2014;3:e000544. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.113.000544.
 286. Hjelmfors L, Strömberg A, Friedrichsen M, Mårtensson J, Jaarsma T. 
Communicating prognosis and end-of-life care to heart failure patients: 
a survey of heart failure nurses’ perspectives. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 
2014;13:152–161. doi: 10.1177/1474515114521746.
 287. Boyd KJ, Worth A, Kendall M, Pratt R, Hockley J, Denvir M, Murray 
SA. Making sure services deliver for people with advanced heart 
failure: a longitudinal qualitative study of patients, family car-
ers, and health professionals. Palliat Med. 2009;23:767–776. doi: 
10.1177/0269216309346541.
 288. Cheang MH, Rose G, Cheung CC, Thomas M. Current challenges in pal-
liative care provision for heart failure in the UK: a survey on the perspec-
tives of palliative care professionals. Open Heart. 2015;2:e000188. doi: 
10.1136/openhrt-2014-000188.
 289. Metzger M, Norton SA, Quinn JR, Gramling R. “That Don’t Work for 
Me”: Patients’ and Family Members’ Perspectives on Palliative Care and 
Hospice in Late-Stage Heart Failure. J Hosp Palliat Nurs. 2013;15:177–
182. doi: 10.1097/NJH.0b013e3182798390.
 290. Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, Butler J, Casey DE, Drazner MH, 
Fonarow GC, Geraci SA, Horwich T, Januzzi JL, Johnson MR, Kasper 
EK, Levy WC, Masoudi FA, McBride PE, McMurray JJV, Mitchell JE, 
Peterson PN, Riegel B, Sam F, Stevenson LW, Tang WH, Tsai EJ, Wilkoff 
BL. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of heart failure: 
a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2013;128:e240–e327.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 van Diepen et al
October 17, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e232–e268. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525
e268
 291. Thorvaldsen T, Benson L, Ståhlberg M, Dahlström U, Edner M, Lund LH. 
Triage of patients with moderate to severe heart failure: who should be 
referred to a heart failure center? J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:661–671. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.10.017.
 292. Hopp FP
, Zalenski RJ, Waselewsky D, Burn J, Camp J, Welch RD, Levy P
. 
Results of a hospital-based palliative care intervention for patients with 
an acute exacerbation of chronic heart failure. J Card Fail. 2016;22:1033–
1036. doi: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2016.04.004.
 293. Sidebottom AC, Jorgenson A, Richards H, Kirven J, Sillah A. Inpatient 
palliative care for patients with acute heart failure: outcomes from 
a randomized trial. J Palliat Med. 2015;18:134–142. doi: 10.1089/
jpm.2014.0192.
 294. Denvir MA, Cudmore S, Highet G, Robertson S, Donald L, Stephen J, 
Haga K, Hogg K, Weir CJ, Murray SA, Boyd K. Phase 2 randomised 
controlled trial and feasibility study of future care planning in patients 
with advanced heart disease. Sci Rep. 2016;6:24619. doi: 10.1038/
srep24619.
 295. Peterson PN, Rumsfeld JS, Liang L, Albert NM, Hernandez AF, Peterson 
ED, Fonarow GC, Masoudi FA; on behalf of the American Heart 
Association Get With The Guidelines–Heart Failure Program. A validated 
risk score for in-hospital mortality in patients with heart failure from 
the American Heart Association Get With The Guidelines Program. Circ 
Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2010;3:25–32.
 296. Fonarow GC, Adams KF Jr, Abraham WT, Yancy CW, Boscardin WJ; 
ADHERE Scientific Advisory Committee, Study Group, and Investigators. 
Risk stratification for in-hospital mortality in acutely decompensated heart 
failure: classification and regression tree analysis. JAMA. 2005;293:572–
580. doi: 10.1001/jama.293.5.572.
 297. Mebazaa A, Yilmaz MB, Levy P
, Ponikowski P
, Peacock WF, Laribi S, Ristic 
AD, Lambrinou E, Masip J, Riley JP
, McDonagh T, Mueller C, deFilippi 
C, Harjola VP
, Thiele H, Piepoli MF, Metra M, Maggioni A, McMurray J, 
Dickstein K, Damman K, Seferovic PM, Ruschitzka F, Leite-Moreira AF, 
Bellou A, Anker SD, Filippatos G. Recommendations on pre-hospital & 
early hospital management of acute heart failure: a consensus paper from 
the Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology, the 
European Society of Emergency Medicine and the Society of Academic 
Emergency Medicine. Eur J Heart Fail. 2015;17:544–558. doi: 10.1002/
ejhf.289.
 298. Coles AH, Fisher K, Darling C, Yarzebski J, McManus DD, Gore JM, 
Lessard D, Goldberg RJ. Long-term survival for patients with acute de-
compensated heart failure according to ejection fraction findings. Am J 
Cardiol. 2014;114:862–868. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2014.06.017.
 299. Gargani L, Pang PS, Frassi F, Miglioranza MH, Dini FL, Landi P
, Picano 
E. Persistent pulmonary congestion before discharge predicts rehospital-
ization in heart failure: a lung ultrasound study. Cardiovasc Ultrasound. 
2015;13:40. doi: 10.1186/s12947-015-0033-4.
 300. Omar HR, Guglin M. Rise in BNP despite appropriate acute decompen-
sated heart failure treatment: Patient characteristics and outcomes. Herz. 
2017;42:411–417. doi: 10.1007/s00059-016-4478-5.
 301. Levy WC, Mozaffarian D, Linker DT, Farrar DJ, Miller LW; REMATCH 
Investigators. Can the Seattle Heart Failure Model be used to risk-
stratify heart failure patients for potential left ventricular assist device 
therapy? J Heart Lung Transplant. 2009;28:231–236. doi: 10.1016/j.
healun.2008.12.015.
 302. Mozaffarian D, Anker SD, Anand I, Linker DT, Sullivan MD, Cleland 
JG, Carson PE, Maggioni AP
, Mann DL, Pitt B, Poole-Wilson PA, 
Levy WC. Prediction of mode of death in heart failure: the Seattle 
Heart Failure Model. Circulation. 2007;116:392–398. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.106.687103.
 303. Russell SD, Miller LW, Pagani FD. Advanced heart failure: a call to 
 
action. Congest Heart Fail. 2008;14:316–321. doi: 10.1111/j.1751- 
7133.2008.00022.x.
 304. Shah AB, Udeoji DU, Baraghoush A, Bharadwaj P
, Yennurajalingam S, 
Schwarz ER. An evaluation of the prevalence and severity of pain and 
other symptoms in acute decompensated heart failure. J Palliat Med. 
2013;16:87–90. doi: 10.1089/jpm.2012.0248.
 305. Ely EW, Inouye SK, Bernard GR, Gordon S, Francis J, May L, Truman 
B, Speroff T, Gautam S, Margolin R, Hart RP
, Dittus R. Delirium in me-
chanically ventilated patients: validity and reliability of the Confusion 
Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit (CAM-ICU). JAMA. 
2001;286:2703–2710.
 306. Gélinas C, Fillion L, Puntillo KA. Item selection and content validity of 
the Critical-Care Pain Observation Tool for non-verbal adults. J Adv Nurs. 
2009;65:203–216. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2648.2008.04847.x.
 307. Honda S, Nagai T, Sugano Y, Okada A, Asaumi Y, Aiba T, Noguchi T, 
Kusano K, Ogawa H, Yasuda S, Anzai T; NaDEF Investigators. Prevalence, 
determinants, and prognostic significance of delirium in patients with 
acute heart failure. Int J Cardiol. 2016;222:521–527. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijcard.2016.07.236.
 308. Nasreddine ZS, Phillips NA, Bédirian V, Charbonneau S, Whitehead V, 
Collin I, Cummings JL, Chertkow H. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, 
MoCA: a brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment. J Am Geriatr 
Soc. 2005;53:695–699. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2005.53221.x.
 309. O’Callaghan A, Laking G, Frey R, Robinson J, Gott M. Can we predict 
which hospitalised patients are in their last year of life? A prospec-
tive cross-sectional study of the Gold Standards Framework Prognostic 
Indicator Guidance as a screening tool in the acute hospital setting. 
Palliat Med. 2014;28:1046–1052. doi: 10.1177/0269216314536089.
 310. Persichini R, Gay F, Schmidt M, Mayaux J, Demoule A, Morélot-Panzini 
C, Similowski T. Diagnostic accuracy of respiratory distress observa-
tion scales as surrogates of dyspnea self-report in intensive care 
 
unit patients. Anesthesiology. 2015;123:830–837. doi: 10.1097/ALN. 
0000000000000805.
 311. Swetz KM, Freeman MR, AbouEzzeddine OF, Carter KA, Boilson BA, 
Ottenberg AL, Park SJ, Mueller PS. Palliative medicine consultation for 
preparedness planning in patients receiving left ventricular assist devices 
as destination therapy. Mayo Clin Proc. 2011;86:493–500. doi: 10.4065/
mcp.2010.0747.
 312. Downar J, Delaney JW, Hawryluck L, Kenny L. Guidelines for the with-
drawal of life-sustaining measures. Intensive Care Med. 2016;42:1003–
1017. doi: 10.1007/s00134-016-4330-7.
 313. McCabe JM, Waldo SW, Kennedy KF, Yeh RW. Treatment and outcomes 
of acute myocardial infarction complicated by shock after public report-
ing policy changes in New York. JAMA Cardiol. 2016;1:648–654. doi: 
10.1001/jamacardio.2016.1806.
 314. Bangalore S, Guo Y, Xu J, Blecker S, Gupta N, Feit F, Hochman JS. Rates 
of invasive management of cardiogenic shock in New York before and 
after exclusion from public reporting. JAMA Cardiol. 2016;1:640–647. 
doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.2016.0785.
 315. van Diepen S, Cook DJ, Jacka M, Granger CB. Critical care cardiology 
research: a call to action. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2013;6:237–
242. doi: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.111.969501.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
