 Annals of Oncology 27: 1386–1422, 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw235
Published online 5 July 2016
ESMO consensus guidelines for the management
of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer
E. Van Cutsem1*, A. Cervantes2, R. Adam3, A. Sobrero4, J. H. Van Krieken5, D. Aderka6, E. Aranda
Aguilar7, A. Bardelli8, A. Benson9, G. Bodoky10, F. Ciardiello11, A. D’Hoore12, E. Diaz-Rubio13,
J.-Y. Douillard14, M. Ducreux15, A. Falcone16,17, A. Grothey18, T. Gruenberger19, K. Haustermans20,
V. Heinemann21, P. Hoff22, C.-H. Köhne23, R. Labianca24, P. Laurent-Puig25, B. Ma26, T. Maughan27,
K. Muro28, N. Normanno29, P. Österlund30,31, W. J. G. Oyen32, D. Papamichael33,
G. Pentheroudakis34, P. Pfeiffer35, T. J. Price36, C. Punt37, J. Ricke38, A. Roth39, R. Salazar40,
W. Scheithauer41, H. J. Schmoll42, J. Tabernero43, J. Taïeb25, S. Tejpar1, H. Wasan44,
T. Yoshino45, A. Zaanan25 & D. Arnold46
1Digestive Oncology, University Hospitals Gasthuisberg Leuven and KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 2Medical Oncology Department, INCLIVA University of Valencia,
Valencia, Spain; 3Hepato-Biliary Centre, Paul Brousse Hospital, Villejuif, France; 4Medical Oncology, IRCCS San Martino Hospital, Genova, Italy; 5Research Institute for
Oncology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; 6Division of Oncology, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel;
7Medical Oncology Department, University Hospital Reina Sofia, Cordoba, Spain; 8School of Medicine, University of Turin, Turin, Italy; 9Division of Hematology/Oncology,
Northwestern Medical Group, Chicago, USA; 10Department of Oncology, St László Hospital, Budapest, Hungary; 11Division of Medical Oncology, Seconda Università di
Napoli, Naples, Italy; 12Abdominal Surgery, University Hospitals Gasthuisberg Leuven and KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 13Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Clínico
San Carlos, Madrid, Spain; 14Medical Oncology, Institut de Cancérologie de l’Ouest (ICO), St Herblain; 15Department of Medical Oncology, Gustave Roussy, Université
Paris-Saclay, Villejuif, France; 16Department of Medical Oncology, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy; 17Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Oncology, University Hospital
‘S. Chiara’, Istituto Toscano Tumori, Pisa, Italy; 18Division of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, USA; 19Department of Surgery I, Rudolfstiftung Hospital, Vienna,
Austria; 20Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospitals Gasthuisberg and KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 21Comprehensive Cancer Center, University Clinic
Munich, Munich, Germany; 22Instituto do Câncer do Estado de São Paulo, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil; 23Northwest German Cancer Center, University
Campus Klinikum Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany; 24Cancer Center, Ospedale Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy; 25Digestive Oncology Department, European Hospital
Georges Pompidou, Paris, France; 26Department of Clinical Oncology, Prince of Wales Hospital, State Key Laboratory in Oncology in South China, Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong; 27CRUK/MRC Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology, Gray Laboratories, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; 28Department of Clinical
Oncology and Outpatient Treatment Center, Aichi Cancer Center Hospital, Nagoya, Japan; 29Cell Biology and Biotherapy Unit, I.N.T. Fondazione G. Pascale, Napoli, Italy;
30Helsinki University Central Hospital, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Helsinki, Finland; 31Department of Oncology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; 32The Institute of
Cancer Research and The Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK; 33Department of Medical Oncology, Bank of Cyprus Oncology Centre, Nicosia, Cyprus; 34Department of
Medical Oncology, University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece; 35Department of Oncology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark; 36Haematology and Medical
Oncology Unit, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Woodville, Australia; 37Department of Medical Oncology, Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands; 38Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, University Clinic Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany; 39Digestive Tumors Unit, Geneva University Hospitals
(HUG), Geneva, Switzerland; 40Catalan Institute of Oncology (ICO), Barcelona, Spain; 41Department of Internal Medicine I and Comprehensive Cancer Center, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; 42Department of Internal Medicine IV, University Clinic Halle, Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany; 43Medical
Oncology Department, Vall d’ Hebron University Hospital, Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology (V.H.I.O.), Barcelona, Spain; 44Department of Cancer Medicine,
Hammersmith Hospital, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK; 45Department of Gastroenterology and Gastrointestinal Oncology, National Cancer Center
Hospital East, Chiba, Japan; 46Instituto CUF de Oncologia (ICO), Lisbon, Portugal
Received 31 March 2016; revised 27 May 2016; accepted 31 May 2016
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common malignancies in Western countries. Over the last 20 years, and the
last decade in particular, the clinical outcome for patients with metastatic CRC (mCRC) has improved greatly due not only
to an increase in the number of patients being referred for and undergoing surgical resection of their localised metastatic
disease but also to a more strategic approach to the delivery of systemic therapy and an expansion in the use of ablative
techniques. This reflects the increase in the number of patients that are being managed within a multidisciplinary team
environment and specialist cancer centres, and the emergence over the same time period not only of improved imaging
techniques but also prognostic and predictive molecular markers. Treatment decisions for patients with mCRC must be
evidence-based. Thus, these ESMO consensus guidelines have been developed based on the current available evidence
*Correspondence to: Prof. Eric Van Cutsem, ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO
Head Office, Via L. Taddei 4, CH-6962 Viganello-Lugano, Switzerland.
E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org
special articles
Annals of Oncology
© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology.
All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 to provide a series of evidence-based recommendations to assist in the treatment and management of patients with
mCRC in this rapidly evolving treatment setting.
Key words: colorectal cancer, ESMO, consensus, clinical practice guidelines
introduction
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second most commonly diag-
nosed cancer in Europe and a leading cause of death both in
Europe and worldwide [1, 2]. In 2012, there were 447 000 new
cases of CRC in Europe with 215 000 deaths and worldwide,
there were 1.4 million new cases with 694 000 deaths. Over the
last decade in particular, the clinical outcome for patients with
metastatic CRC (mCRC) has improved. Today, the median
overall survival (OS) for patients with mCRC being treated both
in phase III trials and in large observational series or registries is
∼30 months and more than double that of 20 years ago.
However, it is unclear which improvements and strategic
changes in the treatment and management of patients with
mCRC in recent years have been responsible for the improved
treatment outcomes for these patients. Factors which may have
contributed are:
(i) changes in the clinical presentation of patients, before the
commencement of treatment, due to closer follow-up after
resection of the primary tumour and earlier detection of
metastatic disease;
(ii) improvements in the efficacy of systemic therapies in terms
of regimens used, sequence of administration, number of
lines of therapy administered and biomarker-based patient
selection;
(iii) an increase in the number of patients being treated with a
view to facilitating resection of their metastases, offering an
increased number of patients the chance of cure and/or
durable relapse-free survival and, more recently, the utilisa-
tion of other ablative therapy techniques with the aim of
achieving the same outcome;
(iv) implementation of ‘continuum of care’ treatment strategies
coupled with the early integration of optimal supportive
care measures.
These ESMO Consensus Guidelines therefore aim to reflect the
diagnostic, therapeutic and strategic improvements which have
contributed to the current ‘state-of-the-art’ treatment approaches
and to provide guidance for the comprehensive management of
patients with mCRC going forward.
methodology
In 2014, the ESMO Guidelines Committee decided to update
the clinical recommendations for mCRC using a consensus con-
ference approach. An international panel of experts in the man-
agement of patients with CRC, from a range of diagnostic and
therapeutic disciplines, was convened in Zurich in December
2014 to update the existing ESMO Consensus Guidelines for the
management of patients with colon and rectal cancer [3]. A set
of pre-formulated topics was prepared and three working
groups convened in the areas of:
(i) molecular pathology and biomarkers;
(ii) local and ablative treatment (LAT) [including surgery and
the management of patients with oligometastatic disease
(OMD)];
(iii) the treatment of metastatic disease.
Each panel member was assigned to one of the above working
groups. Three consensus conference chairs (EVC, AC and DA)
were also appointed. Before the consensus conference, clinically
relevant questions were identified for each working group. Each
working group was responsible for reviewing relevant literature
in order to draft preliminary recommendations relating to each
of their assigned questions. No systematic literature search was
undertaken. The experts in each group were invited to submit their
recommendations in advance to structure the on-site discussions.
During the conference, in parallel sessions, the three working
groups discussed and reached agreement on recommendations
relating to each of their assigned questions. Recommendations
from each group were then presented to the entire panel of experts,
where they were discussed and modified as required until consen-
sus was reached.
An adapted version of the ‘Infectious Diseases Society of
America-United States Public Health Service Grading System’
was used (Table 1, [4]) to define the level of evidence and
strength of each recommendation proposed by the group, as for all
of the ESMO Consensus and ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines,
and are given in the text in square brackets. Statements made based
on expert opinion were also considered to be justified standard
clinical practice by the experts and the ESMO faculty. These
ESMO Consensus Guidelines follow on from those published in
2012 [3] and should be used to support the 2014 ESMO Clinical
Practice Guidelines [5].
molecular pathology and biomarkers
A clinical or biological suspicion that a patient may have
mCRC should always be confirmed by adequate radiological
imaging, and the histology of the primary tumour or metas-
tases, as appropriate, conducted before the commencement of
systemic therapy, as described previously [5]. Tissue samples
will typically range from large tumour samples to smaller
biopsy/endoscopy samples. Whenever possible, any diagnostic
biopsy or tissue sampling procedure should aim to maximise
the number of samples collected (ideally n = 10 biopsies). In
addition to samples taken for embedding, additional frozen
material should be collected to provide the opportunity for
future ‘new’ tests to be conducted on frozen tissue if required. It
is also essential that all tissue and biopsy samples are handled
appropriately in order to facilitate meaningful and accurate
molecular testing.
tissue handling
Standardisation of tissue processing for patients with mCRC
still remains a challenge. The time from tissue sampling to
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw235 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 fixation should be minimised to only a few minutes if possible,
to prevent any degradation of proteins and nucleic acids that
might occur during cold ischaemia [6, 7]. Fixation in 10%
neutral buffered formalin (4% formaldehyde solution), which is
widely available, is generally compatible with any procedure for
protein, RNA and/or DNA biomarker analysis. The fixation
time should be between 6 and 48 h [8]. Longer or shorter fixa-
tion times may adversely affect biomarker testing, while under-
fixation is also associated with poor tissue morphology [9].
Acidic fixatives (e.g. Bouin) are not recommended since they
lead to the rapid degradation of nucleic acids [10]. Similarly,
accelerated fixation with heated formalin is discouraged as it
degrades tissue morphology and affects the results of molecular
studies [11]. Biomarker analyses should be carried out within
4–6 weeks of the sections being cut, as ageing of formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded tissue sections causes the degradation of
both epitopes and DNA [12].
recommendation 1: tissue handling.
• Fixation with 10% neutral buffered formalin (4% formalde-
hyde) is recommended [V, A].
• Fixation time should be no less than 6 h, and no greater than
48 h in duration. In the case of microwave-enhanced fixation,
the quality of both nucleic acids and proteins must be verified
[IV, A].
• Sections for biomarker testing should ideally be cut immedi-
ately before analysis [IV, A].
selection of specimens for biomarker testing
The pathologist plays a central role in biomarker testing and can
either perform the biomarker tests at his/her laboratory if it has
been accredited for biomarker testing, or send the tissue block
to an accredited reference laboratory for external testing. In both
instances, the primary pathologist should review the available
material for each patient and choose the most appropriate block
to be used for testing. The pathologist should also ensure that
the tissue block selected for biomarker analysis contains a
sufficient quantity of neoplastic cells for the analysis [13]. This
is particularly crucial for DNA- or RNA-based biomarker
testing, such as RAS mutation analysis, because a low fraction of
neoplastic cells can lead to dilution of mutant alleles and false-
negative results [14, 15]. To evaluate the tumour content of the
sample, it is recommended that the pathologist assesses a haema-
toxylin and eosin-stained section of the paraffin block designated
for DNA extraction and mutation analysis before DNA extrac-
tion. The minimum fraction of tumour versus non-tumour cells
required will depend on the genotyping method. It has been
demonstrated that a tumour cell content of 30% or less might
lead to false-negative results when a technique with low sensitivity
such as Sanger sequencing is used for testing [16, 17]. A neoplas-
tic cell content of at least 50% is therefore recommended when
using a technique with low sensitivity. Sections of tissue with high
tumour content may be used directly. In samples with a low
tumour cell content, and where feasible, suitable areas identified
by the pathologist may be scraped (manual macro-dissection)
from the tissue slide(s) in order to enrich the tumour cell content.
Laser capture micro-dissection can also be used, but this technol-
ogy is not widely available, and requires the skills of a pathologist,
additional work and, therefore, high costs.
recommendation 2: selection of specimens for biomarker testing.
• The primary pathologist should review all available tumour
specimens to select those that are most suitable for biomarker
analyses [IV, A].
• Enrichment of samples by macro-dissection to maximise
tumour cell content (>50%) before DNA extraction is recom-
mended [III, A].
tissue selection for biomarker testing
Most patients undergo surgery of their primary tumour, although
in some cases, only an endoscopic biopsy of the primary is
carried out. Thus, archival samples of primary tumour tissue are
usually available for biomarker testing for the majority of patients
Table 1. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation (adapted from the Infectious Diseases Society of America—United States Public Health
Coding Systema [4])
Levels of evidence
I
Evidence from at least one large randomised, controlled trial of good methodological quality (low potential for bias) or meta-analyses of well-
conducted randomised trials without heterogeneity
II
Small randomised trials or large randomised trials with a suspicion of bias (low methodological quality) or meta-analyses of such trials or of trials
with demonstrated heterogeneity
III
Prospective cohort studies
IV
Retrospective cohort studies of case–control studies
V
Studies without control group, case reports, experts opinions
Grades of recommendation
A
Strong evidence for efficacy with a substantial clinical benefit, strongly recommended
B
Strong or moderate evidence for efficacy but with a limited clinical benefit, generally recommended
C
Insufficient evidence for efficacy or benefit does not outweigh the risk of the disadvantages (adverse events, costs, …) optional
D
Moderate evidence against efficacy or for adverse outcome, generally not recommended
E
Strong evidence against efficacy or for adverse outcome, never recommended
aBy permission of the Infectious Diseases Society of America.
 | Van Cutsem et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 with advanced or mCRC. However, for ∼20% of patients who
present with metastatic disease, archival material from their
primary tumour will not always be available. For these patients,
biomarker testing is usually carried out using specimens obtained
from primary tumour biopsies or the metastatic tumour, for
example, from resected liver metastases or positive lymph nodes.
For some patients, both the primary tumour and metastatic tissue
specimens may be available for mutation testing. Indeed, a
number of studies have addressed the concordance in KRAS
mutation status between primary colorectal tumours and their
metastases with conflicting results. While some studies have
failed to find any difference in KRAS mutation status between the
primary tumours and their metastases [18–22], others have
reported discordant results in 4%–32% of the patients [23–35].
However, many of these studies involved the analysis of small
numbers of samples, involving heterogeneous metastatic sites and
the use of techniques with low sensitivity that might have led to
false-negative results if adequate enrichment of the tumour cells
was not carried out. In a large study of 305 matched primary col-
orectal tumours and liver metastases, the discordance rate was
3.6% [36]. When these data are pooled with results from different
previous small studies, the overall rate of discordance is ∼5% for
liver metastases. In contrast, a discordance rate of 25% has been
described for lymph node metastases. Although these data are
limited to KRAS exon 2 mutations, they can be extrapolated to
situations where expanded RAS analysis has been conducted (see
below), for which no information is available. Based on this evi-
dence, tissue from either a patient’s primary tumour or a liver
metastasis may be used for RAS mutation testing. Lymph node
metastases do not seem to be suitable for the determination of
the RAS mutation status of colorectal tumours. In patients for
whom both primary tumour and metastases are available, testing
of a sample from either site is sufficient.
recommendation 3: tissue selection.
• Tissue from either the primary tumour or a liver metastasis
may be used for RAS mutation testing [III, A].
• Other metastatic sites such as lymph node or lung metastases
may be used only if primary tumour or liver metastases
samples are not available [II, B].
definition and validation of biomarkers
Biomarkers can be diagnostic, predictive or prognostic. Ideally,
a biomarker should only serve one of these purposes, but there
are good and clinically relevant examples of prognostic biomar-
kers that predict a response to a specific therapy, for example,
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) in breast
cancer and BRAF (strongly prognostic and, to a lesser extent,
predictive) in CRC [37–39]. It is also essential to follow strict
rules for the development and validation of biomarkers that are
specific to the purpose and sometimes also specific to the nature
of each biomarker. Establishing clinical utility in the appropriate
clinical setting is essential [40].
RAS testing
evidence that tumour RAS mutational status is predictive.
Retrospective analyses of pivotal clinical trials for the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) monoclonal antibodies, cetuximab
and panitumumab, have shown that patients with mCRC, whose
tumours contain activating mutations in KRAS exon 2 (codons
12/13), do not derive a benefit from EGFR monoclonal antibody
therapy [41–47]. Furthermore, recent evidence from the PRIME
study with panitumumab [48], from the CRYSTAL study with
cetuximab [49] and from other studies of EGFR monoclonal
antibody therapies has shown that mutations other than those in
KRAS exon 2 [i.e. exons 3 and 4 of KRAS and exons 2, 3 and 4 of
NRAS (expanded RAS analysis)] also predict a lack of response to
EGFR-targeting monoclonal antibodies and that these therapies
may in fact have a detrimental effect in patients with RAS-mutant
disease, specifically when combined with an oxaliplatin-based
cytotoxic backbone [48–54].
In the PRIME study, in which patients were randomised to
receive panitumumab plus FOLFOX4 [infusional 5-fluorouracil
(5-FU), leucovorin, oxaliplatin] versus FOLFOX4 alone first-
line, additional RAS mutations were detected in the tumours of
17% of patients with mCRC originally classified as KRAS exon 2
wild-type. These patients also failed to benefit from panitumu-
mab therapy, and had inferior progression-free survival (PFS)
and OS times compared with those treated with FOLFOX4
alone (not statistically significant). In fact, this study was the
first to hint at a detrimental effect of panitumumab in patients
whose tumours carried RAS mutations at sites other than KRAS
exon 2 [48].
Conversely, those patients whose tumours did not have RAS
mutations at the tested sites had significantly better outcomes
from the addition of panitumumab to FOLFOX4 than those
patients whose tumours contained RAS mutations. The phase II
PEAK study that evaluated FOLFOX6 plus panitumumab
versus FOLFOX6 plus bevacizumab in untreated patients with
KRAS exon 2 wild-type mCRC supported these findings.
Patients with KRAS and NRAS exon 2, 3 and 4 wild-type mCRC
treated with FOLFOX6 plus panitumumab achieved a better
PFS than those treated with FOLFOX6 plus bevacizumab and a
trend towards improved OS was also observed [53]. Using next-
generation sequencing (NGS) techniques, investigators analysed
tumour samples previously assessed for KRAS exon 2 codon 12
and 13 mutations from patients enrolled in the phase III
20020408 trial of panitumumab in patients with chemorefrac-
tory mCRC [52] for additional RAS-activating mutations.
Patients with RAS wild-type tumours achieved a response rate
(RR) with panitumumab of 15% compared with 1% for those
patients with RAS-mutant tumours.
These findings with panitumumab have been upheld by
trials evaluating cetuximab. Using sensitive BEAMing (Beads,
Emulsions, Amplification, and Magnetics) technology, KRAS
exon 2 wild-type tumours from the pivotal CRYSTAL and
OPUS studies were retrospectively evaluated for mutations in
KRAS exons 3 and 4 and NRAS exons 2, 3 and 4 [49, 50]. In the
phase III CRYSTAL study, which randomised patients to receive
first-line FOLFIRI (infusional 5-FU, leucovorin, irinotecan)
with or without cetuximab, other RAS mutations were detected
in nearly 15% of evaluable patients previously assessed to be
KRAS exon 2 wild-type. Similarly, in the phase II OPUS study,
which randomised patients to receive first-line FOLFOX4 with
or without cetuximab, mutations at other RAS loci were detected
in 31% of evaluable tumours previously assessed to be KRAS
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw235 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 exon 2 wild-type. In patients with RAS wild-type tumours
(according to the expanded RAS analysis), the addition of cetuxi-
mab to FOLFIRI or FOLFOX4 was associated with improved
treatment outcomes across all efficacy end points. Conversely, in
patients with RAS-mutant tumours, no benefit from the addition
of cetuximab to FOLFIRI versus FOLFIRI alone was observed
[49]. In the OPUS study, the addition of cetuximab to FOLFOX4
was associated with a non-significant improvement in PFS and
OS in patients with RAS wild-type tumours; it seemed to be detri-
mental in patients whose tumours carried RAS mutations.
Data from the phase III FIRE-3 trial also underscore the
importance of expanded RAS mutational analysis in the selection
of patients for treatment with cetuximab. Previously untreated
patients, with KRAS exon 2 wild-type mCRC, were randomised
to receive FOLFIRI with either cetuximab or bevacizumab.
Additional RAS mutations were identified in the tumours of 16%
of assessable patients, with an improvement in OS (median 33.1
versus 28.7 months) observed for patients with RAS wild-type
tumours treated with cetuximab compared with those with KRAS
exon 2 wild-type tumours treated with cetuximab [55].
Confirmation of these observations was provided by a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis of randomised, controlled
trials evaluating EGFR antibody therapy [56]. The analysis
showed that across nine trials involving 5948 patients, patients
with tumours without any RAS mutations were found to have a
significantly better treatment outcome with EGFR monoclonal
antibody therapy than those whose tumours harboured RAS
mutations [56].
In summary, the cumulative data clearly show that patients
whose tumours harbour any RAS mutation are unlikely to
benefit from EGFR antibody therapy, confirming the presence
of a RAS mutation (according to expanded RAS analysis) as a
negative predictive marker of treatment outcome in patients with
mCRC who might be under consideration for EGFR monoclo-
nal antibody therapy. Thus, cetuximab and panitumumab
should only be considered for the treatment of patients with
RAS wild-type mCRC. Expanded RAS analyses should be con-
ducted on all patients eligible/being considered for EGFR anti-
body therapy.
timing of testing. Wong et al. [57] discuss whether RAS testing
of CRC is better practised as a ‘reflex’ or an ‘on-demand’
process. However, the general consensus of the expert panel was
that patients should be assessed for their tumour RAS mutation
status at the time of diagnosis of their metastatic disease, to
facilitate strategic treatment decisions within a multidisciplinary
team (MDT) environment, local reimbursement regulations
permitting. However, it should also be noted that an external
quality assessment has uncovered differences in the quality of
RAS testing for EGFR antibody therapy [58] and that, to date,
the exact cut-off for clinically relevant RAS-mutant allele
frequencies has not been determined.
Investigation of cost estimates and the economic implications
of expanded RAS testing in patients with mCRC showed the
increased societal cost of expanded RAS testing versus KRAS
exon 2 testing to be inconsequential when compared with the
amount of money saved by not treating the additional up to
18% of patients who harbour additional RAS mutations (beyond
those in KRAS exon 2) with EGFR antibody therapies [59].
recommendation 4: RAS testing.
• RAS mutational status is a negative predictive biomarker for
therapeutic choices involving EGFR antibody therapies in the
metastatic disease setting [I, A].
° RAS testing should be carried out on all patients at the time
of diagnosis of mCRC [I, A].
• RAS testing is mandatory before treatment with the EGFR-
targeted monoclonal antibodies cetuximab and panitumumab
[I, A].
• A network of arrangements should be established to ensure
the rapid and robust transit of tissue samples from referral
centres to testing laboratories, to minimise the turnaround
time and avoid delays in having this information available for
all patients with mCRC.
• Primary or metastatic colorectal tumour tissue can be used for
RAS testing (see also Recommendation 3).
• RAS analysis should include at least KRAS exons 2, 3 and 4
(codons 12, 13, 59, 61, 117 and 146) and NRAS exons 2, 3 and
4 (codons 12, 13, 59, 61 and 117).
• Turnaround time for RAS testing (expanded RAS analysis)
should be ≤7 working days from the time of receipt of the
specimen by the testing laboratory to the time of issuing of
the final report, for >90% of specimens.
• Validation (or verification, where more applicable) of RAS
testing assays should be carried out and recorded before
implementation in clinical use. Laboratory audit mechanisms
should be in place.
• Laboratories providing RAS testing of colorectal tumours
should demonstrate their successful participation in a relevant
external quality assessment scheme, and be appropriately
accredited.
BRAF testing
BRAF mutations (nearly always V600E) are found in the tumours
of between 8% and 12% of patients with mCRC included in clini-
cal trials and are almost exclusively non-overlapping with RAS
mutations [38, 60, 61]. A retrospective analysis of patients with
mCRC demonstrated that two-thirds of BRAF-mutant patients’
primary lesions were located on the right side of the colon and
associated with an increased incidence of peritoneal and distant
lymph node metastases, but fewer pulmonary metastases [60].
Just under one-third of BRAF-mutant tumours also had microsa-
tellite instability (MSI), and the same proportion of tumours with
MSI contained BRAF mutations.
BRAF mutations are a significant negative prognostic marker
for patients with mCRC. Tran et al. [60] reported a median sur-
vival for patients with BRAF-mutant mCRC of 10.4 months
compared with 34.7 months for patients with BRAF wild-type
tumours. In a multivariate analysis, the hazard ratio (HR) for
survival was 10.662 (P < 0.001) [60]. This particularly poor
prognosis for patients with BRAF-mutant tumours is supported
by a number of randomised studies with specific chemotherapy
regimens [38, 44, 48, 61–63]. Although the evidence of BRAF
mutations as a negative predictive biomarker for EGFR antibody
therapy in later lines is accumulating [64, 65], its role in
earlier lines in combination studies with chemotherapy has
not been ascertained [44]. Indeed, two meta-analyses [66, 67]
 | Van Cutsem et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 showed the efficacy benefit of EGFR antibody therapies to be
greater in patients with RAS wild-type/BRAF wild-type tumours
than in those with RAS wild-type/BRAF-mutant tumours. In
the meta-analysis that included two second-line trials and two
trials involving chemorefractory patients [66], the lack of the
conferral of a significant efficacy benefit by EGFR-antibody
therapies over standard chemotherapy alone in patients with
BRAF-mutant tumours was considered to support the assessment
of tumour BRAF mutation status before the initiation of EGFR-
antibody therapy. Conversely, authors of the second meta-analysis
[67] concluded that there was insufficient evidence to exclude
EGFR antibody therapy from patients with RAS wild-type/BRAF-
mutant disease. However, in a small subgroup analysis (n = 28) of
the TRIBE study, the cohort of patients with BRAF-mutant
tumours treated with the chemotherapy triplet FOLFOXIRI plus
bevacizumab showed a non-statistically significant increase in OS
compared with those treated with FOLFIRI plus bevacizumab
[68].
Also, BRAF V600E-mutated melanomas are sensitive to the
BRAF-mutant inhibitor vemurafenib [69], but BRAF-mutated
CRCs are not as sensitive [70, 71]. Feedback reactivation of
EGFR in CRC could explain why CRCs generally have a lower
response to BRAF inhibitors [37, 71]. Clinical trials are ongoing
to test targeted therapies in patients with metastatic BRAF
(V600E) mutant CRC, using combinations of BRAF-mutant
inhibitors (dabrafenib, vemurafenib or encorafenib) in combina-
tion with MEK and EGFR inhibition, and in some cases conven-
tional cytotoxic therapy. Early results are promising [72, 73].
Furthermore, somatic BRAF V600E mutations have been
associated with sporadic cases of DNA mismatch repair defi-
ciency (dMMR) showing an MSI phenotype [74]. However,
BRAF V600E mutation is not associated with the MSI pheno-
type due to a germline MMR mutation (Lynch syndrome) [75,
76]. BRAF V600E mutation testing has therefore been proposed
as a means to exclude Lynch syndrome. Recently, however,
patients with BRAF-mutant tumours with mutations in codons
594 and 596 were shown to exhibit microsatellite stability (MSS)
and markedly longer OS when compared with patients with
BRAF V600E-mutant disease [77].
Tumour BRAF mutation status should be determined for
every case of CRC, ideally at the time of diagnosis, as this repre-
sents a different biological subtype, and in combination with
testing for dMMR, can assist in the identification of a germline
versus somatic cause of dMMR. In patients with mCRC, BRAF
mutation status should be assessed at the same time as RAS
mutational status for prognostic assessment (and/or potential
selection for clinical trials).
recommendation 5: BRAF testing.
• Tumour BRAF mutation status should be assessed alongside the
assessment of tumour RAS mutational status for prognostic
assessment (and/or potential selection for clinical trials) [I, B].
MSI testing
Tumours with MSI retain their chromosomal numbers intact
but contain microsatellite repeats, which vary in length due to
dMMR, and are thought to contribute to the early steps of
tumourigenesis in patients with CRC. Tumours with MSI repre-
sent only 4%–8% of tumours in patients with mCRC. Data are
currently scarce on the prognostic and predictive values of an
MSI phenotype in the metastatic disease setting [78–80]. A recent
retrospective analysis demonstrated that the median age was a bit
younger (67 years), poor differentiation was more frequent
(58%), and that 45% of patients whose tumours had an MSI phe-
notype had stage IV disease at presentation. BRAF V600E muta-
tions were present in 30% of patients with MSI [79]. In mCRC,
some data have suggested that MSI tumours tend to have lower
disease control rates when treated with oxaliplatin-based first-line
therapy [81], although most studies show MSI status to be not
relevant as a single predictive marker for response to irinotecan-
or oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy regimens and not predictive
for the effect of chemotherapy more generally in these patients
[78, 82, 83].
In a pooled analysis of four phase III studies in the first-line
treatment of mCRC (CAIRO, CAIRO2, COIN and FOCUS),
BRAF mutations have been shown to be more frequent in
patients whose tumours exhibit MSI than in those whose
tumours exhibit MSS [62]. The same pooled analysis showed
PFS and OS to be significantly worse for patients with tumours
with MSI when compared with those with tumours showing
MSS [HR, 1.33; 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.12–1.57 and HR,
1.35; 95% CI 1.13–1.61, respectively], and for patients with
BRAF-mutant tumours when compared with those with BRAF
wild-type tumours (HR, 1.34; 95% CI 1.17–1.54 and HR, 1.91;
95% CI 1.66–2.19, respectively) [62]. Emerging data have shown
MMR status to predict the clinical benefit of immune check-
point blockade with pembrolizumab in patients with mCRC.
The
immune-related
objective
RR
and
immune-related
6-month PFS rate were 40% (4 out of 10 patients) and 78%
(7 out of 9 patients), respectively, for patients with dMMR CRC
and 0% and 11% for those with MMR-proficient CRC, with
excellent median PFS and survival (not reached) in the cohort
with dMMR CRCs versus 2.2 and 5.0 months, respectively, in
the cohort with MMR-proficient tumours [84].
Thus, the prevalence of MSI and BRAF mutations in the
tumours of patients with mCRC is low. Both biomarkers confer
an inferior prognosis, which in the case of patients with
tumours with MSI may be driven by the presence of BRAF
mutations. These conclusions are supported by the data from
other studies which show the presence of a BRAF V600E muta-
tion to be as poor a prognostic factor in patients with tumours
with MSI as it is in other patients with mCRC [60].
recommendation 6: MSI testing.
• MSI testing in the metastatic disease setting can assist clini-
cians in genetic counselling [II, B].
• MSI testing has strong predictive value for the use of immune
check-point inhibitors in the treatment of patients with
mCRC [II, B].
biomarkers of chemotherapy sensitivity or toxicity
dihydropyrimidine
dehydrogenase. Dihydropyrimidine
dehydrogenase (DPD) is a key enzyme in the metabolic
catabolism of 5-FU and capecitabine. About 85% of 5-FU is
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw235 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 eliminated
through
a
catabolic
process
involving
DPD.
Numerous genetic mutations have been identified in the DPD
gene locus (DPYD), with a few key variants having functional
consequences for enzymatic activity. Deficiencies in DPD
activity have been shown to cause 5-FU-treated cancer patients
to experience severe drug-related toxicities [85], and DPD
activity is a predictive biomarker of potential toxicity when
using 5-FU and capecitabine [86]. Polymorphism has been
documented mainly on the DPYD*2A gene at a frequency of
2%–3% with geographical variation.
Several methods are available to detect DPD deficiency such
as the functional dihydrouracil/uracil ratio in plasma, the uracil
breath test or DPYD*2 mutations. Patients with known partial
DPD deficiency benefit from dose adaptation of their 5-FU/
capecitabine therapy to avoid severe toxicity. In patients with
complete DPD deficiency, fluoropyrimidines should not be used
and an alternative treatment offered.
DPD deficiency is generally not assessed in routine practice
before 5-FU administration. There is no recommended standar-
dised assessment technique, although several methods are avail-
able (see above). None of the current strategies are adequate to
mandate routine DPD testing before starting fluoropyrimidine-
based therapy [II, C].
Testing for DPD deficiency, however, remains an option. In
the case of patients who experience severe 5-FU toxicity, DPD
levels should be tested before 5-FU is re-introduced.
UDP glucuronosyltransferase 1 family, polypeptide A1. UDP
glucuronosyltransferase 1 family, polypeptide A1 (UGT1A1) is
an enzyme of the glucuronidation pathway that transforms small
lipophilic molecules, such as steroids, bilirubin, hormones and
drugs, into water-soluble, excretable metabolites. The gene is part of
a complex locus that encodes several UDP-glucuronosyltransferases.
Polymorphism may be associated with increased toxicity to
irinotecan. UGT1A1 is responsible for bilirubin glucuronidation as
well as glucuronidation of SN-38, the active metabolite of irinotecan.
Genetic variations within the UGT1A1 gene have also been
associated with the development of certain drug toxicities. The
UGT1A1*28 variant, the allele behind many cases of Gilbert
syndrome, has been associated with an increased risk for neutro-
paenia in patients receiving irinotecan [87, 88], and the United
States Food and Drug Administration recommends on the irino-
tecan drug label that patients with the *28/*28 genotype should
receive a lower starting dose of irinotecan [89]. The *28 allele
has also been shown to be associated with an increased risk of
developing diarrhoea in patients receiving irinotecan [87, 88].
The UGT1A1*6 variant, more common in Asian populations
than the *28 variant, has also been associated with the develop-
ment of irinotecan-related toxicities. Patients who are heterozy-
gous or homozygous for the *6 allele may have a higher risk of
developing neutropaenia and diarrhoea than those with the
UGT1A1*1/*1 genotype.
Thus, UGT1A1 gene polymorphisms are predictive of irinote-
can-related side-effects, including diarrhoea, neutropaenia and
vomiting. However, in everyday practice, UGT1A1/UGT1A1
status is rarely used as a predictive biomarker of irinotecan toxi-
city. Attention should be paid to bilirubin levels, especially in
patients where conjugated bilirubin is <20% of total bilirubin.
excision repair cross-complementation group 1. The function of
the excision repair cross-complementation group 1 (ERCC1)
protein is predominantly in the nucleotide excision repair of
damaged DNA. Nucleotide excision repair is the primary DNA
repair mechanism involved in the removal of therapeutic
platinum-DNA adducts from tumour DNA. A variety of
methods can be used to measure the level of ERCC1 activity,
namely immunohistochemistry (IHC) for protein expression,
reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction (RT–PCR) for
mRNA expression and DNA single-nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) for genotyping. High ERCC1 levels have been shown to
be a negative predictive marker for platinum-based therapy in
patients with lung cancer [90, 91]. In CRC, depending on the
techniques used, high ERRC1 expression levels have been
shown to be associated with poor prognosis and to be predictive
of a poor outcome in patients receiving oxaliplatin-based
therapy (RT–PCR mRNA evaluation). A meta-analysis showed
ERCC1-C118T polymorphisms to predict clinical outcome in
patients with CRC receiving oxaliplatin-based therapy [92].
More specifically, PFS and OS were significantly shorter in
patients with T/T or T/C genotypes of ERCC1-C118T when
compared with those with the C/C genotype. Thus, high ERCC1
gene expression seems to confer oxaliplatin resistance, while
ERCC1-C118T polymorphisms are predictive of treatment
outcome in patients receiving oxaliplatin-based therapy [92].
Recently it has been proposed that ERRC1 induction after
exposure to oxaliplatin may be dependent on KRAS mutational
status [93].
At the present time, the use of ERCC1 protein levels cannot
be recommended for treatment decisions involving the use of
oxaliplatin in routine practice. Clinical trials have not been able
to demonstrate a predictive role for ERCC1 status for treatment
with oxaliplatin.
thymidylate synthase. Thymidylate synthase (TS) is the primary
target for 5-FU. 5-FU is an inhibitor of TS. Experimentally, it has
been shown that low levels of TS expression lead to a better
response to 5-FU and improved survival of colon cancer patients
[94]. The TS gene (TYMS) is under the control of a promoter
acting as an enhancer (TSER). Earlier studies have shown that
higher numbers of TSER repeats (TSER2*, TSER3* or higher)
lead to higher TS expression and activity. TS activity and CRC
sensitivity to 5-FU seem to correlate with TSER polymorphisms.
These correlations, however, need to be confirmed in a larger
randomised study.
recommendation 7: biomarkers of chemotherapy sensitivity and
toxicity:
• DPD testing before 5-FU administration remains an option
but is not routinely recommended [II, D].
• UGT1A1 phenotyping remains an option and should be
carried out in patients with a suspicion of UGT1A1 deficiency
as reflected by low conjugated bilirubin and in patients where
an irinotecan dose of >180 mg/m2 per administration is
planned [95] [III, C].
• ERCC1 expression cannot be recommended for use as a bio-
marker for treatment decisions involving the use of oxaliplatin
 | Van Cutsem et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 in routine clinical practice, but could be included prospec-
tively in clinical trials [III, D].
• TS activity and TSER genotyping are not recommended for
use in clinical practice [II, D].
emerging biomarkers
A list of biomarkers beyond RAS mutational status is emer-
ging which may impact on the response to all classes of
targeted agents, and specifically the current perspective of
EGFR-antibody therapies. These include HER2, MET and
KRAS gene amplification, ligands such as transforming
growth factor-α (TGF-α), amphiregulin and epiregulin,
EGFR mutations and alterations/mutations in HER3, PI3KCA
and PTEN.
Mutations in KRAS, NRAS and BRAF and amplification of
HER2 and MET drive primary (de novo) resistance to anti-EGFR
treatment. Recently, the emergence of alterations in these genes
was detected in patients who responded to EGFR blockade and
then relapsed. Molecular heterogeneity impairs the efficacy of
EGFR-antibody therapy in patients with mCRC by fuelling
de novo and acquired resistance [96]. With the exception of EGFR
mutations, which are described only in the acquired setting, all of
the genetic alterations defined as a mechanism of de novo resis-
tance are also responsible for acquired resistance. Differences can
be found in the frequency of individual genetic alterations, such as
KRAS and NRAS exon 3 mutations, which occur more frequently
in the acquired rather than in the de novo setting. Acquired resis-
tance to EGFR-antibody therapy is driven by the selection of cell
clones that carry RAS or RAF mutations but account for only
0.4%–17% of tumour cells. Mutations in KRAS exons 3 and 4 and
NRAS exons 2, 3, and 4 as well as amplification of KRAS, HER2
and MET [96–99] account for around 20% of mCRC patients who
do not benefit from anti-EGFR treatment, although initially
selected for anti-EGFR treatment based on KRAS exon 2 wild-
type status [48, 52–54, 97, 100–104]. The prognostic role of
PIK3CA mutations is uncertain [105], but a PIK3CA exon 20
mutation may predict resistance to EGFR-antibody therapy [106–
110], although the correlation is not strong enough to be applied
as a negative predictive marker [111]. PIK3CA and PTEN altera-
tions often co-occur with KRAS or BRAF mutations [107, 112],
but there is insufficient evidence for their use as biomarkers of
resistance to EGFR-antibody therapy. There is no clear evidence
for HER3 overexpression and HER3 mutations, mesenchymal–
epidermal transition (MET)/MET alterations (overexpression or
gene amplification) or KRAS amplification, EGFR mutations [tyr-
osine kinase (TK) or ligand-binding domains] or amplification in
the resistance to EGFR antibody therapies. Emerging data indicate
that HER2 activating mutations or HER2 amplification may
mediate in some instances resistance to EGFR antibodies [100,
113]. A phase II clinical trial also showed that HER2 amplification
is predictive of response to HER2 dual inhibition with trastuzu-
mab and lapatinib in a cohort of CRC patients failing EGFR anti-
body therapy [114].
Thus, although CRC is primarily considered to be a genetic
disease, characterised by the sequential accumulation of genetic
alterations, there is growing evidence that epigenetic alterations
add an additional layer of complexity to its pathogenesis and
characterise a subgroup of CRCs with a distinct aetiology and
prognosis. A systematic review and meta-analysis of the prog-
nostic value of the CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) in
patients with CRC showed the CIMP to be independently asso-
ciated with a significantly worse prognosis [115]. However, epi-
genetic DNA hypermethylation inactivation of the SRBC gene,
the product of which interacts with the product of the BRCA1
gene, predicted a shorter PFS, particularly in oxaliplatin-treated
patients with mCRC for whom metastasectomy was not indi-
cated (HR, 1.96; 95% CI 1.13–3.40; log-rank P = 0.01). SRBC
hypermethylation was also associated with a shorter PFS (HR,
1.90; log-rank P = 0.045), in a validation cohort of unresectable
colorectal tumours treated with oxaliplatin [116].
recommendation 8: emerging biomarkers not recommended for
routine patient management outside of a clinical trial setting:
• Detection of mutations in PIK3CA, exon 20 [II, D].
• Evaluation of PTEN loss by IHC [V, D].
• Evaluation of the levels of the EGFR ligands amphiregulin,
epiregulin and TGF-α [II, D].
• Evaluation of levels of EGFR protein expression [II, E].
• Evaluation of EGFR amplification and copy number and
EGFR ectodomain mutations [IV, D].
• Evaluation of HER2 amplification or HER2 activating mutations.
• Evaluation of HER3, and MET receptor overexpression [IV, D].
emerging technologies
A number of novel tools for the assessment of diagnostic, prog-
nostic and/or predictive biomarkers in patients with mCRC have
been proposed, with an increasing interest in liquid biopsies
involving the analysis of either circulating tumour cells (CTCs) or
circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA). Although the levels of CTCs
as assessed (mostly using the CellSearch system) have been shown
to correlate with prognosis in patients with mCRC [117], the clin-
ical utility of CTC assessments in patients with mCRC has hardly
been explored.
Conversely, analysis of ctDNA is emerging as a new tool for
molecular profiling that has more possibilities for translation into
the clinic than CTCs. The seminal work of Bardelli and colleagues
has shown very promising results from ctDNA liquid biopsies
[118, 119]. In addition to the seminal papers from Bardelli and
colleagues and Montagut et al. [120], a number of tumour–blood
concordance studies are currently being conducted that will
undoubtedly validate the clinical utility of these technologies for
identifying tumour mutations in the blood of patients. Currently,
its use as a monitoring tool for secondary resistance to EGFR
antibody therapies is under investigation. It can be anticipated
that liquid biopsies will be used therapeutically in the near future
as more and better drugs are developed against mutant clones (or
those with other molecular alterations, e.g. amplifications, etc.)
that emerge upon exposure to EGFR-targeted therapies [40, 118,
120–135].
Similarly,
increasing
evidence
suggests
that
micro-RNA
(miRNA) is involved in the pathogenesis and progression of mCRC
[136]. However, the prognostic and predictive role of miRNA needs
to be demonstrated in a randomised clinical trial setting. Finally,
NGS can provide important information on tumour heterogeneity
and clonal evolution. NGS has already been published as a reliable
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw235 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 technology for use in patients with mCRC and has the potential to
screen for larger cancer gene panels in clinical trials [137].
recommendation 9: emerging technologies.
• Although CTC number correlates with prognosis in patients
with mCRC, the clinical utility of CTC assessments is not yet
clear and therefore cannot be recommended [IV, D].
• The utility of liquid ctDNA biopsies to guide treatment deci-
sions is currently under investigation in clinical trials, but
cannot yet be recommended in routine practice [V, D].
• Whole genome, whole exome and whole transcriptome analy-
sis should be carried out only in a research setting [V, D].
view on how molecular classification should be
developed going forward
CRC is a heterogeneous disease with heterogeneous outcomes
and drug responses. To date, pathological staging and gene
expression signatures have failed to accurately predict disease
recurrence and prognosis. In an attempt to identify biologically
homogeneous subtypes of CRC, many independent groups have
reported the results of gene expression-based subtyping, with
Marisa et al. [138], the first to present a robust transcriptome-
based classification of colon cancer. Subsequently, an inter-
national consortium dedicated to large-scale data sharing and
analytics has recently provided a robust and unified classifica-
tion, defining four different subtypes: CMS1 (MSI Immune),
hypermutated, microsatellite unstable, with strong immune activa-
tion; CMS2 (Canonical), epithelial, chromosomally unstable, with
marked WNT and MYC signalling activation; CMS3 (Metabolic),
epithelial, with evident metabolic dysregulation; and CMS4
(Mesenchymal), prominent TGF-β activation, stromal inva-
sion and angiogenesis [139]. This effort provides the most
robust and reproducible classification system currently avail-
able for CRC and may form the basis for future clinical trials.
local ablative treatment (LAT), including
surgery, and management of patients
with OMD
the role of MDTs and tumour boards
The optimal treatment strategies for patients with mCRC are evol-
ving rapidly with improved clinical outcomes being achieved
when the treatment approaches for individual patients are dis-
cussed within an MDT of experts who meet regularly as a tumour
board to review mCRC cases [140, 141]. An ideal MDT should
include access to both a colorectal surgeon (preferably with exper-
tise in peritoneal approaches) and a specialist hepatobiliary and/
or, lung surgeon as necessary, with the obligatory inclusion of a
pathologist and a diagnostic radiologist, as well as radiation and
medical oncologists. An interventional radiologist/nuclear physi-
cian may also be included as appropriate, as the role of ablative
treatments gains increasing importance (see below). Ideally,
patients should be treated either in specialist cancer centres or,
alternatively, where this is not possible, as part of a network of
individuals dedicated to the management of CRC with an estab-
lished referral route between their site or centre and a specialist
cancer centre (virtual MDTs). Wherever possible, MDTs should
provide the opportunity to register patients for the local and/or
national registries with extreme/unusual patients’ details just
noted, to provide information on the diversity of patients seen.
Several (observational) studies have shown improved clinical out-
comes, including improved OS, when patients with CRC are
managed by MDTs [141, 142].
The role of the MDT is to define the initial diagnostic workup
and then the treatment focus, based on the best diagnostic and
therapeutic decision-making available [3]. Furthermore, an
MDT-managed treatment strategy has to be maintained for the
duration of a patient’s treatment, to allow the refinement of
treatment strategies according to on-treatment information (e.g.
response to a selected treatment) and evaluation of the potential
need for the integration of ablative treatments (such as second-
ary surgery and LAT strategies, see below).
The first step in the process is for the MDT members to criti-
cally define whether or not a patient has initially clearly resect-
able or initially unresectable metastatic disease and to define the
status of the resection of the primary tumour when considering
the management of both synchronous and/or oligometastatic
CRC, and the first-line treatment of patients with metastatic
disease. Conversely, for patients whose disease is deemed ‘never
to be resectable’, the discussion may be left to the treating
medical oncologist (after discussion with the MDT) and patient
as to the pros and cons of various approaches and sequences
based on the perceived aims [e.g. duration of disease control
versus quality of life (QoL), and toxicity profiles, etc.].
oligometastatic disease
OMD is characterised by the localisation of the disease to a few
sites and lesions and is associated with the option to use LAT
approaches in patient treatment strategies with a view to improving
disease control and therefore clinical outcome in these patients.
Generally, OMD may be characterised by the existence of
metastases at up to 2 or occasionally 3 sites and 5 or sometimes
more lesions, predominantly visceral and occasionally lymphono-
dal. Typically, these are the primary, and other involved sites such
as the liver, lung, peritoneum, nodes and ovary. Patients with
disease at other sites, such as multiple lesions in the bones and the
brain, may also be treated using a local ablative approach, but as
these patients are associated with an unfavourable prognosis, local
ablative treatment strategies are only used to prevent immediate
complications. This latter group of patients should be excluded
from a classification of OMD. On the other hand, a patient with
one or two resectable liver metastases, and a single bone lesion,
should be classified as having OMD, because for a patient with
this disease profile, locally ablative treatment strategies could be
used and meaningfully contribute to their prognosis.
Thus, treatment strategies for patients with OMD should be
based on the possibility of achieving complete ablation of all
tumour masses, using surgical R0 resection (complete resection
with clear resection margins and no evidence of microscopic
residual tumour) and/or LAT, either initially or possibly after
induction treatment with systemic therapy, for both the primary
tumour and metastases.
For patients with OMD confined to a single organ (most fre-
quently the liver), or a few organs (pre-dominantly visceral metas-
tases, e.g. lung), a potentially curative approach exists. Numerous
 | Van Cutsem et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 case series have shown that in this setting, long-term survival or
even cure can be attained in 20%–50% of patients who undergo
complete R0 resection of their metastases [143]. Even in the
absence of randomised trials comparing surgical with non-surgical
disease management, surgery has become the standard treatment
approach for patients with resectable OMD.
For patients with more extensive OMD involving more sites
or lesions, e.g. primary, liver, lung, peritoneum, nodes, bones,
brain, ovary and >4 organs, the value of a surgical approach is
controversial. In these patients, surgery may contribute to long-
term survival but is rarely curative [143]. For this group of
patients, the consideration of localised interventions (LAT)
becomes relevant, in combination with systemic therapy (as part
of a multimodal therapy approach), following a careful MDT
discussion and assessment. The goal for this group of patients is
to achieve long-term disease control, potentially contributing to
OS (and, although unlikely, potentially cure), with well-
controlled sites of metastases, but without continued systemic
therapy. Liver-directed therapy is probably the best established
of the LAT interventions; however, the increasing use of the
appropriate ablative treatment strategy from a ‘toolbox’ of
options, including, for example, stereotactic ablative body radio-
therapy (SBRT) and radiofrequency ablation (RFA) for visceral or
nodal involvement, peritonectomy with or without hyperthermic
intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) for peritoneal disease,
and nodal dissection, sees the management of this subgroup of
patients becoming increasingly complex (Figure 1). Furthermore,
the potential still exists for isolated bone, pancreatic and brain
metastases, but these are rare and likely to not have a defined
treatment pathway.
Subcharacterisation of OMD according to site also impacts on
the treatment options and the timing of treatment. Patients with
liver and lung metastases have a much better prognosis than those
with other metastatic disease locations. In fact, because lung
involvement is associated with better outcomes, it may be appro-
priate to ‘watch and wait’ or at least employ a sequential approach
[144, 145]. The data showing different outcomes depending on the
site(s) of OMD are likely to reflect molecular differences. For
example, patients whose mCRC is associated with RAS and BRAF
mutations have worse clinical outcomes, with RAS mutations
shown to be associated with an increased incidence of lung, bone
and brain metastases [146]. Moreover there are data to suggest that
tumour TS expression levels and RAS mutation status are altered
by site of metastasis compared with the primary [23–36, 147].
recommendation 10: OMD.
• For patients with OMD, systemic therapy is the standard of
care and should be considered as the initial part of every treat-
ment strategy (exception: patients with single/few liver or lung
lesions, see below).
• The best local treatment should be selected from a ‘toolbox’ of
procedures according to disease localisation, treatment goal
(‘the more curative the more surgery’/higher importance of
local/complete control), treatment-related morbidity and patient-
related factors such as comorbidity/ies and age [IV, B].
liver metastases and surgical resection
For patients with colorectal liver metastases (CLM), the treat-
ment strategy should be directed towards complete resection
whenever possible, with both ‘oncological’ (prognostic) and
‘technical’ (surgical) criteria being considered when evaluating
patients for surgery [148]. However, prospective evaluations do
not exist either for ‘oncological’ or for ‘technical’ criteria, and
for many of these, there is no (international) consensus.
The ‘technical’ definitions of resectable CLM have evolved
over time, with the current consensus proposing that disease
Toolbox of ablative treatments
Local treatments
Thermal devices
Radiofrequency
ablation or
cryoablation
Microwave ablation
External Body
Radiotherapy with
high-precision RT
Chemoembolisation
TACE/Beads
Brachytherapy
electroporation
Radioembolisation
SIRT
Non-thermal devices
Embolic devices
Local
chemotherapy
Locoregional treatments
Figure 1. Toolbox of ablative treatments. SIRT, selective internal radiation therapy; RT, radiation therapy; TACE, transarterial chemoembolisation.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw235 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 should be considered technically resectable as long as complete
macroscopic resection is feasible, while maintaining at least a
30% future liver remnant (FLR) or a remnant liver to body
weight ratio >0.5 (e.g. >350 g of liver per 70 kg patient) [149–
151]. However, the concern remains that not all patients with
technically resectable liver-limited metastases benefit from
surgery, with approximately half developing widespread sys-
temic disease within 3 years of resection [152].
The ‘oncological’ criteria provide prognostic information that
predict a longer disease-free survival (DFS) or a higher likeli-
hood of cure. These include, as strong parameters, the number
of lesions, the presence (or suspicion) of extrahepatic disease
and the criteria used in numerous retrospective evaluations and
in the FONG score [153]. Thus, for some patients, neoadjuvant
chemotherapy may be a better option than upfront surgery.
In practice, patients can be categorised into groups based on
technological and oncological criteria as outlined in Figure 2
and according to the new system for deciding whether or not a
patient is eligible for resection proposed by Adam et al. [148],
and described in Table 2.
imaging in the identification of resectable/
unresectable disease
Computed tomography (CT) scans are routinely used for
primary staging and disease surveillance in patients with CRC.
Although practice varies between treatment centres, the evi-
dence suggests that the best methods for detection of liver
metastases from CRC are CT and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) [154]. However, many teams alternate liver ultrasonogra-
phy (US) and CT for detection of disease to decrease the expo-
sure of patients to the radiation resulting from repeated CT
scans. For the characterisation of focal liver lesions, CT, con-
trast-enhanced US (CEUS) and MRI can be used [155]. For
lesions <10 mm in diameter, MRI is a more sensitive modality
than CT [156] and specifically hepatobiliary MRI with specific
contrast enhancers (such as gadoxetate) which is associated with
a higher accuracy of lesion detection [157].
For the detection of extrahepatic metastases and local recur-
rence at the site of the initial colorectal surgery, CT and positron
emission tomography (PET)/CT scans are used [158]. A pro-
spective randomised trial evaluating high-quality CT and PET
imaging involving 263 patients showed only a 7.6% change in
management following PET [159], while a retrospective analysis
reported a change in intended curative therapy to palliative
therapy or vice versa in one-third of patients [160]. Also, a
recently published meta-analysis of studies evaluating PET and
PET/CT in patients with liver metastases reported PET findings
to result in changes in the management of a mean of 24% of
patients, with a mean incidence of PET-based extrahepatic
Oncological
criteria
(prognostic)
Bad
Good
Perioperative FOLFOX
Preoperative FOLFOX
No preoperative
therapy
(adjuvant?)
Conversion with
‘best systemic therapy’
Excellent
Easy
Difficult
Surgical
 criteria
 (technical)
Figure 2. Categorisation of patients according to technical and oncological criteria. FOLFOX, infusional 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, oxaliplatin.
Table 2. Contraindications to hepatic resection in patients with
CRC liver metastases (adapted from Adam et al. [148] with
permission from AlphaMed Press)
Category
Contraindication
Technical (A)
1. Absolute
Impossibility of R0 resection with ≥30% liver remnant
Presence of unresectable extrahepatic disease
2. Relative
R0 resection possible only with complex procedure
(portal vein embolisation, two-stage hepatectomy,
hepatectomy combined with ablationa)
R1 resection
Oncological (B)
1.
Concomitant extrahepatic disease (unresectable)
2.
Number of lesions ≥5
3.
Tumour progression
Patients should be categorised as A1 or A2/B1, B2 or B3.
aAll methods, including radiofrequency ablation.
 | Van Cutsem et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 disease of 32% [161]. However, although PET may provide addi-
tional information, mainly in patients with a high risk of extra-
hepatic disease, there is currently no consensus as to the patient
population with the most to gain. The current evidence is not
considered strong enough to recommend the use of PET in all
patients.
recommendation 11: imaging in the identification and management
of disease.
• Imaging should comprise first an abdominal/pelvic and thor-
acic CT scan and, in the case of doubt, a second method such
as US (CEUS), MRI or PET/CT scan depending on the locali-
sation of the metastases. US may be helpful to characterise
liver metastases, MRI liver, peritoneal or pelvic metastases
and PET/CT extrahepatic disease [IV, B].
• A stepwise imaging approach is the recommended policy, in
relation to the therapeutic possibilities, rather than the use of
all imaging modalities in all patients [V, B].
liver metastases that are technically resectable
up front
The primary goal for patients who present with technically
resectable liver metastases is clearly cure, with the primary goal
R0 resection, although it should be noted that a 10-year follow
up is required for confirmation of this [162]. In the management
of these patients, imaging is used to determine the nature and
true extent of their disease.
In patients with ‘favourable oncological’ criteria (i.e. >50% like-
lihood of cure based on various factors including long-term meta-
chronous disease), and ‘favourable surgical’ criteria (no massive
disease infiltration), both upfront surgery [R0 resection/no evi-
dence of disease (NED)] and perioperative chemotherapy are
options. The panel expressed no clear preference for one option
over the other, since the 5-year OS rate reported for the EPOC
study with perioperative chemotherapy, 51% (95% CI 45–58) in
the perioperative chemotherapy group versus 48% (95% CI 40–
55) in the surgery-only group, is not convincing, despite the fact
that the DFS in eligible patients was significantly improved [163].
However, in patients with disease that is technically easy to
resect but where the prognostic situation is unclear or likely not
to be ‘excellent’, perioperative chemotherapy should be the treat-
ment approach of choice (Figure 2). Perioperative chemotherapy
in this group should comprise 3 months chemotherapy before
surgery and 3 months chemotherapy post-surgery, only. The
preferred treatment in this setting should be FOLFOX [or alter-
natively capecitabine with oxaliplatin (CAPOX)] as reported for
the EPOC trial [163, 164]. EGFR-targeting monoclonal antibo-
dies (cetuximab and panitumumab) are not to be used in this
setting, based on the data from the New EPOC trial [165]. No
data with bevacizumab are available for this specific patient
group; therefore, bevacizumab should not be used [V, consensus
>75%].
In patients with disease that is technically easy to resect but
with one or more unfavourable prognostic features, resulting in
a relatively low chance of ‘cure’, there is uncertainty regarding
the best treatment strategy. Either FOLFOX alone, as used in the
EPOC study, or a highly active regimen such as a chemotherapy
doublet plus monoclonal antibody therapy or FOLFOXIRI
either alone or in combination with bevacizumab should be
considered preoperatively [V, consensus >75%].
In the case of patients with good oncological and technical
(surgical) criteria, who have not received perioperative che-
motherapy, there is no strong evidence to support the use of
adjuvant chemotherapy [166]. However, the experience of
Kemeny et al. [167] indicates that patients with unfavourable
prognostic criteria (e.g. by FONG score) may benefit from adju-
vant treatment. However, the expert opinion is that if patients
have not received any previous chemotherapy for metastatic
disease, then chemotherapy is recommended (low level of evi-
dence—expert opinion), with the recommendations being
FOLFOX or CAPOX, unless patients were previously recently
(<6–12 months) exposed to oxaliplatin-based adjuvant che-
motherapy for stage II or III CRC.
recommendation 12: perioperative treatment.
• Both technical criteria for resection and prognostic considera-
tions define the need for systemic perioperative therapy [IV, B].
• In patients with clearly resectable disease and favourable prog-
nostic criteria, perioperative treatment may not be necessary
and upfront resection is justified [I, C; consensus >75%].
• In patients with technically resectable disease where the prog-
nosis is unclear or probably unfavourable, perioperative com-
bination chemotherapy (FOLFOX or CAPOX) should be
administered [I, B; consensus >75%].
• Targeted agents should not be used in resectable patients
where the indication for perioperative treatment is prognostic
in nature [II, E].
• In situations where the criteria for prognosis and resectability
are not sharply defined, perioperative therapy should be con-
sidered (as part of a continuum of treatment option) [IV, B]
(Figure 2). Patients with synchronous onset of metastases
should be allocated to this group and therapeutic pathway.
• In patients with favourable oncological and technical (surgi-
cal) criteria, who have not received perioperative chemother-
apy, there is no strong evidence to support the use of adjuvant
chemotherapy [II, C], whereas patients with unfavourable cri-
teria may benefit from adjuvant treatment [III, B].
• In patients who have not received any previous chemotherapy,
adjuvant treatment with FOLFOX or CAPOX is recom-
mended (unless patients were previously recently exposed to
oxaliplatin-based adjuvant chemotherapy) [IV, B].
• Decision-making should include patients’ characteristics and
preferences [IV, B].
unresectable CLM with ‘conversion’ as a strategic
treatment goal
Any patient with limited liver and/or lung metastases should be
considered a candidate for potential secondary resection as cur-
rently, there are no criteria that allow us to distinguish between
those patients for whom purely palliative treatment and those
for whom potentially curative treatment is appropriate.
Systemic therapy given with a view to rendering technically
unresectable colorectal metastases resectable is called conversion
therapy, and offers the best means of ‘converting’ patients with
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw235 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 unresectable metastatic disease to resectability [168]. Also,
although survival times are slightly shorter for those patients
with mCRC who undergo conversion therapy followed by
surgery than for those patients with initially resectable meta-
static disease, they are far better than if resection was not carried
out at all [168, 169].
In patients receiving conversion therapy, response to systemic
therapy is a strong prognostic indicator but is also unpredict-
able. With the increasing efficacy of systemic therapy regimens,
it is recommended that resectability is first evaluated after (only)
2 months of optimal treatment and again after 4 months, when
the maximal tumour shrinkage is deemed to have occurred in
most patients, so that the opportunity for resection is not
missed in patients who a priori have a low chance of further
resection [148]. However, due to the limitations of RECIST (1.1;
potentially 2.0) [170], radiologists should be advised to pay
special attention to the treatment effects if the vascular endothe-
lial growth factor (VEGF)-targeting antibody bevacizumab is a
component of the therapy regimen.
As reported previously [5], up to 75% of these patients will
suffer a relapse following resection of their hepatic metastases,
with the majority occurring in the liver. There is no role for
partial palliative resection of metastases, but other ablative tech-
niques, such as RFA or SBRT, may be used as an adjunct to
surgery to achieve a situation where there is NED. They may
also provide an alternative to resection in the case of patients
with poor anatomical localisation of their metastases for resec-
tion, and in order to retain sufficient FLR. Resection of resect-
able lung metastases offers 25%–35% 5-year survival rates in
carefully selected patients. Although resection of lung metas-
tases is less well studied, R0 resection of lung metastases can
also be recommended [5].
In addition ∼20%–30% of newly diagnosed patients with
mCRC present with synchronous metastases. There is no stan-
dard of care for treating patients with synchronous CRC liver
metastases, although in this potentially curative setting treat-
ment typically involves a two-stage resection. However, some-
times surgery is not the first step for these patients who may
also require systemic therapy. The majority opinion was that
patients presenting with synchronous metastatic disease should
be treated more aggressively, with the recommendation that pre-
operative chemotherapy should be used.
conversion treatment
The observation that patients with initially unresectable CLM
whose metastases are rendered resectable after responding to
chemotherapy have a better long-term outcome than patients
treated with chemotherapy alone has led to the introduction of
conversion chemotherapy into clinical practice [148, 171–174].
Resection rates have been shown to be correlated with
response to systemic therapy [175]. However, these correlations
may be biased by other factors such as the year of the trial (in
later years with more active systemic regimens, resection is more
frequently integrated into the therapeutic algorithms), as well as
patient selection and criteria for resection. Furthermore, only a
few of the trials specifically designed to investigate conversion
chemotherapy as a treatment strategy in patients with initially
unresectable CLM (Table 3) were randomised, controlled trials,
making it difficult to reach any decision regarding the ‘best’
regimen to use in this clinical setting.
In the CELIM trial, one of the first of these trials to be con-
ducted, patients with technically unresectable and/or ≥5 liver
metastases treated with either FOLFOX plus cetuximab or
FOLFIRI plus cetuximab were evaluated for resectability every
2 months [176]. A tumour RR of 62% was achieved for all
patients and 70% in patients with KRAS exon 2 wild-type disease.
An encouraging 33% of patients across the two treatment arms
underwent R0 resection of their liver metastases. However, as this
trial involved randomisation between two different chemotherapy
regimens, both in combination with cetuximab, no conclusion
can be drawn regarding either the benefit of different treatment
intensities or the benefit of any specific drug used.
More importantly, two randomised phase II trials in patients
with unresectable disease have shown treatment intensification to
lead to increased RRs with a consequential increase in the rates of
R0 resection and therefore improved prognosis [177, 178]. The
first of these was a prospective, randomised, Chinese trial in 138
patients with KRAS exon 2 wild-type liver-limited disease where
an increased RR in the cetuximab-containing combination che-
motherapy (FOLFIRI/mFOLFOX6) arm was associated with an
increase in R0 resection rate [177]. Twenty patients (29%) in the
cetuximab-containing arm and nine (13%) in the chemotherapy
alone arm became eligible for resection. Overall, 18 patients
(26%) in the cetuximab arm and five (7%) in the chemotherapy
alone arm underwent an R0 resection. Significantly, patients in
Table 3. Conversion chemotherapy approach in patients with liver-limited disease
Study
CTx
Controlled study
n
RR, %
Liver resection rate, %
Vie-LM-Bev [302]
CAPOX + bevacizumab
No
56
73
93
CELIM [176]
FOLFOX6/FOLFIRI + cetuximab
No
106
70
33
GONO [179]
FOLFOXIRI + bevacizumab
No
30
80
40
POCHER [303]
Chrono-IFLO + cetuximab
No
43
79
60
BOXER [304]
CAPOX + bevacizumab
No
45
78
40
OLIVIA [178]
FOLFOXIRI + bevacizumab versus FOLFOX + bevacizumab
Yes
80
81 versus 62
49 versus 23 (R0)
Ye et al. [177]
FOLFIRI/FOLFOX ± cetuximab
Yes
116
57 versus 29
26 versus 7 (R0)
CAPOX (XELOX), capecitabine and oxaliplatin; Chrono-IFLO; chronomodulated irinotecan, 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin and oxaliplatin; CTx,
chemotherapy; FOLFIRI, infusional 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin and irinotecan; FOLFOX, infusional 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin and oxaliplatin; FOLFOXIRI,
infusional 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, irinotecan and oxaliplatin; RR, response rate.
 | Van Cutsem et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 either treatment arm undergoing hepatic resection had a longer
median survival time than those who did not [46.4 versus 25.7
months for the cetuximab arm (P = 0.007) and 36.0 versus 19.6
months for the chemotherapy alone arm (P = 0.004)].
The second trial was the European, multinational, open-label,
phase II OLIVIA trial in which patients with unresectable liver
metastases were randomised to receive bevacizumab plus either
FOLFOXIRI (n = 41) or mFOLFOX6 (n = 39) [178]. The overall
resection rates were 61% and 49%, respectively, and the R0 re-
section rates were 49% and 23%, respectively. The correspond-
ing tumour RRs were 81% and 62%, respectively. In this trial,
FOLFOXIRI plus bevacizumab was associated with higher re-
sponse and resection rates than mFOLFOX6 plus bevacizumab
in patients with initially unresectable CLM. However, as bevaci-
zumab was included in both arms and the intensification was
set by the addition of a third chemotherapy compound, the rela-
tive value of bevacizumab in this setting remains unclear, as
FOLFOXIRI alone is known to achieve a high RR [179]. Also,
consideration of the other available data from these studies [176,
177, 180] clearly shows both FOLFOX and FOLFIRI to be active
in combination with EGFR inhibitors in patients with RAS
wild-type disease in this treatment setting, while FOLFOXIRI
plus (or minus) bevacizumab has been shown to be superior to
the corresponding FOLFOX or FOLFIRI regimens and its activ-
ity to be independent of tumour RAS and BRAF mutation status
[68, 178, 181, 182].
Studies involving the retrospective analysis of RR (specifically
in patients with liver-limited disease) and the corresponding R0
resection rates provide additional information [44, 46, 183, 184],
but need to be regarded with caution. However, it seems clear
that regimens that achieve high RRs are beneficial and are asso-
ciated with higher R0 resection rates. Thus, the standard che-
motherapy regimens used in the CRYSTAL, PRIME and OPUS
trials with EGFR-targeting monoclonal antibodies versus che-
motherapy alone in patients with RAS wild-type disease, and
FOLFOXIRI plus bevacizumab versus the doublet mFOLFOX6
plus bevacizumab should be regarded as standard treatment
options. Moreover, data from the FIRE-3 [55] and CALGB
[185] studies show that a cytotoxic doublet plus cetuximab in
RAS wild-type patients is associated with higher RRs compared
with bevacizumab, although this did not translate into higher
resection rates in either of these studies.
role of other efficacy (response) parameters
The new metric response parameters early tumour shrinkage
(ETS) and depth of response (DpR) are emerging to characterise
the response, but may also be useful as predictors of long-term
outcome in patients with mCRC [186], and in particular those
receiving EGFR-antibody therapy [187–189], although recent
data have also shown this for a triplet compared with a doublet of
cytotoxics in combination with bevacizumab [68, 190]. In trials
investigating treatment intensification [44, 46, 182, 191, 192], the
more intensive therapy arms had higher DpR and ETS rates, and
higher RRs. In the FIRE-3 and PEAK trials, the DpR and ETS
rates were higher for the EGFR-inhibitor containing combina-
tions (cetuximab and panitumumab, respectively) than for the
bevacizumab-containing regimen [193, 194].
The pathological response after preoperative chemotherapy
also provides strong prognostic information and could serve in
the future as a stratification parameter for further treatment
decisions. To date, no prospective pathological response data
from randomised trials are available, and therefore, pathological
response should not yet be used as a decision-making factor.
The time to maximum response is typically ∼12–16 weeks
(FIRE-3 trial DpR analysis) [193] in patients with disease that is
borderline in terms of resectability and who are receiving perio-
perative therapy (Figure 2). According to the expert consensus
discussion, the total therapy duration pre- and post-surgery
should not exceed 6 months.
The role of continued systemic treatment, post-conversion treat-
ment and surgery is unclear. It is also unclear whether the mono-
clonal antibody therapies should be continued post-resection.
Intra-arterial chemotherapy and chemoembolisation have been
shown to achieve high RRs and R0 resection rates in small series
[195–197] and may be used to shrink a larger tumour so that it
can be removed by surgery, but the data on chemoembolisation
for liver metastases from CRC are exploratory.
recommendation 13: conversion therapy.
• In potentially resectable patients (if conversion is the goal), a
regimen leading to high RRs and/or a large tumour size
reduction (shrinkage) is recommended [II, A].
• There is uncertainty surrounding the best combination to use
as only few trials have addressed this specifically:
° In patients with RAS wild-type disease, a cytotoxic doublet
plus an anti-EGFR antibody seems to have the best benefit
risk/ratio, although the combination of FOLFOXIRI plus
bevacizumab may also be considered and, to a lesser extent,
a cytotoxic doublet plus bevacizumab [II, A].
° In patients with RAS-mutant disease: a cytotoxic doublet
plus bevacizumab or FOLFOXIRI plus bevacizumab [II, A].
• Patients must be re-evaluated regularly in order to prevent the
overtreatment of resectable patients as the maximal response
is expected to be achieved after 12–16 weeks of therapy in
most patients.
metastases at unfavourable/uncommon sites and
role of ablative treatment with or without surgery
Patients with a limited number of lesions and involved sites and
who therefore do not belong to the group of patients with limited
CLM should be regarded as having OMD and be treated accord-
ing to the standard treatment algorithm presented in Figure 3.
In these patients, the use of local ablation therapies such as RFA
or cryoablation has been shown to be feasible, as well as precision
radiotherapy (SBRT) and, to a lesser extent, chemoembolisation.
The selection of the best instruments from the ‘toolbox’ of abla-
tive therapies (Figure 3) for use in this setting differs according to:
• the size and localisation of the metastases—and therefore
access with regard to the use of the best treatment method;
• the rates of local control achieved (with the local control
greater for surgery than for the other options);
• the invasiveness of the technique;
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw235 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 • the non-tumour-related prognostic considerations and patient
factors as well as patient preferences;
• the local expertise with regard to the use of a particular abla-
tive treatment method;
• consideration of patient frailty and life expectancy.
Selection of the best ‘situation-adapted’ treatment strategy
should consider all of these factors as part of an MDT treatment
decision before the start of systemic treatment and at the time of
best response. Adoption of the treatment approach outlined in
Figure 3 requires repeated MDT discussions for the duration of
an individual patient’s treatment pathway.
use of local and ablative therapy in patients
with OMD (with non-curative intent)
A treatment goal of ablation is a relatively new concept for
patients with mCRC and involves an attempt to eradicate all
visible metastatic lesions using the best instrument from the
toolbox of LATs, in combination with systemic therapy. The
overall goal of this strategy is not necessarily to cure the patient,
as the prognosis for these patients is generally poor due to the
unfavourable localisation of their metastases and the number of
involved organs coupled with the limitations of local ablative
treatments, compared with surgical resection.
However, full ablation of all visible sites may allow disconti-
nuation of the standard of care, systemic therapy, with the possi-
bility of a (relevant) relapse-/disease-free interval. The CLOCC
trial, a prematurely terminated randomised phase II trial, has
shown that the combined approach with surgery and RFA of
unresectable metastases plus systemic therapy may be associated
with a significant improvement in OS [198].
recommendation 14: ablative techniques.
• Despite the lack of more available prospective data, this strate-
gic treatment approach should be evaluated and pursued
further in suitable patients [II, B].
toolbox of LATs
The most important discriminator for the usage of different
toolbox instruments is, after tumour location, the type of energy
administered. Current technologies comprise invasive thermal
ablation with distinct size limitations (e.g. RFA and others),
conformal radiation techniques which are directed against iso-
lated lesions, and chemoembolisation or radioembolisation with
yttrium-labelled microspheres, both of which are limited to the
liver for use in the management of CLM that are rather diffuse.
thermal ablation
In patients with advanced CLM, thermal ablation such as RFA
often cannot be used due to the inherent size limitation of
∼3 cm [199]. However, in the phase II CLOCC trial (chemother-
apy plus or minus RFA) [200], RFA combined with surgical
resection for the treatment of patients with CLM suggested an
improvement in both PFS and OS [198]. A considerable amount
of data are available on the use of thermal ablation in combina-
tion with liver resection for the treatment of patients with CLM
either as part of a two-stage approach or intraoperatively using
ultrasound guidance [201].
Thermal ablation techniques also have proven efficacy in the
ablation of lung metastases from CRC. Local control rates of
88%–92% at 1 year and 77% at 3 years have been reported for
RFA of lung metastases [202, 203]. Mortality and major compli-
cation rates may be as low as 1%, whereas grade 1 and 2 events
occur in up to 33% of treatments [204, 205]. However, a recent
meta-analysis of four RFA patient series and 23 surgical patient
series demonstrated that the data currently available for lung
metastases from CRC do not allow a firm conclusion to be drawn
with regard to the use of surgery or RFA, although most evidence
supports surgery as the most effective treatment option [205].
stereotactic ablative body radiotherapy
High conformal hypofractionated irradiation [e.g. SBRT, high-
dose rate (HDR)-brachytherapy] of CLM has been reported to
achieve high local control rates. The risk of recurrence correlates
with increasing tumour size as well as the applied dose regimen
[206, 207].
SBRT and HDR-brachytherapy achieve similar results to
RFA, with local tumour control >80% at 12 months depending
on size [208–212]. Also, although grade 2 toxicity may be as
high as 70%, grade ≥3 events have not been recorded across
several series. Support for the use of SBRT in the liver is growing
with data reported for five retrospective studies [213–215] and
eight prospective studies [216–222] of SBRT in the treatment of
liver metastases from various primaries. SBRT has also been
used successfully in patients with unresectable visceral pulmon-
ary or hepatic metastases [223]. Prospective trials will validate
which patients benefit most from SBRT with its short treatment
time course, lack of a need for recovery and favourable overall
Best systemic treatment
in terms of induction of response
Evaluation at 6–8 weeks
At time of "best response" also evaluate
use of best treatment strategies available
(patient-/expertise-dependent)
"Toolbox" instruments for local ablative
treatment (surgery, invasive local ablation
[RFA, microwave], precision radiotherapy
[SBRT], embolisation techniques
[any particles/beads, SIRT])
Consider (recommended) re-uptake
of systemic treatment, but limit treatment
duration to a total of 6 months
Figure 3. Standard treatment algorithm for patients with oligometastatic
disease. RFA, radiofrequency ablation; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation
therapy; SIRT, selective internal radiation therapy.
 | Van Cutsem et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 toxicity profile. The use of SBRT together with systemic therapy
should also be investigated prospectively.
recommendation 15: local ablation techniques.
• In patients with unresectable liver metastases only, or OMD,
local ablation techniques such as thermal ablation or high
conformal radiation techniques (e.g. SBRT, HDR-brachyther-
apy) can be considered. The decision should be taken by an
MDT based on local experience, tumour characteristics and
patient preference [IV, B].
• In patients with lung only or OMD of the lung, ablative high
conformal radiation or thermal ablation may be considered if
resection is limited by comorbidity, the extent of lung par-
enchyma resection, or other factors [IV, B].
• SBRT is a safe and feasible alternative treatment for oligome-
tastatic colorectal liver and lung metastases in patients not
amenable to surgery or other ablative treatments [IV, B].
• RFA can be used in addition to surgery with the goal of eradi-
cating all visible metastatic sites [II, B].
chemoembolisation
To date, the data on chemoembolisation for liver metastases from
CRC are mostly observational series in various treatment situa-
tions [195–197]. Comparative data are limited to irinotecan-based
drug-eluting beads in a small phase II cohort in previously treated
patients showing a benefit versus systemic chemotherapy [224],
and the role of intra-arterial irinotecan in patients pre-exposed to
intravenous irinotecan is unclear. Numerous trials with che-
motherapy-loaded particles (beads) are ongoing, also in combina-
tion with systemic treatment and in the neoadjuvant setting.
radioembolisation
Radioembolisation [selective internal radiation therapy (SIRT)]
typically involves a single delivery of yttrium-90 connected to
either resin or glass particles into the hepatic artery with the
therapeutic effect essentially limited to irradiation.
For patients with liver-limited metastases failing the available
chemotherapeutic options, radioembolisation with yttrium-90
resin microspheres has been shown to prolong the time to
tumour progression in the liver, based on a small randomised
phase III study [225].
Recently, a randomised phase III study of SIRT with resin micro-
spheres as an adjunct to chemotherapy in the first-line treatment
setting failed to show an overall PFS benefit (as primary end point
of the study) and the OS data are not yet available (SIRFLOX
study) [226]. However, a (potentially relevant) improved time to
liver progression has been shown for patients treated with che-
motherapy plus radioembolisation. In this trial, around 45% of
patients had the primary tumour in place and around 40% had
extrahepatic disease, suggesting that radioembolisation may be
most beneficial in patients with liver-limited disease.
Yttrium-90-labelled particles may also currently be a good
alternative in patients who are potential candidates for resec-
tion, but display a small FLR volume. A matched-pair analysis
comparing yttrium-90-labelled particles with portal vein embo-
lisation showed a lesser, but still pronounced benefit of yttrium-
90-labelled particles with regard to contralateral liver hypertrophy,
following simultaneous treatment of the ipsilateral tumour load
with yttrium-90-labelled particles [227].
recommendation 16: embolisation.
• For patients with liver-limited disease failing the available
chemotherapeutic options
° Radioembolisation with yttrium-90 microspheres should
be considered [II, B].
° Chemoembolisation may be also considered as a treatment
option [IV, B].
• Radioembolisation (and chemoembolisation) of CLM in
earlier treatment lines may be interesting as ‘consolidation
treatment’ but should be limited to clinical trials.
cytoreductive surgery and HIPEC for patients with
peritoneal metastases
In selected patients with peritoneal metastasis, complete cytoreduc-
tive surgery and HIPEC may provide prolonged survival when
carried out in experienced high-volume centres (in view of the rela-
tively high morbidity associated with the procedure) [228–230].
The efficacy of this multimodality treatment depends on the extent
of peritoneal dissemination and is scored using the peritoneal
cancer index (PCI), which is the main prognostic factor [231].
Involvement of the lower ileum is a negative prognostic factor.
Cytoreductive surgery is particularly effective in patients with
low-volume peritoneal disease (a PCI <12 is often suggested) and
no evidence of systemic disease. With recommendations on stan-
dardising the delivery of HIPEC in patients with CRC [232] and
evaluation of oxaliplatin versus mitomycin C for HIPEC [233],
cytoreductive surgery and HIPEC is on the verge of becoming the
Table 4. Drivers for first-line treatment
Tumour characteristics
Patient characteristics
Treatment characteristics
Clinical presentation:
Tumour burden
Tumour localisation
Age
Toxicity profile
Tumour biology
Performance status
Flexibility of treatment administration
RAS mutation status
Organ function
Socioeconomic factors
BRAF mutation status
Comorbidities, patient attitude, expectation and preference
Quality of life
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw235 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 accepted standard treatment approach for patients with peritoneal
metastases from a colorectal primary.
recommendation 17: cytoreductive surgery and HIPEC.
• Complete cytoreductive surgery and HIPEC can be consid-
ered for patients with limited peritoneal metastases in centres
which are very experienced in the use of HIPEC [III, B].
treatment of metastatic disease
The definition of a (potential) treatment aim and strategy is
important for both the upfront integration of a multimodal treat-
ment approach and for the choice of a systemic treatment strategy
(first-line and later-line) as part of a ‘continuum of care’.
Relevant factors for determination of the treatment goal are:
• tumour- and disease-related characteristics, such as clinical pre-
sentation and patterns of tumour biology (e.g. metastases
limited to the liver and/or lung, the dynamics of progression,
symptoms and prognostic molecular or biochemical markers);
• patient-related factors (co-morbidity, socioeconomic factors
and expectations of the patient);
• treatment-related factors such as toxicity (Table 4).
A patient with classical mCRC may typically achieve an OS of
∼30 months as the result of an MDT-managed ‘continuum of
care’. An example of a typical ‘continuum of care’ treatment
sequence is outlined below:
• approximately 4–6 months of first-line ‘induction’ therapy;
• 4–6 (–8) months of ‘maintenance’ therapy—or no treatment
after resection and/or ablation following first-line treatment;
• about 3 months re-introduction (or treatment beyond pro-
gression);
• 5–7 months of second-line therapy;
• a treatment break before initiation of a further line;
• approximately 3 months of third-line therapy;
• potentially a fourth line (in patients with RAS wild-type disease);
• a few months of re-challenge of initial induction or first-line
therapy;
• a few months best supportive care only.
determination of the therapeutic strategy
The optimal therapeutic strategy for each patient is determined
following a clinical examination, blood counts, determination of
liver and renal function parameters, measurement of tumour
marker [the most relevant being carcinoembryonic antigen
(CEA)] levels, an abdominal and thoracic CT/MRI scan and an
assessment of the patient’s general clinical condition (health),
independent of their malignant disease.
The general condition and performance status of a patient are
strong prognostic and predictive factors for chemotherapy.
Whether a patient is classified as ‘fit’ or ‘unfit’ is now used to
determine whether or not they will be assigned to a more inten-
sive (combination of 2 or 3 cytotoxics with a biological) or less
intensive treatment approach with the classical drivers of treat-
ment choice being tumour, patient and treatment characteristics
as outlined in Table 4. Historically, ‘fit’ patients with mCRC
were categorised according to the previous ESMO consensus
guidelines into four groups (0, 1, 2, and 3) to determine the stra-
tegic treatment approaches (Table 5) [3, 5].
The decision as to whether a patient has initially resectable or
initially unresectable metastatic disease should be made at the
first meeting of the MDT. Patients with initially resectable meta-
static disease should be referred for immediate resection or peri-
operative chemotherapy with the goal being to achieve complete
R0 resection and/or a situation where the patient can be treated
Table 5. Historical ESMO groups for treatment stratification of fit patients with metastatic CRC [3]
Group 0
Resectable
Group 1
Potentially resectable
Group 2
Not resectable
Group 3
Not resectable
Clinical presentation
Clearly resectable R0 liver
and/or lung disease
Unresectable liver/lung-
limited disease which
might become resectable
after response to
conversion therapy
Multiple metastases/sites
Tumour-related
symptoms
Able to withstand
intensive therapy
Asymptomatic
Multiple metastases
Never able to undergo resection
Unsuitable for intensive therapy
Frail with co-morbidities
Treatment goal
Cure (NED)
Maximum tumour
shrinkage
Clinically relevant tumour
shrinkage
Disease control
Halt/slow tumour progression
Tumour shrinkage less relevant
Tolerability most relevant
Treatment intensity
Surgery
Intensive treatment approach
Less intensive treatment approach
Immediate surgery with
no prior chemotherapy
or
moderate (FOLFOX)
perioperative
chemotherapy
Upfront most active
combination regimen
Upfront active
combination (at least a
chemotherapy doublet)
Treatment selected according to
patient preference
Sequential approach (start with
single agent or doublet with low
toxicity)
FOLFOX an exception
CRC, colorectal cancer; FOLFOX, infusional 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, oxaliplatin; NED, no evidence of disease.
 | Van Cutsem et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 with another ablative treatment (LAT). In the case of patients
with OMD, the goal would be the creation of a situation where
the patient has NED as described previously.
However, in the case of fit patients with mCRC, whose metas-
tases are not initially resectable, it is becoming increasingly
obvious that the original ESMO groups 1 and 2 are becoming
less clearly delineated and the treatment strategies less strict (see
shading Table 5).
Indeed, two clinically relevant categories are evolving for the
systemic treatment of ‘fit’ patients with CRC whose metastatic
disease is not resectable at presentation:
A. 1) Those for whom intensive treatment is appropriate with
the goal of cytoreduction (tumour shrinkage) and con-
version to resectable disease
or
2) Those who need intensive treatment, although they will
never make it to resection or LAT, since they need a rapid
reduction in tumour burden because of impending clinical
threat, impending organ dysfunction or severe symptoms.
B. Those for whom intensive treatment is not necessary and
where the goal is disease control.
The application of LAT within the context of OMD and the
sequence of induction chemotherapy followed by LAT (without
further systemic treatment) may also need to be considered as a
pre-defined treatment sequence. Such patients should be consid-
ered as belonging to group A1 above.
For patients in both categories, knowledge of the RAS and
BRAF mutational status of their disease is used to further refine
treatment strategies (Table 6).
the systemic therapy options in the first-line
treatment setting
The typical first-line chemotherapy backbone comprises a fluor-
opyrimidine (intravenous 5-FU or oral capecitabine) used in
various combinations and schedules with irinotecan or oxalipla-
tin [5]. Combination chemotherapy with a fluoropyrimidine
plus oxaliplatin or irinotecan (FOLFOX or FOLFIRI) provides
higher RRs and better progression-free and (partly) OS times
than a fluoropyrimidine (5-FU/leucovorin) alone [I, B] [234,
235]. Infusional regimens of 5-FU/leucovorin [234, 235] are
generally less toxic than bolus regimens [236, 237] and should
be used in preference. The oral fluoropyrimidine capecitabine
can be used as an alternative to 5-FU/leucovorin alone [238]
and in combination with oxaliplatin [239]. Capecitabine is less
frequently used in combination with irinotecan due to early
concerns that it was more toxic than FOLFIRI [240, 241].
However, the results are controversial [242, 243]. The monoclo-
nal antibodies bevacizumab (anti-VEGF) and cetuximab and
panitumumab (anti-EGFR) have been shown to improve the
clinical outcome of patients with mCRC when combined with
combination chemotherapy regimens in the first-line setting [I,
B] [43–46, 48–50, 101, 244, 245].
The triplet combination chemotherapy regimen FOLFOXIRI
has been demonstrated to be superior to FOLFIRI in an Italian
study [181]. FOLFOXIRI plus bevacizumab has also been shown
to be superior to both FOLFIRI plus bevacizumab and
FOLFOX6 plus bevacizumab [68, 178, 182]. However, the super-
iority of the cytotoxic triplet over a cytotoxic doublet has not
been demonstrated in all studies [246]. The contribution of bev-
acizumab in the triplet combination is also uncertain.
Thus, the chemotherapy options for the treatment of patients
with mCRC in the first-line setting are typically (for most patients)
a cytotoxic doublet such as FOLFOX, CAPOX or FOLFIRI or, pos-
sibly, in very selected patients the cytotoxic triplet FOLFOXIRI or
fluoropyrimidine monotherapy in selected patients with asympto-
matic primarily unresectable metastases that are likely to be eligible
for multiple lines of treatment and who are not candidates for a
combination chemotherapy.
anti-VEGF therapy. The monoclonal antibody bevacizumab,
which binds circulating VEGF-A, has been shown to increase
the activity (either RR, PFS and/or OS) in combination with
bolus 5-FU/leucovorin/irinotecan and in combination with 5-
FU/leucovorin or capecitabine alone in the first-line treatment
setting [I, B] [244, 247–249]. Bevacizumab in combination with
a fluoropyrimidine plus oxaliplatin has been shown to increase
PFS but not RR or OS in the first-line setting in a large phase III
study [I, B] [245]. However, in smaller randomised trials
evaluating the addition of bevacizumab to FOLFOX or FOLFIRI
Table 6. Revised ESMO groups for treatment stratification of patients according to whether patients are ‘fit’ or ‘unfit’
Patient’s
classification
‘Fit’ patients
‘Unfit’ patients
Group 1
Group 2
Clinical presentation
A) Conversion and achievement of NED
B) Impending clinical threat, impending organ dysfunction
and severe (disease-related) symptoms
Treatment biomarker driven: RAS wt, RAS mt, BRAF mt
patient subgroups
Asymptomatic patients
No impending clinical threat
Resection not an option
Treatment biomarker driven: RAS wt, RAS mt,
BRAF mt patient subgroups
Best supportive
care
Treatment goal
A) Cytoreduction, followed by R0 resection; NED achieved
by LAT
B) Improvement of symptoms and hence avoidance of rapid
evolution and prolonged survival
Disease control and hence prolonged survival
Palliative
LAT, local and ablative therapy; mt, mutant; NED, no evidence of disease; wt, wild-type.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw235 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 failed to demonstrate an improved outcome [250, 251] which is
somewhat at odds with the randomised trial comparisons of
both chemotherapy backbones plus bevacizumab versus each
other [242, 252], data from the CALGB 80405 trial where
investigator-based selection did not lead to a difference between
chemotherapy backbones [185], and the data from large
observational trials with nearly 5000 patients where no difference
was detected [253, 254].
FOLFOXIRI in combination with bevacizumab has also been
shown to enhance RR and PFS compared with FOLFIRI plus
bevacizumab [68] and to produce one of the longest median OS
recorded in this clinical setting, but is limited to very selected
patients. The contribution of bevacizumab to the cytotoxic
regimens in both arms of this study is uncertain as it was not
investigated.
Bevacizumab is usually continued in combination with any
cytotoxic agent or any combination of cytotoxic agents until
disease progression or unacceptable toxicity [5]. Currently,
there is no validated predictive marker for bevacizumab.
anti-EGFR therapy. The EGFR antibodies cetuximab and
panitumumab are active in various combinations with their
activity, either alone or in combination with cytotoxics, limited
to those patients whose tumours do not harbour a RAS mutation.
It has been shown that expanding RAS mutational analysis of
tumours to include detection of mutations in exons 3 and 4 of
KRAS and exons 2, 3 and 4 of NRAS is superior to KRAS exon 2
analysis in predicting which patients are unlikely to respond
(negative predictive factor) or in whom EGFR antibody therapy
may be detrimental. Thus, a tumour RAS mutation is a negative
predictive marker for treatment outcome with the EGFR
monoclonal antibody therapies [II, B], and as stated previously
(Recommendation 4), knowledge of the expanded RAS mutational
status of a patient’s tumour is therefore a prerequisite for the use
of cetuximab or panitumumab as mandated by the European
Medicines Agency (EMA) [255, 256].
Expanded RAS analysis should be carried out at diagnosis in
order to determine whether EGFR antibody therapies are likely
to be of clinical benefit. Moreover, the evidence is increasing
that a BRAF mutation is predictive for a lack of benefit from
EGFR-targeting monoclonal antibodies administered as mono-
therapy in later lines [64, 65]. However, its role in combination
with cytotoxic agents has not been ascertained [44].
Cetuximab has been shown to improve the RR and median
PFS and OS rates in first line in combination with FOLFIRI
when compared with FOLFIRI alone in mCRC patients with
RAS wild-type tumours [43, 44, 49] [I, B]. Both cetuximab and
panitumumab also increase the activity of the cytotoxic doublet
FOLFOX in mCRC patients with RAS wild-type tumours
[38, 45, 46, 48, 50, 183]. However, in contrast, the addition of
EGFR antibodies to oxaliplatin-based regimens where non-infu-
sional fluoropyrimidines were used (e.g. bolus administration,
FLOX; capecitabine, CAPOX) has not resulted in any benefit
[38, 61].
Biologicals are generally indicated for the first-line treatment
of patients with mCRC unless contraindicated due to, for
example, reduced organ function, poor performance status or
cardiovascular insufficiency. Capecitabine-based therapy should
not be used in combination with EGFR antibody therapies [38].
recommendation 18: first-line systemic therapy combinations
according to targeted agent used:
• Biologicals (targeted agents) are indicated in the first-line
treatment of most patients unless contraindicated [I, A].
• The VEGF antibody bevacizumab should be used in combina-
tion with:
° the cytotoxic doublets FOLFOX/CAPOX/FOLFIRI,
° the cytotoxic triplet FOLFOXIRI in selected fit and moti-
vated patients where cytoreduction (tumour shrinkage) is
the goal—and potentially also in fit patients with tumour
BRAF mutations [II, B],
° fluoropyrimidine monotherapy in patients unable to toler-
ate aggressive treatment [I, B].
• EGFR antibodies should be used in combination with:
° FOLFOX/FOLFIRI [I, A],
° capecitabine-based and bolus 5-FU based regimens should
not be combined with EGFR antibodies [I, E].
Consideration also needs to be given to the clear evidence that
patients should receive all three available cytotoxic agents
(fluoropyrimidine, oxaliplatin and irinotecan) and all tar-
geted treatments (anti-VEGF and, if RAS wild-type, anti-
EGFR) during the course of their treatment whenever possible
[257, 258], although the optimal sequence remains to be elu-
cidated.
To date, there is no unequivocal evidence for the superiority
of one class of biological over another (bevacizumab versus the
EGFR antibody therapies) in the first-line treatment of patients
with RAS wild-type mCRC, although the combination with an
EGFR antibody led to an improved RR in both phase III trials
and to an improved OS in the FIRE 3 study, but not in the
CALGB study. The PFS was identical for bevacizumab- and
cetuximab-containing combinations in both phase III studies
[55, 193, 259, 260].
Also, although the treatment goal is a moving target, depend-
ing on the course of the disease, the aim should be for 70%–80%
of ‘fit’ patients to receive second-line therapy and 50%–60% of
‘fit’ patients, third-line therapy.
discontinuation of treatment and the concept
of maintenance therapy
Historically,
continuing
patients
on
chemotherapy
until
disease progression or unacceptable toxicity has been routine
in clinical trials. However, clinical trials using this approach as
well as clinical observations made during routine practice have
indicated the dangers of continuing cytotoxic therapy, specifi-
cally oxaliplatin-containing therapy, as cumulative toxicity
often occurs before clinical progression. As a result, disconti-
nuation and/or intermittent combination chemotherapy/main-
tenance strategies have been investigated in a number of
clinical trials with the result that these approaches provide an
attractive treatment option for patients with a response or
stable disease.
The early UK MRC CR06 trial randomised patients with
either an objective response or stable disease following 3 months
of single-agent fluoropyrimidine therapy to continue on che-
motherapy or take a treatment break with further chemotherapy
 | Van Cutsem et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 reserved for disease progression [261]. No clear difference in OS
was observed between the two treatment arms with an HR of
0.87 favouring intermittent therapy.
Since then the administration of intermittent combination
chemotherapy has been investigated in a number of clinical
trials. The GISCAD study showed that intermittent treatment
with FOLFIRI compared with continued treatment did not
diminish the efficacy of treatment [262]. The OPTIMOX-1 trial
randomised patients to receive FOLFOX4 until progression (or
unacceptable toxicity) or FOLFOX7 (using a higher dose of oxa-
liplatin) for six cycles after which patients whose disease
responded continued on maintenance 5-FU with the reintro-
duction of oxaliplatin only at disease progression [263]. No dif-
ference in PFS or OS time was noted and was taken as an
indication that oxaliplatin-free intervals did not shorten survival
time. The randomised OPTIMOX-2 and UK MRC COIN trials
subsequently investigated treatment breaks without mainte-
nance 5-FU [264, 265]. In both studies, a detrimental effect with
inferior outcomes due to treatment-free intervals could not be
excluded, but was small probably due to the short ‘induction’
phase of chemotherapy.
More recently, the concept of treatment discontinuation has
been refined further. Randomised trials involving more than
1000 patients have investigated the concept of ‘maintenance’
treatment as a separate phase in the treatment strategy and con-
tinuum of care [266–270]. The data from these randomised
phase II/III trials comparing maintenance therapy with biologi-
cals plus or minus chemotherapy with a chemotherapy-free
interval [265, 269–271] show any fluoropyrimidine plus bevaci-
zumab to have the best activity in terms of interval PFS and a
trend towards an improved survival. Also, although a study
from the Nordic group did not show a benefit from the combi-
nation of bevacizumab and erlotinib [272], the DREAM study
showed a significant OS advantage for a maintenance strategy
with bevacizumab plus erlotinib [266]. However, this combina-
tion is not considered as a standard treatment because of the rela-
tively small size of the DREAM study and the lack of activity of
erlotinib in mCRC [266]. Currently, the integration of approaches
other than de-escalation as maintenance strategies [266, 272],
should be reserved for clinical trials.
Thus, after ‘induction’ treatment, an active maintenance treat-
ment is seen as a possible option, especially in patients treated
with oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy, as it allows an early and
upfront pre-planned discontinuation of the initially chosen sys-
temic therapy combination. The optimal maintenance treatment
following induction with fluoropyrimidine/oxaliplatin and bev-
acizumab is a combination of a fluoropyrimidine (capecitabine)
plus bevacizumab as demonstrated in the CAIRO3 and AIO
0207 trials [268, 270] [I, B], and may also be considered for
patients following initial FOLFOXIRI plus or minus bevacizu-
mab therapy [182, 273]. However, the future challenge is to
determine in which patients’ treatment should be deescalated
and in which patients it can be stopped completely. Very limited
and preliminary data exist on maintenance strategies involving
EGFR-antibody therapies, which do not allow any conclusion to
be drawn [61, 266, 267, 274].
For patients receiving FOLFIRI first-line, the optimum dura-
tion of induction therapy is unclear and continuation of
FOLFIRI induction therapy is recommended for at least as long
as tumour shrinkage continues or disease stabilisation is main-
tained and the treatment remains tolerable.
Individualisation of the treatment approach after discussion
with the patient is an essential component of this process and
should include discussions of projected survival time, time free
from cancer symptoms, time free from the side-effects and con-
straints of treatment, and impact on career and family life (social
and financial).
It is important to acknowledge that the discussion on mainte-
nance treatment raises the question of a pre-planned abbrevia-
tion and shortening of the time on first-line therapy, followed
by a well-defined treatment algorithm.
However, ‘treatment holidays’ per se, in the meaning of a pro-
longed pausing of any treatment for a limited time, can be discussed
for any patient with indolent and asymptomatic presentation of
their disease.
In any patient, re-introduction of an initially successful induc-
tion regimen should be considered as a treatment option either
following the ‘maintenance’ strategy or at a later stage in the
therapeutic pathway.
recommendation 19: maintenance therapy.
• Patients receiving FOLFOX or CAPOX plus bevacizumab-
based therapy as induction therapy should be considered for
maintenance therapy after 6 cycles of CAPOX and 8 cycles of
FOLFOX. The optimal maintenance treatment is a combina-
tion of a fluoropyrimidine plus bevacizumab. Bevacizumab as
monotherapy is not recommended [I, B].
• Patients receiving FOLFIRI can continue on induction
therapy—at a minimum—for as long as tumour shrinkage
continues and the treatment is tolerable [V, B].
• For patients receiving initial therapy with FOLFOXIRI plus or
minus bevacizumab, a fluoropyrimidine plus bevacizumab
may be considered as maintenance therapy (as was done in
the pivotal trials examining FOLFOXIRI).
• For patients receiving initial therapy with a single-agent fluor-
opyrimidine (plus bevacizumab), induction therapy should be
maintained [V, A].
• Individualisation and discussion with the patient is essential
[V, A].
• Initial induction therapy or a second-line therapy have to be
reintroduced at radiological or first signs of symptomatic pro-
gression. If a second-line therapy is chosen, re-introduction of
the initial induction treatment should be a part of the entire
treatment strategy as long as no relevant residual toxicity is
present [III, B].
second line
Second-line therapy describes the therapy received from the time
that the first-line chemotherapy backbone has to be changed,
mostly after failure of a first-line strategy, and should be offered to
as many patients as possible. Second-line therapy is normally
proposed for patients with good performance status and adequate
organ function, and is dependent on the first-line therapy choice.
Second-line therapy with oxaliplatin and irinotecan is known to
be superior to best supportive care and 5-FU [275–277].
In patients in whom the initial chemotherapy backbone has
failed, the chemotherapy backbone should be changed [5].
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw235 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Following failure on 5-FU/leucovorin, patients who can tolerate it
should be switched to an irinotecan or oxaliplatin-containing
combination chemotherapy regimen such as FOLFIRI, FOLFOX
or possibly irinotecan/oxaliplatin [278–280]. Patients who receive
FOLFIRI up front should receive FOLFOX and those patients who
receive FOLFOX up front should receive an irinotecan-containing
regimen, preferably FOLFIRI, with early evidence of the efficacy of
this strategy provided by the trial of Tournigand et al. [281].
Also, as stated previously, treatment with all three cytotoxics
(fluoropyrimidine, irinotecan and oxaliplatin) during the course
of a patient’s treatment is associated with longer survival [257,
258]. However, when considering current treatment strategies,
biologicals and predictive markers (e.g. tumour RAS mutation
status for EGFR antibody therapy) need to be added to the mix
which makes the decision-making more complex.
If bevacizumab was not used as the biological first line, it should
be considered in second line, as FOLFOX plus bevacizumab was
shown to improve OS compared with FOLFOX alone in a phase
III trial [282] and confirmed in subsequent studies [283–285].
Data from the randomised phase III TML study [283], and from
the BEBYP study [286], showed continuation of bevacizumab
treatment with second-line chemotherapy to benefit patients pre-
viously treated with bevacizumab, suggesting that patients treated
first line with bevacizumab can benefit from subsequent therapies
that target VEGF. The anti-angiogenic fusion protein aflibercept
has been shown to confer a survival advantage when added to
FOLFIRI in patients previously progressing on a prior oxaliplatin-
containing regimen compared with FOLFIRI plus placebo [287].
A benefit has also been reported for patients treated with afliber-
cept who had received prior bevacizumab therapy [288]. Recently,
a similar OS benefit has been reported for the anti-VEGFR2 anti-
body ramucirumab, also in combination with FOLFIRI, as
second-line treatment following first-line treatment with a fluoro-
pyrimidine, oxaliplatin and bevacizumab [289]. In total, four trials
have reported a gain in OS by the addition of an antiangiogenic
compound, irrespective of the various first-line regimens [282,
283, 287, 289].
Both EGFR antibodies, cetuximab and panitumumab, have
been shown to increase RR and PFS, but not OS when combined
with irinotecan-containing therapy in the second-line treatment
setting [47, 65, 290] and can be considered if not used previously
in the treatment of patients with RAS wild-type disease. However,
generally, there is a similar relative benefit when cetuximab (and
panitumumab) is used in later lines compared with second line,
which was confirmed in a recent randomised trial [291].
No randomised phase III studies have been carried out which
compare the different biologicals available, specifically in patients
who are fast progressors (PFS <3–4 months) on a first-line bevaci-
zumab-containing regimen. In view of the inclusion criteria of
the bevacizumab, aflibercept and ramucirumab trials [283, 287,
289], aflibercept and ramucirumab may be considered for the
treatment of patients with RAS mutant or unclassified tumours,
and EGFR inhibitors for patients with RAS wild-type disease,
especially when a higher RR is desired. The toxicity profiles of
bevacizumab, aflibercept, ramucirumab and cetuximab/panitu-
mumab also need to be considered. A randomised phase II trial,
however, suggested no difference in OS or in PFS between bevaci-
zumab and panitumumab when combined with FOLFIRI [292].
This trial does not influence the recommendations, because it is a
randomised phase II trial and also in view of the previously men-
tioned data on the similar relative benefit of EGFR antibodies in
later lines compared with second line.
recommendation 20: second-line combinations with targeted agents.
• Patients who are bevacizumab naïve should be considered for
treatment with an antiangiogenic (bevacizumab or aflibercept)
second line [I, A]. The use of aflibercept should be restricted
to combination with FOLFIRI for patients progressing on an
oxaliplatin-containing regimen [I, A].
• Patients who received bevacizumab first line should be consid-
ered for treatment with:
° Bevacizumab post-continuation strategy [I, A].
° Aflibercept or ramucirumab (in combination with FOLFIRI)
when treated in first line with oxaliplatin [I, A].
° EGFR antibodies in combination with FOLFIRI/irinotecan
for patients with RAS wild-type (BRAF wild-type) disease
• Relative benefit of EGFR antibodies is similar in later
lines compared with second line [II, A].
• Patients who are fast progressors on first-line bevacizumab-
containing regimens should be considered for treatment with
aflibercept or ramucirumab (only in combination with
FOLFIRI) [II, B], and—in the case of patients with RAS wild-
type disease and no pre-treatment with anti-EGFR therapy—
EGFR antibody therapy, preferably in combination with
chemotherapy [II, B].
third line
Both cetuximab and panitumumab have shown efficacy in the
third-line/salvage-therapy setting in patients with RAS wild-
type tumours [293–295], and are equally active as single agents
[296]. The combination of cetuximab with irinotecan is more
active than cetuximab alone, in irinotecan refractory patients
[293]. Any activity in patients with BRAF-mutant tumours, if
active at all, seems to be limited to patients with chemorefractory
mCRC [64, 65]. There is no unequivocal evidence to support
administration of the alternative EGFR antibody, if a patient is
refractory to the other.
The multi-targeted kinase inhibitor regorafenib has reported
activity versus placebo plus best supportive care in two phase III
trials [297, 298]. Regorafenib has demonstrated a significant
improvement in OS (and maintenance of QoL over time) in
patients pre-treated with all available cytotoxics and bevacizu-
mab and EGFR antibodies [297], and can be proposed as a stan-
dard treatment in this setting [I, B]. However, some concerns
over safety have raised some doubt as to whether the labelled
dose (160 mg/day day 1–21 q4 weeks) is the optimal dose. In
reality, it seems that in some regions many physicians start with
a lower dose and then increase the dose to the approved dose if
no toxicity is observed. Frequent and close monitoring for
regorafenib toxicity is recommended.
Recently, an oral agent that combines trifluridine and tipiracil
hydrochloride, has been shown to be effective in the treatment of
patients with refractory mCRC, leading to a significant survival
benefit that is similar to that of regorafenib, but with limited toxi-
city and is therefore a potential new option [299, 300].
 | Van Cutsem et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 recommendation 21: third-line therapy.
• In RAS wild-type and BRAF wild-type patients not previously
treated with EGFR antibodies, cetuximab or panitumumab
therapy should be considered
° Cetuximab and panitumumab are equally active as single
agents [I, A].
° The combination of cetuximab with irinotecan is more active
than cetuximab alone, in irinotecan refractory patients [II, B].
° There is no unequivocal evidence to administer the alterna-
tive EGFR antibody, if a patient is refractory to one of the
EGFR antibodies [I, C].
• Regorafenib is recommended in patients pre-treated with
fluoropyrimidines, oxaliplatin, irinotecan, bevacizumab and
in RAS wild-type patients with EGFR antibodies [I, B].
° Regorafenib is superior to placebo in terms of OS, although
there are toxicity concerns in frail patients.
• Trifluridine/tipiracil is recommended for patients pre-
treated with fluoropyrimidines, oxaliplatin, irinotecan, bev-
acizumab and in RAS wild-type patients with EGFR antibo-
dies [I, B].
consensus recommendations on the
use of cytotoxics and biologicals in the
first- and subsequent-line treatment
of patients with mCRC
Within the expert panel, the consensus was that the initial cate-
gorisation of patients with mCRC for treatment should be made
according to whether they were clinically ‘fit’ or ‘unfit’ and sub-
sequently according to treatment goal. There was also the recog-
nition that there may be an intermediate category of patients
who are ‘unfit’ but may benefit from treatment. It was also
recognised that all treatment decisions involving patients
Assessment of clinical condition of the patient
Unfita (but may be suitable)
Fita
Unfita
BSC
GOAL
Cytoreduction (Shrinkage)**
OMD
See
figure 2
RAS wt
CT doublet +
anti-EGFR
Re-evaluation/assessment of response every 2 months*
Re-evaluation/assessment of response every 2–3 months*
Progressive
disease
Progressive disease
GOAL
Surgery
Cytoreduction (Shrinkage)**
Continue
Continue;
maintenance;
or pause
Continue;
maintenance;
or pause
Disease control
Combination CT
+ bevacizumab
CT triplet +
bevacizumab
Second-line
Second-line
CT doublet +
biological agent
CT doublet +
bevacizumab
CT triplet +/–
bevacizumab
RAS mt
BRAF mt
RAS wt
RAS mt
BRAF mt
MOLECULAR PROFILE
Disease control (control of progression)
MOLECULAR PROFILE
Patients with clearly
resectable metastases
Surgery alone
surgery with perioperative
postoperative CT
FP+bevacizumab: reduced
dose doublet; anti-EGFR
Figure 4. Zurich treatment algorithm. BSC, best supportive care; CT, chemotherapy; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; FP, fluoropyrmidine; mt,
mutant, NED, no evidence of disease; OMD, oligometastatic disease; wt, wild-type. aPatients assessed as fit or unfit according to medical condition not due to
malignant disease. *After two re-evaluations, consider maintenance. **(A) Includes two subgroups: (1) those for whom intensive treatment is appropriate with
the goal of cytoreduction (tumour shrinkage) and conversion to resectable disease; (2) those who need an intensive treatment, although they will never make it
to resection or LAT, since they need a rapid reduction of tumour burden because of impending clinical threat, impending organ dysfunction, severe symptoms.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw235 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Table 7. Systemic therapy choices according to the Zurich treatment algorithm for patients with unresectable metastatic disease (excluding those with oligometastatic disease)a
Category
Fit patientsb
Unfitb
May be unfit
Unfit
Treatment goal
Cytoreduction (tumour shrinkage)
Disease control (control of progression)
Palliation
Molecular profile
RAS wt
RAS mt
BRAF mt
RAS wt
RAS mt
BRAF mt
Any
Any
First-line
Preferred choice (s)
CT doublet + EGFR antibodyc,d
CT doublet + bevacizumab
FOLFOXIRI + bevacizumab
CT doublet + bevacizumab
or
CT doublet + EGFR
antibodyc
CT doublet
+ bevacizumab
FOLFOXIRI ± bevacizumab
FP + bevacizumab
BSC
Second choice
FOLFOXIRI ± bevacizumab
FOLFOXIRI + bevacizumab
CT doublet + bevacizumab
FP + bevacizumab
CT doublet + bevacizumab
Reduced-dose CT doublet
—
Third choice
CT doublet + bevacizumab
FOLFOXIRI
FOLFOXIRI
If RAS wt may consider
EGFR antibody therapy
—
Maintenance
Preferred choice
FP + bevacizumabe
FP + bevacizumab
FP + bevacizumab
FP + bevacizumabe
FP + bevacizumab
FP + bevacizumab
FP + bevacizumab
—
Second choice
Pause
Pause
Pause
Pause
Pause
Pause
FP
—
Second line
Preferred choice(s)
CT doublet + bevacizumab
CT doublet + bevacizumab
CT doublet + bevacizumab
CT doublet + bevacizumab
or
CT doublet + EGFR antibody
CT doublet
+ bevacizumab
CT doublet + bevacizumab
—
Second choice
CT doublet + EGFR antibodyc,f
or
FOLFIRI + aflibercept/
ramucirumab
FOLFIRI + aflibercept/
ramucirumab
FOLFIRI + aflibercept/
ramucirumab
FOLFIRI + aflibercept/
ramucirumab
FOLFIRI + aflibercept/
ramucirumab
FOLFIRI + aflibercept/
ramucirumab
-
Third line
Preferred choice (s)
CT doublet + EGFR antibodyc,f
or
irinotecan + cetuximabf
Regorafenib or trifluridine/
tipiracil
Regorafenib or trifluridine/
tipiracil
CT doublet + EGFR antibodyc
or irinotecan + cetuximab
Regorafenib or
trifluridine/tipiracil
Regorafenib or
trifluridine/tipiracil
—
Second choice
EGFR antibody monotherapyf
EGFR antibody monotherapyf
—
Third choice
Regorafenib or trifluridine/
tipiracil
Regorafenib or trifluridine/
tipiracil
—
BSC, best supportive care; CT, chemotherapy; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; FP, fluoropyrmidine; FOLFOXIRI, infusional 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, irinotecan and oxaliplatin; mt, mutant; wt,
wild-type.
aCross references to Figure 4.
bPatients assessed as fit or unfit according to medical condition not due to malignant disease.
cEGFR antibodies: cetuximab and panitumumab.
dIn patients in need of a rapid reduction in tumour burden because of impending clinical threat, impending organ dysfunction and severe disease-related symptoms, a similar strategy can be proposed, although
the consensus on the preferred treatment of choice was less strong. For those patients who have RAS wild-type disease, a cytotoxic doublet plus an EGFR antibody is a preferred option, although a cytotoxic
doublet plus bevacizumab is an equally valid alternative. A cytotoxic triplet plus or minus bevacizumab may be an alternative for selected, very fit and motivated patients.
eIn patients where a bevacizumab-containing regimen was started. In patients where a cetuximab-containing combination was started: pause or less intensive regimen.
fIf not yet pretreated with an EGFR antibody.
 | Van Cutsem et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 categorised as being clinically fit must be made at a tumour
board meeting by an MDT, informed by the appropriate mole-
cular analyses. The appropriate molecular analyses are to be
carried out at the time of initial diagnosis of mCRC and should
comprise a full analysis of tumour RAS mutational status
(KRAS: exon 2, 3 and 4 and NRAS: exon 2, 3 and 4) with a
simultaneous analysis of tumour BRAF mutational status, con-
ducted in a validated laboratory/testing centre, to facilitate the
best diagnostic and prognostic decision making possible. All
patients considered for systemic therapy should be stratified
according to whether their tumours were RAS wild-type, RAS
mutant or BRAF mutant.
The expert panel consensus outlined below led to the genera-
tion of the Zurich treatment algorithm (Figure 4).
allocation to first-line treatment
1) Fit patients with resectable metastatic disease
The assignment of ‘fit’ patients to surgery is dependent on
surgical evaluation within an MDT according to technical
and prognostic criteria, as described above, and consideration
of any contraindications for resection; as outlined in Table 2.
In the case of ‘fit’ patients with initially resectable metastatic
disease, the recommendation is (Recommendation 12 this docu-
ment) that they can either be referred immediately for potentially
curative surgery or for perioperative chemotherapy (FOLFOX)
[163, 164], dependent on the available prognostic information
and surgical considerations.
2) Fit patients with unresectable metastatic disease
For fit patients with unresectable metastatic disease, the treat-
ment goals are either cytoreduction (A) or disease control and
hence prolongation of survival (Figure 4 and Table 6).
A. cytoreduction.
1) For those patients with potentially resectable mCRC for
whom cytoreduction and conversion to resectable disease
and/or for patients with OMD, the integration of local or
ablative methods after response to systemic therapy are the
goals, intensive treatment (cytotoxics in combination with
biologicals) should be the treatment of choice for first-line
induction therapy.
However, uncertainty remains as to which is the best combi-
nation to use for patients stratified according to the molecular
profile of their disease, with the treatment recommendations of
the panel presented in Figure 4 and below, with the alternative
options presented in Table 7.
Consensus recommendation for patients where cytoreduction
with ‘conversion’ and/or the integration of local ablative treat-
ment is the goal
• A1a. For those patients who have RAS wild-type disease, a
cytotoxic doublet plus an EGFR antibody should be the treat-
ment of choice.
• A1b. For those patients with RAS-mutant disease, a cytotoxic
doublet plus bevacizumab or cytotoxic triplet plus bevacizu-
mab are the preferred options.
• A1c. Patients should be revaluated for their disease status
every 2 months in order to ensure that resectable patients are
not over-treated.
• A1d. If, after the first re-evaluation at 2 months, there is evi-
dence of tumour shrinkage, patients should be recommended
for either potentially curative surgery or the most suitable
LAT strategy—with a view to eliminating all evidence of
disease (i.e. R0 resection, NED).
• A1e. If no response is evident at first evaluation, it is suggested
that the cytotoxic doublet is changed in order to maximise the
chance of resection [5].
• A1f. Where there is evidence for cytoreduction, but the
patients are not suitable for surgery, they should continue on
combination chemotherapy plus the appropriate biological
dependent on RAS and BRAF mutation status as indicated in
Figure 4.
• A1g. Where there is evidence of disease progression, patients
should continue to second-line therapy (Figure 5).
• A1h. Toxicity might also require a change to an alternative
regimen.
2) A specific group of patients who need an intensive treatment,
although neither resection nor LAT of metastases are a treat-
ment goal: are patients in need of a rapid reduction in tumour
burden because of impending clinical threat, impending
organ dysfunction and severe disease-related symptoms. In
these patients, a similar strategy can be proposed, although
the consensus on the preferred treatment of choice was less
strong.
Consensus recommendation for patients where cytoreduction is
needed because of aggressive biology and/or risk of developing or
existing severe symptoms
• A2a. For those patients who have RAS wild-type disease, a
cytotoxic doublet plus an EGFR antibody is a preferred
option, although a cytotoxic doublet plus bevacizumab is an
equally valid alternative. A cytotoxic triplet plus or minus
Reasons for first-line discontinuation
Tumour progression
(clinical resistance)
Consider second-line CT
(PS, organ function)
Early progession
(during 1–2 months
of discontinuation)
Progression
Reintroduction of
first-line CT
Late progression
(occurring after at least
2 months of treatment)
Excessive toxicity
(intolerance)
Patient/doctor decision
(stop CT) +/– maintenance
Figure 5. Maintenance and second-line treatment options. CT, chemother-
apy; PS, performance status.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw235 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Table 8. Summary of recommendations
LAT (including surgery and the management of patients with OMD)
Recommendation 1: Tissue handling
• Fixation with 10% neutral buffered formalin (4% formaldehyde) is recommended [V, A]
• Fixation time should be no less than 6 h, and no greater than 48 h in duration. In the case of microwave-enhanced fixation, the quality of both nucleic
acids and proteins must be verified [IV, A]
• Sections for biomarker testing should ideally be cut immediately before analysis [IV, A]
Recommendation 2: Selection of specimens for biomarker testing
• The primary pathologist should review all available tumour specimens to select those that are most suitable for biomarker analyses [IV, A]
• Enrichment of samples by macro-dissection to maximise tumour cell content (>50%) before DNA extraction is recommended [III, A]
Recommendation 3: Tissue selection
• Tissue from either the primary tumour or a liver metastasis may be used for RAS mutation testing [III, A]
• Other metastatic sites such as lymph node or lung metastases may be used only if primary tumour or liver metastases samples are not available [II, B]
Recommendation 4: RAS testing
• RAS mutational status is a negative predictive biomarker for therapeutic choices involving EGFR antibody therapies in the metastatic disease setting [I, A]
° RAS testing should be carried out on all patients at the time of diagnosis of mCRC [I, A]
• RAS testing is mandatory before treatment with the EGFR-targeted monoclonal antibodies cetuximab and panitumumab [I, A]
• A network of arrangements should be established to ensure the rapid and robust transit of tissue samples from referral centres to testing laboratories, to
minimise the turnaround time and avoid delays in having this information available for all patients with mCRC
• Primary or metastatic colorectal tumour tissue can be used for RAS testing (see also Recommendation 3)
• RAS analysis should include at least KRAS exons 2, 3 and 4 (codons 12, 13, 59, 61, 117 and 146) and NRAS exons 2, 3 and 4 (codons 12, 13, 59, 61 and 117)
• Turnaround time for RAS testing (expanded RAS analysis) should be ≤7 working days from the time of receipt of the specimen by the testing laboratory
to the time of issuing of the final report, for >90% of specimens.
• Validation (or verification, where more applicable) of RAS testing assays should be carried out and recorded before implementation in clinical use.
Laboratory audit mechanisms should be in place
• Laboratories providing RAS testing of colorectal tumours should demonstrate their successful participation in a relevant external quality assessment
scheme, and be appropriately accredited.
Recommendation 5: BRAF testing
• Tumour BRAF mutation status should be assessed alongside the assessment of tumour RAS mutational status for prognostic assessment (and/or
potential selection for clinical trials) [I, B]
Recommendation 6: Microsatellite instability testing
• MSI testing in the metastatic disease setting can assist clinicians in genetic counselling [II, B]
• MSI testing has strong predictive value for the use of immune check-point inhibitors in the treatment of patients with mCRC [II, B]
Recommendation 7: Biomarkers of chemotherapy sensitivity and toxicity
• DPD testing before 5-FU administration remains an option but is not routinely recommended [II, D]
• UGT1A1 phenotyping remains an option and should be carried out in patients with a suspicion of UGT1A1 deficiency as reflected by low conjugated
bilirubin and in patients where an irinotecan dose of >180 mg/m2 per administration is planned [95] [III, C]
• ERCC1 expression cannot be recommended for use as a biomarker for treatment decisions involving the use of oxaliplatin in routine clinical practice, but
could be included prospectively in clinical trials [III, D]
• TS activity and TSER genotyping are not recommended for use in clinical practice [II, D]
Recommendation 8: Emerging biomarkers not recommended for routine patient management outside of a clinical trial setting:
• Detection of mutations in PIK3CA exon 20 [II, D]
• Evaluation of PTEN loss by IHC [V, D]
• Evaluation of the levels of the EGFR ligands amphiregulin, epiregulin and transforming growth factor-α [II, D]
• Evaluation of levels of EGFR protein expression [II, E]
• Evaluation of EGFR amplification and copy number and EGFR ectodomain mutations [IV, D]
• Evaluation of HER2 amplification or HER2 activating mutations
• Evaluation of HER3, and MET receptor overexpression [IV, D]
Recommendation 9: Emerging technologies
• Although CTC number correlates with prognosis in patients with mCRC, the clinical utility of CTC assessments is not yet clear and therefore cannot be
recommended [IV, D]
• The utility of liquid ctDNA biopsies to guide treatment decisions is currently under investigation in clinical trials, but cannot yet be recommended in
routine practice [V, D]
• Whole genome, whole exome and whole transcriptome analysis should be carried out only in a research setting [V, D]
Continued
 | Van Cutsem et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Table 8. Continued
LAT (including surgery and the management of patients with OMD)
Recommendation 10: OMD
• For patients with OMD, systemic therapy is the standard of care and should be considered as the initial part of every treatment strategy (exception:
patients with single/few liver or lung lesions, see below).
• The best local treatment should be selected from a ‘toolbox’ of procedures according to disease localisation, treatment goal (‘the more curative the more
surgery’/higher importance of local/complete control), treatment-related morbidity and patient-related factors such as comorbidity/ies and age [IV, B]
Recommendation 11: Imaging in the identification and management of disease
• Imaging should comprise first an abdominal/pelvic and thoracic CT scan and, in the case of doubt, a second method such as US (CEUS), MRI or PET/
CT scan depending on the localisation of the metastases. US may be helpful to characterise liver metastases, MRI liver, peritoneal or pelvic metastases
and PET/CT extrahepatic disease [IV, B]
• A stepwise imaging approach is the recommended policy, in relation to the therapeutic possibilities, rather than the use of all imaging modalities in all
patients [V, B]
Recommendation 12: Perioperative treatment
• Both, technical criteria for resection and prognostic considerations define the need for systemic perioperative therapy [IV, B]
• In patients with clearly resectable disease and favourable prognostic criteria, perioperative treatment may not be necessary and upfront resection is
justified [I, C; consensus >75%]
• In patients with technically resectable disease where the prognosis is unclear or probably unfavourable, perioperative combination chemotherapy
(FOLFOX or CAPOX) should be administered [I, B; consensus >75%]
• Targeted agents should not be used in resectable patients where the indication for perioperative treatment is prognostic in nature [II, E]
• In situations where the criteria for prognosis and resectability are not sharply defined, perioperative therapy should be considered (as part of a
continuum of treatment option) [IV, B] (Figure 2). Patients with synchronous onset of metastases should be allocated to this group and therapeutic
pathway
• In patients with favourable oncological and technical (surgical) criteria, who have not received perioperative chemotherapy, there is no strong evidence
to support the use of adjuvant chemotherapy [II, C], whereas patients with unfavourable criteria may benefit from adjuvant treatment [III, B]
• In patients who have not received any previous chemotherapy, adjuvant treatment with FOLFOX or CAPOX is recommended (unless patients were
previously recently exposed to oxaliplatin-based adjuvant chemotherapy) [IV, B]
• Decision-making should include patients’ characteristics and preferences [IV, B]
Recommendation 13: Conversion therapy
• In potentially resectable patients (if conversion is the goal), a regimen leading to high response rates and/or a large tumour size reduction (shrinkage) is
recommended [II, A]
• There is uncertainty surrounding the best combination to use as only few trials have addressed this specifically:
° In patients with RAS wild-type disease, a cytotoxic doublet plus an EGFR antibody seems to have the best benefit risk/ratio, although the combination
of FOLFOXIRI plus bevacizumab may also be considered and, to a lesser extent, a cytotoxic doublet plus bevacizumab [II, A]
° In patients with RAS mutant disease: a cytotoxic doublet plus bevacizumab or FOLFOXIRI plus bevacizumab [II, A]
• Patients must be re-evaluated regularly in order to prevent the overtreatment of resectable patients as the maximal response is expected to be achieved
after 12–16 weeks of therapy in most patients.
Recommendation 14: Ablative techniques
• Despite the lack of more available prospective data, this strategic treatment approach should be evaluated and pursued further in suitable patients [II, B]
Recommendation 15: Local ablation techniques
• In patients with unresectable liver metastases only, or OMD, local ablation techniques such as thermal ablation or high conformal radiation techniques
(e.g. SBRT, HDR-brachytherapy) can be considered. The decision should be taken by an MDT based on local experience, tumour characteristics and
patient preference [IV, B]
• In patients with lung only or OMD of the lung, ablative high conformal radiation or thermal ablation may be considered if resection is limited by
comorbidity, the extent of lung parenchyma resection, or other factors [IV, B]
• SBRT is a safe and feasible alternative treatment for oligometastatic colorectal liver and lung metastases in patients not amenable to surgery or other
ablative treatments [IV, B]
• RFA can be used in addition to surgery with the goal of eradicating all visible metastatic sites [II, B]
Recommendation 16: Embolisation
• For patients with liver-limited disease failing the available chemotherapeutic options
° Radioembolisation with yttrium-90 microspheres should be considered [II, B]
° Chemoembolisation may be also considered as a treatment option [IV, B]
• Radioembolisation (and chemoembolisation) of CLM in earlier treatment lines may be interesting as ‘consolidation treatment’ but should be limited to
clinical trials
Continued
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw235 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Table 8. Continued
LAT (including surgery and the management of patients with OMD)
Recommendation 17: Cytoreductive surgery and HIPEC
• Complete cytoreductive surgery and HIPEC can be considered for patients with limited peritoneal metastases in centres which are very experienced in
the use of HIPEC [III, B]
Treatment of metastatic disease
Recommendation 18: First-line systemic therapy combinations according to targeted agent used
• Biologicals (targeted agents) are indicated in the first-line treatment of most patients unless contraindicated [I, A]
• The VEGF antibody bevacizumab should be used in combination with:
° The cytotoxic doublets FOLFOX/CAPOX/FOLFIRI
° The cytotoxic triplet FOLFOXIRI in selected fit and motivated patients where cytoreduction (tumour shrinkage) is the goal—and potentially also in fit
patients with tumour BRAF mutations [II, B]
° Fluoropyrimidine monotherapy in patients unable to tolerate aggressive treatment [I, B]
• EGFR antibodies should be used in combination with:
° FOLFOX/FOLFIRI [I, A]
° Capecitabine-based and bolus 5-FU based regimens should not be combined with EGFR antibodies [I, E]
Recommendation 19: Maintenance therapy
• Patients receiving FOLFOX or CAPOX plus bevacizumab-based therapy as induction therapy, should be considered for maintenance therapy after
6 cycles of CAPOX or 8 cycles of FOLFOX. The optimal maintenance treatment is a combination of a fluoropyrimidine (plus bevacizumab).
Bevacizumab as monotherapy is not recommended [I, B]
• Patients receiving FOLFIRI can continue on induction therapy—at a minimum—for as long as tumour shrinkage continues and the treatment is
tolerable [V, B]
• For patients receiving initial therapy with FOLFOXIRI plus or minus bevacizumab, a fluoropyrimidine plus bevacizumab may be considered as
maintenance therapy (as was done in the pivotal trials examining FOLFOXIRI)
• For patients receiving initial therapy with single-agent fluoropyrimidine (plus bevacizumab), induction therapy should be maintained [V, A].
Individualisation and discussion with the patient is essential [V, A]
• Initial induction therapy or a second-line therapy have to be reintroduced at radiological or first signs of symptomatic progression. If a second-line therapy is
chosen, re-introduction of the initial induction treatment should be a part of the entire treatment strategy as long as no residual toxicity is present [III, B]
Recommendation 20: Second-line combinations with targeted agents
• Patients who are bevacizumab naïve should be considered for treatment with an antiangiogenic (bevacizumab or aflibercept) second-line [I, A]. The use
of aflibercept should be restricted to combination with FOLFIRI for patients progressing on an oxaliplatin-containing regimen [I, A]
• Patients who received bevacizumab first-line should be considered for treatment with:
° Bevacizumab post-continuation strategy [I, A]
° Aflibercept or ramucirumab (in combination with FOLFIRI) when treated in first line with oxaliplatin [I, A]
° EGFR antibodies in combination with FOLFIRI/irinotecan for patients with RAS wild-type (BRAF wild-type) disease
• Relative benefit of EGFR antibodies is similar in later lines compared with second-line [II, A]
• Patients who are fast progressors on first-line bevacizumab-containing regimens should be considered for treatment with aflibercept or ramucirumab
(only in combination with FOLFIRI) [II, B], and—in the case of patients with RAS wild-type disease and no pre-treatment with anti-EGFR therapy—
EGFR antibody therapy, preferably in combination with chemotherapy [II, B]
Recommendation 21: Third-line therapy
• In RAS wild-type and BRAF wild-type patients not previously treated with EGFR antibodies, cetuximab or panitumumab therapy should be considered
° Cetuximab and panitumumab are equally active as single agents [I, A]
° The combination of cetuximab with irinotecan is more active than cetuximab alone, in irinotecan refractory patients [II, B]
° There is no unequivocal evidence to administer the alternative EGFR antibody, if a patient is refractory to one of the EGFR antibodies [I, C].
• Regorafenib is recommended in patients pre-treated with fluoropyrimidines, oxaliplatin, irinotecan, bevacizumab and in RAS wild-type patients with
EGFR antibodies [I, B]
° Regorafenib is superior to placebo in terms of OS, although there are toxicity concerns in frail patients.
• Trifluridine/tipiracil is a new option for patients pre-treated with fluoropyrimidines, oxaliplatin, irinotecan, bevacizumab and in RAS wild-type patients
with EGFR antibodies [I, B]
Consensus recommendations on the use of cytotoxics and biologicals in the first- and subsequent-line treatment of patients with mCRC
Consensus recommendation for patients where cytoreduction with ‘conversion’ and/or the integration of local ablative treatment is the goal
• A1a. For those patients who have RAS wild-type disease, a cytotoxic doublet plus an EGFR antibody should be the treatment of choice
• A1b. For those patients with RAS mutant disease, a cytotoxic doublet plus bevacizumab or cytotoxic triplet plus bevacizumab are the preferred options
• A1c. Patients should be revaluated for their disease status every 2 months in order to ensure that resectable patients are not over-treated
• A1d. If, after the first re-evaluation at 2 months, there is evidence of tumour shrinkage, patients should be recommended for either potentially curative
surgery or the most suitable LAT strategy—with a view to eliminating all evidence of disease (i.e. R0 resection, NED)
Continued
 | Van Cutsem et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 bevacizumab may be an alternative for selected, very fit and
motivated patients.
• A2b. For those patients with RAS-mutant disease, a cytotoxic
doublet plus bevacizumab is the preferred option. A cytotoxic
triplet plus or minus bevacizumab may be an alternative for
selected, very fit and motivated patients.
• A2c. Patients should be revaluated for their disease status
every 2 months.
• A2d. Treatment should not be changed in patients without
tumour progression and not suffering from major toxicity.
B. disease control. The recommendation for fit patients, for
whom surgery or induction therapy plus LAT are not options and,
where the treatment goal is long-term disease control without
symptomatic toxicity, is that they should receive chemotherapy
(usually a doublet) plus bevacizumab or a cytotoxic doublet plus
EGFR antibody therapy as an alternative option for patients with
RAS wild-type disease.
Patients should be re-evaluated every 2–3 months. Where
there is evidence of good disease control, patients should con-
tinue on therapy and if after two re-evaluations, a patient has
achieved a good response/disease control, active maintenance
therapy
with
chemotherapy
might
be
considered
(see
Recommendation 19). Patients with progressive disease or
excessive toxicity should progress to second-line therapy (see
Figure 5 and Table 7).
Consensus recommendation for patients where disease control is
the goal
• B1a. For these patients, a cytotoxic doublet in combination
with
bevacizumab
or
in
patients
with
RAS
wild-type
tumours a cytotoxic doublet plus an EGFR antibody are
recommended.
• B1b. Patients should be revaluated for their disease status
every 2–3 months.
• B1c. In patients with a good response or at least disease
control, active maintenance therapy should be considered. A
fluoropyrimidine plus bevacizumab is the preferred option if
they started with a cytotoxic doublet plus bevacizumab.
• B1d. Where there is evidence of disease progression, patients
should continue to second-line therapy (Figure 5).
• B1e. Toxicity might also require a change to second-line
therapy.
3) Unfit patients
Patients with mCRC who are assessed as being unfit for any
treatment should receive best supportive care. For the other
patients in this group who are unfit, but may be suitable for
treatment, physician experience should guide treatment choice
with potential treatment options being capecitabine plus bevaci-
zumab or a reduced-dose doublet of cytotoxics.
In the case of unfit patients with RAS wild-type disease where
there is the fear that they may be receiving their last line of treat-
ment, anti-EGFR therapy can be considered (Figure 4).
4) Treatment of elderly patients with mCRC
Fit older patients should be treated with systemic combination
chemotherapy plus targeted agents as they derive the same
benefit as younger patients [301]. For older patients unfit for
standard combination chemotherapy (with or without targeted
agents), less intensive therapies including capecitabine plus
Table 8. Continued
LAT (including surgery and the management of patients with OMD)
• A1e. If no response is evident at first evaluation, it is suggested that the cytotoxic doublet is changed in order to maximise the chance of resection [5]
• A1f. Where there is evidence for cytoreduction but the patients are not suitable for surgery, they should continue on combination chemotherapy plus the
appropriate biological dependent on RAS and BRAF mutation status as indicated in Figure 4.
• A1g. Where there is evidence of disease progression, patients should continue to second-line therapy (Figure 5).
• A1h. Toxicity might also require a change to an alternative regimen.
Consensus recommendation for patients where cytoreduction is needed because of aggressive biology and/or risk of developing or existing severe symptoms
• A2a. For those patients who have RAS wild-type disease, a cytotoxic doublet plus an EGFR antibody is a preferred option, although a cytotoxic doublet
plus bevacizumab is an equally valid alternative. A cytotoxic triplet plus or minus bevacizumab may be an alternative for selected, very fit and motivated
patients
• A2b. For those patients with RAS mutant disease, a cytotoxic doublet plus bevacizumab is the preferred option. A cytotoxic triplet plus or minus
bevacizumab may be an alternative for selected, very fit and motivated patients
• A2c. Patients should be revaluated for their disease status every 2 months
• A2d. Treatment should not be changed in patients without tumour progression and not suffering from major toxicity
Consensus recommendation for patients where disease control is the goal
• B1a. For these patients, a cytotoxic doublet in combination with bevacizumab or in patients with RAS wild-type tumours, a cytotoxic doublet plus an
EGFR antibody are recommended
• B1b. Patients should be revaluated for their disease status every 2–3 months
• B1c. In patients with a good response or at least disease control, active maintenance therapy should be considered. A fluoropyrimidine plus bevacizumab
is the preferred option if they started their treatment with a cytotoxic doublet plus bevacizumab
• B1d. Where there is evidence of disease progression, patients should continue to second-line therapy (Figure 5)
• B1e. Toxicity might also require a change to second-line therapy.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw235 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 bevacizumab or reduced dose fluoropyrimidine plus oxaliplatin
or irinotecan are appropriate first-line options [301].
note
A summary of recommendations is provided in Table 8.
funding
All costs relating to the consensus conference were covered from
the European Society for Medical Oncology central funds.
There was no external funding of the event or manuscript pro-
duction.
disclosure
RA has reported honoraria from Amgen, Merck-Serono, Sanofi,
Roche. EAA has reported advisory role for Amgen, Bayer,
Celgene, Merck, Roche, Sanofi. DAr has reported honoraria/
consultancy for Roche, Merck-Serono, Bayer, Amgen; research
funding from Roche. ABa has reported advisory boards for
Horizon Discovery, Trovagene and Biocartis; stock holder for
Horizon Discovery. ABe has reported research support directly
to institution from Amgen, Genentech, Astellas/Aveo, Gilead,
Bayer; scientific consultancy for Genentech, Lilly/ImClone,
Sanofi, Bayer, Bristol-Myers Squibb; no stock and no speakers’
bureau. GB has reported research grants from Bayer, Celgene,
Lilly, Roche, Abbvie; speaker for Roche, Bayer, Lilly, Amgen,
Janssen, Taiho, Pfizer, Novartis. AC has reported member of
speaker’s bureau for Roche and Merck-Serono; advisory boards
for Merck-Serono, Roche, Amgen, Bayer and Lilly. FC has
reported consultancy/advisory roles for Bayer, Roche, Merck-
Serono, Sanofi, Lilly, Astra Zeneca. ED-R has reported advisory
boards for Roche, Merck-Serono, Sanofi, Bayer, Amgen;
research grants from Roche, Merck-Serono, Amgen. J-YD has
reported advisory boards, symposia, lectures for Amgen, Roche,
Merck-Serono, Sanofi, Bayer. MD has reported advisory boards
for Celgene, Merck-Serono, Roche, Amgen, Novartis, Sanofi;
symposia lectures for Merck-Serono, Roche, Novartis, Celgene;
research funding from Roche, Pfizer, Chugai. AF has reported
honoraria for advisory role, speaker at symposia and research
funding from Amgen, Bayer, Merck-Serono, Roche, Sanofi and
Lilly. AG has reported research fundings and honoraria for con-
sultancy activities from Genentech, Roche, Eisai, Bayer, Amgen.
TG has reported speakers’ bureau member and research funding
from Roche, Merck-Serono, Amgen, Sanofi-Aventis, Bayer. VH
has reported research funding from Merck-Serono, Roche,
Sanofi, Amgen, Lilly; speaker’s honoraria and advisory boards
for Merck-Serono, Roche, Sanofi, Amgen and Lilly. C-HK has
reported speakers’ honoraria and advisory boards for Amgen,
Merck, Pfizer, Sanofi; research grants from Novartis, Roche,
Celgene. RL has reported advisory boards for Merck, Roche,
Sanofi, Amgen. PL-P has reported honoraria for conferences
and consulting from Amgen, Sanofi, Merck-Serono, Boehringer
Ingenheim, Astra Zeneca, Roche, Lilly, Integragen. BM has
reported research grants from Merck Serono, Hoffmann La
Roche; consultancy/advisory board for Bayer, Boehringer-
Ingelheim, Novartis. TM has reported research funding from
Astra Zeneca, GlaxoSmithKline and Almac Diagnostics. KM
has reported member of speaker’s bureau for Merck-Serono,
Taiho, Chugai and Takeda. PO has reported honoraria for lec-
tures, advisory boards or travel grants from Amgen, Bayer,
Celgene, Merck-Serono, Nordic Drugs, Roche, Sanofi Oncology,
Prime Oncology and Finnish medical associations. DP has
reported advisory boards and lectures for Roche, Merck-Serono,
Amgen. GP has reported research grants from Roche, Sanofi,
Amgen. PP has reported advisory boards, symposia, lectures for
Amgen, Bayer, Celgene, Merck-Serono, Merck Sharp & Dohme,
Nordic Drugs, Roche, Sanofi, Taiho. TJP has reported advisory
boards for Amgen, Roche, Merck. CP has reported advisory role
for Merck-Serono, Roche, Bayer, Nordic Pharma, Amgen. JR
has reported research funding, speaker fees, advisory board
member for Bayer, Simtex, Merck-Serono. RS has reported
member of advisory board and speaker’s bureau for Merck-
Serono and Amgen; research funding from Roche, Amgen and
Merck-Serono. WS has reported research funding and honoraria
for consultancy activities from Roche, Merck, Bayer, Amgen. HJS
has reported support for clinical trials from Roche; advisory boards
for Amgen, Roche and Bayer. AS has reported advisory boards and
satellite symposia for Roche, Merck-Serono, Amgen, Takeda, Bayer,
Sanofi, Lilly, Celgene. JTab has reported consultancy/advisory role
for Amgen, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Celgene, Chugai, Lilly,
MSD, Merck-Serono, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi, Symphogen, Taiho
and Takeda. JTai has reported advisory, research grants, speaker for
Roche, Merck, Amgen, Sanofi, Bayer. EVC has reported research
grants Bayer, Boehringer, Amgen, Celgene, Ipsen, Lilly, Merck,
Novartis, Roche, Sanofi. JHVK has reported research funding from
Amgen and Merck-Serono. HW has reported advisory boards and
speakers’ bureau for Sanofi, Bayer, Roche, Merck, Sirtex Medical,
Lilly. TY has reported research funding from Pfizer, Eli Lilly,
Sumitomo Dainippon, Taiho, Yakult and Daiichi Sankyo. DAd,
ADH, KH, PH, NN, WJGO, AR, ST and AZ have reported no
potential conflicts of interest.
references
1. Ferlay J, Steliarova-Foucher E, Lortet-Tieulent J et al. Cancer incidence and
mortality patterns in Europe: estimates for 40 countries in 2012. Eur J Cancer
2013; 49: 1374–1403.
2. Ferlay J, Soerjomataram I, Dikshit R et al. Cancer incidence and mortality
worldwide: sources, methods and major patterns in GLOBOCAN 2012. Int J
Cancer 2015; 136: E359–E386.
3. Schmoll HJ, Van Cutsem E, Stein A et al. ESMO consensus guidelines for
management of patients with colon and rectal cancer. A personalized approach
to clinical decision making. Ann Oncol 2012; 23: 2479–2516.
4. Dykewicz CA, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Infectious Diseases
Society of America, American Society of Blood and Marrow Transplantation.
Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among
hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33:
139–144.
5. Van Cutsem E, Cervantes A, Nordlinger B et al. Metastatic colorectal cancer:
ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann
Oncol 2014; 25(Suppl 3): iii1–iii9.
6. Neumeister VM, Anagnostou V, Siddiqui S et al. Quantitative assessment of effect
of preanalytic cold ischemic time on protein expression in breast cancer tissues.
J Natl Cancer Inst 2012; 104: 1815–1824.
7. Portier BP, Wang Z, Downs-Kelly E et al. Delay to formalin fixation ‘cold ischemia
time’: effect on ERBB2 detection by in-situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry.
Mod Pathol 2013; 26: 1–9.
 | Van Cutsem et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 8. Engel KB, Moore HM. Effects of preanalytical variables on the detection of
proteins by immunohistochemistry in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue.
Arch Pathol Lab Med 2011; 135: 537–543.
9. Arber DA. Effect of prolonged formalin fixation on the immunohistochemical reactivity
of breast markers. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol 2002; 10: 183–186.
10. Babic A, Loftin IR, Stanislaw S et al. The impact of pre-analytical processing on
staining quality for H&E, dual hapten, dual color in situ hybridization and
fluorescent in situ hybridization assays. Methods 2010; 52: 287–300.
11. Chafin D, Theiss A, Roberts E et al. Rapid two-temperature formalin fixation.
PLoS One 2013; 8: e54138.
12. Kerr KM, Bubendorf L, Edelman MJ et al. Second ESMO consensus conference
on lung cancer: pathology and molecular biomarkers for non-small-cell lung
cancer. Ann Oncol 2014; 25: 1681–1690.
13. van Krieken JH, Jung A, Kirchner T et al. KRAS mutation testing for predicting
response to anti-EGFR therapy for colorectal carcinoma: proposal for an
European quality assurance program. Virchows Arch 2008; 453: 417–431.
14. Dijkstra JR, Heideman DA, Meijer GA et al. KRAS mutation analysis on low
percentage of colon cancer cells: the importance of quality assurance. Virchows
Arch 2013; 462: 39–46.
15. Tsiatis AC, Norris-Kirby A, Rich RG et al. Comparison of Sanger sequencing,
pyrosequencing, and melting curve analysis for the detection of KRAS
mutations: diagnostic and clinical implications. J Mol Diagn 2010; 12:
425–432.
16. Carotenuto P, Roma C, Rachiglio AM et al. Detection of KRAS mutations in
colorectal carcinoma patients with an integrated PCR/sequencing and real-time
PCR approach. Pharmacogenomics 2010; 11: 1169–1179.
17. Tol J, Dijkstra JR, Vink-Borger ME et al. High sensitivity of both sequencing and
real-time PCR analysis of KRAS mutations in colorectal cancer tissue. J Cell Mol
Med 2010; 14: 2122–2131.
18. Etienne-Grimaldi MC, Formento JL, Francoual M et al. K-Ras mutations and
treatment
outcome
in
colorectal
cancer
patients
receiving
exclusive
fluoropyrimidine therapy. Clin Cancer Res 2008; 14: 4830–4835.
19. Losi L, Benhattar J, Costa J. Stability of K-ras mutations throughout the natural
history of human colorectal cancer. Eur J Cancer 1992; 28A: 1115–1120.
20. Suchy B, Zietz C, Rabes HM. K-ras point mutations in human colorectal
carcinomas: relation to aneuploidy and metastasis. Int J Cancer 1992; 52: 30–33.
21. Weber JC, Meyer N, Pencreach E et al. Allelotyping analyses of synchronous
primary and metastasis CIN colon cancers identified different subtypes. Int J
Cancer 2007; 120: 524–532.
22. Zauber P, Sabbath-Solitare M, Marotta SP, Bishop DT. Molecular changes in the
Ki-ras and APC genes in primary colorectal carcinoma and synchronous
metastases compared with the findings in accompanying adenomas. Mol Pathol
2003; 56: 137–140.
23. Oudejans JJ, Slebos RJ, Zoetmulder FA et al. Differential activation of ras genes
by point mutation in human colon cancer with metastases to either lung or liver.
Int J Cancer 1991; 49: 875–879.
24. Al-Mulla F, Going JJ, Sowden ET et al. Heterogeneity of mutant versus wild-type
Ki-ras in primary and metastatic colorectal carcinomas, and association of
codon-12 valine with early mortality. J Pathol 1998; 185: 130–138.
25. Albanese I, Scibetta AG, Migliavacca M et al. Heterogeneity within and between
primary colorectal carcinomas and matched metastases as revealed by analysis
of Ki-ras and p53 mutations. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2004; 325:
784–791.
26. Oliveira C, Velho S, Moutinho C et al. KRAS and BRAF oncogenic mutations in
MSS colorectal carcinoma progression. Oncogene 2007; 26: 158–163.
27. Artale S, Sartore-Bianchi A, Veronese SM et al. Mutations of KRAS and BRAF in
primary and matched metastatic sites of colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 2008;
26: 4217–4219.
28. Santini D, Loupakis F, Vincenzi B et al. High concordance of KRAS status
between primary colorectal tumors and related metastatic sites: implications for
clinical practice. Oncologist 2008; 13: 1270–1275.
29. Cejas P, Lopez-Gomez M, Aguayo C et al. KRAS mutations in primary colorectal
cancer tumors and related metastases: a potential role in prediction of lung
metastasis. PLoS One 2009; 4: e8199.
30. Garm Spindler KL, Pallisgaard N, Rasmussen AA et al. The importance of KRAS
mutations and EGF61A>G polymorphism to the effect of cetuximab and
irinotecan in metastatic colorectal cancer. Ann Oncol 2009; 20: 879–884.
31. Loupakis F, Pollina L, Stasi I et al. PTEN expression and KRAS mutations on
primary tumors and metastases in the prediction of benefit from cetuximab plus
irinotecan for patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 2009; 27:
2622–2629.
32. Molinari F, Martin V, Saletti P et al. Differing deregulation of EGFR and
downstream proteins in primary colorectal cancer and related metastatic sites
may be clinically relevant. Br J Cancer 2009; 100: 1087–1094.
33. Perrone F, Lampis A, Orsenigo M et al. PI3KCA/PTEN deregulation contributes to
impaired responses to cetuximab in metastatic colorectal cancer patients. Ann
Oncol 2009; 20: 84–90.
34. Baldus SE, Schaefer KL, Engers R et al. Prevalence and heterogeneity of KRAS,
BRAF, and PIK3CA mutations in primary colorectal adenocarcinomas and their
corresponding metastases. Clin Cancer Res 2010; 16: 790–799.
35. Italiano A, Hostein I, Soubeyran I et al. KRAS and BRAF mutational status in
primary colorectal tumors and related metastatic sites: biological and clinical
implications. Ann Surg Oncol 2010; 17: 1429–1434.
36. Knijn N, Mekenkamp LJ, Klomp M et al. KRAS mutation analysis: a comparison
between primary tumours and matched liver metastases in 305 colorectal cancer
patients. Br J Cancer 2011; 104: 1020–1026.
37. Corcoran RB, Ebi H, Turke AB et al. EGFR-mediated re-activation of MAPK
signaling contributes to insensitivity of BRAF mutant colorectal cancers to RAF
inhibition with vemurafenib. Cancer Discov 2012; 2: 227–235.
38. Maughan TS, Adams RA, Smith CG et al. Addition of cetuximab to oxaliplatin-
based first-line combination chemotherapy for treatment of advanced colorectal
cancer: results of the randomised phase 3 MRC COIN trial. Lancet 2011; 377:
2103–2114.
39. Swain SM, Baselga J, Kim SB et al. Pertuzumab, trastuzumab, and docetaxel in
HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2015; 372: 724–734.
40. Dancey JE, Dobbin KK, Groshen S et al. Guidelines for the development and
incorporation of biomarker studies in early clinical trials of novel agents. Clin
Cancer Res 2010; 16: 1745–1755.
41. Amado RG, Wolf M, Peeters M et al. Wild-type KRAS is required for
panitumumab efficacy in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol
2008; 26: 1626–1634.
42. Karapetis CS, Khambata-Ford S, Jonker DJ et al. K-ras mutations and benefit
from cetuximab in advanced colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 2008; 359:
1757–1765.
43. Van Cutsem E, Kohne CH, Hitre E et al. Cetuximab and chemotherapy as initial
treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 2009; 360:
1408–1417.
44. Van Cutsem E, Kohne CH, Lang I et al. Cetuximab plus irinotecan, fluorouracil,
and leucovorin as first-line treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer: updated
analysis of overall survival according to tumor KRAS and BRAF mutation status. J
Clin Oncol 2011; 29: 2011–2019.
45. Bokemeyer C, Bondarenko I, Makhson A et al. Fluorouracil, leucovorin, and
oxaliplatin with and without cetuximab in the first-line treatment of metastatic
colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 2009; 27: 663–671.
46. Bokemeyer C, Bondarenko I, Hartmann JT et al. Efficacy according to biomarker
status of cetuximab plus FOLFOX-4 as first-line treatment for metastatic
colorectal cancer: the OPUS study. Ann Oncol 2011; 22: 1535–1546.
47. Peeters M, Price TJ, Cervantes A et al. Randomized phase III study of
panitumumab with fluorouracil, leucovorin, and irinotecan (FOLFIRI) compared
with FOLFIRI alone as second-line treatment in patients with metastatic colorectal
cancer. J Clin Oncol 2010; 28: 4706–4713.
48. Douillard JY, Oliner KS, Siena S et al. Panitumumab-FOLFOX4 treatment and
RAS mutations in colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 2013; 369: 1023–1034.
49. Van Cutsem E, Lenz HJ, Kohne CH et al. Fluorouracil, leucovorin, and irinotecan
plus cetuximab treatment and RAS mutations in colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol
2015; 33: 692–700.
50. Bokemeyer C, Kohne CH, Ciardiello F et al. FOLFOX4 plus cetuximab treatment
and RAS mutations in colorectal cancer. Eur J Cancer 2015; 51: 1243–1252.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw235 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 51. Peeters M, Oliner KS, Price TJ et al. Analysis of KRAS/NRAS mutations in a
Phase III Study of panitumumab with FOLFIRI compared with FOLFIRI alone as
second-line treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2015;
21: 5469–5479.
52. Poulin-Costello M, Azoulay L, Van Cutsem E et al. An analysis of the treatment
effect of panitumumab on overall survival from a phase 3, randomized,
controlled, multicenter trial (20020408) in patients with chemotherapy refractory
metastatic colorectal cancer. Target Oncol 2013; 8: 127–136.
53. Schwartzberg LS, Rivera F, Karthaus M et al. PEAK: a randomized, multicenter
phase II study of panitumumab plus modified fluorouracil, leucovorin, and
oxaliplatin (mFOLFOX6) or bevacizumab plus mFOLFOX6 in patients with
previously untreated, unresectable, wild-type KRAS exon 2 metastatic colorectal
cancer. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 2240–2247.
54. Stintzing S, Jung A, Rossius L et al. Mutations within the EGFR signaling
pathway: influence on efficacy in FIRE-3—a randomized phase III study of
FOLFIRI plus cetuximab or bevacizumab as first-line treatment for wild-type (WT)
KRAS (exon 2) metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) patients. J Clin Oncol 2014;
32(3 Suppl): abstr 445.
55. Heinemann V, von Weikersthal LF, Decker T et al. FOLFIRI plus cetuximab versus
FOLFIRI plus bevacizumab as first-line treatment for patients with metastatic
colorectal cancer (FIRE-3): a randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol
2014; 15: 1065–1075.
56. Sorich MJ, Wiese MD, Rowland A et al. Extended RAS mutations and anti-EGFR
monoclonal antibody survival benefit in metastatic colorectal cancer: a meta-
analysis of randomized, controlled trials. Ann Oncol 2015; 26: 13–21.
57. Wong NA, Gonzalez D, Salto-Tellez M et al. RAS testing of colorectal carcinoma
—a guidance document from the Association of Clinical Pathologists Molecular
Pathology and Diagnostics Group. J Clin Pathol 2014; 67: 751–757.
58. Tack V, Ligtenberg MJ, Tembuyser L et al. External quality assessment unravels
interlaboratory differences in quality of RAS testing for anti-EGFR therapy in
colorectal cancer. Oncologist 2015; 20: 257–262.
59. Kircher SM, Mohindra N, Nimeiri H. Cost estimates and economic implications of
expanded RAS testing in metastatic colorectal cancer. Oncologist 2015; 20: 14–18.
60. Tran B, Kopetz S, Tie J et al. Impact of BRAF mutation and microsatellite
instability on the pattern of metastatic spread and prognosis in metastatic
colorectal cancer. Cancer 2011; 117: 4623–4632.
61. Tveit KM, Guren T, Glimelius B et al. Phase III trial of cetuximab with continuous
or intermittent fluorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin (Nordic FLOX) versus FLOX
alone in first-line treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer: the NORDIC-VII
study. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30: 1755–1762.
62. Venderbosch S, Nagtegaal ID, Maughan TS et al. Mismatch repair status and
BRAF mutation status in metastatic colorectal cancer patients: a pooled analysis
of the CAIRO, CAIRO2, COIN, and FOCUS studies. Clin Cancer Res 2014; 20:
5322–5330.
63. Tol J, Nagtegaal ID, Punt CJ. BRAF mutation in metastatic colorectal cancer. N
Engl J Med 2009; 361: 98–99.
64. Peeters M, Oliner KS, Parker A et al. Massively parallel tumor multigene
sequencing to evaluate response to panitumumab in a randomized phase III
study of metastatic colorectal cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2013; 19: 1902–1912.
65. Seymour MT, Brown SR, Middleton G et al. Panitumumab and irinotecan versus
irinotecan alone for patients with KRAS wild-type, fluorouracil-resistant advanced
colorectal cancer (PICCOLO): a prospectively stratified randomised trial. Lancet
Oncol 2013; 14: 749–759.
66. Pietrantonio F, Petrelli F, Coinu A et al. Predictive role of BRAF mutations in
patients with advanced colorectal cancer receiving cetuximab and panitumumab:
a meta-analysis. Eur J Cancer 2015; 51: 587–594.
67. Rowland A, Dias MM, Wiese MD et al. Meta-analysis of BRAF mutation as a
predictive biomarker of benefit from anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody therapy
for RAS wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer. Br J Cancer 2015; 112:
1888–1894.
68. Cremolini C, Loupakis F, Antoniotti C et al. FOLFOXIRI plus bevacizumab versus
FOLFIRI plus bevacizumab as first-line treatment of patients with metastatic
colorectal cancer: updated overall survival and molecular subgroup analyses of
the open-label, phase 3 TRIBE study. Lancet Oncol 2015; 16: 1306–1315.
69. Sosman JA, Kim KB, Schuchter L et al. Survival in BRAF V600-mutant
advanced melanoma treated with vemurafenib. N Engl J Med 2012; 366:
707–714.
70. Kopetz S, Desai J, Chan E et al. Phase II pilot study of vemurafenib in patients
with metastatic BRAF-mutated colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 2015; 33:
4032–4038.
71. Prahallad A, Sun C, Huang S et al. Unresponsiveness of colon cancer to BRAF
(V600E) inhibition through feedback activation of EGFR. Nature 2012; 483:
100–103.
72. Corcoran RB, Atreya CE, Falchook GS et al. Combined BRAF and MEK inhibition
with dabrafenib and trametinib in BRAF V600-mutant colorectal cancer. J Clin
Oncol 2015; 33: 4023–4031.
73. Hyman
DM,
Puzanov
I,
Subbiah
V
et
al.
Vemurafenib
in
multiple
nonmelanoma cancers with BRAF V600 mutations. N Engl J Med 2015; 373:
726–736.
74. Bettstetter M, Dechant S, Ruemmele P et al. Distinction of hereditary
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer and sporadic microsatellite-unstable colorectal
cancer through quantification of MLH1 methylation by real-time PCR. Clin Cancer
Res 2007; 13: 3221–3228.
75. Domingo E, Niessen RC, Oliveira C et al. BRAF-V600E is not involved in the
colorectal tumorigenesis of HNPCC in patients with functional MLH1 and MSH2
genes. Oncogene 2005; 24: 3995–3998.
76. Loughrey MB, Waring PM, Tan A et al. Incorporation of somatic BRAF mutation
testing into an algorithm for the investigation of hereditary non-polyposis
colorectal cancer. Fam Cancer 2007; 6: 301–310.
77. Cremolini C, Di Bartolomeo M, Amatu A et al. BRAF codons 594 and 596
mutations identify a new molecular subtype of metastatic colorectal cancer at
favorable prognosis. Ann Oncol 2015; 26: 2092–2097.
78. Des Guetz G, Uzzan B, Nicolas P et al. Microsatellite instability: a predictive
marker in metastatic colorectal cancer? Target Oncol 2009; 4: 57–62.
79. Goldstein J, Tran B, Ensor J et al. Multicenter retrospective analysis of metastatic
colorectal cancer (CRC) with high-level microsatellite instability (MSI-H). Ann
Oncol 2014; 25: 1032–1038.
80. Muller CI, Schulmann K, Reinacher-Schick A et al. Predictive and prognostic
value of microsatellite instability in patients with advanced colorectal cancer
treated with a fluoropyrimidine and oxaliplatin containing first-line chemotherapy.
A report of the AIO Colorectal Study Group. Int J Colorectal Dis 2008; 23:
1033–1039.
81. Nopel-Dunnebacke S, Schulmann K, Reinacher-Schick A et al. Prognostic value
of microsatellite instability and p53 expression in metastatic colorectal cancer
treated
with
oxaliplatin
and
fluoropyrimidine-based
chemotherapy.
Z
Gastroenterol 2014; 52: 1394–1401.
82. des Guetz G, Mariani P, Cucherousset J et al. Microsatellite instability and
sensitivitiy to FOLFOX treatment in metastatic colorectal cancer. Anticancer Res
2007; 27: 2715–2719.
83. Kim JE, Hong YS, Ryu MH et al. Association between deficient mismatch repair
system and efficacy to irinotecan-containing chemotherapy in metastatic colon
cancer. Cancer Sci 2011; 102: 1706–1711.
84. Le DT, Uram JN, Wang H et al. PD-1 blockade in tumors with mismatch-repair
deficiency. N Engl J Med 2015; 372: 2509–2520.
85. Sanoff HK, McLeod HL. Predictive factors for response and toxicity in
chemotherapy: pharmacogenomics. Semin Colon Rectal Surg 2008; 19:
226–230.
86. Meulendijks D, Henricks LM, Sonke GS et al. Clinical relevance of DPYD variants
c.1679T>G, c.1236G>A/HapB3, and c.1601G>A as predictors of severe
fluoropyrimidine-associated toxicity: a systematic review and meta-analysis of
individual patient data. Lancet Oncol 2015; 16: 1639–1650.
87. Marsh S, Hoskins JM. Irinotecan pharmacogenomics. Pharmacogenomics 2010;
11: 1003–1010.
88. Barbarino JM, Haidar CE, Klein TE, Altman RB. PharmGKB summary: very
important pharmacogene information for UGT1A1. Pharmacogenet Genomics
2014; 24: 177–183.
89. Camptosar
prescribing
information.
http://labeling.pfizer.com/ShowLabeling.
aspx?id=533. 2014.
 | Van Cutsem et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 90. Olaussen KA, Mountzios G, Soria JC. ERCC1 as a risk stratifier in platinum-based
chemotherapy for nonsmall-cell lung cancer. Curr Opin Pulm Med 2007; 13:
284–289.
91. Soria JC. ERCC1-tailored chemotherapy in lung cancer: the first prospective
randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 2007; 25: 2648–2649.
92. Qian YY, Liu XY, Wu Q et al. The ERCC1 C118T polymorphism predicts clinical
outcomes of colorectal cancer patients receiving oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy:
a meta-analysis based on 22 studies. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev 2014; 15:
8383–8390.
93. Orlandi A, Di Salvatore M, Bagala C et al. ERCC1 induction after oxaliplatin
exposure may depend on KRAS mutational status in colorectal cancer cell line: in
vitro veritas. J Cancer 2015; 6: 70–81.
94. Peters GJ, Backus HH, Freemantle S et al. Induction of thymidylate synthase as a
5-fluorouracil resistance mechanism. Biochim Biophys Acta 2002; 1587:
194–205.
95. Hoskins JM, Goldberg RM, Qu P et al. UGT1A1*28 genotype and irinotecan-
induced neutropenia: dose matters. J Natl Cancer Inst 2007; 99: 1290–1295.
96. Misale S, Di Nicolantonio F, Sartore-Bianchi A et al. Resistance to anti-EGFR
therapy in colorectal cancer: from heterogeneity to convergent evolution. Cancer
Discov 2014; 4: 1269–1280.
97. Bardelli A, Siena S. Molecular mechanisms of resistance to cetuximab and
panitumumab in colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 2010; 28: 1254–1261.
98. Mohan S, Heitzer E, Ulz P et al. Changes in colorectal carcinoma genomes under
anti-EGFR therapy identified by whole-genome plasma DNA sequencing. PLoS
Genet 2014; 10: e1004271.
99. Yonesaka K, Zejnullahu K, Okamoto I et al. Activation of ERBB2 signaling causes
resistance to the EGFR-directed therapeutic antibody cetuximab. Sci Transl Med
2011; 3: 99ra86.
100. Bertotti A, Migliardi G, Galimi F et al. A molecularly annotated platform of patient-
derived xenografts (‘xenopatients’) identifies HER2 as an effective therapeutic
target in cetuximab-resistant colorectal cancer. Cancer Discov 2011; 1:
508–523.
101. Douillard JY, Siena S, Cassidy J et al. Randomized, phase III trial of panitumumab
with infusional fluorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX4) versus
FOLFOX4 alone as first-line treatment in patients with previously untreated
metastatic colorectal cancer: the PRIME study. J Clin Oncol 2010; 28:
4697–4705.
102. Stintzing S, Jung AS, Rossius L et al. Analysis of KRAS/NRAS and BRAF
mutations in FIRE-3. Eur J Cancer 2013; 49(Suppl 3): abstr LBA17.
103. Valtorta E, Misale S, Sartore-Bianchi A et al. KRAS gene amplification in
colorectal cancer and impact on response to EGFR-targeted therapy. Int J Cancer
2013; 133: 1259–1265.
104. Vaughn CP, Zobell SD, Furtado LV et al. Frequency of KRAS, BRAF, and NRAS
mutations in colorectal cancer. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 2011; 50: 307–312.
105. Ogino S, Lochhead P, Giovannucci E et al. Discovery of colorectal cancer PIK3CA
mutation as potential predictive biomarker: power and promise of molecular
pathological epidemiology. Oncogene 2014; 33: 2949–2955.
106. Jhawer M, Goel S, Wilson AJ et al. PIK3CA mutation/PTEN expression status
predicts response of colon cancer cells to the epidermal growth factor receptor
inhibitor cetuximab. Cancer Res 2008; 68: 1953–1961.
107. Karapetis CS, Jonker D, Daneshmand M et al. PIK3CA, BRAF, and PTEN status
and benefit from cetuximab in the treatment of advanced colorectal cancer—
results from NCIC CTG/AGITG CO.17. Clin Cancer Res 2014; 20: 744–753.
108. Prenen H, De Schutter J, Jacobs B et al. PIK3CA mutations are not a major
determinant of resistance to the epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor
cetuximab in metastatic colorectal cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2009; 15:
3184–3188.
109. Sartore-Bianchi A, Martini M, Molinari F et al. PIK3CA mutations in colorectal
cancer are associated with clinical resistance to EGFR-targeted monoclonal
antibodies. Cancer Res 2009; 69: 1851–1857.
110. Tian S, Simon I, Moreno V et al. A combined oncogenic pathway signature of
BRAF, KRAS and PI3KCA mutation improves colorectal cancer classification and
cetuximab treatment prediction. Gut 2013; 62: 540–549.
111. Misale S, Yaeger R, Hobor S et al. Emergence of KRAS mutations and acquired
resistance to anti-EGFR therapy in colorectal cancer. Nature 2012; 486:
532–536.
112. Laurent-Puig P, Cayre A, Manceau G et al. Analysis of PTEN, BRAF, and EGFR
status in determining benefit from cetuximab therapy in wild-type KRAS
metastatic colon cancer. J Clin Oncol 2009; 27: 5924–5930.
113. Kavuri SM, Jain N, Galimi F et al. HER2 activating mutations are targets for
colorectal cancer treatment. Cancer Discov 2015; 5: 832–841.
114. Siena S, Sartore-Bianchi A, Lonardi S et al. Trastuzumab and lapatinib in HER2-
amplified metastatic colorectal cancer patients (mCRC): the HERACLES trial. J
Clin Oncol 2015; 33(15 Suppl): abstr 3508.
115. Juo YY, Johnston FM, Zhang DY et al. Prognostic value of CpG island methylator
phenotype among colorectal cancer patients: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Ann Oncol 2014; 25: 2314–2327.
116. Moutinho C, Martinez-Cardus A, Santos C et al. Epigenetic inactivation of the
BRCA1 interactor SRBC and resistance to oxaliplatin in colorectal cancer. J Natl
Cancer Inst 2014; 106: djt322.
117. Cohen SJ, Punt CJ, Iannotti N et al. Relationship of circulating tumor cells to
tumor response, progression-free survival, and overall survival in patients with
metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 2008; 26: 3213–3221.
118. Diaz LA, Jr., Bardelli A. Liquid biopsies: genotyping circulating tumor DNA. J Clin
Oncol 2014; 32: 579–586.
119. Siravegna G, Bardelli A. Genotyping cell-free tumor DNA in the blood to detect
residual disease and drug resistance. Genome Biol 2014; 15: 449.
120. Montagut C, Dalmases A, Bellosillo B et al. Identification of a mutation
in the extracellular domain of the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
conferring cetuximab resistance in colorectal cancer. Nat Med 2012; 18:
221–223.
121. Aung KL, Board RE, Ellison G et al. Current status and future potential of somatic
mutation testing from circulating free DNA in patients with solid tumours. Hugo J
2010; 4: 11–21.
122. Bettegowda C, Sausen M, Leary RJ et al. Detection of circulating tumor DNA
in early- and late-stage human malignancies. Sci Transl Med 2014; 6:
224ra224.
123. Dawson SJ, Tsui DW, Murtaza M et al. Analysis of circulating tumor DNA to
monitor metastatic breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2013; 368: 1199–1209.
124. De Mattos-Arruda L, Weigelt B, Cortes J et al. Capturing intra-tumor genetic
heterogeneity by de novo mutation profiling of circulating cell-free tumor DNA: a
proof-of-principle. Ann Oncol 2014; 25: 1729–1735.
125. Diaz LA, Jr., Williams RT, Wu J et al. The molecular evolution of acquired
resistance to targeted EGFR blockade in colorectal cancers. Nature 2012; 486:
537–540.
126. Forshew T, Murtaza M, Parkinson C et al. Noninvasive identification and
monitoring of cancer mutations by targeted deep sequencing of plasma DNA. Sci
Transl Med 2012; 4: 136ra168.
127. Gormally E, Caboux E, Vineis P, Hainaut P. Circulating free DNA in plasma or
serum as biomarker of carcinogenesis: practical aspects and biological
significance. Mutat Res 2007; 635: 105–117.
128. Higgins MJ, Jelovac D, Barnathan E et al. Detection of tumor PIK3CA status in
metastatic breast cancer using peripheral blood. Clin Cancer Res 2012; 18:
3462–3469.
129. Murtaza M, Dawson SJ, Tsui DW et al. Non-invasive analysis of acquired
resistance to cancer therapy by sequencing of plasma DNA. Nature 2013; 497:
108–112.
130. Newman AM, Bratman SV, To J et al. An ultrasensitive method for quantitating
circulating tumor DNA with broad patient coverage. Nat Med 2014; 20:
548–554.
131. Punnoose EA, Atwal S, Liu W et al. Evaluation of circulating tumor cells and
circulating tumor DNA in non-small cell lung cancer: association with clinical
endpoints in a phase II clinical trial of pertuzumab and erlotinib. Clin Cancer Res
2012; 18: 2391–2401.
132. Schwarzenbach H, Hoon DS, Pantel K. Cell-free nucleic acids as biomarkers in
cancer patients. Nat Rev Cancer 2011; 11: 426–437.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw235 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 133. Taly V, Pekin D, Benhaim L et al. Multiplex picodroplet digital PCR to detect KRAS
mutations in circulating DNA from the plasma of colorectal cancer patients. Clin
Chem 2013; 59: 1722–1731.
134. Taniguchi K, Uchida J, Nishino K et al. Quantitative detection of EGFR mutations
in circulating tumor DNA derived from lung adenocarcinomas. Clin Cancer Res
2011; 17: 7808–7815.
135. Thierry AR, Mouliere F, El Messaoudi S et al. Clinical validation of the detection of
KRAS and BRAF mutations from circulating tumor DNA. Nat Med 2014; 20:
430–435.
136. Li J, Mansmann UR. A microRNA molecular modeling extension for prediction of
colorectal cancer treatment. BMC Cancer 2015; 15: 472.
137. Ciardiello F, Normanno N, Maiello E et al. Clinical activity of FOLFIRI plus
cetuximab according to extended gene mutation status by next-generation
sequencing: findings from the CAPRI-GOIM trial. Ann Oncol 2014; 25:
1756–1761.
138. Marisa L, de Reynies A, Duval A et al. Gene expression classification of colon
cancer into molecular subtypes: characterization, validation, and prognostic
value. PLoS Med 2013; 10: e1001453.
139. Guinney J, Dienstmann R, Wang B et al. The consensus molecular subtypes of
colorectal cancer. Nat Med 2015; 21: 1350–1356.
140. Prades J, Borras JM. Shifting sands: adapting the multidisciplinary team model
to technological and organizational innovations in cancer care. Future Oncol
2014; 10: 1995–1998.
141. Shah S, Arora S, Atkin G et al. Decision-making in Colorectal Cancer Tumor
Board meetings: results of a prospective observational assessment. Surg Endosc
2014; 28: 2783–2788.
142. Prades J, Remue E, van Hoof E, Borras JM. Is it worth reorganising cancer
services on the basis of multidisciplinary teams (MDTs)? A systematic review of
the objectives and organisation of MDTs and their impact on patient outcomes.
Health Policy 2015; 119: 464–474.
143. Weiser MR, Jarnagin WR, Saltz LB.
Colorectal cancer patients with
oligometastatic liver disease: what is the optimal approach? Oncology (Williston
Park) 2013; 27: 1074–1078.
144. Khattak MA, Martin HL, Beeke C et al. Survival differences in patients with
metastatic colorectal cancer and with single site metastatic disease at initial
presentation: results from South Australian clinical registry for advanced
colorectal cancer. Clin Colorectal Cancer 2012; 11: 247–254.
145. Price TJ, Townsend AR, Beeke C et al. ‘Watchful waiting’ for metastatic
colorectal cancer, antediluvian or an option to be considered again? Asia Pac J
Clin Oncol 2012; 8: 10–13.
146. Yaeger R, Cercek A, Chou JF et al. BRAF mutation predicts for poor outcomes
after metastasectomy in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Cancer
2014; 120: 2316–2324.
147. Ohrling K, Edler D, Hallstrom M, Ragnhammar P. Expression of thymidylate
synthase in liver and lung metastases of colorectal cancer and their matched
primary tumours. Anticancer Res 2008; 28: 1741–1747.
148. Adam R, De Gramont A, Figueras J et al. The oncosurgery approach to managing
liver metastases from colorectal cancer: a multidisciplinary international
consensus. Oncologist 2012; 17: 1225–1239.
149. Clavien PA, Petrowsky H, DeOliveira ML, Graf R. Strategies for safer liver surgery
and partial liver transplantation. N Engl J Med 2007; 356: 1545–1559.
150. Zorzi D, Laurent A, Pawlik TM et al. Chemotherapy-associated hepatotoxicity and
surgery for colorectal liver metastases. Br J Surg 2007; 94: 274–286.
151. Jones RP, Stattner S, Sutton P et al. Controversies in the oncosurgical
management of liver limited stage IV colorectal cancer. Surg Oncol 2014; 23:
53–60.
152. Kanas GP, Taylor A, Primrose JN et al. Survival after liver resection in metastatic
colorectal cancer: review and meta-analysis of prognostic factors. Clin Epidemiol
2012; 4: 283–301.
153. Fong Y, Fortner J, Sun RL et al. Clinical score for predicting recurrence after
hepatic resection for metastatic colorectal cancer: analysis of 1001 consecutive
cases. Ann Surg 1999; 230: 309–318; discussion 318–321.
154. Floriani I, Torri V, Rulli E et al. Performance of imaging modalities in diagnosis of
liver metastases from colorectal cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J
Magn Reson Imaging 2010; 31: 19–31.
155. Bartolotta TV, Taibbi A, Midiri M et al. Characterisation of focal liver lesions
undetermined at grey-scale US: contrast-enhanced US versus 64-row MDCT and
MRI with liver-specific contrast agent. Radiol Med 2010; 115: 714–731.
156. Niekel MC, Bipat S, Stoker J. Diagnostic imaging of colorectal liver metastases
with CT, MR imaging, FDG PET, and/or FDG PET/CT: a meta-analysis of
prospective studies including patients who have not previously undergone
treatment. Radiology 2010; 257: 674–684.
157. Zech CJ, Korpraphong P, Huppertz A et al. Randomized multicentre trial of
gadoxetic acid-enhanced MRI versus conventional MRI or CT in the staging of
colorectal cancer liver metastases. Br J Surg 2014; 101: 613–621.
158. Hendlisz A, Golfinopoulos V, Garcia C et al. Serial FDG-PET/CT for early outcome
prediction
in
patients
with
metastatic
colorectal
cancer
undergoing
chemotherapy. Ann Oncol 2012; 23: 1687–1693.
159. Moulton C, Levine MN, Law C et al. An Ontario Clinical Oncology Group (OCOG)
randomized controlled trial (RCT) assessing FDG PET/CT in resectable liver
colorectal adenocarcinoma metastases (CAM). J Clin Oncol 2011; 29(Suppl):
abstr 3520.
160. Petersen RK, Hess S, Alavi A, Hoilund-Carlsen PF. Clinical impact of FDG-PET/CT
on colorectal cancer staging and treatment strategy. Am J Nucl Med Mol Imaging
2014; 4: 471–482.
161. Maffione AM, Lopci E, Bluemel C et al. Diagnostic accuracy and impact on
management of (18)F-FDG PET and PET/CT in colorectal liver metastasis: a
meta-analysis and systematic review. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 2015; 42:
152–163.
162. Tomlinson JS, Jarnagin WR, DeMatteo RP et al. Actual 10-year survival after
resection of colorectal liver metastases defines cure. J Clin Oncol 2007; 25:
4575–4580.
163. Nordlinger B, Sorbye H, Glimelius B et al. Perioperative FOLFOX4 chemotherapy
and surgery versus surgery alone for resectable liver metastases from colorectal
cancer (EORTC 40983): long-term results of a randomised, controlled, phase 3
trial. Lancet Oncol 2013; 14: 1208–1215.
164. Nordlinger B, Sorbye H, Glimelius B et al. Perioperative chemotherapy with
FOLFOX4 and surgery versus surgery alone for resectable liver metastases from
colorectal cancer (EORTC Intergroup trial 40983): a randomised controlled trial.
Lancet 2008; 371: 1007–1016.
165. Primrose J, Falk S, Finch-Jones M et al. Systemic chemotherapy with or without
cetuximab in patients with resectable colorectal liver metastasis: the New EPOC
randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol 2014; 15: 601–611.
166. Mitry E, Fields AL, Bleiberg H et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy after potentially
curative resection of metastases from colorectal cancer: a pooled analysis of two
randomized trials. J Clin Oncol 2008; 26: 4906–4911.
167. Kemeny N, Capanu M, D’Angelica M et al. Phase I trial of adjuvant hepatic
arterial infusion (HAI) with floxuridine (FUDR) and dexamethasone plus systemic
oxaliplatin, 5-fluorouracil and leucovorin in patients with resected liver
metastases from colorectal cancer. Ann Oncol 2009; 20: 1236–1241.
168. Adam R, Delvart V, Pascal G et al. Rescue surgery for unresectable colorectal
liver metastases downstaged by chemotherapy: a model to predict long-term
survival. Ann Surg 2004; 240: 644–657; discussion 657–658.
169. Adam R, Barroso E, Laurent C et al. Impact of the type and modalities of
preoperative chemotherapy on the outcome of liver resection for colorectal
metastases. J Clin Oncol 2011; 29(15 Suppl): abstr 3519.
170. Chun YS, Vauthey JN, Boonsirikamchai P et al. Association of computed
tomography morphologic criteria with pathologic response and survival in patients
treated with bevacizumab for colorectal liver metastases. JAMA 2009; 302:
2338–2344.
171. Adam R, Bhangui P, Poston G et al. Is perioperative chemotherapy useful for
solitary, metachronous, colorectal liver metastases? Ann Surg 2010; 252: 774–787.
172. Nordlinger B, Van Cutsem E, Gruenberger T et al. Combination of surgery and
chemotherapy and the role of targeted agents in the treatment of patients with
colorectal liver metastases: recommendations from an expert panel. Ann Oncol
2009; 20: 985–992.
173. Nordlinger B, Van Cutsem E, Rougier P et al. Does chemotherapy prior to liver
resection increase the potential for cure in patients with metastatic colorectal
cancer? A report from the European Colorectal Metastases Treatment Group. Eur
J Cancer 2007; 43: 2037–2045.
 | Van Cutsem et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 174. Van Cutsem E, Nordlinger B, Adam R et al. Towards a pan-European consensus
on the treatment of patients with colorectal liver metastases. Eur J Cancer 2006;
42: 2212–2221.
175. Folprecht G, Grothey A, Alberts S et al. Neoadjuvant treatment of unresectable
colorectal liver metastases: correlation between tumour response and resection
rates. Ann Oncol 2005; 16: 1311–1319.
176. Folprecht G, Gruenberger T, Bechstein WO et al. Tumour response and
secondary resectability of colorectal liver metastases following neoadjuvant
chemotherapy with cetuximab: the CELIM randomised phase 2 trial. Lancet
Oncol 2010; 11: 38–47.
177. Ye LC, Liu TS, Ren L et al. Randomized controlled trial of cetuximab plus
chemotherapy for patients with KRAS wild-type unresectable colorectal liver-
limited metastases. J Clin Oncol 2013; 31: 1931–1938.
178. Gruenberger T, Bridgewater J, Chau I et al. Bevacizumab plus mFOLFOX-6 or
FOLFOXIRI in patients with initially unresectable liver metastases from colorectal
cancer: the OLIVIA multinational randomised phase II trial. Ann Oncol 2014; 26:
702–708.
179. Masi G, Loupakis F, Salvatore L et al. Bevacizumab with FOLFOXIRI (irinotecan,
oxaliplatin, fluorouracil, and folinate) as first-line treatment for metastatic
colorectal cancer: a phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol 2010; 11: 845–852.
180. Folprecht G, Gruenberger T, Bechstein W et al. Survival of patients with initially
unresectable colorectal liver metastases treated with FOLFOX/cetuximab or
FOLFIRI/cetuximab in a multidisciplinary concept (CELIM study). Ann Oncol
2014; 25: 1018–1025.
181. Falcone A, Ricci S, Brunetti I et al. Phase III trial of infusional fluorouracil,
leucovorin, oxaliplatin, and irinotecan (FOLFOXIRI) compared with infusional
fluorouracil, leucovorin, and irinotecan (FOLFIRI) as first-line treatment for
metastatic colorectal cancer: the Gruppo Oncologico Nord Ovest. J Clin Oncol
2007; 25: 1670–1676.
182. Loupakis F, Cremolini C, Masi G et al. Initial therapy with FOLFOXIRI and
bevacizumab for metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 2014; 371:
1609–1618.
183. Douillard JY, Siena S, Cassidy J et al. Final results from PRIME: randomized
phase III study of panitumumab with FOLFOX4 for first-line treatment of
metastatic colorectal cancer. Ann Oncol 2014; 25: 1346–1355.
184. Okines A, Puerto OD, Cunningham D et al. Surgery with curative-intent in
patients treated with first-line chemotherapy plus bevacizumab for metastatic
colorectal cancer First BEAT and the randomised phase-III NO16966 trial. Br J
Cancer 2009; 101: 1033–1038.
185. Venook A, Niedzwiecki D, Lenz HJ et al. CALGB/SWOG 80405: Phase III trial of
irinotecan/5-FU/leucovorin (FOLFIRI) or oxaliplatin/5-FU/leucovorin (mFOLFOX6)
with bevacizumab (BV) or cetuximab (CET) for patients (pts) with KRAS wild-type
(wt) untreated metastatic adenocarcinoma of the colon or rectum (MCRC). J Clin
Oncol 2014; 32(15 Suppl): abstr LBA 3.
186. Piessevaux H, Buyse M, Schlichting M et al. Use of early tumor shrinkage to
predict long-term outcome in metastatic colorectal cancer treated with
cetuximab. J Clin Oncol 2013; 31: 3764–3775.
187. Mansmann UR, Laubender RP, Giessen CA et al. Validating the prognostic
relevance of initial change in tumor size using a series of therapeutic regimens
for patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC). J Clin Oncol 2012; 30
(Suppl 4): abstr 580.
188. Mansmann UR, Laubender RP, Sartorius U et al. Improved early prediction of
individual prognosis for patients with mCRC: joint modeling of tumor shrinkage
with volume data for PFS and OS. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30(Suppl 15): abstr 3603.
189. Piessevaux H, Buyse M, De Roock W et al. Radiological tumor size decrease at
week 6 is a potent predictor of outcome in chemorefractory metastatic
colorectal cancer treated with cetuximab (BOND trial). Ann Oncol 2009; 20:
1375–1382.
190. Cremolini C, Loupakis F, Antoniotti C et al. Early tumor shrinkage and depth of
response predict long-term outcome in metastatic colorectal cancer patients
treated with first-line chemotherapy plus bevacizumab: results from phase III
TRIBE trial by the Gruppo Oncologico del Nord Ovest. Ann Oncol 2015; 26:
1188–1194.
191. Cremolini C, Loupakis F, Falcone A. FOLFOXIRI and bevacizumab for metastatic
colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 2015; 372: 291–292.
192. Cremolini C, Loupakis F, Masi G et al. FOLFOXIRI/bevacizumab versus FOLFIRI/
bevacizumab as first-line treatment in unresectable metastatic colorectal cancer:
results of phase III TRIBE trial by GONO Group. Ann Oncol 2014; 24(Suppl 4):
abstr O-0026.
193. Stintzing S, Modest DP, Fischer von Weikersthal L et al. Independent radiological
evaluation of objective response, early tumor shrinkage, and depth of response in
FIRE-3 (AIO KRK-0306) in the final RAS evaluable population. Ann Oncol 2014;
25(Suppl 5): abstr LBA11.
194. Rivera F, Karthaus M, Hecht JR et al. First-line treatment with modified FOLFOX6
(mFOLFOX6) + panitumumab or bevacizumab in patients with RAS/BRAF wild-
type (WT) metastatic colorectal carcinoma (mCRC). Ann Oncol 2015; 26(Suppl
4): abstr PD-014.
195. Bhutiani N, Akinwande O, Martin RC, 2nd. Efficacy and toxicity of hepatic intra-
arterial drug-eluting (irinotecan) bead (DEBIRI) therapy in irinotecan-refractory
unresectable colorectal liver metastases. World J Surg 2015.
196. Liu DM, Thakor AS, Baerlocher M et al. A review of conventional and drug-eluting
chemoembolization in the treatment of colorectal liver metastases: principles and
proof. Future Oncol 2015; 11: 1421–1428.
197. Martin RC, 2nd, Scoggins CR, Schreeder M et al. Randomized controlled trial of
irinotecan drug-eluting beads with simultaneous FOLFOX and bevacizumab for
patients with unresectable colorectal liver-limited metastasis. Cancer 2015; 121:
3649–3658.
198. Ruers T, Punt C, Van Coevorden F et al. Radiofrequency ablation (RFA)
combined with chemotherapy for unresectable colorectal liver metastases
(CRC LM): long-term survival results of a randomized phase II study of the
EORTC-NCRI CCSG-ALM Intergroup 40004 (CLOCC). J Clin Oncol 2015; 33
(15 Suppl): abstr 3501.
199. Tanis E, Nordlinger B, Mauer M et al. Local recurrence rates after radiofrequency
ablation or resection of colorectal liver metastases. Analysis of the European
Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer #40004 and #40983. Eur J
Cancer 2014; 50: 912–919.
200. Ruers T, Punt C, Van Coevorden F et al. Radiofrequency ablation combined with
systemic treatment versus systemic treatment alone in patients with non-
resectable colorectal liver metastases: a randomized EORTC Intergroup phase II
study (EORTC 40004). Ann Oncol 2012; 23: 2619–2626.
201. Evrard S, Poston G, Kissmeyer-Nielsen P et al. Combined ablation and resection
(CARe) as an effective parenchymal sparing treatment for extensive colorectal
liver metastases. PLoS One 2014; 9: e114404.
202. Lencioni R, Crocetti L, Cioni R et al. Response to radiofrequency ablation of
pulmonary tumours: a prospective, intention-to-treat, multicentre clinical trial (the
RAPTURE study). Lancet Oncol 2008; 9: 621–628.
203. Petre EN, Jia X, Thornton RH et al. Treatment of pulmonary colorectal metastases
by radiofrequency ablation. Clin Colorectal Cancer 2013; 12: 37–44.
204. Kashima M, Yamakado K, Takaki H et al. Complications after 1000 lung
radiofrequency ablation sessions in 420 patients: a single center’s experiences.
Am J Roentgenol 2011; 197: W576–W580.
205. Schlijper RC, Grutters JP, Houben R et al. What to choose as radical local
treatment for lung metastases from colo-rectal cancer: surgery or radiofrequency
ablation? Cancer Treat Rev 2014; 40: 60–67.
206. Ricke J, Mohnike K, Pech M et al. Local response and impact on survival after
local ablation of liver metastases from colorectal carcinoma by computed
tomography-guided high-dose-rate brachytherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
2010; 78: 479–485.
207. Sterzing F, Brunner TB, Ernst I et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy for liver
tumors: principles and practical guidelines of the DEGRO Working Group on
Stereotactic Radiotherapy. Strahlenther Onkol 2014; 190: 872–881.
208. Collettini F, Schnapauff D, Poellinger A et al. Percutaneous CT-guided high-dose
brachytherapy (CT-HDRBT) ablation of primary and metastatic lung tumors in
nonsurgical candidates. Rofo 2012; 184: 316–323.
209. Comito T, Cozzi L, Clerici E et al. Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy (SABR) in
inoperable oligometastatic disease from colorectal cancer: a safe and effective
approach. BMC Cancer 2014; 14: 619.
210. Filippi AR, Badellino S, Guarneri A et al. Outcomes of single fraction stereotactic
ablative radiotherapy for lung metastases. Technol Cancer Res Treat 2014; 13:
37–45.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw235 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 211. Tselis N, Ferentinos K, Kolotas C et al. Computed tomography-guided interstitial
high-dose-rate brachytherapy in the local treatment of primary and secondary
intrathoracic malignancies. J Thorac Oncol 2011; 6: 545–552.
212. Peters N, Wieners G, Pech M et al. CT-guided interstitial brachytherapy of
primary and secondary lung malignancies: results of a prospective phase II trial.
Strahlenther Onkol 2008; 184: 296–301.
213. Blomgren H, Lax I, Naslund I, Svanstrom R. Stereotactic high dose fraction
radiation therapy of extracranial tumors using an accelerator. Clinical experience
of the first thirty-one patients. Acta Oncol 1995; 34: 861–870.
214. Wada H, Takai Y, Nemoto K, Yamada S. Univariate analysis of factors correlated
with tumor control probability of three-dimensional conformal hypofractionated
high-dose radiotherapy for small pulmonary or hepatic tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 2004; 58: 1114–1120.
215. Wulf J, Guckenberger M, Haedinger U et al. Stereotactic radiotherapy of primary
liver cancer and hepatic metastases. Acta Oncol 2006; 45: 838–847.
216. Ambrosino G, Polistina F, Costantin G et al. Image-guided robotic stereotactic
radiosurgery for unresectable liver metastases: preliminary results. Anticancer
Res 2009; 29: 3381–3384.
217. Goodman KA, Wiegner EA, Maturen KE et al. Dose-escalation study of single-
fraction stereotactic body radiotherapy for liver malignancies. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 2010; 78: 486–493.
218. Hoyer M, Roed H, Traberg Hansen A et al. Phase II study on stereotactic body
radiotherapy of colorectal metastases. Acta Oncol 2006; 45: 823–830.
219. Lee MT, Kim JJ, Dinniwell R et al. Phase I study of individualized
stereotactic body radiotherapy of liver metastases. J Clin Oncol 2009; 27:
1585–1591.
220. Mendez Romero A, Wunderink W, Hussain SM et al. Stereotactic body radiation
therapy for primary and metastatic liver tumors: a single institution phase i-ii
study. Acta Oncol 2006; 45: 831–837.
221. Rusthoven KE, Kavanagh BD, Cardenes H et al. Multi-institutional phase I/II trial
of stereotactic body radiation therapy for liver metastases. J Clin Oncol 2009; 27:
1572–1578.
222. Scorsetti M, Arcangeli S, Tozzi A et al. Is stereotactic body radiation therapy an
attractive option for unresectable liver metastases? A preliminary report from a
phase 2 trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2013; 86: 336–342.
223. Fumagalli I, Bibault JE, Dewas S et al. A single-institution study of stereotactic
body radiotherapy for patients with unresectable visceral pulmonary or hepatic
oligometastases. Radiat Oncol 2012; 7: 164.
224. Fiorentini G, Aliberti C, Tilli M et al. Intra-arterial infusion of irinotecan-loaded
drug-eluting beads (DEBIRI) versus intravenous therapy (FOLFIRI) for hepatic
metastases from colorectal cancer: final results of a phase III study. Anticancer
Res 2012; 32: 1387–1395.
225. Hendlisz A, Van den Eynde M, Peeters M et al. Phase III trial comparing
protracted intravenous fluorouracil infusion alone or with yttrium-90 resin
microspheres radioembolization for liver-limited metastatic colorectal cancer
refractory to standard chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 2010; 28: 3687–3694.
226. van Hazel GA, Heinemann V, Sharma NK et al. SIRFLOX: randomized phase iii
trial comparing first-line mFOLFOX6 (plus or minus bevacizumab) versus
mFOLFOX6 (plus or minus bevacizumab) plus selective internal radiation therapy
in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 2016; 34:
1723–1731.
227. Garlipp B, de Baere T, Damm R et al. Left-liver hypertrophy after therapeutic
right-liver radioembolization is substantial but less than after portal vein
embolization. Hepatology 2014; 59: 1864–1873.
228. Cao C, Yan TD, Black D, Morris DL. A systematic review and meta-analysis of
cytoreductive surgery with perioperative intraperitoneal chemotherapy for
peritoneal carcinomatosis of colorectal origin. Ann Surg Oncol 2009; 16:
2152–2165.
229. Cotte E, Passot G, Mohamed F et al. Management of peritoneal carcinomatosis
from colorectal cancer: current state of practice. Cancer J 2009; 15: 243–248.
230. Elias D, Lefevre JH, Chevalier J et al. Complete cytoreductive surgery plus
intraperitoneal chemohyperthermia with oxaliplatin for peritoneal carcinomatosis
of colorectal origin. J Clin Oncol 2009; 27: 681–685.
231. Elias D, Mariani A, Cloutier AS et al. Modified selection criteria for complete
cytoreductive surgery plus HIPEC based on peritoneal cancer index and small
bowel involvement for peritoneal carcinomatosis of colorectal origin. Eur J Surg
Oncol 2014; 40: 1467–1473.
232. Turaga K, Levine E, Barone R et al. Consensus guidelines from The American
Society of Peritoneal Surface Malignancies on standardizing the delivery of
hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) in colorectal cancer patients
in the United States. Ann Surg Oncol 2014; 21: 1501–1505.
233. Prada-Villaverde A, Esquivel J, Lowy AM et al. The American Society of Peritoneal
Surface Malignancies evaluation of HIPEC with mitomycin C versus oxaliplatin in
539 patients with colon cancer undergoing a complete cytoreductive surgery. J
Surg Oncol 2014; 110: 779–785.
234. de Gramont A, Figer A, Seymour M et al. Leucovorin and fluorouracil with or
without oxaliplatin as first-line treatment in advanced colorectal cancer. J Clin
Oncol 2000; 18: 2938–2947.
235. Douillard JY, Group VS. Irinotecan and high-dose fluorouracil/leucovorin for
metastatic colorectal cancer. Oncology (Williston Park) 2000; 14: 51–55.
236. de Gramont A, Bosset JF, Milan C et al. Randomized trial comparing monthly
low-dose leucovorin and fluorouracil bolus with bimonthly high-dose leucovorin
and fluorouracil bolus plus continuous infusion for advanced colorectal cancer: a
French intergroup study. J Clin Oncol 1997; 15: 808–815.
237. Meta-Analysis Group in CancerLevy E, Piedbois P et al. Toxicity of fluorouracil in
patients with advanced colorectal cancer: effect of administration schedule and
prognostic factors. J Clin Oncol 1998; 16: 3537–3541.
238. Van Cutsem E, Hoff PM, Harper P et al. Oral capecitabine vs intravenous 5-
fluorouracil and leucovorin: integrated efficacy data and novel analyses from two
large, randomised, phase III trials. Br J Cancer 2004; 90: 1190–1197.
239. Cassidy J, Clarke S, Diaz-Rubio E et al. Randomized phase III study of
capecitabine plus oxaliplatin compared with fluorouracil/folinic acid plus
oxaliplatin as first-line therapy for metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol
2008; 26: 2006–2012.
240. Fuchs CS, Marshall J, Mitchell E et al. Randomized, controlled trial of irinotecan
plus infusional, bolus, or oral fluoropyrimidines in first-line treatment of
metastatic colorectal cancer: results from the BICC-C Study. J Clin Oncol 2007;
25: 4779–4786.
241. Kohne CH, De Greve J, Hartmann JT et al. Irinotecan combined with infusional 5-
fluorouracil/folinic acid or capecitabine plus celecoxib or placebo in the first-line
treatment of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. EORTC study 40015.
Ann Oncol 2008; 19: 920–926.
242. Schmiegel W, Reinacher-Schick A, Arnold D et al. Capecitabine/irinotecan or
capecitabine/oxaliplatin in combination with bevacizumab is effective and safe as
first-line therapy for metastatic colorectal cancer: a randomized phase II study of
the AIO colorectal study group. Ann Oncol 2013; 24: 1580–1587.
243. Moosmann N, von Weikersthal LF, Vehling-Kaiser U et al. Cetuximab plus
capecitabine and irinotecan compared with cetuximab plus capecitabine and
oxaliplatin as first-line treatment for patients with metastatic colorectal cancer:
AIO KRK-0104—a randomized trial of the German AIO CRC study group. J Clin
Oncol 2011; 29: 1050–1058.
244. Hurwitz H, Fehrenbacher L, Novotny W et al. Bevacizumab plus irinotecan,
fluorouracil, and leucovorin for metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 2004;
350: 2335–2342.
245. Saltz LB, Clarke S, Diaz-Rubio E et al. Bevacizumab in combination with
oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy as first-line therapy in metastatic colorectal
cancer: a randomized phase III study. J Clin Oncol 2008; 26: 2013–2019.
246. Souglakos J, Androulakis N, Syrigos K et al. FOLFOXIRI (folinic acid, 5-
fluorouracil, oxaliplatin and irinotecan) vs FOLFIRI (folinic acid, 5-fluorouracil and
irinotecan) as first-line treatment in metastatic colorectal cancer (MCC): a
multicentre randomised phase III trial from the Hellenic Oncology Research Group
(HORG). Br J Cancer 2006; 94: 798–805.
247. Cunningham D, Lang I, Marcuello E et al. Bevacizumab plus capecitabine versus
capecitabine alone in elderly patients with previously untreated metastatic
colorectal cancer (AVEX): an open-label, randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol
2013; 14: 1077–1085.
248. Kabbinavar F, Irl C, Zurlo A, Hurwitz H. Bevacizumab improves the overall and
progression-free survival of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer treated
with 5-fluorouracil-based regimens irrespective of baseline risk. Oncology 2008;
75: 215–223.
 | Van Cutsem et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 249. Tebbutt NC, Wilson K, Gebski VJ et al. Capecitabine, bevacizumab, and
mitomycin in first-line treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer: results of the
Australasian Gastrointestinal Trials Group Randomized Phase III MAX Study. J
Clin Oncol 2010; 28: 3191–3198.
250. Passardi A, Nanni O, Tassinari D et al. Effectiveness of bevacizumab added to
standard chemotherapy in metastatic colorectal cancer: final results for first-line
treatment from the ITACa randomized clinical trial. Ann Oncol 2015; 26:
1201–1207.
251. Souglakos J, Ziras N, Kakolyris S et al. Randomised phase-II trial of CAPIRI
(capecitabine, irinotecan) plus bevacizumab vs FOLFIRI (folinic acid, 5-
fluorouracil, irinotecan) plus bevacizumab as first-line treatment of patients with
unresectable/metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC). Br J Cancer 2012; 106:
453–459.
252. Yamazaki K, Nagase M, Tamagawa H et al. A randomized phase III trial of
mFOLFOX6 plus bevacizumab versus FOLFIRI plus bevacizumab as first-line
treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer: West Japan Oncology Group study
4407G (WJOG4407G). J Clin Oncol 2014; 32(15 Suppl): abstr 3534.
253. Kozloff M, Yood MU, Berlin J et al. Clinical outcomes associated with
bevacizumab-containing treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer: the BRiTE
observational cohort study. Oncologist 2009; 14: 862–870.
254. Van Cutsem E, Rivera F, Berry S et al. Safety and efficacy of first-line
bevacizumab with FOLFOX, XELOX, FOLFIRI and fluoropyrimidines in metastatic
colorectal cancer: the BEAT study. Ann Oncol 2009; 20: 1842–1847.
255. European Medicines Agency. CHMP summary of opinion—erbitux. http://www.
ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Summary_of_opinion/human/
000558/WC500155463.pdf (6 January 2015, date last accessed).
256. European Medicines Agency. CHMP summary of opinion—vectibix. http://www.
ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Summary_of_opinion/human/
000741/WC500144827.pdf (6 January 2015, date last accessed).
257. Grothey A, Sargent D, Goldberg RM, Schmoll HJ. Survival of patients with
advanced colorectal cancer improves with the availability of fluorouracil-
leucovorin, irinotecan, and oxaliplatin in the course of treatment. J Clin Oncol
2004; 22: 1209–1214.
258. Grothey A, Sargent D. Overall survival of patients with advanced colorectal cancer
correlates with availability of fluorouracil, irinotecan, and oxaliplatin regardless of
whether doublet or single-agent therapy is used first line. J Clin Oncol 2005; 23:
9441–9442.
259. Heinemann V, Modest DP, Fischer von Weikersthal L et al. Independent radiological
evaluation of objective response, early tumor shrinkage, and depth of response in
FIRE-3 (AIO KRK-0306). Ann Oncol 2014; 25(Suppl 2): abstr O-0030.
260. Lenz HJ, Niedzwiecki D, Innocenti F et al. CALGB/SWOG 80405: phase III trial of
irinotecan/5-FU/leucovorin (FOLFIRI) or oxaliplatin/5-FU/leucovorin (mFOLFOX6)
with bevacizumab (BV) or cetuximab (CET) for patients (pts) with expanded RAS
analyses untreated metastatic adenocarcinoma of the colon or rectum (mCRC).
Ann Oncol 2014; 25(Suppl 5): abstr 501O.
261. Maughan TS, James RD, Kerr DJ et al. Comparison of intermittent and
continuous palliative chemotherapy for advanced colorectal cancer: a multicentre
randomised trial. Lancet 2003; 361: 457–464.
262. Labianca R, Sobrero A, Isa L et al. Intermittent versus continuous chemotherapy
in advanced colorectal cancer: a randomised ‘GISCAD’ trial. Ann Oncol 2011;
22: 1236–1242.
263. Tournigand C, Cervantes A, Figer A et al. OPTIMOX1: a randomized study of
FOLFOX4 or FOLFOX7 with oxaliplatin in a stop-and-go fashion in advanced
colorectal cancer—a GERCOR study. J Clin Oncol 2006; 24: 394–400.
264. Adams RA, Meade AM, Seymour MT et al. Intermittent versus continuous
oxaliplatin and fluoropyrimidine combination chemotherapy for first-line treatment
of advanced colorectal cancer: results of the randomised phase 3 MRC COIN
trial. Lancet Oncol 2011; 12: 642–653.
265. Chibaudel B, Maindrault-Goebel F, Lledo G et al. Can chemotherapy be
discontinued in unresectable metastatic colorectal cancer? The GERCOR
OPTIMOX2 Study. J Clin Oncol 2009; 27: 5727–5733.
266. Tournigand C, Chibaudel B, Samson B et al. Bevacizumab with or without
erlotinib as maintenance therapy in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer
(GERCOR DREAM; OPTIMOX3): a randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet
Oncol 2015; 16: 1493–1505.
267. Diaz-Rubio E, Gomez-Espana A, Massuti B et al. First-line XELOX plus
bevacizumab followed by XELOX plus bevacizumab or single-agent bevacizumab
as maintenance therapy in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer: the phase
III MACRO TTD study. Oncologist 2012; 17: 15–25.
268. Hegewisch-Becker S, Graeven U, Lerchenmuller CA et al. Maintenance strategies
after first-line oxaliplatin plus fluoropyrimidine plus bevacizumab for patients with
metastatic colorectal cancer (AIO 0207): a randomised, non-inferiority, open-
label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2015; 16: 1355–1369.
269. Koeberle D, Betticher DC, von Moos R et al. Bevacizumab continuation versus no
continuation after first-line chemotherapy plus bevacizumab in patients with
metastatic colorectal cancer: a randomized phase III non-inferiority trial (SAKK
41/06). Ann Oncol 2015; 26: 709–714.
270. Simkens LH, van Tinteren H, May A et al. Maintenance treatment with
capecitabine and bevacizumab in metastatic colorectal cancer (CAIRO3): a phase
3 randomised controlled trial of the Dutch Colorectal Cancer Group. Lancet
2015; 385: 1843–1852.
271. Wasan H, Meade AM, Adams R et al. Intermittent chemotherapy plus either
intermittent or continuous cetuximab for first-line treatment of patients with KRAS
wild-type advanced colorectal cancer (COIN-B): a randomised phase 2 trial.
Lancet Oncol 2014; 15: 631–639.
272. Johnsson A, Hagman H, Frodin JE et al. A randomized phase III trial on
maintenance treatment with bevacizumab alone or in combination with erlotinib
after chemotherapy and bevacizumab in metastatic colorectal cancer: the Nordic
ACT Trial. Ann Oncol 2013; 24: 2335–2341.
273. Stein A, Atanackovic D, Hildebrandt B et al. Upfront FOLFOXIRI+bevacizumab
followed by fluoropyrimidin and bevacizumab maintenance in patients with
molecularly unselected metastatic colorectal cancer. Br J Cancer 2015; 113:
872–877.
274. Garcia Alfonso P, Benavides M, Sanchez Ruiz A et al. Phase II study of first-line
mFOLFOX plus cetuximab (C) for 8 cycles followed by mFOLFOX plus C or
single agent (S/A) C as maintenance therapy in patients (P) with metastatic
colorectal cancer (mCRC): The MACRO-2 trial (Spanish Cooperative Group for
the Treatment of Digestive Tumors [TTD]). Ann Oncol 2014; 25(Suppl 4): abstr
499O.
275. Cunningham D, Pyrhonen S, James RD et al. Randomised trial of irinotecan plus
supportive care versus supportive care alone after fluorouracil failure for patients
with metastatic colorectal cancer. Lancet 1998; 352: 1413–1418.
276. Rougier P, Lepille D, Bennouna J et al. Antitumour activity of three second-line
treatment combinations in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer after optimal
5-FU regimen failure: a randomised, multicentre phase II study. Ann Oncol 2002;
13: 1558–1567.
277. Rougier P, Van Cutsem E, Bajetta E et al. Randomised trial of irinotecan versus
fluorouracil by continuous infusion after fluorouracil failure in patients with
metastatic colorectal cancer. Lancet 1998; 352: 1407–1412.
278. Haller DG, Rothenberg ML, Wong AO et al. Oxaliplatin plus irinotecan compared
with irinotecan alone as second-line treatment after single-agent fluoropyrimidine
therapy for metastatic colorectal carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 2008; 26: 4544–4550.
279. Koopman M, Antonini NF, Douma J et al. Sequential versus combination
chemotherapy with capecitabine, irinotecan, and oxaliplatin in advanced
colorectal cancer (CAIRO): a phase III randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2007;
370: 135–142.
280. Seymour MT, Maughan TS, Ledermann JA et al. Different strategies of sequential
and combination chemotherapy for patients with poor prognosis advanced
colorectal cancer (MRC FOCUS): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2007;
370: 143–152.
281. Tournigand C, Andre T, Achille E et al. FOLFIRI followed by FOLFOX6 or the
reverse sequence in advanced colorectal cancer: a randomized GERCOR study. J
Clin Oncol 2004; 22: 229–237.
282. Giantonio BJ, Catalano PJ, Meropol NJ et al. Bevacizumab in combination with
oxaliplatin, fluorouracil, and leucovorin (FOLFOX4) for previously treated
metastatic colorectal cancer: results from the Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group Study E3200. J Clin Oncol 2007; 25: 1539–1544.
283. Bennouna J, Sastre J, Arnold D et al. Continuation of bevacizumab after first
progression in metastatic colorectal cancer (ML18147): a randomised phase 3
trial. Lancet Oncol 2013; 14: 29–37.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw235 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
 284. Beretta GD, Petrelli F, Stinco S et al. FOLFIRI + bevacizumab as second-line
therapy for metastatic colorectal cancer pretreated with oxaliplatin: a pooled
analysis of published trials. Med Oncol 2013; 30: 486.
285. Lievre A, Samalin E, Mitry E et al. Bevacizumab plus FOLFIRI or FOLFOX in
chemotherapy-refractory
patients
with
metastatic
colorectal
cancer:
a
retrospective study. BMC Cancer 2009; 9: 347.
286. Masi G, Salvatore L, Boni L et al. Continuation or reintroduction of bevacizumab
beyond progression to first-line therapy in metastatic colorectal cancer: final
results of the randomized BEBYP trial. Ann Oncol 2015; 26: 724–730.
287. Van Cutsem E, Tabernero J, Lakomy R et al. Addition of aflibercept to fluorouracil,
leucovorin, and irinotecan improves survival in a phase III randomized trial in
patients with metastatic colorectal cancer previously treated with an oxaliplatin-
based regimen. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30: 3499–3506.
288. Tabernero J, Van Cutsem E, Lakomy R et al. Aflibercept versus placebo in
combination with fluorouracil, leucovorin and irinotecan in the treatment of
previously treated metastatic colorectal cancer: prespecified subgroup analyses
from the VELOUR trial. Eur J Cancer 2014; 50: 320–331.
289. Tabernero J, Yoshino T, Cohn AL et al. Ramucirumab versus placebo in
combination with second-line FOLFIRI in patients with metastatic colorectal
carcinoma that progressed during or after first-line therapy with bevacizumab,
oxaliplatin, and a fluoropyrimidine (RAISE): a randomised, double-blind,
multicentre, phase 3 study. Lancet Oncol 2015; 16: 499–508.
290. Sobrero AF, Maurel J, Fehrenbacher L et al. EPIC: phase III trial of cetuximab plus
irinotecan after fluoropyrimidine and oxaliplatin failure in patients with metastatic
colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 2008; 26: 2311–2319.
291. Cascinu S, Lonardi S, Rosati G et al. A phase III multicenter trial comparing two
different sequences of second/third line therapy (cetuximab/irinotecan followed
by FOLFOX versus FOLFOX followed by cetuximab/irinotecan) in metastatic K-
RAS wt colorectal cancer (mCC) patients, refractory to FOLFIRI/Bevacizumab. Eur
J Cancer 2015; 51(Suppl S3): abstr 2006.
292. Hecht JR, Cohn A, Dakhil S et al. SPIRITT: a randomized, multicenter, phase II
study of panitumumab with FOLFIRI and bevacizumab with FOLFIRI as second-
line treatment in patients with unresectable wild type KRAS metastatic colorectal
cancer. Clin Colorectal Cancer 2015; 14: 72–80.
293. Cunningham D, Humblet Y, Siena S et al. Cetuximab monotherapy and cetuximab
plus irinotecan in irinotecan-refractory metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J
Med 2004; 351: 337–345.
294. Geva R, Vecchione L, Tejpar S et al. Bevacizumab plus chemotherapy as salvage
treatment in chemorefractory patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Onco
Targets Ther 2013; 6: 53–58.
295. Hecht JR, Patnaik A, Berlin J et al. Panitumumab monotherapy in patients
with previously treated metastatic colorectal cancer. Cancer 2007; 110:
980–988.
296. Price TJ, Peeters M, Kim TW et al. Panitumumab versus cetuximab in patients
with chemotherapy-refractory wild-type KRAS exon 2 metastatic colorectal
cancer (ASPECCT): a randomised, multicentre, open-label, non-inferiority phase
3 study. Lancet Oncol 2014; 15: 569–579.
297. Grothey A, Van Cutsem E, Sobrero A et al. Regorafenib monotherapy for
previously treated metastatic colorectal cancer (CORRECT): an international,
multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet 2013; 381:
303–312.
298. Li J, Qin S, Xu R et al. Regorafenib plus best supportive care versus placebo plus
best supportive care in Asian patients with previously treated metastatic
colorectal cancer (CONCUR): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2015; 16: 619–629.
299. Mayer RJ, Van Cutsem E, Falcone A et al. Randomized trial of TAS-102 for
refractory metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 2015; 372:
1909–1919.
300. Yoshino T, Mizunuma N, Yamazaki K et al. TAS-102 monotherapy for pretreated
metastatic colorectal cancer: a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled
phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol 2012; 13: 993–1001.
301. Papamichael D, Audisio RA, Glimelius B et al. Treatment of colorectal cancer in
older patients: International Society of Geriatric Oncology (SIOG) consensus
recommendations 2013. Ann Oncol 2015; 26: 463–476.
302. Gruenberger B, Tamandl D, Schueller J et al. Bevacizumab, capecitabine, and
oxaliplatin as neoadjuvant therapy for patients with potentially curable metastatic
colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 2008; 26: 1830–1835.
303. Garufi C, Torsello A, Tumolo S et al. Cetuximab plus chronomodulated irinotecan,
5-fluorouracil, leucovorin and oxaliplatin as neoadjuvant chemotherapy in
colorectal liver metastases: POCHER trial. Br J Cancer 2010; 103: 1542–1547.
304. Wong R, Cunningham D, Barbachano Y et al. A multicentre study of
capecitabine, oxaliplatin plus bevacizumab as perioperative treatment of patients
with poor-risk colorectal liver-only metastases not selected for upfront resection.
Ann Oncol 2011; 22: 2042–2048.
 | Van Cutsem et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1386/1741549 by guest on 01 June 2019
