 Synthesis
Cannibalism and Infectious Disease: Friends or Foes?
Benjamin G. Van Allen,1,2,* Forrest P. Dillemuth,1 Andrew J. Flick,1 Matthew J. Faldyn,1
David R. Clark,1,3 Volker H. W. Rudolf,4 and Bret D. Elderd1
1. Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70803;
2. Marine Biology Research Division,
University of California, San Diego, California 92093;
3. Department of Biology, University of Puerto Rico–Rio Piedras Campus, San Juan,
Puerto Rico 00931;
4. Department of BioSciences MS-170, 6100 Main Street, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005
Submitted December 14, 2016; Accepted April 12, 2017; Electronically published July 14, 2017
abstract: Cannibalism occurs in a majority of both carnivorous
and noncarnivorous animal taxa from invertebrates to mammals.
Similarly, infectious parasites are ubiquitous in nature. Thus, inter-
actions between cannibalism and disease occur regularly. While some
adaptive benefits of cannibalism are clear, the prevailing view is that
the risk of parasite transmission due to cannibalism would increase
disease spread and, thus, limit the evolutionary extent of cannibalism
throughout the animal kingdom. In contrast, surprisingly little atten-
tion has been paid to the other half of the interaction between canni-
balism and disease, that is, how cannibalism affects parasites. Here we
examine the interaction between cannibalism and parasites and show
how advances across independent lines ofresearch suggest that cannibal-
ism can also reduce the prevalence of parasites and, thus, infection risk
for cannibals. Cannibalism does this by both directly killing parasites in
infected victims and by reducing the number of susceptible hosts, often
enhanced by the stage-structured nature of cannibalism and infection.
While the well-established view that disease should limit cannibalism
has held sway, we present theory and examples from a synthesis of the
literature showing how cannibalism may also limit disease and highlight
key areas where conceptual and empirical work is needed to resolve this
debate.
Keywords: cannibalism, transmission, parasite, disease, trophic trans-
mission, epidemic.
Introduction
Cannibalism, the consumption of conspecifics, is wide-
spread among animal species (Fox 1975; Polis 1981; Smith
and Reay 1991; Ibáñez and Keyl 2010; Richardson et al.
2010). Understanding why cannibalism arises and how it is
maintained in animal populations has long fascinated and
challenged researchers (Fox 1975; Polis 1981; Elgar and Crespi
1992). Theory predicts that cannibalistic behavior should be
determined by a balance between its costs (e.g., risk of injury
or loss of inclusive fitness when harming kin) and benefits
(e.g., gains in nutrition, reduction in competition; Polis 1981;
Stenseth 1985; Elgar and Crespi 1992; Pfennig 1997; Rich-
ardson et al. 2010; Rudolf et al. 2010). The risk of infection is
widely expected to select against cannibalism as well, since
individuals are more likely to contract parasites when con-
suming conspecific versus heterospecific victims, which im-
poses a significant cost on cannibalistic behavior (Pfennig
2000). Yet evidence for disease imposing strong or widespread
selection against cannibalistic behavior is limited and equivo-
cal, despite the ubiquity of parasites and cannibalistic taxa
(Reed et al. 1996; Rudolf and Antonovics 2007; Bolker et al.
2008; Sadeh et al. 2016). In this review and synthesis, we argue
that it is important to consider the ecological and evolutionary
effects of cannibalism on the parasite and its subsequent
impact on parasite transmission. While this is rarely done,
existing evidence suggests that when we consider the feed-
back between parasites and cannibalism, cannibalism may
be more likely to reduce parasite prevalence and thus limit
the negative effects of parasites on cannibalistic behavior.
The argument that the risks of parasite transmission
through cannibalism outweigh any benefits arises from two
central tenets. First, scientists were under the erroneous im-
pression that incidences of cannibalism were extremely rare
in nature (Eibl-Eibelsfelt 1961; Dawkins 1976). Although
later work indicates that cannibalism occurs with high fre-
quency across many taxa (Fox 1975; Polis 1981; Ibáñez and
Keyl 2010; Richardson et al. 2010; Ohlberger et al. 2012), sev-
eral studies suggested that the risk of parasite transmission
could be a dominating factor limiting cannibalistic behavior
and leading to its supposed infrequency across most species
(Elgar and Crespi 1992; Pfennig et al. 1998; Curtis 2014). Sec-
ond, studies of kuru in the Fore people of New Guinea, as well
as other work with prion diseases, have indirectly promoted
the idea that cannibalism could be a common mechanism re-
sponsible forthespreadofparasites(Lindenbaum1979;Klitz-
man et al. 1984; Collinge et al. 2006). Indeed, there is clear
empirical evidence that some wildlife diseases can be spread
through cannibalism (Pfennig et al. 1991; Boots 1998; Forbes
* Corresponding author; e-mail: bgvanallen@ucsd.edu.
ORCIDs: Van Allen, http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8489-4790; Clark, http://
orcid.org/0000-0003-3125-0160.
Am. Nat. 2017. Vol. 190, pp. 299–312. q 2017 by The University of Chicago.
0003-0147/2017/19003-57445$15.00. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1086/692734
vol. 190, no. 3
the american naturalist
september 2017
This content downloaded from 128.042.224.004 on September 18, 2017 09:25:56 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
 2000; Pfennig 2000; Williams and Hernández 2006; Rudolf
and Antonovics 2007; Bolker et al. 2008). As a result, the idea
that cannibalism spreads disease or at least creates significant
risk of infection for cannibals has continued to dominate the
ecological literature.
In contrast, the ecological and evolutionary literature has
paid surprisingly little attention to how cannibalism affects
parasites and how this alters the relationship between can-
nibalism and disease. In this review, we take a comprehen-
sive look at the interaction of cannibalism and parasites and
synthesize the findings of recent theoretical and empirical
studies. Based on this body of work, we identify and discuss
three main mechanisms/concepts (fig. 1) whereby cannibal-
ism can alter the prevalence and transmission of parasites
(i.e., micro and, to a lesser extent, macroparasite pathogens).
First, we discuss per capita effects of cannibalism on disease
transmission (fig. 1A; Rudolf and Antonovics 2007). Second,
we show how cannibalism can reduce the spread of diseases
and does not always lead to higher risk of transmission for
the cannibal (fig. 1B; Hart 1990; Reed et al. 1996; Boots
1998; Meunier 2015). Third, we discuss the ways that patho-
gens and cannibalism interact with stage-structured host
populations and how this affects population and disease dy-
namics (fig. 1C; Claessen et al. 2004; Rudolf 2008; Ohlberger
et al. 2012). Together, these mechanisms, which operate
across taxa, alter multiple facets of parasite transmission
and often make cannibalism more likely to prevent disease
rather than disease limiting cannibalism. Following these
sections, we discuss how details in the strategies of can-
nibals and hosts can alter both cannibal risk and parasite
spread. We then consider the relationship between canni-
balism and broader behavioral and evolutionary questions
such as filial cannibalism. Finally, we highlight gaps in cur-
rent research and suggest fruitful avenues for future empir-
ical and theoretical research.
Cannibalism as the Sole Form of Disease Transmission
Cannibalism itself is unlikely to spread disease because the
net number of infected individuals in the population can-
not increase after one infected individual is consumed by a
single cannibal (Rudolf and Antonovics 2007). Further,
infected cannibals can only reduce the prevalence of the
disease by continuing to eat infected and uninfected con-
specifics (Rudolf and Antonovics 2007). This is shown in
a susceptible-infected model with disease transmission oc-
curring only through cannibalism (Rudolf and Antonovics
2007), where
dS
dt p bN 1 eaN2 2 aNS 2 dagIS 2 dS,
dI
dt p dagIS 2 aNI 2 (d 1 v)I:
ð1Þ
Here the rate of change of susceptibles (S) and infecteds (I)
is determined by the birth of new susceptibles (bN, where
N p S 1 I); the increase in births due to resources gained
from cannibals consuming victims, e; the cannibalism rate,
a; the transmission of disease from infected victims to the
cannibal(s), d; the group size of cannibals per victim, g; the
background death rate, d; and the increase in infected in-
dividual mortality rate, v. For simplicity, this model assumes
that infection takes hold immediately but only results in a
higher mortality rate and does not alter cannibalistic behav-
ior or production of new susceptible offspring. While canni-
balistic transmission of disease can make cannibalism of in-
A
Per capita
5
10
15
20
0
50 100 150 200 250
Group Size
# of Susceptible
No Disease
Group cannibalism needed
for disease to spread
−1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Fraction Infected
log10(Host Density)
C
Size/Stage Structured
Removal of smaller infecteds,
who contain less of a viral load
B
Population Level
Decrease population below
epizootic threshold
Cannibalism rate
Pop. growth rate
Disease Spreads
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Disease prevalence
Figure 1: Three major mechanisms by which cannibalism negatively affects disease transmission: per capita (A), population level (B; dark
region in the upper left denotes areas of population extinction), and size/stage structured (C; dashed line p noncannibalistic population,
solid line p cannibalistic population). Per capita figure derived from Rudolf and Antonovics (2007).
300
The American Naturalist
This content downloaded from 128.042.224.004 on September 18, 2017 09:25:56 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
 fected victims individually risky, this model indicates that a
parasite spread only through one-on-one cannibalism can-
not invade a cannibalistic population (Rudolf and Antono-
vics 2007). The findings of this analytical solution are borne
out in the scarcity of diseases spread exclusively through
cannibalism. While many diseases are spread somewhat in-
cidentally though cannibalism (i.e., cannibalism is not a
major transmission source), none is known to transmit
solely through the killing and consumption of conspecifics,
even for the few diseases where cannibalism represents a
major course of transmission (Rudolf and Antonovics 2007).
We caution that this pattern may partly be caused by the in-
teraction between large populations and their diseases as
compared to small populations. If cannibalistic transmis-
sion is perfect or near so, then even with only one-on-one
cannibalism, population size goes down while the number
of infections stays the same. This could lead to a noticeable
increase in prevalence within a small cannibalistic popula-
tion as cannibals pass the infection between increasingly
fewer individuals. Even in this case, however, the actual
number of infections will not increase due to cannibalism.
While one-on-one cannibalism cannot promote the spread
of disease, cannibalism can still spread disease through a pop-
ulation by itself if, on average, more than one susceptible in-
dividual becomes infected per cannibalistic event (Rudolf and
Antonovics 2007). For this to occur, however, multiple can-
nibals must consume the same infected victim. Even in the
case of group cannibalism, transmission must also be high
enough in concert with the average group size to maintain
more than one new infection per cannibalistic event on in-
fected hosts (Rudolf and Antonovics 2007). These rules were
likely met in the case of the prion disease kuru, which spread
in human populations in New Guinea, since multiple individ-
uals contacted and consumed the remains of recently dead
infected individuals, and the transmission rate was high (Lin-
denbaum 1979; Klitzman et al. 1984; Collinge et al. 2006). The
spread of kuru through cannibalism alone is perhaps inci-
dental to the situation, since prion proteins can spread through
a number of mechanisms involving transfer of contami-
nated body fluids (Collinge 2001). In general, most exam-
ples of group consumption of conspecific victims come from
humans and their closest relatives, the chimpanzees (Arcadi
and Wrangham 1999; Mitani et al. 2002; Wilson et al. 2004;
Rudolf and Antonovics 2007). Other sociable and predatory
animals, such as wolves and lions, rarely consume conspe-
cifics in groups (Rausch 1967; Bertram 1975). The prevalence
of group cannibalism in invertebrates is less well known, but
group cannibalism could occur in some species that frequently
occur at high density or live in social groups (see, e.g., Wis-
singer et al. 2003; Vijendravarma et al. 2013). Given that can-
nibals rarely share infected victims in nature, theory sug-
gests that lethal cannibalism is an insufficient transmission
mechanism in the absence of any other transmission mech-
anisms to ensure the persistence of parasites across most
populations.
The absence of diseases spread exclusively through canni-
balism is striking, given how common trophic transmission
of parasites is in other systems. For example, the consump-
tion of living victims is the only mode of transmission for
many parasites, which spread from intermediate hosts (i.e.,
prey) to definite hosts (i.e., predators; Kuris 1974; Lafferty
1999; Johnson et al. 2010). Other forms of trophic transmis-
sion often considered cannibalism, such as nonlethal partial
consumption (i.e., Sarcocystis in lizards [Matuschka and
Bannert 1989] or devil facial tumor disease in Tasmanian
devils [McCallum et al. 2009]), are not constrained in the
same way as the killing and consumption of conspecifics
(Rudolf and Antonovics 2007). Since infected individuals
are not killed or removed from the populations in these sys-
tems, these transmission routes are more similar to standard
frequency-dependent transmission, which allows transmis-
sion of the parasite to more than one conspecific at more
than one time. Together these empirical and theoretical stud-
ies indicate that, compared to other forms of trophic trans-
mission, cannibalism appears to be a disadvantageous mech-
anism for a pathogen to solely exploit without relying on other
means of transmission.
Cannibalism Culls the Infected and Reduces
the Susceptible Population
Not all diseases that can spread in cannibalistic popula-
tions are transmitted through cannibalism, yet cannibal-
ism can still inhibit the spread of these diseases via two re-
lated mechanisms. First, cannibalism can be an intense
form of density-dependent population regulation that de-
creases the number of susceptible hosts (Fox 1975; Polis
1981; Wagner and Wise 1996; Moksnes 2004; Bolker et al.
2008; Van Allen and Rudolf 2013; Sadeh et al. 2016). Since
parasites transmitted via density-dependent means, as com-
pared to frequency-dependent transmission, require a thresh-
old density of susceptible hosts to invade a population (Mc-
Callum et al. 2001; Potapov et al. 2012), cannibalism could
keep populations below this threshold. Thus, cannibalism
can prevent or limit parasite invasion (Anderson and May
1980; McCallum et al. 2001; Potapov et al. 2012). Second,
the consumption of infected conspecifics will not increase
the number of infections (even if the parasite can be trans-
mitted through cannibalism; see eq. [1]) and can decrease
the number of infected individuals, reducing disease trans-
mission even without density-dependent transmission (Reed
et al. 1996; Boots 1998; Rudolf and Antonovics 2007; Bolker
et al. 2008; Sadeh et al. 2016). Through these mechanisms,
cannibalism is somewhat analogous to the culling of a wild
animal population to prevent the spread of disease (Potapov
et al. 2012; Brooks-Pollock et al. 2014). We can contrast the
Cannibalism and Infectious Disease
301
This content downloaded from 128.042.224.004 on September 18, 2017 09:25:56 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
 effects of cannibalism and proportional increases in mortality
(such as culling) on the dynamics of a horizontally spread
parasite using the general model,
dS
dt p bN
�
1 2 N
K
�
2 (m 1 h)S 2 bSI 1 eaN2
2aNS 2 daIS,
dI
dt p bSI 2 (m 1 m 1 h)I 2 aNI 1 daIS,
ð2Þ
where S and I are the susceptible and infected individuals, re-
spectively, and N p S 1 I. Susceptible individuals are added
to the population assuming logistic growth b(1 2 N=K)(N),
die naturally at the rate of mS, and become infected through
density-dependent horizontal (from individual to individual)
transmission at rate b. Infected individuals are instanta-
neously infectious and have mortality increased by rate m.
Both groups are equally susceptible to harvesting or culling,
h, and are cannibalistic, without regard to infection status,
at rate a. The parameters e and d represent the increase in
reproductive output individuals receive from cannibalism per
capita and the transmission rate of the disease through can-
nibalism on infected individuals, respectively.
Analysis of the model indicates that even low levels of
cannibalism reduce the prevalence of infection in the pop-
ulation and can result in the exclusion of the pathogen
across a wide range of parameter space (fig. 2A). Culling
or harvesting, on the other hand, must be balanced very
closely to the growth rate of the population, since only a
narrow range of parameter values exist where prevalence
is reduced (fig. 2B). Excluding the pathogen with culling
requires especially finely tuned efforts, since only margin-
ally higher rates of mortality will cause the population it-
self to collapse toward extinction. If the growth rate of the
population is too high (greater than h 1 m, both of which
are necessarily less than 1), then culling cannot exclude dis-
ease from the population (fig. 2B). This limitation is not
nearly as strict with cannibalism, since mortality is limited
by the population size itself, leading to a nonlinear relation-
ship between population growth rate and pathogen exclu-
sion (fig. 2A). Even in the simulation shown in figure 2A,
where cannibalistic transmission occurs in more than half
of cases (d p 0:6) and horizontal transmission is high
(b p 0:5), there is substantial parameter space where the
parasite either cannot invade or persists at low prevalence.
The ability for cannibalism to reduce parasite spread and
frequency in a population increases (all else equal) as trans-
mission and population growth rates become lower (e.g., b,
d, e, and/or b decrease) but remains even when all cannibal-
istic events lead to a transmission event. From this epidemi-
ological perspective, cannibalism has a strong tendency to
reduce the prevalence of horizontally transmitted parasites,
because it reduces population density and removes infected
individuals (when d ! 1 and when infected individuals con-
sume other infected individuals).
While this result indicates that cannibalism tends to re-
duce parasite prevalence in a population, cannibals still of-
ten face a higher risk of infection than noncannibals be-
cause they consume infected victims. The strength of this
A
B
0.13
0.4
0.68
0.95
1.23
1.5
0.13
0.4
0.68
0.95
1.23
1.5
Population Growth Rate
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Population Growth Rate
Cannibalism Rate
Culling Rate
Disease Prevalence
Figure 2: Effect of cannibalism (A) and culling (B) on equilibrium disease prevalence in a population across different population growth
rates and cannibalistic or culling mortality rates using equation (2). Darker shading indicates a higher equilibrium prevalence of the disease
within the population, and light gray areas in the upper left of both plots denote population extinction (equilibrium (S 1 I) ! 1). Light areas
indicate a failure of the pathogen to invade and establish (indicating that the reproductive rate of the parasite, R0, was !1 leading to equilibrium
disease prevalence !0.001). In both plots, the parameter associated with increased mortality varies between 0 and 1, and population growth rate
varies between 0.13 and 1.5. Both ranges were explored with 100 equally spaced steps of parameter values (in all, 100,000 combinations) run for
100 time steps. The parameters used for cannibalism (A) are K p 10,000, e p 0:3, d p 0:6, m p 0:06, b p 0:5, and m p 0:5, while for
culling (B), e p 0 and d p 0; all other parameters are the same as in panel A. Each simulation began with S p 20 and I p 0:5 to simulate
the invasion of a population by the parasite. Dashed lines through A are used for figure 3.
302
The American Naturalist
This content downloaded from 128.042.224.004 on September 18, 2017 09:25:56 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
 infection risk varies with the ability of the parasites to trans-
mit through cannibalism and the frequency of consuming
infected individuals. Cannibalistic transmission (d) is fixed
in our population model (eq. [2]), but the frequency of con-
suming infected individuals changes with parasite preva-
lence for a given cannibalism rate and population size.
Higher cannibalism rates reduce parasite prevalence and
population size but increase the number of potentially in-
fected victims that cannibals encounter. As a result, the
per capita risk of infection through cannibalism changes
nonlinearly (in eq. [2]) as cannibalism rates increase (fig. 3).
At equilibrium densities, per capita infection risk for cannibals
increases briefly as cannibalism rates increase, but this risk
soon declines as higher cannibalism rates more effectively
reduce parasite prevalence and the number of potential
victims (fig. 3). As a result, infection risk for cannibals de-
creases as cannibalism rates become higher (relative to lower
cannibalism rates) and eventually reaches zero when cannibal-
ism prevents a parasite from spreading in the population
(fig. 3). This illustrates that while cannibalism does increase
individual risk of infection, more cannibalism may not result
in increasing risk, and indeed the opposite can be true (Bolker
et al. 2008). Furthermore, while cannibalism can be costly be-
cause of this increased infection risk, cannibalism has many
other benefits that could overcome its costs (Fox 1975; Polis
1981; Pfennig 2000). More studies are needed that examine
the eco-evolutionary costs and benefits of cannibalism in light
of this nonlinear risk of infection to determine when parasites
could select against cannibalism, and vice versa.
Size- and Stage-Structured Cannibalism
Who is a cannibal and who is a victim is frequently decided
by variation in size or stage (Fox 1975; Polis 1981; Claessen
et al. 2004; Ibáñez and Keyl 2010; Richardson et al. 2010;
Miller and Rudolf 2011). Earlier life stages tend to be smaller
and less able to defend themselves. Consequently, older,
larger individuals typically consume earlier, smaller stages.
Many parasites affect the size/stage structure of a popula-
tion at the individual level, by altering or stopping growth
and changing host behavior (Sait et al. 1994; Park et al.
1996; Kelehear et al. 2009; Hatcher et al. 2014; Bunke et al.
2015). Furthermore, larger and more mature individuals
tend to be more resistant and require higher doses to be-
come infected, making younger/smaller stages an easier tar-
get for parasites (Feng et al. 1985; Briggs and Godfray 1995;
Boots 1998; Boff et al. 2000; Kelehear et al. 2009; Haislip
et al. 2011; Harrison and Hoover 2012). Thus, increased par-
asite prevalence in a population also frequently increases size
and activity differences among individuals and thereby in-
creases the opportunity for targeted cannibalism of smaller
infected conspecifics. Such size-specific effects of parasites
can thus strongly interact with the population-culling effects
of cannibalism by increasing both the reduction of host den-
sity and targeted removal of infected individuals, but poten-
tially decreasing the consumption of infecteds by infecteds
and increasing the quality of potential hosts when parasites
spread through cannibalism. With this increased biological
realism, the answers begin to lie in the details.
A particularly striking case of the interactions between
cannibalism and parasite-induced variation in size/stage
occurs in lepidopteran larvae infected with lethal baculo-
viruses. Baculoviruses are a large group of viruses that infect
a number of lepidopteran species. Lepidopteran larvae inad-
vertently ingest viral particles in the environment, and the vi-
rus prevents the infected host from continuing its develop-
ment, but healthy individuals continue to grow (Elderd 2013).
This stunting effect can lead to substantial differences in
size and stage between healthy and infected individuals
(fig. 4; Elderd et al. 2008; Elderd and Reilly 2014). Despite
being generally herbivorous, a high proportion of lepidop-
teran larvae are also cannibalistic (Richardson et al. 2010).
A
B
C
Figure 3: Risk of infection through cannibalism after the system reached equilibrium at the end of each simulation using equation (2). Each
figure represents a slice through panel A of figure 2. Instantaneous infection risk through cannibalistic activity (beyond any risk of infection
through horizontal transmission) occurs when consuming conspecifics who may or may not be infected with a parasite that can transfer
through cannibalism, but this risk does not linearly increase with increased cannibalistic activity. Infection risk is calculated by multiplying
the cannibalism rate by the cannibalistic transmission rate (d) and the number of infected individuals in the population at equilibrium (i.e.,
the number of infected potential victims). As a result, at equilibrium, infection risk p a # d # I. The cannibalistic transmission rate used
here is as in figure 2, d p 0:6.
Cannibalism and Infectious Disease
303
This content downloaded from 128.042.224.004 on September 18, 2017 09:25:56 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
 To understand how cannibalism may affect disease dynam-
ics in such a stage-structured population, we constructed a
model using a suite of differential equations based on an
SEIR (susceptible, exposed, infectious, or recovered) model
(Fuller et al. 2012; Elderd and Reilly 2014) modified for this
cannibalistic insect host-parasite interaction:
dS
dt p 2bSP 2 faS
X
m
i21
Ei,
dE1
dt p bSP 1 faS
X
m
i21
Ei 2 mdE1 2 aSE1,
dEi
dt p mdEi21 2 mdEi 2 aSEi, i p 2 ::: m,
dP
dt p mdEm 2 mP:
ð3Þ
Here susceptible individuals, S, move into the first exposed
stage, E1, as determined by the transmission rate, b, and the
amount of pathogen, P, in the system. Susceptible individu-
als can also become infected by attacking and consuming ex-
posed individuals, Ei, of various stages (1 ... m) given the at-
tack rate, a, and the fraction of attacks, f, that result in an
infection. Individuals leave the first exposed stage, E1, either
by moving to the next stage at rate md or by being consumed
by a susceptible individual. Eventually, exposed individuals
move through all m stages and liquefy to become pathogen,
P. The pathogen degrades over time due to UV sunlight ex-
posure (Fuller et al. 2012) at rate m. There are no recovered
individuals in the model, as the parasite is fatal once in-
fected. The exposed and infected (Ei) individuals move
through a number of discrete stages during which the path-
ogen develops in the host. Almost all microparasites have
some latent stage before peak infectiousness (Fraser et al.
2004); the length of the baculovirus latent stage is likely
due to the dramatic liquefaction of host tissue necessary for
transmission to occur (Fuller et al. 2012; Elderd 2013). The
total time in the exposed stage is the sum of m exponential
distributions, which is a gamma distribution with a mean
time in the exposed class of 1=d and a variance of (1=md2).
This model describes a single epidemic of baculovirus infec-
tion in a cohort of fall armyworms (Spodoptera frugiperda).
Note, we assume only susceptible individuals are cannibals
and all exposed individuals are equally infectious. The for-
mer holds if healthy individuals readily consume infected
individuals. The latter is an assumption that can be relaxed
but could be considered conservative.
Under this stage-structured framework (fig. 5), the cu-
mulative fraction of individuals infected during a disease
outbreak is always less than if a population was noncanni-
balistic at relatively high host densities (solid lines as com-
pared to the dashed lines). At low host densities, cannibal-
ism can slightly increases transmission of the disease but
only when the cannibalistic transmission rate is very high
(e.g., 90% in fig. 5A). However, as host density increases,
the disease reduction effects of cannibalism becomes stron-
ger with increasing cannibalism rates. Interestingly, infec-
Figure 4: Two fall armyworm (Spodoptera frugiperda) caterpillars of the same age (within 24 h). The caterpillar on the left was infected with
the baculovirus Autographica californica multinucleate nucleopolyhedrovirus (AcMNPV) shortly after hatching and remained at that stage,
while the uninfected larger caterpillar continued to grow and is in the fourth instar in this photo. The smaller, infected individual is a very
inviting target for cannibalism by its much larger conspecific.
304
The American Naturalist
This content downloaded from 128.042.224.004 on September 18, 2017 09:25:56 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
 tion rates peak at medium host densities in cannibalistic
populations and decline as host density increases, while in-
fection rates simply increase to 100% in noncannibalistic
populations (fig. 5). This difference in patterns of infection
frequency between cannibalistic and noncannibalistic popu-
lations suggests that the nonlinear effects of cannibalism
seen in equation (2) operate similarly here.
Our work with S. frugiperda shows that fourth-instar
larvae consuming infected first-instar larvae are infected
less than 10% of the time, suggesting that cannibalism could
effectively reduce infection rates in real populations (fig. 5;
B. G. Van Allen and B. D. Elderd, unpublished data). While
the figure shows epizootic dynamics when larvae pupate after
30 days, which is reasonable for the fall armyworm, the dy-
namics change very little if the pupation time is either in-
creased or decreased. In this system, cannibalism could have
a greater effect toward reducing disease, as infected larger in-
dividuals remain cannibalistic for days. The infection prog-
resses more slowly in these largerhosts, but they then produce
far more viral particles when they liquefy, whether they ac-
quire the disease from cannibalism or horizontal transmis-
sion (Valicente et al. 2013). By the time this happens, however,
the rest of the uninfected cohort will have pupated and any
virus produced will have to survive to infect a new cohort.
Overall, stage-structured cannibalism and the higher proba-
bility of smaller stages becoming infected and cannibalized in
many systems could act to increase the impacts of the per
capita and population-level effects of cannibalism on parasite
transmission.
Through these three individual- and population-level
mechanisms, cannibalism should tend to reduce the prev-
alence and/or fitness of parasites invading cannibalistic pop-
ulations. One or more of these mechanisms most likely op-
erates in virtually every cannibalistic population (table 1). The
three models presented here are the first logical steps to ex-
amine the dynamics of cannibalism and disease spread, but
they focus on simple (albeit common) scenarios. However, par-
ticular life histories and parasite strategies in the real world
could potentially alter the relationship between cannibalism
and disease. In the remainder of this article, we examine how
widely different outcomes in the relationship between canni-
balism and parasites are possible, first primarily from the per-
spective of variation in cannibals and then from the perspec-
tive of variation in parasites.
Devil in the Details: A Cannibal’s Perspective
Cannibalism increases the chance of becoming infected when
parasites capable of surviving the transmission from victim
to cannibal occur in the population (i.e., fig. 3). This increased
−1.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Fraction Infected
log10(Host Density)
 Increasing 
 transmission, f
A
−1.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
log10(Host Density)
 Decreasing 
 attack,α
B
Figure 5: Effects of cannibalism on the cumulative fraction of individuals infected during a disease outbreak. Only infected individuals are
cannibalized, and host pupation occurs after 30 days. Cannibalism rates of infected individuals are similar to what might be expected in
lepidopteran host-pathogen systems where the host is cannibalistic, such as in fall armyworms (Spodoptera frugiperda). In both plots, the
dashed line represents noncannibalistic populations. As transmission rate of the parasite through cannibalism increases, the dynamics be-
come more similar to noncannibalistic populations (dark to light solid gray lines). A, The attack rate, a, equals 0.02; the number of stages, m,
equals 8; d equals 1/7.2; and the cannibalistic transmission rate of the parasite increases from 0 (darkest gray solid line) to 0.1, 0.5, and 0.9
(lightest gray solid line). B, The cannibalistic transmission rate, f, equals 0.01; the number of stages m equals 8; d equals 1/7.2; and the attack
rate increases from 0.001 (lightest gray solid line) to 0.02, 0.05, and 0.1 (darkest gray solid line). In general, as the attack rate decreases, the
overall fraction infected increases.
Cannibalism and Infectious Disease
305
This content downloaded from 128.042.224.004 on September 18, 2017 09:25:56 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
 Table 1: List of empirical and empirically parameterized studies that examine cannibalism and disease transmission with direct or hypothesized relevance for prevalence
Host-parasite system
Type of data
Effect on cannibals (direction)
Effect on parasites (direction)
Citation
Tiger salamander and bacterial patho-
gens
Field survey and lab experi-
ments
Risk of infection reduces cannibalism
(reduce)
Not measured (unclear)
Pfennig et al. 1991
Prefer consuming congeners over
conspecifics (reduce)
Not measured (unclear)
Pfennig et al. 1998
Empirically parameterized model:
risk of infection does not reduce
cannibalism (no effect)
Not beneficial (negative?)
Bolker et al. 2008
Cane toad and lungworms
Lab experiment
Parasites readily spread through
cannibalism to large cannibals
(unclear)
Unclear (benefits?)
Pizzato and Shine 2011
Arctic char and cestodan parasites
Field survey
Parasites readily spread through
cannibalism to large cannibals
(unclear)
Unclear (benefits?)
Hammar 2000
Sand goby and pathogenic water mold
Lab experiment
None (promote)
Consuming portion of eggs
reduces chance of egg
parasites (negative)
Lehtonen and Kvarnemo
2015
Fall armyworm and iridovirus
Lab experiment
Virus spreads well through canni-
balism (unclear)
Cannibalism thins population
(unclear)
Williams and Hernandez
2006
Fall armyworm and baculovirus
Lab experiment
Low transmission to highly canni-
balistic larger stages, less canni-
balism in smaller more susceptible
stages (reduce)
Not measured (unclear)
Chapman et al. 1999
Parasite spreads through cannibal-
ism moderately well (unclear)
Reduces industrial production
of virus (negative)
Valicente et al. 2013
Oblique-banded leafroller and parasit-
oid wasp
Lab experiment
Only consumption of infected
conspecifics, no transmission
(promote)
Kills parasitoid (negative)
Wang and Daane 2014
Indian meal moth and parasitic wasp
Lab experiment and model
No risk of infection (promote)
Cannibalism kills parasitoid
and thins population (neg-
ative)
Reed et al. 1996
Indian meal moth and viral parasite
Lab experiment
High risk of infection but decreases
with size difference (unclear)
Cannibalism thins population
(unclear)
Boots 1998
Termites and entomopathogenic fungi
Lab experiment
None (promote)
Kills parasite and eliminates
spread (negative)
Chouvenc and Su 2012
Note: Direction brackets for effects on cannibalism indicate whether the study suggests that the interaction between cannibalism and parasites should lead to selection (individual or kin) to promote or reduce
cannibalistic behavior from the cannibal’s perspective. Direction brackets for effects on parasites indicate whether the interaction between cannibalism and disease should have beneficial or negative effects on
parasite prevalence or parasite fitness within the cannibalistic population. Note that a number of the studies do not provide a clear picture in terms of which direction should be favored for the cannibal and/or the
parasite. Almost all studies involve cannibalism on infected conspecifics (model 1), many involve population thinning (model 2), and many involve stage structure (model 3).
This content downloaded from 128.042.224.004 on September 18, 2017 09:25:56 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
 risk relative to noncannibals would seem to select against the
evolution of cannibalism that specifically targets infected in-
dividuals. Indeed, across a number of systems, there is evi-
dence of a behavioral tendency to avoid infected conspecifics
(Boots 1998; Pfennig et al. 1998; Crossland et al. 2011; Curtis
2014), though a tendency to cannibalize smaller and weaker
conspecifics can directly oppose this (Boots 1998; Pizzato and
Shine 2011). However, when there is no risk of infection for
cannibals that consume infected individuals, it appears that
targeted cannibalism of infected individuals can occur. For
example, the targeted consumption of cannibalized conspe-
cifics when risk to cannibals is nonexistent could help explain
why some pathogens fail to control their hosts. The entomo-
pathogenic fungus Metarhizium anisopliae has long been con-
sidered a promising candidate for biocontrol of subterranean
termites. Yet, attempts to induce an epidemic of this pathogen
in natural colonies have proved fruitless for decades (Chouvenc
etal.2011).This could be at least partially driven by termite
behavior: termites use burial and cannibalism of moribund
individuals to prevent the transmission of fungal pathogens
within their colonies (Rosengaus and Traniello 2001; Chouvenc
and Su 2012; Meunier 2015). Importantly, M. anisopliae does
not transmit through the gut and does not form disease-causing
spores until after the host is dead, making cannibalism of mor-
ibund individuals nearly risk free (Rosengaus and Traniello
2001). Accounting for the coordinated cannibalism and burial
of infected conspecifics, 75% of a termite population must si-
multaneously become infected with a lethal dose of the path-
ogen to cause an epidemic that will destroy the colony, which
is highly unrealistic in structurally complex subterranean ter-
mite colonies (Chouvenc and Su 2012). Reports of caterpillars
of lepidopteran species preferentially or only consuming con-
specifics with either nontransmissible parasitoids (Reed et al.
1996; Wang and Daane 2014) or transmissible parasitoids
(Boots 1998) suggests that this phenomenon is worthy of fur-
ther examination. Ignoring the negative effects of cannibal-
ism on parasites can be a costly mistake for those interested in
using parasites for biocontrol (Chouvenc et al. 2011).
While examples of targeted cannibalism of infected con-
specifics are rare in the literature, this behavior may be more
common and simply overlooked, especially if cannibalism
occurs before individuals become visibly sick (to the researcher).
While caution is warranted in ascribing adaptive signifi-
cance to a species’ behavior, whether it avoids or targets in-
fecteds (Poulin 1995), it seems that killing a parasite in a le-
thally infected host before it is able to further transmit can
have clear selective benefits for an uninfected cannibal and
its relatives. Future studies are needed to determine how fre-
quent this behavior is in nature.
The relationship between individual risk of infection
through cannibalism and the ability of cannibalism to re-
duce the prevalence of disease could be an important factor
leading to variation in the rate of cannibalism between pop-
ulations or species. Based on the models in this article and
others, the correlations between individual risk of infection
during cannibalism and the population-level frequency of
cannibalism should often be negative (eqq. [2], [3]; fig. 3;
Rudolf and Antonovics 2007). However, as the prevalence
and transmission rate of a parasite increases, higher canni-
balism rates are required to reduce parasite prevalence as
transmission rate increases (i.e., fig. 2 and comparisons be-
tween panels in fig. 3). As a result, higher parasite transmis-
sion rates could select against increased cannibalism rates,
until higher cannibalism rates reduce risk sufficiently to
balance it against the associated benefits of cannibalism. In-
terestingly, this eco-evolutionary relationship between can-
nibalism rate, individual risk, and parasite transmission rate
mirrors other work on cannibalism in dispersing populations
(Rudolf et al. 2010). Species or populations that start with low
cannibalism rates could be less likely to reach the point where
cannibalism reduces disease and more likely to find risk of
infection selecting against cannibalism. In any case, while
low cannibalism rates and high pathogen prevalence may
make cannibalism individually risky, it still would tend to re-
duce parasite prevalence and thus also be risky for the para-
site (fig. 3; Rudolf and Antonovics 2007; Bolker et al. 2008).
Cannibalism as a way to specifically remove individuals
to prevent disease spread could potentially also help ex-
plain the conundrum of filial cannibalism. Cannibalism is
expected to be most common in animals when consuming
close relatives (kin) is unlikely (Fox 1975; Polis 1981; Pfen-
nig 1997; Rudolf et al. 2010). However, the practice of filial
cannibalism, the consumption of eggs or juveniles by parents,
is a widespread exception to this rule (Polis 1981; Smith and
Reay 1991; Elgar and Crespi 1992; Richardson et al. 2010). By
consuming weak or recently infected individuals, parents
could protect their healthier offspring from later infection
through eliminating current parasites and a reduction in
clutch/litter density (Polis 1981; Hart 1990; Elgar and Crespi
1992; Richardson et al. 2010; Lehtonen and Kvarnemo 2015).
This possibility ties well to recent work suggesting that the
strength of kin selection varies with estimated future fitness
(Dugas et al. 2016) and suggests that filial cannibalism could
be another estimation of risk (including the risk of disease
transmission) balanced against offspring potential (Lehtonen
and Kvarnemo 2015). While additional explanations for filial
cannibalism exist, such as maintaining balance between fu-
ture costs of offspring rearing and resource levels (Fox 1975;
Rohwer 1978; Polis 1981; Manica 2002; Klug and Bonsall
2007), the casting of filial cannibalism as a mechanism that
reduces the prevalence of parasites is similar to a smaller-
scale version of the culling through cannibalism concept
outlined above. This suggests that diseases may actually pro-
mote evolution of filial cannibalism, but this intriguing hy-
pothesis remains to be tested (but see Lehtonen and Kvar-
nemo 2015).
Cannibalism and Infectious Disease
307
This content downloaded from 128.042.224.004 on September 18, 2017 09:25:56 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
 Across the diversity of hosts and pathogens, the effect of
cannibalism on parasite transmission in the population could
vary for a number of reasons. Diseases with a longer latent pe-
riod before they become transmittable are more susceptible
to removal through (even incidental) cannibalism, as they are
also more likely to be removed through quarantine and other
mechanisms that remove infected individuals from the wider
population (Hart 1990; Fraser et al. 2004; Chouvenc and Su
2012; Wang and Daane 2014). If the parasite induces traits
in infected individuals that make them less likely to be con-
sumed, or if the parasite is transmitted through frequency de-
pendence instead of density dependence (thereby removing a
specific population size threshold for disease spread), the
strength of the density-dependent effects of cannibalism are
likely to be reduced (Potapov et al. 2012; Rudolf et al. 2012).
Parasites can also increase the cannibalistic behavior of hosts,
which can indirectly increase (i.e., by consuming susceptibles)
or directly decrease (i.e., by consuming infecteds) the preva-
lence of the parasite, as well as decrease population density
(Bunke et al. 2015). When a pathogen invades the community
at a high rate, such as when a co-occurring population of a dif-
ferent species or an environmental source transmits the dis-
ease to the cannibalistic population, the ability of cannibalism
to reduce parasite frequency could be overwhelmed and can-
nibalism could perhaps even increase the rate of parasite
spread (Pfennig et al. 1991; Altizer et al. 2003, 2011; Rudolf
and Antonovics 2005; McCallum 2012). In this spillover
scenario, a disease could perhaps more easily select against
cannibalism. However, even in this case, models suggest
that the risk of disease through cannibalism must be both
high and persistent (Bolker et al. 2008).
Devil in the Details: A Parasite’s Perspective
While cannibalism of infected hosts can certainly be risky
for susceptible cannibals, the parasite risks death with a
best-case alternative of infecting a new host. Even if the par-
asite infects the new host, this will simply replace the old
host with a new one in most situations (Rudolf and An-
tonovics 2007). However, there are a number of life-history
strategies a pathogen can adopt to avoid or ameliorate a re-
duction in its prevalence/fitness in a cannibalistic popula-
tion. Cannibalism most simply represents an increased mor-
tality rate of infected and susceptible hosts. Theory predicts
that increased host mortality will favor faster onset of trans-
mission and higher transmission rates for the parasite, possi-
bly resulting in higher virulence and, subsequently, faster
death rates (Anderson and May 1982; Ewald 1983; Gandon
et al. 2001). Decreasing the latent period and beginning to
spread more quickly also gives cannibals less time to consume
infected hosts. Surviving cannibalism by infecting the canni-
bal still usually results in fewer available hosts and forces the
parasite to start over in the new host, delaying further trans-
mission. While surviving cannibalism and increasing viru-
lence may ameliorate a bad situation to insure continued in-
fection of the host, these potential parasite responses will not
directly result in cannibalism increasing the spread of disease.
Parasites infecting populations with stage-structured can-
nibalism can also avoid the negative effects of cannibalism
by simply targeting the larger, cannibalistic individuals that
are immune to cannibalism themselves (Rudolf et al. 2012).
However, larger individuals may be less vulnerable to infec-
tion (Feng et al. 1985; Briggs and Godfray 1995; Boots 1998;
Boff et al. 2000; Kelehear et al. 2009; Haislip et al. 2011;
Harrison and Hoover 2012), and in the absence of cannibal-
ism, competition among parasites typically imposes strong
selection for a parasite to attack the younger stages of their
hosts (Rudolf et al. 2012). Parasites that specialize in in-
fecting the cannibalistic stage can escape the direct effects
of cannibalism entirely but must be capable of selecting
and infecting these individuals and are left with only those
hosts who have made it through the earlier stage (Rudolf
et al. 2012). However, when cannibals specialize on infected
victims without regard to size, no stage may be safe. Whether
cannibalism is rare or common in a population, it likely has
negative effect on parasites.
Despite the generally negative impact of cannibalism on
parasite spread and fitness, there are situations and sys-
tems where cannibalism could increase the spread of dis-
ease (Sadeh and Rosenheim 2016; Sadeh et al. 2016). First,
the parasite must be capable of surviving cannibalistic en-
counters and transferring to the cannibal. Second, if this
new host has higher survival, more resources, or perhaps
has contact with more new susceptible hosts, then the par-
asite could find itself in a much better situation than in
its original host. This situation can provide a clear benefit
for the parasite (Pizzato and Shine 2011), especially when
small hosts are both more susceptible to parasites and
more likely to die in other ways before the parasite can re-
produce (e.g., through predation or other parasite infec-
tions). As parasites are transferred to safe cannibalistic
hosts through cannibalistic transmission and small/vul-
nerable individuals die off due to their higher rate of mor-
tality, the overall rate of infection can increase by default
even without further transmission (Hammar 2000; Pizzato
and Shine 2011). Reaching these safe hosts also allows the
parasite to reach the part of the population not regulated
by cannibalism and escape its effects. This effect requires
specific life histories and situations for both the parasite
and host, but there is evidence that it occurs in multiple
taxa (Hammar 2000; Pizzato and Shine 2011), and more
work is needed to determine how often parasites can use
cannibalism to their advantage this way.
In combination with certain alternative modes of trans-
mission, cannibalism could act to increase parasite spread
instead of decreasing it. In situations where a disease is
308
The American Naturalist
This content downloaded from 128.042.224.004 on September 18, 2017 09:25:56 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
 transmitted vertically (from mother to offspring only), re-
cent work indicates that cannibalism can indirectly increase
disease prevalence by reducing the number of susceptibles
while infected juveniles are added to the population (Sadeh
and Rosenheim 2016). An example of this is likely found in
the group of microsporidian pathogens that infect freshwater
amphipods (MacNeil et al. 2003). Multiple sources assert that
these pathogens are spread solely through cannibalism (Mac-
Neil et al. 2003; Bunke et al. 2015). However, microsporidian
parasites of freshwater amphipods are additionally vertically
transmitted and alter population sex ratios (Bandi et al. 2001;
Terry et al. 2004). Both factors would not be apparent in many
experimental designs but could facilitate pathogen persis-
tence in the population by themselves (Hurst 1993). Infected
amphipods are also more cannibalistic, which could addi-
tionally increase the production of infected offspring with-
out any further cannibalistic disease transmission (Bunke et al.
2015). In this way, cannibalism could work with vertically
transmitted parasites to increase parasite spread (Sadeh and
Rosenheim 2016).
Our review indicates that the relationship between can-
nibalism and disease could be a critical link in the spread
of parasites in a wide range of animal populations. Yet this
link has received surprisingly limited attention. The low
recognition of the importance of cannibalism for reducing
the prevalence of infectious disease likely stems from a num-
ber of direct and indirect biases on our measurements and
perceptions. There has been a long-standing unjustified stigma
against cannibalism implying that it should be rare in nature
(Eibl-Eibelsfelt 1961). As a consequence, cannibalism is still
highly understudied, especially as related to its interaction
with parasitism, despite its high frequency across the animal
kingdom. Cannibalism is most likely noticed in species with
many offspring and relatively fast life histories, such as in-
vertebrates, fish, and many reptile and amphibian species (Po-
lis and Myers 1985; Smith and Reay 1991; Ibáñez and Keyl
2010; Richardson et al. 2010), and since diseases are much
less understood or studied in invertebrates and other smaller
animals than in large vertebrates, the empirical evidence
linking cannibalism to disease is also less well known. Canni-
balism is generally less frequent in the largest vertebrates as
well, barring certain social species (Fox 1975; Polis 1981;
Fernandez-Jalvo et al. 1996; Rudolf and Antonovics 2007),
leading to the situation where cannibalism is not common
enough to significantly reduce disease, yet parasites could still
perhaps spread through it (Forbes 2000; Pozio 2013). Addi-
tionally, noting the presence of disease is perhaps much more
compelling than noting the absence of disease in an organism
or population. As a result, the attention paid to exceptional
systems where cannibalism appears to readily transmit par-
asites and spread disease could overshadow other systems in
which cannibalism reduces disease spread or has little effect
on it. In addition to the cultural taboo of cannibalism, these
factors likely play a major role in slowing our recognition of
the impacts of cannibalism on infectious disease.
Future Directions
The progress synthesized in this review reveals the impor-
tance of eco-evolutionary feedbacks between cannibalism
and infectious diseases and suggests a range of open and ex-
citing avenues for future research. We show a number of
mechanisms through which cannibalism can reduce para-
site prevalence and spread, while in many cases also reduc-
ing the negative selective effects of parasites on cannibals.
We additionally highlight the mechanisms through which
cannibalism sometimes could enhance the spread of disease
(Sadeh and Rosenheim 2016; Sadeh et al. 2016) and rarer
cases where it appears that cannibalistic behavior could
have arisen to combat or avoid parasites (Chouvenc and
Su 2012; Lehtonen and Kvarnemo 2015; table 1).
Empirical examinations of the relationship between can-
nibalism and pathogen prevalence in natural populations,
however, are few and scattered (Pfennig et al. 1991; Reed
et al. 1996; Chouvenc and Su 2012; Lehtonen and Kvar-
nemo 2015), and more empirical work in natural or labora-
tory settings is needed. While theory suggests that cannibal-
ism should reduce the prevalence of parasites and their
ability to invade the population, this is largely untested.
Similarly, it is unknown which of the different mechanisms
(such as per capita vs. population density) are most impor-
tant, and whether there are systematic differences across
taxa groups, life histories, or environments.
The evolutionary consequences of cannibalism for para-
site life history are largely unstudied (Rudolf et al. 2012; ta-
ble 1). In this review, we outline predictions from general
epidemic theory that could be tested along gradients of can-
nibalistic behavior in a suitable system. Whether cannibal-
ism could select for earlier onset of transmission, increased
noncannibalistic transmission, and/or increased cannibal-
istic transmission separately or simultaneously—and how
this might vary between different life histories and sys-
tems—is an open question. Changes to parasite life history
and prevalence could feed back to alter cannibalistic behav-
ior as well. Evolutionary theory predicts that cannibalism
and disease should have an antagonistic relationship, with
the prevalence of each selecting against the other (Pfennig
et al. 1991, 1998; Bolker et al. 2008), though which process
limits the other more strongly and how their interactions
play out in terms of both traits (evolution) and through host
and pathogen dynamics (ecology) remain open questions.
The effects and importance of the interactions between
cannibalism and disease in different environments, life
histories, and systems will certainly vary, and a number
of approaches will be needed to understand this important
connection between parasites and the life history of their
Cannibalism and Infectious Disease
309
This content downloaded from 128.042.224.004 on September 18, 2017 09:25:56 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
 hosts. More natural history data on parasite prevalence and
cannibalism rates is essential to determining the relationship
between cannibalism and disease across taxa (Tewksbury
et al. 2014). Combined natural history, experiments, and mod-
els have provided much of the work on cannibalism and dis-
ease thus far (Pfennig et al. 1991; Reed et al. 1996; Boots 1998;
Bolker et al. 2008; Pizzato and Shine 2011; Lehtonen and
Kvarnemo 2015; Sadeh and Rosenheim 2016; Sadeh et al.
2016), but much more work across taxa is needed to identify
general patterns. Once more empirical investigations of these
issues have been completed, a meta-analysis of their results
and the prevalence of cannibalistic behavior and parasitism
rates for populations or species could be used along with
theoretical work to provide evidence to support or weaken
the arguments outlined in this article and determine any po-
tential phylogenetic patterns. Such a meta-analysis would
provide much needed direction for future work in under-
standing the ecological and evolutionary relationships be-
tween cannibalism and parasite transmission.
Conclusion
In this review, we have shown that across taxa, systems, and
life histories, cannibalism is often likely to decrease the
prevalence or spread of parasites. From the perspective of
a population or an epidemiologist then, cannibalism should
reduce the spread of disease. From an individual perspec-
tive, we have shown that the risk of infection is often very
low, but in certain situations it could be substantial (Pfen-
nig et al. 1998; Rudolf and Antonovics 2007). As a result,
cannibalism and parasites may find themselves in an antag-
onistic situation, both inflicting costs on each other (Pfen-
nig et al. 1998; Bolker et al. 2008). However, in many cases,
it seems that cannibalism should reduce disease prevalence
and thereby decrease the negative selective effect of para-
sites on cannibalism, and not vice versa (Rudolf and Anto-
novics 2007; Bolker et al. 2008). This reduction in the effects
of parasites on cannibals could then allow the direct posi-
tive effects of cannibalism (resources, reduced competition)
to become more heavily weighted, balanced only against the
other classic negative effects (injury and killing kin; Polis
1981; Rudolf et al. 2010). In sum, we propose that the mul-
tiple mechanisms by which cannibalism reduces the risk of
disease tend to reduce the negative effects of disease on can-
nibalism beyond what is usually appreciated. The focus of
much work on cannibalism posits that cannibalism may
transmit disease and that the associated negative effects of
disease transmission may select against cannibalism. As
we have shown, this is in conflict with recent theoretical
and empirical work. More research is needed to clarify
the relationship between cannibalism and disease, and what
governs variation in this relationship between systems. Un-
til this is done, we provided some building blocks that can
be used to demonstrate that the relationship between can-
nibalism and disease is complex but can often involve more
costs for the parasite than for the hosts, thus reducing the
prevalence of disease.
Acknowledgments
This work was funded by National Science Foundation
(NSF) grant 1316334 as part of the joint NSF–National In-
stitutes of Health–USDA Ecology and Evolution of Infec-
tious Diseases program. We thank T. Lyles for insightful
commentary on a draft of the manuscript.
Literature Cited
Altizer, S., R. Bartel, and B. A. Han. 2011. Animal migration and in-
fectious disease risk. Science 331:296–302.
Altizer, S., D. Harvell, and E. Friedle. 2003. Rapid evolutionary dy-
namics and disease threats to biodiversity. Trends in Ecology
and Evolution 18:589–596.
Anderson, R. M., and R. M. May. 1980. Infectious diseases and pop-
ulation cycles of forest insects. Science 210:658–661.
———. 1982. Coevolution of hosts and parasites. Parasitology
85:411–426.
Arcadi, A. C., and R. W. Wrangham. 1999. Infanticide in chimpanzees:
review of cases and a new within-group observation from the Kan-
yawara study group in Kibale National Park. Primates 40:337–351.
Bandi, C., A. M. Dunn, G. D. Hurst, and T. Rigaud. 2001. Inherited
microorganisms, sex-specific virulence and reproductive parasit-
ism. Trends in Parasitology 17:88–94.
Bertram, B. C. 1975. Social factors influencing reproduction in wild
lions. Journal of Zoology 177:463–482.
Boff, M. I. C., G. L. Wiegers, and P. H. Smits. 2000. Influences of host
size and host species on the infectivity and development of Hetero-
rhabditis megidis (strain NLH-E87. 3). BioControl 45:469–482.
Bolker, B. M., F. De Castro, A. Storfer, S. Mech, E. Harvey, and J. P.
Collins. 2008. Disease as a selective force precluding widespread
cannibalism: a case study of an iridovirus of tiger salamanders,
Ambystoma tigrinum. Evolutionary Ecology Research 10:105–128.
Boots, M. 1998. Cannibalism and the stage-dependent transmission
of a viral pathogen of the Indian meal moth, Plodia interpunctella.
Ecological Entomology 23:118–122.
Briggs, C. J., and H. C. J. Godfray. 1995. The dynamics of insect-
pathogen interactions in stage-structured populations. American
Naturalist 145:855–887.
Brooks-Pollock, E., G. O. Roberts, and M. J. Keeling. 2014. A dynamic
model of bovine tuberculosis spread and control in Great Britain.
Nature 511:228–231.
Bunke, M., M. E. Alexander, J. T. A. Dick, M. J. Hatcher, R. Paterson,
and A. M. Dunn. 2015. Eaten alive: cannibalism is enhanced by
parasites. Royal Society Open Science 2:140369–140369.
Chapman, J. W., T. Williams, A. Escribano, P. Caballero, R. D. Cave,
and D. Goulson. 1999. Age-related cannibalism and horizontal
transmission of a nuclear polyhedrosis virus in larval Spodoptera
frugiperda. Ecological Entomology 24:268–275.
Chouvenc, T., and N.-Y. Su. 2012. When subterranean termites chal-
lenge the rules of fungal epizootics. PLoS ONE 7:e34484.
310
The American Naturalist
This content downloaded from 128.042.224.004 on September 18, 2017 09:25:56 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
 Chouvenc, T., N.-Y. Su, and J. Kenneth Grace. 2011. Fifty years of
attempted biological control of termites: analysis of a failure. Bio-
logical Control 59:69–82.
Claessen, D., A. M. De Roos, and L. Persson. 2004. Population dy-
namic theory of size-dependent cannibalism. Proceedings of the
Royal Society B 271:333–340.
Collinge, J. 2001. Prion diseases of humans and animals: their causes
and molecular basis. Annual Review of Neuroscience 24:519–550.
Collinge, J., J. Whitfield, E. McKintosh, J. Beck, S. Mead, D. J. Thomas,
and M. P. Alpers. 2006. Kuru in the 21st century: an acquired hu-
man prion disease with very long incubation periods. Lancet 367:
2068–2074.
Crossland, M. R., M. N. Hearnden, L. Pizzatto, R. A. Alford, and R.
Shine. 2011. Why be a cannibal? the benefits to cane toad, Rhinella
marina [pBufo marinus], tadpoles of consuming conspecific eggs.
Animal Behaviour 82:775–782.
Curtis, V. A. 2014. Infection-avoidance behaviour in humans and
other animals. Trends in Immunology 35:457–464.
Dawkins, R. 1976. The selfish gene: 30th anniversary edition. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
Dugas, M. B., L. McCormack, A. Gadau, R. A. Martin, L. J. Harmon,
and Y. Michalakis. 2016. Choosy cannibals preferentially consume
siblings with relatively low fitness prospects. American Naturalist
188:124–131.
Eibl-Eibelsfelt, I. 1961. The fighting behavior of animals. Scientific
American 205:112–123.
Elderd, B. D. 2013. Developing models of disease transmission:
insights from ecological studies of insects and their baculoviruses.
PLoS Pathogens 9:e1003372.
Elderd, B. D., J. Dushoff, and G. Dwyer. 2008. Host-pathogen inter-
actions, insect outbreaks, and natural selection for disease resis-
tance. American Naturalist 172:829–842.
Elderd, B. D., and J. R. Reilly. 2014. Warmer temperatures increase
disease transmission and outbreak intensity in a host-pathogen
system. Journal of Animal Ecology 83:838–849.
Elgar, M. A., and B. J. Crespi. 1992. Cannibalism: ecology and evo-
lution among diverse taxa. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Ewald, P. W. 1983. Host-parasite relations, vectors, and the evolu-
tion of disease severity. Annual Review of Ecology and Systemat-
ics 14:465–485.
Feng, Z., R. I. Carruthers, D. W. Roberts, and D. S. Robson. 1985.
Age-specific dose-mortality effects of Beaiveria bassaiana (Duetero-
mycotina: Hyphomycetes) on the European Corn Borer, Ostrinia
nubalis (Lepidoptera: Pyralidae). Invertebrate Pathology 46:259–264.
Fernandez-Jalvo, Y., J. C. Diez, J. M. B. de Castro, E. Carbonell, and
J. L. Arsuaga. 1996. Evidence of early cannibalism. Science
271:277–278.
Forbes, L. B. 2000. The occurrence and ecology of Trichinella in ma-
rine mammals. Veterinary Parasitology 93:321–334.
Fox, L. R. 1975. Cannibalism in natural populations. Annual Review
of Ecology and Systematics 6:87–106.
Fraser, C., S. Riley, R. M. Anderson, and N. M. Ferguson. 2004. Factors
that make an infectious disease outbreak controllable. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 101:6146–6151.
Fuller, E., B. D. Elderd, and G. Dwyer. 2012. Pathogen persistence in
the environment and insect-baculovirus interactions: disease-
density thresholds, epidemic burnout, and insect outbreaks. Ameri-
can Naturalist 179:E70–E96.
Gandon, S., V. A. Jansen, and M. Van Baalen. 2001. Host life history
and the evolution of parasite virulence. Evolution 55:1056–1062.
Haislip, N. A., M. J. Gray, J. T. Hoverman, and D. L. Miller. 2011.
Development and disease: how susceptibility to an emerging path-
ogen changes through anuran development. PLoS ONE 6:e22307.
Hammar, J. 2000. Cannibals and parasites: conflicting regulators of
bimodality in high latitude Arctic char, Salvelinus alpinus. Oikos
88:33–47.
Harrison, R., and K. Hoover. 2012. Baculoviruses and other occluded
insect viruses. Pages 73–131 in F. E. Vega and H. K. Kaya, eds. In-
sect pathology. Elsevier, London.
Hart, B. L. 1990. Behavioral adaptations to pathogens and parasites: five
strategies. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 14:273–294.
Hatcher, M. J., J. T. A. Dick, and A. M. Dunn. 2014. Parasites that
change predator or prey behaviour can have keystone effects on
community composition. Biology Letters, http://dx.doi.org/10.1098
/rsbl.2013.0879.
Hurst, L. D. 1993. The incidences: mechanisms and evolution of cyto-
plasmic sex ratio distorters in animals. Biological Reviews 68:121–194.
Ibáñez, C. M., and F. Keyl. 2010. Cannibalism in cephalopods. Re-
views in Fish Biology and Fisheries 20:123–136.
Johnson, P. T., A. Dobson, K. D. Lafferty, D. J. Marcogliese, J. Memmott,
S. A. Orlofske, R. Poulin, and D. W. Thieltges. 2010. When parasites
become prey: ecological and epidemiological significance of eating
parasites. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 25:362–371.
Kelehear, C., J. K. Webb, and R. Shine. 2009. Rhabdias pseudo-
sphaerocephala infection in Bufo marinus: lung nematodes reduce
viability of metamorph cane toads. Parasitology 136:919.
Klitzman, R. L., M. P. Alpers, and D. C. Gajdusek. 1984. The natural
incubation period of Kuru and the episodes of transmission in
three clusters of patients. Neuroepidemiology 3:3–20.
Klug, H., and M. B. Bonsall. 2007. When to care for, abandon, or eat
your offspring: the evolution of parental care and filial cannibal-
ism. American Naturalist 170:886–901.
Kuris, A. M. 1974. Trophic interactions: similarity of parasitic castrators
to parasitoids. Quarterly Review of Biology 49:129–148.
Lafferty, K. D. 1999. The evolution of trophic transmission. Parasi-
tology Today 15:111–115.
Lehtonen, T. K., and C. Kvarnemo. 2015. Infections may select for
filial cannibalism by impacting egg survival in interactions with
water salinity and egg density. Oecologia (Berlin) 178:673–683.
Lindenbaum, S. 1979. Kuru sorcery: disease and danger in the New
Guinea Highlands. Routledge, Abingdon-on-Thames, Oxfordshire.
MacNeil, C., J. T. A. Dick, M. J. Hatcher, N. J. Fielding, K. D. Hume, and
A. M. Dunn. 2003. Parasite transmission and cannibalism in an amphi-
pod (Crustacea). International Journal for Parasitology 33:795–798.
Manica, A. 2002. Filial cannibalism in teleost fish. Biological Reviews
of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 77:261–277.
Matuschka, F.-R., and B. Bannert. 1989. Recognition of cyclic trans-
mission of Sarcocystis stehlinii n. sp. in the Gran Canarian giant
lizard. Journal of Parasitology 75:383.
McCallum, H. 2012. Disease and the dynamics of extinction. Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 367:2828–2839.
McCallum, H., N. Barlow, and J. Hone. 2001. How should pathogen trans-
mission be modelled? Trends in Ecology and Evolution 16:295–300.
McCallum, H., M. Jones, C. Hawkins, R. Hamede, S. Lachish, D. L.
Sinn, N. Beeton, and B. Lazenby. 2009. Transmission dynamics of
Tasmanian devil facial tumor disease may lead to disease-induced
extinction. Ecology 90:3379–3392.
Meunier, J. 2015. Social immunity and the evolution of group living
in insects. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, http://
dx.doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2014.0102.
Cannibalism and Infectious Disease
311
This content downloaded from 128.042.224.004 on September 18, 2017 09:25:56 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
 Miller, T. E. X., and V. H. W. Rudolf. 2011. Thinking inside the box:
community-level consequences of stage-structured populations.
Trends in Ecology and Evolution 26:457–466.
Mitani, J. C., D. P. Watts, and M. N. Muller. 2002. Recent develop-
ments in the study of wild chimpanzee behavior. Evolutionary
Anthropology 11:9–25.
Moksnes, P.-O. 2004. Self-regulating mechanisms in cannibalistic
populations of juvenile shore crabs Carcinus maenas. Ecology
85:1343–1354.
Ohlberger, J., Ø. Langangen, N. C. Stenseth, and L. A. Vøllestad.
2012. Community-level consequences of cannibalism. American
Naturalist 180:791–801.
Park, E. J., C.-M. Yin, and J. P. Burand. 1996. Baculovirus replication
alters hormone-regulated host development. Journal of General
Virology 77:547–554.
Pfennig, D. W. 1997. Kinship and cannibalism. Bioscience 47:667–675.
———. 2000. Effect of predator-prey phylogenetic similarity on the
fitness consequences of predation: a trade-off between nutrition
and disease? American Naturalist 155:335–345.
Pfennig, D. W., S. G. Ho, and E. A. Hoffman. 1998. Pathogen trans-
mission as a selective force against cannibalism. Animal Behav-
iour 55:1255–1261.
Pfennig, D. W., M. L. G. Loeb, and J. P. Collins. 1991. Pathogens as a
factor limiting the spread of cannibalism in tiger salamanders.
Oecologia (Berlin) 88:161–166.
Pizzato, L., and R. Shine. 2011. You are what you eat: parasite trans-
fer in cannibalistic cane toads. Hepetologica 67:118–123.
Polis, G. A. 1981. The evolution and dynamics of intraspecific pre-
dation. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 12:225–251.
Polis, G. A., and C. A. Myers. 1985. A survey of intraspecific predation
among reptiles and amphibians. Journal of Herpetology 19:99.
Potapov, A., E. Merrill, and M. A. Lewis. 2012. Wildlife disease elim-
ination and density dependence. Proceedings of the Royal Society
B 279:3139–3145.
Poulin, R. 1995. “Adaptive” changes in the behaviour of parasitized
animals: a critical review. International Journal for Parasitology
25:1371–1383.
Pozio, E. 2013. The opportunistic nature of Trichinella—exploitation of
new geographies and habitats. Veterinary Parasitology 194:128–132.
Rausch, R. A. 1967. Some aspects of the population ecology of wolves,
Alaska. American Zoologist 7:253–265.
Reed, D. J., M. Begon, and D. J. Thompson. 1996. Differential can-
nibalism and population dynamics in a host-parasitoid system.
Oecologia (Berlin) 105:189–193.
Richardson, M. L., R. F. Mitchell, P. F. Reagel, and L. M. Hanks.
2010. Causes and consequences of cannibalism in noncarnivorous
insects. Annual Review of Entomology 55:39–53.
Rohwer, S. 1978. Parent cannibalism of offspring and egg raiding as
a courtship strategy. American Naturalist 112:429–440.
Rosengaus, R., and J. Traniello. 2001. Disease susceptibility and the
adaptive nature of colony demography in the dampwood termite
Zootermopsis angusticollis. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology
50:546–556.
Rudolf, V. H. 2008. Impact of cannibalism on predator-prey dynam-
ics: size-structured interactions and apparent mutualism. Ecology
89:1650–1660.
Rudolf, V. H., and J. Antonovics. 2007. Disease transmission by can-
nibalism: rare event or common occurrence? Proceedings of the
Royal Society B 274:1205–1210.
Rudolf, V. H., I. Sorrell, and A. B. Pederson. 2012. Revenge of the
host: cannibalism, ontogenetic niche shifts, and the evolution of
life-history strategies in host-parasitoid systems. Evolutionary Ecology
Research 14:31–49.
Rudolf, V. H. W., and J. Antonovics. 2005. Species coexistence and
pathogens with frequency-dependent transmission. American Nat-
uralist 166:112–118.
Rudolf, V. H. W., M. Kamo, and M. Boots. 2010. Cannibals in space:
the coevolution of cannibalism and dispersal in spatially struc-
tured populations. American Naturalist 175:513–524.
Sadeh, A., T. D. Northfield, and J. A. Rosenheim. 2016. The epide-
miology and evolution of parasite transmission through cannibal-
ism. Ecology 97:2003–2011.
Sadeh, A., and J. A. Rosenheim. 2016. Cannibalism amplifies the
spread of vertically-transmitted pathogens. Ecology 97:1994–2002.
Sait, S. M., M. Begon, and D. J. Thompson. 1994. The effects of a
sublethal baculovirus infection in the Indian meal moth, Plodia
interpunctella. Journal of Animal Ecology 63:541.
Smith, C., and P. Reay. 1991. Cannibalism in teleost fish. Reviews in
Fish Biology and Fisheries 1:41–64.
Stenseth, N. C. 1985. On the evolution of cannibalism. Journal of
Theoretical Biology 115:161–177.
Terry, R. S., J. E. Smith, R. G. Sharpe, T. Rigaud, D. T. J. Littlewood,
J. E. Ironside, D. Rollinson, et al. 2004. Widespread vertical trans-
mission and associated host sex-ratio distortion within the eu-
karyotic phylum Microspora. Proceedings of the Royal Society B
271:1783–1789.
Tewksbury, J. J., J. G. T. Anderson, J. D. Bakker, T. J. Billo, P. W.
Dunwiddie, M. J. Groom, S. E. Hampton, et al. 2014. Natural
history’s place in science and society. BioScience 64:300–310.
Valicente, F. H., E. S. Tuelher, R. C. Pena, R. Andreazza, and M. R. F.
Guimarães. 2013. Cannibalism and virus production in Spodoptera
frugiperda (J.E. Smith) (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae) larvae fed with two
leaf substrates inoculated with baculovirus Spodoptera. Neotropical
Entomology 42:191–199.
Van Allen, B. G., and V. H. W. Rudolf. 2013. Ghosts of habitats past:
environmental carry-over effects drive population dynamics in
novel habitat. American Naturalist 181:596–608.
Vijendravarma, R. K., S. Narasimha, and T. J. Kawecki. 2013. Pred-
atory cannibalism in Drosophila melanogaster larvae. Nature Com-
munications 4:1789.
Wagner, J. D., and D. H. Wise. 1996. Cannibalism regulates densities
of young wolf spiders: evidence from field and laboratory experi-
ments. Ecology 77:639–652.
Wang, X.-G., and K. M. Daane. 2014. Cannibalism of parasitoid-
attacked conspecifics in a non-carnivorous caterpillar. Entomologia
Experimentalis et Applicata 151:112–121.
Williams, T., and O. Hernández. 2006. Costs of cannibalism in the
presence of an iridovirus pathogen of Spodoptera frugiperda. Eco-
logical Entomology 31:106–113.
Wilson, M. L., W. R. Wallauer, and A. E. Pusey. 2004. New cases of
intergroup violence among chimpanzees in Gombe National Park,
Tanzania. International Journal of Primatology 25:523–549.
Wissinger, S. A., W. S. Brown, and J. E. Jannot. 2003. Caddisfly life
histories along permanence gradients in high-altitude wetlands in
Colorado (USA). Freshwater Biology 48:255–270.
Editor: Yannis Michalakis
312
The American Naturalist
This content downloaded from 128.042.224.004 on September 18, 2017 09:25:56 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
