 ARTICLE
Molecular insights into Vibrio cholerae’s intra-
amoebal host-pathogen interactions
Charles Van der Henst1, Audrey Sophie Vanhove1, Natália Carolina Drebes Dörr1, Sandrine Stutzmann1,
Candice Stoudmann1, Stéphanie Clerc2, Tiziana Scrignari1, Catherine Maclachlan2, Graham Knott
2 &
Melanie Blokesch
1
Vibrio cholerae, which causes the diarrheal disease cholera, is a species of bacteria commonly
found in aquatic habitats. Within such environments, the bacterium must defend itself
against predatory protozoan grazers. Amoebae are prominent grazers, with Acanthamoeba
castellanii being one of the best-studied aquatic amoebae. We previously showed that V.
cholerae resists digestion by A. castellanii and establishes a replication niche within the host’s
osmoregulatory organelle. In this study, we decipher the molecular mechanisms involved in
the maintenance of V. cholerae’s intra-amoebal replication niche and its ultimate escape from
the succumbed host. We demonstrate that minor virulence features important for disease in
mammals, such as extracellular enzymes and flagellum-based motility, have a key role in the
replication and transmission of V. cholerae in its aqueous environment. This work, therefore,
describes new mechanisms that provide the pathogen with a fitness advantage in its primary
habitat, which may have contributed to the emergence of these minor virulence factors in the
species V. cholerae.
DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x
OPEN
1 Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, Global Health Institute, School of Life Sciences, Station 19, EPFL-SV-UPBLO, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de
Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. 2 Bioelectron Microscopy Core Facility (BioEM), School of Life Sciences, Station 19, EPFL-SV-PTBIOEM, Ecole
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
M.B. (email: melanie.blokesch@epfl.ch)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3460 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1
1234567890():,;
 T
he diarrheal disease cholera is not extinct. Seven cholera
pandemics have been recorded in modern history and the
latest is still ongoing1,2. Cholera is caused by ingestion of
the bacterium Vibrio cholerae. Toxigenic strains of this species are
capable of damaging the host due to the presence of so-called
virulence factors, which refers “to the elements (i.e., gene pro-
ducts) that enable a microorganism to colonize a host niche
where the organism proliferates and causes tissue damage or
systemic inflammation”3. Bacterial strains without these factors
are usually attenuated with respect to the infection process.
For V. cholerae, the two major virulence factors, cholera toxin
and the toxin-coregulated pilus, have a pivotal role in the infec-
tion, but additional minor virulence factors have also been
identified. These include factors such as outer membrane porins,
a pore-forming hemolysin, diverse proteases, N-acetyl-glucosa-
mine binding protein, flagellum-based motility, to name a few4–7.
The hemagglutinin/protease (HapA), for example, is a zinc-
metalloprotease8, which was first identified due to its mucinase
activity9. This enzyme was later demonstrated to not only cause
hemagglutination but to also hydrolyze fibronectin, mucin, and
lactoferrin, all of which were thought to contribute to the host
defense against V. cholerae10. HapA also causes cell rounding, loss
of the barrier function of the epithelial layer, and, ultimately,
detachment of cells under tissue culture conditions11,12. Con-
sistent with these in vitro activities, a tenfold increase in the 50%
lethal dose in the absence compared to the presence of the HapA
protease for V. cholerae strains that otherwise lack cholera toxin
was reported13.
A second well-characterized minor virulence factor that is
widespread among Vibrio species14 is hemolysin (HlyA), which is
also known as V. cholerae cytolysin or vacuolating toxin.
Hemolysin is a secreted protein belonging to the family of pore-
forming toxins (PFTs), as it forms aqueous channels in host cells
in vitro15. In vivo data by Ichinose et al.16 showed that purified
hemolysin induced intestinal fluid accumulation in rabbits and in
orally inoculated suckling mice, two commonly used animal
models of cholera. The authors therefore concluded that hemo-
lysin was an enterotoxic factor that contributed to gastroenteritis
caused by non-pandemic V. cholerae strains16. The role of HlyA
as enterotoxic or diarrheagenic factor, especially in pandemic
isolate-derived vaccine strains lacking cholera toxin, was later
confirmed by Alm et al.17 who also demonstrated that mice
infected with hemolysin-deficient V. cholerae survived longer
than those inoculated with their hemolysin-positive parental
strains. More recent studies using streptomycin-treated adult
mice and pandemic isolates of V. cholerae showed that hemolysin
was the major cause of lethality in this animal model of cholera18.
Moreover, it has been suggested that HlyA and other secreted
accessory toxins modify the host environment, thereby con-
tributing to prolonged disease-free colonization that could con-
tribute to disease transmission via asymptomatic carriers19.
It was proposed that hlyA might be located on a pathogenicity
island due to the close proximity of additional genes that likewise
encode extracellular enzymes20. This region encodes apart from
hemolysin (hlyA) a lipase (lipA), a metalloprotease (prtV), and a
lecithinase/phospholipase
(lec;
also
known
as
thermolabile
hemolysin). The lecithinase activity of the latter enzyme was
characterized21,22, but molecular details and its concrete function
are still unknown.
To date, a limited number of studies have shown that minor
virulence factors, such as those mentioned above, are also
advantageous in an environmental context23,24. Indeed, despite V.
cholerae being an aquatic bacterium that is well adapted for
survival in this environment, the molecular details about V.
cholerae’s environmental lifestyle are still lacking. To address this
knowledge gap, we aimed to elucidate the molecular mechanisms
that V. cholerae would use as part of its environmental lifestyle,
such as its interactions with grazing amoebal predators. In this
context, we recently demonstrated that V. cholerae survives pre-
dation by Acanthamoeba castellanii, a free-living amoebal spe-
cies25. This amoeba is frequently encountered in aquatic
reservoirs and follows a bi-phasic lifecycle: the motile trophozoite
form, which grazes on bacterial prey, and the double-walled
resistant cyst stage, which forms under harsh conditions26. We
previously showed that V. cholerae interacts with A. castellanii
through the evolution of two distinct phenotypes. Firstly, upon
phagocytosis by the feeding amoebal trophozoite, a fraction of the
ingested V. cholerae population can resist amoebal digestion, then
exit the phagosomal pathway by exocytosis. Notably and in
contrast to a previous study27, we never observed free V. cholerae
cells in the cytosol of such trophozoites25, indicating that the
bacteria are not released from food vacuoles intracellularly. Sec-
ondly, the pathogen colonizes the amoeba’s contractile vacuole
(CV), which is its osmoregulatory organelle. This organelle
expands and contracts in a rhythmic manner based on the
accumulation and expulsion of excess water from the cytosol of
the cell28. While there is still a significant knowledge gap with
respect to the detailed mechanisms underlying its osmoregulatory
function, it is currently thought that water enters the CV due to a
~1.5 times higher osmolarity of the CV fluid compared to that of
the cytosol29. The water discharge process, on the other hand, is
based on the fusion of the CV and the plasma membrane, a
process that is actively driven by myosin-I30. This discharge
process is essential, as interference with the water expulsion leads
to an overfilling of the CV and, ultimately, amoebal cell lysis30.
With respect to V. cholerae, we recently showed that the bac-
terium enters this organelle through vacuolar fusion of V. cho-
lerae-containing food vacuoles with the CV. This creates a
replication niche for the pathogen in which V. cholerae is
maintained even upon amoebal encystement, before it ultimately
lyses the host25. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms
of this host–pathogen interaction remained elusive and were
therefore addressed in the current study. We show that V. cho-
lerae fine-tunes extracellular enzymes to avoid premature intox-
ication of its host, allowing the bacterium to take full advantage of
the intra-amoebal replication niche for undisturbed and non-
competitive proliferation before finally lysing its amoebal host.
We also demonstrate that flagellum-based motility is of impor-
tance for V. cholerae to ultimately escape the ruptured host niche
to return to the aquatic environment.
Results
Visualization of colonized contractile vacuoles. Using confocal
laser scanning microscopy, we recently demonstrated that V.
cholerae could enter the CV of A. castellanii and replicate within
this niche25, though underlying molecular mechanisms of this
host–pathogen interaction remained largely unknown. This is
partially due to the low throughput of transmission electron
microscopy (TEM), which only allowed for the imaging of hyper-
colonizing V. cholerae mutant strains, due to their lack of quorum-
sensing, while spatial information on wild-type (WT) bacteria
within the amoebal vacuoles remained missing25. To circumvent
this problem, we developed a correlative light and electron
microscopy (CLEM) imaging strategy, which allowed us to study
this specific host–pathogen interaction for WT V. cholerae for the
first time at high resolution. We identified V. cholerae-infected A.
castellanii cells by pathogen-produced green fluorescent protein
GFP and then targeted these cells for TEM. Using this method
allowed us get information on the morphology of the colonizing
bacteria and their spatial distribution. As shown in Fig. 1, the
morphologies of such intra-vacuolar WT bacteria possessed the
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x
2
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3460 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 typical Vibrio shape. Moreover, the membrane surrounding the
CV was largely intact, which was consistent with the non-encysted
phenotype of the amoeba (Fig. 1a).
We estimated the number of objects—in this case, bacteria—in
the CV using an unbiased stereological approach31. To do this, a
representative WT V. cholerae-colonized amoeba, at 20 h post-
primary contact (p.p.c.), was identified in the fluorescent channel.
After sample preparation and imaging, the number of bacteria in
the vacuole was estimated to be 194 (±60). This number, and the
apparent density of bacteria in the 3D reconstruction (Fig. 1b and
Supplementary Movie 1), correlates well with the active growth of
V. cholerae in this organelle, as the vacuole’s initial colonization
only involved one or a few bacteria25.
Absence of HapA leads to aberrant amoebal morphologies. As
the 3D reconstruction suggested that V. cholerae cells were den-
sely packed within the vacuole at this later point of the infection,
we wondered how the bacteria eventually escaped the vacuole
after amoebal encystation and how the timing was properly
regulated. To answer these questions, we first took an educated
guess approach, which has its limitation but turned out as useful
in this study. We therefore tested diverse knockout mutants of V.
cholerae for their intra-amoebal behavior. We were especially
interested in strains that lacked certain extracellular enzymes, as
some of those were known to be important in the pathogen’s
intra-human lifestyle and its transmission to new hosts.
We challenged A. castellanii with a HapA-deficient V. cholerae
strain (Supplementary Table 1) and compared the amoebal
response to the WT-challenged condition. By doing this, we
observed that a vast majority (79.8%) of infected amoebal cells
showed an aberrant morphology upon co-incubation with the
hapA-minus strain for 20 h, which occurred significantly less
often for WT-infected amoebae (11.6%, Fig. 2a, b). These
morphological
abnormalities
ranged
from
a
shrinking
or
compacting phenotype towards pseudopodia retraction and
detachment, all of which ultimately abolished amoebal grazing
(Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. 1). Complementation assays,
involving a genetically engineered derivative of the hapA-minus
strain with a new copy of hapA on the large chromosome
(Supplementary Fig. 2), were performed using the amoebal
infection protocol and fully restored the WT-infected amoebal
morphologies (Fig. 2a, b).
Seeing these striking differences between WT-infected and
hapA-minus-infected amoebae, we wondered whether the latter
might cause “amoebal constipation”, meaning the accumulation
of undigested phagosomal V. cholerae without efficient exocy-
tosis. Indeed, based on the confocal microscopy images, we could
localize the accumulated bacteria due to their green fluorescence.
However, recognition of the CV in the transmitted light channel
was often difficult for hapA-minus mutant-infected amoebae due
to their compaction and malformation (Fig. 2a). Therefore, it
seemed possible that the bacteria were contained in digestive food
vacuoles of the endosomal pathway, blocking amoebal digestion
A. castellanii
V. cholerae
A. castellanii
V. cholerae
CLSM
a
b
TEM
V. cholerae
Magnification
Fig. 1 Correlative light and electron microscopy (CLEM) for visualizing wild-type V. cholerae inside the contractile vacuole (CV). a Low- and high-resolution
imaging of an infected amoeba. GFP-tagged V. cholerae were seen to be localized inside of a CV of A. castellanii using confocal laser scanning microscopy
(CLSM; low resolution) in fixed samples. Shown are a merged image of the transmitted light channel and the green channel (left) and the green channel
image alone (second from left). After staining of the sample, the same amoeba was imaged at high resolution using transmission electron microscopy
(TEM; right images). Scale bar in all images: 5 µm. b 3D reconstruction of the colonized CV. The region containing the amoeba shown in a was serially thin
sectioned (50 nm thickness) and serial images were taken with the TEM. These images were then aligned to generate a 3D model of the colonized amoeba.
Shown are snapshots of the resulting 3D reconstruction movie (Supplementary Movie 1)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3460 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
3
 WT
a
b
c
d
e
f
Transmitted light
Merge
V. cholerae
ΔhapA
WT
Transmitted light
Transmitted light
Magnification
V. cholerae
Amoebae
Transmitted light
V. cholerae
70
ns
60
****
50
40
Percentage calcofluor positive infected amoebae
30
20
10
0
V. cholerae
Calcofluor
V. cholerae
Calcofluor
Dextran
V. cholerae
Dextran
ΔhapA
WT
ΔhapA
WT
ΔhapA
ΔhapA::hapA
WT
ΔhapA
CLSM
TEM
ΔhapA::hapA
ΔhapA::hapA
ΔhapA::hapA
100
ns
****
Percentage of infected amoebae
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
WT
Normal morphology
Aberrant morphology
ΔhapA
Fig. 2 Hemagglutinin protease-deficient V. cholerae strains intoxicate amoebal trophozoites. a CLSM images of amoebae that were colonized by GFP-
tagged wild-type (WT), hapA-minus (ΔhapA), or the hapA complemented (ΔhapA::hapA) V. cholerae strains at 20 h p.p.c. Shown are the transmitted light
channel (top), the green channel (middle), and the merged image of both channels (bottom). The white arrows highlight the aberrant morphology of the
intoxicated amoeba. b Quantification of normal and aberrant morphologies of amoeba infected with any of the three bacterial strains mentioned in
a. c Protease-deficient V. cholerae mutants do not co-localize with dextran-labeled digestive vacuoles. Labeling of the endosomal pathway using fluorescent
dextran shows the residence of WT (top) and ΔhapA (bottom) strains inside the dextran-negative CV. d Cellulose is not deposited around amoebae
infected with hapA-minus bacteria at 30 h p.p.c. Amoebae infected with WT, ΔhapA, or the hapA complemented strain (ΔhapA::hapA) were stained with
calcofluor to visualize deposited cellulose around the cysts. The white arrows point towards a cellulose-deficient A. castellanii infected by the hapA-minus
strain. e Quantification of the calcofluor-stained infected amoebae. Bacterial strains correspond to those in d. f CLEM images of WT- and hapA-minus-
infected amoebal trophozoites (details as in Fig. 1). Scale bars: 10 µm (a, c, d) and 5 µm (f). All graphs show the averages of three independent biological
replicates (±s.d., as shown by the error bars). Statistics are based on a one-way ANOVA. ***p ≤ 0.001; ns (not significant), p > 0.05
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x
4
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3460 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 as opposed to being localized to the CV, as is the case for WT V.
cholerae. To distinguish between both scenarios (localization
within a digestive vacuole or within the CV), we labeled the
amoebal endosomal pathway with fluorescently labeled dextran.
As the dextran- and bacteria-derived fluorescent signals did not
overlap, these experiments confirmed the intra-CV localization of
the hapA-minus strain (Fig. 2c).
HapA-deficiency impairs encystation. Next, we wondered
whether, despite these unusual amoebal morphologies, the life-
cycle between hapA-minus V. cholerae and A. castellanii would
proceed as previously reported for the WT25. Such a progression
included amoebal encystation followed by the escape of V. cho-
lerae from the CV into the cyst’s cytosol, leading, ultimately, to
lysis of the amoebal host. To determine this, we imaged infected
amoebae at a later time point (30 h p.p.c.) to allow the lifecycle
progression to develop. To better distinguish aberrantly rounded
cells from cysts, we used calcofluor staining, as this fluorescence
stain is known to bind to the deposited cellulose cell wall layer in
Acanthamoeba cysts32. As shown in Fig. 2d (and quantified in
Fig. 2e), the ability to form cellulose-positive cysts was severely
impaired in amoebae infected with the hapA-minus mutant
strain. This impaired encystation contrasted greatly to that of
both the WT-infected A. castellanii and the complemented hapA-
minus strain (Fig. 2d, e). We therefore concluded that the absence
of the HapA protease leads to premature amoebal intoxication
and, consequently, a defect in the encystation process.
To better understand the defect in the encystation process, we
again used CLEM to obtain high-resolution images of colonized
amoebae. The WT-infected CVs seemed to maintain their
internal pressure, leading to a clear separation between the
content of the CV and the amoebal cytosol (Figs. 1a and 2f),
though this evident distinction was lacking in host cells that were
infected by the mutant V. cholerae strain, which showed signs of
impaired membrane integrity (Fig. 2f).
Uncontrolled hemolysis leads to premature intoxication. We
speculated that the seemingly collapsed CV membranes might
have been due to amoebal membrane rupture caused by the
hapA-minus mutant strain. Given that bacterial pathogens often
cause membrane rupture through the secretion of PFTs33, we
wondered whether the secreted hemolysin of V. cholerae (HlyA)
might be involved in the observed amoebal intoxication. Con-
sistent with this idea was a study by Tsou and Zhu34 that showed
that the HapA protease degrades HlyA in an in vitro assay. This
led us to hypothesize that HapA protease-deficient strains of V.
cholerae would display enhanced hemolysis, which, ultimately,
could cause the observed amoebal intoxication. To test this
hypothesis, we generated several V. cholerae strains that lacked
hapA, hlyA, or both genes simultaneously (Supplementary
Table 1) and tested them for hemolysis and proteolysis on blood
and milk agar plates, respectively. As shown in Supplementary
Fig. 2, there was a strong increase in hemolysis in strains lacking
hapA, while the absence of hlyA fully abolished this activity.
Complementation assays, in which the mutant strain contained a
new copy of the missing gene elsewhere on the chromosome
(Supplementary Table 1), restored the system to that of the WT
(Supplementary Fig. 2a and b). Interestingly and consistent with
the extracellular localization of both enzymes, we showed that the
secreted HapA protease from a WT strain was also able to
inactivate HlyA that was released by a co-cultured hapA-minus
mutant strain. However, when we engineered an hlyA-over-
expression strain (Supplementary Table 1), the protease activity
exerted by the strain itself or from the co-cultured WT bacteria
was insufficient to abolish hemolysis (Supplementary Fig. 2).
With these newly constructed strains in hand, we then tested
their effect on A. castellanii. Consistent with our hypothesis that a
hapA mutant of V. cholerae would possess enhanced hemolysin
activity, which, ultimately, would result in amoebal intoxication,
we found that the absence of hlyA in the protease-minus
background restored normal host morphology and cyst formation
(Fig. 3a, b and Supplementary Fig. 3a–d). Infection of A.
castellanii by the V. cholerae double-mutant (ΔhapAΔhlyA) also
resulted in an intact integrity of the CV membrane (Fig. 3c and
Supplementary Fig. 3e). Overproduction of HlyA in a WT
background strain, however, fully phenocopied or even aggra-
vated the protease-minus phenotypes (Fig. 3a, b and Supplemen-
tary Fig. 3a–d). These data, therefore, support the notion that
HlyA is causing amoebal intoxication and that the HapA protease
counteracts this effect.
To determine whether HlyA impacts the amoebae through
activity inside of the CV instead of in the surrounding medium,
we co-infected A. castellanii with WT V. cholerae (labeled with
dsRed) and either a second WT strain as a control or,
alternatively,
the
hapA-minus
strain
or
the
HlyA-
overexpression strain at a 1:1 ratio (all labeled with GFP). We
then imaged the amoebae and quantified the number of
colonized ones that showed either a normal or aberrant
morphology (Supplementary Fig. 4). This experiment suggested
that the secreted protease in the WT strain rescues the amoebae
from intoxication by protease-minus and, therefore, HlyA-
producing V. cholerae if both strains occurred within the same
CV (Supplementary Fig. 4b and Supplementary Table 2). This
rescuing phenotype was not observed when the second strain
was the HlyA-overproducing strain (Supplementary Fig. 4c and
Supplementary Table 2). Amoebae containing mono-colonized
CVs showed the same phenotype as we had observed in the
single strain infection experiments (Supplementary Fig. 4
compared to Figs. 2 and 3). These in vivo observations are,
therefore, fully consistent with the in vitro hemolysin activity
described above and suggest that both enzymes are present and
active inside the amoebal CV.
To
test
whether
these
HapA-related
and
HlyA-related
phenotypes are conserved in V. cholerae strains, we repeated
the above-described experiments with diverse pandemic and non-
pandemic V. cholerae isolates. First, we compared the well-
studied pandemic O1 El Tor isolate A155235, which we primarily
use in our laboratory, with two other O1 El Tor strains, namely
C6706 and N16961 (Supplementary Table 1). Strain A1552 was
isolated in California from a traveller returning from South
America36, which links this strain to the Peruvian cholera
outbreak in 1990s. V. cholerae strain C6706 was isolated in Peru
in 1991. Notably, as we recently showed that a laboratory-
domesticated version of this strain with a severe quorum-sensing
defect has spread amongst V. cholerae laboratories around the
globe37, we decided to work with an old stock of strain C6706
(named C6706-original in this study; gift from J. Mekalanos,
Harvard). We also included the first sequenced V. cholerae strain
N1696138, which was isolated in Bangladesh in 1975. This strain
carries a frameshift mutation in the gene encoding the major
regulator of quorum sensing HapR39, which we genetically
repaired (named N16961-hapRRep in this study; Supplementary
Table 1). As shown in Supplementary Fig. 5, all three O1 El Tor
pandemic isolates behaved similarly in our amoebal infection
assay and confirmed the hemolysin-mediated toxicity of the
hapA-minus variants. We also extended our analysis to the non-
pandemic V. cholerae strain Sa5Y, an isolate from the California
coast40. Interestingly, this strain exerted enhanced hemolysis
in vitro compared to the pandemic isolates (Supplementary
Fig. 5a) and therefore phenocopied the hapA-minus mutants of
the pandemic isolates with respect to its toxicity towards A.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3460 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
5
 WT
Transmitted light
a
b
c
ΔhapA
ΔhapA ΔhlyA
hlyA
WT
ΔhapA
ΔhapA ΔhlyA
ΔhapA ΔhlyA
hlyA
Transmitted light
V. cholerae
V. cholerae
Amoebae
Magnification
CLSM
TEM
V. cholerae
Calcofluor
V. cholerae
Calcofluor
Fig. 3 Amoebal intoxication in hemagglutinin protease-deficient strains is caused by the PFT hemolysin (HlyA). a Aberrant amoebal morphotypes are
caused by hemolysin (HlyA). Deletion of the hemolysin gene (hlyA) in the protease-minus V. cholerae strain (ΔhapAΔhlyA) nullifies intoxication of the
amoebal trophozoites upon infection, while the latter is elicited through the overexpression of hlyA in the WT background (hlyA↑). All of the bacterial
strains were GFP-tagged. Merged images of the transmitted light channel and the green channel were taken at 20 h p.p.c. Aberrantly shaped amoebae are
indicated by white arrows. Scale bar: 10 µm b Absence of amoebal cellulose deposition is caused by hemolysin. A. castellanii cells were infected by the same
V. cholerae strains as in a and, after staining with calcofluor, imaged at 30 h p.p.c. White arrows depict colonized amoebae that are calcofluor-negative and
aberrantly shaped. Scale bar: 10 µm. c CLEM image of an amoeba that is infected by the protease-deficient and hemolysin-deficient V. cholerae strain
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x
6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3460 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 castellanii (Supplementary Fig. 5c). Consistent with what we
described above for the pandemic isolates, this toxicity towards
the amoeba was almost completely abrogated in hemolysin-
deficient mutant derivatives (Supplementary Fig. 5c).
Other PFTs and the type VI secretion system do not harm A.
castellanii. As the experiments above suggested that the PFT
hemolysin intoxicates amoebal trophozoites, we wondered if two
other PFTs of V. cholerae, RTX and VasX, would result in similar
50
40
30
20
10
0
50
40
30
20
10
0
Percentage of infected amoebae
Percentage of infected amoebae
WT
ΔrtxA
ΔvipA
ΔvipA
ΔvipA
ΔvipA
ΔvipA
ΔvipA
CV of trophozoite
CV of cyst
Cytosol of cyst
lysed cyst
CV of trophozoite
CV of cyst
Cytosol of cyst
lysed cyst
CV of trophozoite
CV of cyst
Cytosol of cyst
lysed cyst
WT
VipA-sfGFP
A1552
ATCC25872
Ph
GFP
Overlay
108
107
106
105
104
103
102
Recovered E.coli (CFU/ml)
WT
WT
d.l.
A1552
ATCC25872
WT
ΔhlyA
ΔhlyAΔvipA
A1552
Hemolytic
activity
Hemolytic
activity
–
–
–
–
–
–
ATCC25872
+
+
50
40
30
20
10
0
Percentage of infected amoebae
–
–
A1552ΔhlyA
ATCC25872ΔhlyA
a
b
c
d
e
f
Fig. 4 The pore-forming toxins RTX and VasX do not intoxicate A. castellanii. Distribution of V. cholerae wild-type (WT) and a rtxA-deficient mutant
strain (a) or WT and a strain with an impaired type VI secretion system (T6SS) (ΔvipA; deficient for VasX secretion) (b) within infected A. castellanii at
20 h p.p.c. The considered compartments were the CV of trophozoites, the CV of cysts, and the cytosol of cysts before and after lysis. Values represent
averages from three independent experiments (±s.d., as shown by the error bars). c, d The type VI secretion system of toxigenic strain ATCC25872 is
constitutively on. c V. cholerae strains A1552 (O1 El Tor; pandemic) and ATCC25872 (O37; non-pandemic) carrying a gene that encodes a translational
fusion between the T6SS sheath protein VipA and sfGFP (vipA-sfgfp) at the native locus of vipA were grown for 3.5 h in LB. The images depict cells
visualized in the phase contrast (Ph), in the green (GFP) channel, and an overlay of both channels. Scale bar: 5 μm. d The constitutive T6SS activity of strain
ATCC25872 was confirmed in an interspecies killing assay in which E. coli served as prey. Prey survival was assessed by counts of colony-forming units
(CFUs) after plating on selective medium. Values represent average from three independent experiments (±s.d.). e Hemolysin-based hemolytic activity
might mask effects of the T6SS in ATCC25872. V. cholerae A1552 and ATCC25872 as well as their ΔhlyA, ΔvipA, and ΔhlyAΔvipA variants were tested for
hemolytic activity on blood agar plates. f Mutant V. cholerae A1552 and ATCC25872 strains lacking hemolysin (ΔhlyA) or hemolysin and the T6SS core
protein VipA (ΔhlyAΔvipA) were assessed for their intra-amoebal localization at 20 h p.p.c. as described for a. Values are averages from three
independent biological experiments
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3460 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
7
 outcomes. RTX is a >4000 amino acid protein, which belongs the
family
of
multifunctional-autoprocessing
repeats-in-toxin
(MARTX) toxins. Pore formation by RTX serves to translocate
effector domains of this large protein across the plasma mem-
brane of eukaryotic cells41. Notably, an earlier study suggested
that the RTX protein of V. cholerae does not impair the mem-
brane integrity of eukaryotic cells (e.g., HEp-2 cells)42, while a
more recent study showed that the RTX toxin of Vibrio vulnificus
caused pores in human erythrocytes43. To test whether RTX
contributes to V. cholerae’s lifecycle within A. castellanii, we
engineered an rtxA-minus strain of V. cholerae (Supplementary
Table 1) and compared its behavior to the WT control. As shown
in Fig. 4a, no difference in bacterial localization was observed
when these two strains were compared, indicating that RTX is not
required for V. cholerae to establish its replication niche within
the amoeba’s CV.
The third PFT of V. cholerae, VasX, is transported into
eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells by the type VI secretion system
(T6SS)44–46. The T6SS is a multi-protein complex that delivers
effector proteins into adjacent cells in a contact-dependent
manner47,48. Interestingly, the T6SS was first discovered in a non-
pandemic strain of V. cholerae, strain V52, due to its toxic effect
towards the soil amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum49. To test
whether VasX or any other T6SS effector protein (such as the
lipase TseL or the actin-cross-linking domain of VgrG144–46) was
involved in V. cholerae’s interaction with A. castellanii, we tested
a T6SS-defective bacterial mutant that lacked a core structural
component of the secretion system (A1552ΔvipA; Supplementary
Table 1) in the amoebal infection assay. No change in the
bacterial lifecycle was observed for this mutant when compared to
its parental WT strain (Fig. 4b).
Notably, pandemic isolates of V. cholerae are known to be
T6SS-silent under laboratory conditions49 and instead require
specific environmental cues for T6SS induction50,51. We therefore
wondered whether the absence of induction would mask potential
effects that T6SS-delivered effector proteins could have on A.
castellanii. To address this question, we took advantage of V.
cholerae strain ATCC25872 (Supplementary Table 1), a toxigenic
O37 serogroup strain that is closely related to strain V52 but in
contrast to the latter52 quorum sensing proficient53. First, we
confirmed its constitutive T6SS production by imaging a
derivative of this strain that carries a translational fusion between
the T6SS sheath protein VipA and super-folder GFP50,54 (Fig. 4c).
Constitutive T6SS activity was further demonstrated in an
interbacterial predation assay in which strain ATCC25872, but
not its vipA-negative derivative, efficiently killed co-cultured
Escherichia coli cells (Fig. 4d). Next, we aimed at challenging
amoebae
with
this
T6SS-active
strain.
However,
strain
ATCC25872 produced high levels of hemolysin (Fig. 4e),
consistent with what was previously shown for strain V5249. To
avoid that these high levels of HlyA would mask any T6SS-
mediated effects due to premature intoxication of the amoebae,
we engineered T6SS-proficient or T6SS-deficient mutants in an
hlyA-minus background. As shown in Fig. 4f, no difference was
observed between T6SS-active and T6SS inactive strains in the
amoebal infection model or when strain ATCC25872 was
compared to the same genetically engineered mutants of
pandemic strain A1552. We therefore concluded that neither
the RTX toxin nor the T6SS contribute to V. cholerae’s interaction
with A. castellanii under the tested conditions.
V. cholerae uses its lecithinase to lyse amoebal cysts. While the
experiments described above highlighted the essential nature of
the HapA protease for reducing the cytotoxicity of V. cholerae
towards its amoebal host at early time points, it remained to be
discovered how the pathogen eventually escaped from its amoebal
host to return to the environment. We reasoned that the patho-
gen would need to disrupt the host’s plasma membrane. The
plasma membrane of A. castellanii contains lecithin, which is a
mixture of glycerophospholipids that includes a high percentage
of phosphatidylethanolamine and phosphatidylcholine55. We
therefore speculated that V. cholerae might use its lecithinase22 to
disrupt this membrane. We generated a lec-minus strain and
confirmed its impaired lecithinase activity on egg yolk plates
(Supplementary Fig. 6). We also complemented the lec-minus
strain by placing a new copy of lec that was preceded by its native
promoter onto the chromosome (Δlec::lec). The same genetic
constructs were also added into the WT background to generate a
lec-merodiploid strain of V. cholerae (WT::lec). All of the strains
were tested for their lecithinase activity in vitro and behaved as
expected (Supplementary Fig. 6).
Next, we infected A. castellanii with this set of genetically
engineered strains. We observed that while the lec-deficient
strains were able to colonize the CV and escape from it in the cyst
stage, the bacteria were unable to ultimately lyse the amoebal
host, as visualized through the exclusion of extracellular dextran
(Fig. 5). The complemented strain had its cyst lysis capability
restored, a phenotype that was enhanced for the lec-merodiploid
bacteria (Fig. 5). We therefore concluded that the lecithinase
enzyme indeed targets and permeabilizes the plasma membrane
of the host, thereby triggering the death of the cyst, a phenotype
that was conserved in other pandemic and non-pandemic V.
cholerae strains (Supplementary Fig. 6c and d).
V. cholerae escapes through flagellum-based motility. As we
observed that V. cholerae is highly motile within the amoebal host
(Supplementary Movie 2), we wondered whether this motility
contributed to the pathogen’s intra-amoebal lifestyle and its
escape from the succumbed host. We therefore generated non-
motile mutants of V. cholerae by deleting either the gene that
encodes the major flagellin subunit FlaA or the flagellar motor
protein PomB (Supplementary Table 1). While the first approach
resulted in non-flagellated bacteria, the latter approach led to
rotation-deficient but fully flagellated bacteria (Fig. 6a). The
motility deficiency of the mutants was further confirmed in
in vitro motility assays (Supplementary Fig. 7). Next, we infected
A. castellanii with these mutant strains. While both mutant
strains still infected the amoebal CV, the strains were more static
within this niche (Fig. 6b and Supplementary Movies 3 and 4).
We therefore wondered whether motility would have a role in the
escape of V. cholerae from the lysed CV and lysed cysts. To test
this idea, we infected amoebae with the WT and the flaA-minus
strains, which we labeled with different fluorescent proteins,
namely dsRed and GFP, respectively. We then took time-lapse
movies over several hours to observe the colonizing bacteria of
those amoebae that contained both strains within the same CV
(Fig. 6c and Supplementary Movie 5). These experiments showed
that, compared to the WT strain, the non-motile mutant was
retained in the lysed CV (Supplementary Movie 6) and its escape
back to the environment was severely impaired after the final lysis
of the cyst (Supplementary Movie 7). We concluded, therefore,
that motility has a major role in V. cholerae’s interaction with A.
castellanii.
Discussion
V. cholerae, the bacterial agent responsible for cholera, still poses a
global threat to human health. However, apart from its chitin-
induced phenotypes, which include chitin catabolism, interbacterial
competition, and horizontal gene transfer50 (reviewed by refs.56–59),
we know very little about its environmental lifestyle and its potential
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x
8
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3460 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 interactions with non-human hosts. Such ancient host–pathogen
interactions are, however, often considered as evolutionary pre-
cursors to modern interactions that occur between bacteria and
their human hosts60. Moreover, aquatic predators are recognized
for their contribution to pathogen emergence due to the selection
pressure they exert on their bacterial prey61. Here, we examined the
molecular mechanisms that V. cholerae uses to interact with the
aquatic amoeba A. castellanii and to maintain a favorable replica-
tion niche within the amoebal osmoregulatory organelle. Based on
the molecular checkpoints that were deciphered in the current
study, we expanded our model of the pathogen’s intra-amoebal
lifecycle (Fig. 7). Specifically, we showed the importance of several
extracellular enzymes in this host–pathogen interaction. The pro-
duction of the HapA protease, which cleaves the pore-forming
hemolysin toxin, proved essential for avoiding premature intox-
ication of the amoebal host (Fig. 7, label A). In contrast to intra-
cellular pathogens, such as Listeria monocytogenes or Shigella
flexneri, that use PFTs to escape from acidic vacuolar compartments
to reach the host cell’s cytosol, the situation described herein is very
different. In this case, the host–pathogen interaction relies on V.
cholerae residing in a non-digestive vacuole in which it can readily
replicate25. This non-digestive CV is an essential osmoregulatory
organelle of the amoeba meaning that HlyA-mediated rupture of
the vacuolar membrane would, therefore, release V. cholerae into
the cytosol, though, at the expense of rapid host cell death. We
speculated, therefore, that this HapA-mediated disintegration of
HlyA might have evolved to allow V. cholerae to maximize its
growth output within this intra-amoebal replication niche by
avoiding the premature death of its host. Notably, the HapA pro-
tease is considered a minor virulence factor that contributes to
disease outcomes in animal models of cholera13,62, along with HlyA
itself, as described above. In this study, we did not observe any
obvious phenotype for V. cholerae strains lacking HlyA with respect
to their ability to first colonize and then escape the amoebal CV.
However, at this point we cannot exclude the contribution of HlyA
as well as other, potentially redundant, enzymes to the other dis-
cussed phenotype in which the V. cholerae pathogen escapes from
the A. castellanii phagosomal pathway25. Alternatively, HlyA might
have a role in another context in the pathogen’s environmental
lifestyle. It was shown that HlyA causes developmental delays and
lethality in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans through intestinal
cytopathic changes63, and similar effect might occur with other
hosts in the pathogen’s aquatic reservoirs. Notably, both enzymes
(HapA and HlyA) are widely distributed among pathogenic
Vibrios14, which reinforces the notion that they have important
roles in environmental settings.
While the production of the HapA protease protects the CV
from premature lysis, such lysis still occurs when the amoeba has
undergone encystation and the CV is fully occupied by the bac-
teria. We have previously shown that the rupture of the vacuolar
membrane is dependent on the production of the Vibrio extra-
cellular polysaccharide (VPS; Fig. 7, label B), and we hypothesized
that this might be due to a VPS-dependent agglutination effect25.
Consistent with this idea is a recent study on the importance of
the osmotic pressure generated by the hydrogel-like VPS matrix
of V. cholerae64. These authors suggested that the capacity of V.
cholerae to escape the amoebal CV, which we had previously
reported25, could indeed be related to the osmotic-pressure
response of the VPS biofilm matrix64. Alternatively, the accu-
mulation of the VPS might hinder the CV from contracting and
therefore from expelling the accumulated water. Given the con-
tinued influx of water from the cytosol such a malfunctioning
would likewise lead to the lysis of the vacuole, as observed (ref.25
and this study) and consistent with a previous report in which the
authors blocked the vacuole’s contractility using antibodies
against myosin-I30.
After V. cholerae escaped from the vacuole and upon further
growth within the cytosol of the amoebal cyst, another extracellular
enzyme, the lecithinase/phospholipase, was required to ultimately
kill the host and return the bacteria to the environment (Fig. 7, label
E). This lecithinase is encoded in close proximity to the hemolysin
gene, a region that was previously speculated to represent a
pathogenicity island20. Unfortunately, apart from the absence of a
phenotype for the lec-minus mutant in rabbit-ligated ileal loops22, a
model of cholera that primarily aims at judging cholera toxin-
mediated fluid accumulation, this enzyme had not been extensively
studied in vivo (for current 7th pandemic O1 El Tor strains).
However, a recent study based on an activity-based protein profiling
Transmitted
light
V. cholerae
V. cholerae
Dextran
Dextran
WT
Δlec::lec
Δlec
Δlec
Δlec::lec
WT::lec
50
40
30
20
10
0
Lysed cysts (percentage of infected amoebae)
WT
WT::lec
**
ns
***
a
b
Fig. 5 Cyst permeabilization by V. cholerae depends on its lecithinase.
a Representative images and b quantification of lysed or non-lysed cysts
that were infected by WT, lecithinase-minus (Δlec), lecithinase-minus but
complemented (Δlec::lec), and lec-merodiploid V. cholerae strains (all GFP
positive). The permeabilization phenotype was visualized through the
infiltration of dextran from the surrounding medium in the white arrow-
marked cysts, which did not occur for the Δlec strain. Scale bar: 10 µm. The
graph in b represents average values from three independent biological
replicates (±s.d.). Statistics are based on a one-way ANOVA with ***p ≤
0.001; **p ≤ 0.01; ns, p > 0.05
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3460 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
9
 method showed that the lecithinase/phospholipase is active in cecal
fluids of infected infant rabbits65. Further studies are therefore
required to conclusively determine whether this enzyme should also
be considered as a minor virulence factor for animals, as we
demonstrated here for amoebae.
Lastly, we showed that bacterial motility is required to effi-
ciently escape from the lysed CV and the succumbed host (Fig. 7,
labels C and D), which, ultimately, allows the bacteria to return to
the aquatic environment. One could speculate that the lysed cyst
might generate a nutrient gradient that attracts novel predators, a
disadvantageous scenario for any prey. Indeed, we frequently
observed that dead cysts were readily ingested by feeding tro-
phozoites, which could counter-select for non-motile mutants
that cannot escape from the cellular debris. Likewise, motility has
also been demonstrated to be of importance for virulence in
animal models. Indeed, non-motile mutants exerted less fluid
accumulation in rabbit ileal loops62 and were severely attenuated
for the colonization of infant mouse small intestines4. These
correlations between the contribution to virulence in animal
models and in the environmental host–pathogen interaction
described herein therefore support the “coincidental evolution
hypothesis”. This hypothesis suggests that “virulence factors
result from adaptation to other ecological niches” and, in parti-
cular, from “selective pressure exerted by protozoan predator”66.
Methods
Bacterial strains and growth conditions. All bacterial strains used in this study
are listed in Supplementary Table 1. V. cholerae strains are derivatives of the 7th
pandemic O1 El Tor strain A1552 if not indicated otherwise. Bacteria were grown
on LB plates (1.5% agar) or under shaking conditions in liquid LB medium.
Antibiotics were supplemented when needed for genetic engineering and selection
at the following concentrations: 100 µg/ml of ampicillin; 50 µg/ml of gentamicin,
and 75 µg/ml of kanamycin. Amoebal infection media were free of antibiotics.
For counter-selection of site-directly modified phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase
(pheS*)-carrying strains (Trans2 method; see below) 4-chloro-phenylalanine (cPhe;
C6506, Sigma-Aldrich, Buchs, Switzerland) was added to the medium before
autoclaving. Optimization experiments showed that a concentration of 20 mM of
cPhe was best for V. cholerae counter-selection.
Genetic engineering of bacterial strains. All oligonucleotides used for genetic
engineering are listed in Supplementary Table 3. Genetic engineering of strains to
delete/insert genes or to add gene fusions onto the V. cholerae chromosomes was
performed using the previously described TransFLP method67–70. An alternative
protocol, based on two rounds of transformation, was established in this study
(named Trans2) to generate complemented strains or overexpression constructs.
This method was adapted from Gurung et al.71 to work in V. cholerae and is based
on the counter-selectablility of bacteria carrying a mutated version of the α subunit
of phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase in cPhe-containing medium. The gene encoding
the phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase of V. cholerae (α subunit; pheS or VC1219) was
integrated into plasmid pBR-FRT-Kan-FRT251 to generate the plasmid pBR-
FKpheSF (carrying the aminoglycoside 3′-phosphotransferase-encoding gene [aph
(3′)] and pheS flanked by FRT sites). This and subsequent plasmids served as
templates for inverse PCR to generate the site-directly mutated pheS in the pBR-
FKpheSF[A294G] and pBR-FKpheSF[A294G/T251A] plasmids (renamed for
simplicity as pFRT-aph-pheS*). This double-mutant template was generated based
on a study in E. coli that showed improved counter-selectablility of this version of
pheS (pheS*) on cPhe-containing agar plates72. In contrast to a previous study71,
the pheS* allele used in this study (pheS[A294G/T251A]) was placed downstream
of the constitutively expressed aph(3′) to ensure expression independent of the
subsequent insertion site on the chromosome. The aph(3′)-pheS* construct was
PCR amplified using the pFRT-aph-pheS* plasmid as a template and fused by
overlapping PCR with fragments carrying parts of the 5′- and 3′-region of the lacZ
gene. The resulting PCR fragment (lacZ’-aph(3′)-pheS*-‘lacZ) was used as a
transforming material for chitin-induced naturally competent V. cholerae cells68.
Transformants were selected on kanamycin-containing LB agar plates. The growth
impairment of the transformants due to the presence of pheS* was verified on
cPhe-containing agar plates followed by verification through Sanger sequencing.
These strains underwent a second round of transformation on chitin (therefore the
name Trans2). The second-round transforming material was devoid of any resis-
tance gene and carried the desired genetic construct (generated by PCR amplifi-
cation) flanked by the 5′- and 3′-parts of the lacZ gene. Screening for the
integration of this construct was done using cPhe-containing agar plates. Trans-
formants that grew were tested by colony PCR for the replacement of the aph(3′)-
pheS* genes and, ultimately, confirmed for marker- and scar-less integration using
Sanger sequencing.
WT 
ΔflaA
ΔpomB
a 
b
c
Transmitted
light
V. cholerae 
Merge
ΔflaA-GFP 
WT-dsRed
Merge 
Transmitted
light 
Time (hours p.p.c.)
15:15  
17:35   
19:10  
21:32  
Fig. 6 Efficient escape from the ruptured CV and the lysed cysts requires flagellum-based motility. a Scanning electron micrographs of WT V. cholerae and
its flaA- and pomB-deficient derivatives, which lack the major flagellin and cannot rotate their flagellum, respectively (as schematized below the images).
Scale bar: 1 µm. b Close-up view of confocal scanning images of CVs (transmitted light) that were colonized by each one of the three GFP-tagged strains
shown in a. The scanning speed was lowered for these experiments to visualize the fast movement of WT V. cholerae inside the CV. See also
Supplementary Movies 2 to 4 for dynamics of intra-vacuolar WT, ΔflaA, and ΔpomB bacteria. Scale bar: 5 µm. c Escaping from the lysed amoebal host and
spreading requires flagellum-based motility. A. castellanii was infected with a 1:1 mixture of WT (dsRed-tagged) and non-motile flaA-minus (GFP-tagged)
bacteria. Time-lapse microscopic imaging of a co-infected amoeba was started at 15 h p.p.c and followed for more than six hours (time is indicated on the
right). Still images derived from the recorded movie (Supplementary Movie 5) are depicted and show (from top to bottom) the colonized trophozoite
before and after encystation, after rupture of the CV, and after cyst lysis. Scale bar: 10 µm
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x
10
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3460 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 Variants of the mini-Tn7 transposon carrying constitutively expressed gfp, an
optimized version of dsRed (dsRed.T3[DNT]50,73), or mCherry were stably
integrated into the V. cholerae chromosome through triparental mating74.
Determination of enzymatic activities. Semi-quantitative assays in specific media
were used to determine enzymatic activities. To perform these assays, 5 µl of the
respective overnight bacterial cultures were spotted onto the following three types
of agar plates. (i) Milk agar was used to determine protease activity due to the
hydrolysis of casein. The modified recipe used in this study contained 0.5% tryp-
tone, 0.25% yeast extract, 0.1% dextrose, 1% skim milk powder, and 1.25% agar.
The bacteria were incubated on these plates for 24 h at 30 °C. (ii) Trypticase Soy
Agar II with 5% sheep blood (BD, Heidelberg, Germany) was used to test for
hemolysis (24 h at 30 °C). (iii) Egg yolk agar plates (Hardy Diagnostic, Santa Maria,
CA, USA) were used to evaluate lecithinase activity (72 h at 30 °C). Lecithinase
activity was quantified after taking pictures with a tabletop scanner and analyzing
these images using ImageJ75. Values are given according to the formula (area of
bacteria + area of precipitate) − (area of the bacteria) = area of precipitate [cm2].
Gene expression analysis based on qRT-PCR. The relative gene expression
compared to the gene gyrA was determined using quantitative reverse transcription
PCR (qRT-PCR)-based transcript scoring in V. cholerae76. Data are based on three
biologically independent experiments (±standard deviation [s.d.]). Primers used for
qPCR are indicated in Supplementary Table 3.
Amoebal infections. The amoeba Acanthamoeba castellanii (ATCC strain 30010)
served as the host in all of the infection experiments. Supplemented peptone-yeast-
glucose (PYG) medium (ATCC medium 712) was used to propagate uninfected
amoebae and half-concentrated defined artificial seawater (0.5× DASW; buffered
with 50 mM HEPES)77 was used as the infection medium.
For infection experiments, amoebae were diluted with fresh PYG at a
concentration of 1 × 105 amoebae/ml and seeded into a µ-Dish (low wall 35 mm
ibidiTreat devices; 80136-IBI, Vitaris, Baar, Switzerland). After three hours of static
incubation at 24 °C, adherent amoebae were washed three times with the infection
medium. Exponentially growing bacteria were likewise extensively washed in
infection medium and added to the amoebae at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of
1000. Co-cultures were incubated statically at 24 °C for the indicated time post-
primary contact (p.p.c.)25.
Confocal laser scanning microscopy-based techniques. Confocal lasers scan-
ning microscope (CLSM) imaging was done using a Zeiss LSM 700 inverted
microscope (Zeiss, Feldbach, Switzerland). To label the endosomal pathway of the
amoebae, Alexa Fluor 647-labeled dextran (MW 10,000; D22914, Thermo Fisher
Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) was added to the infection medium at a
final concentration of 100 µg/ml. The fluorescent stain calcofluor white was sup-
plemented wherever indicated at a final concentration of 0.2%, as this stain is
known to bind to cellulose (18909-100ML-F, Sigma-Aldrich, Buchs, Switzerland).
Fluorescent signals were quantified using the open-source imaging software Ima-
geJ75 (NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA). Bacterial motility inside the amoebae (see
Supplementary Movies 2, 3, and 4) was assessed using short frame intervals and/or
a reduced scanning speed.
Scanning electron microscopy. For scanning electron microscopy (SEM) imaging,
a 10 mm in diameter silicon wafer was coated with 100 µg/ml of poly-D-lysine
hydrobromide (P6407, Sigma-Aldrich, Buchs, Switzerland) for 2 h at room tem-
perature, then washed three times with bi-distillated water. Exponentially grown
bacteria were washed with PBS and allowed to settle for 20 min at room tem-
perature onto the silicon wafer. The supernatant was removed, and a 0.1 M
phosphate buffer solution of 1.25% glutaraldehyde and 1% tannic acid was gently
added. After 1 h, the fixative was removed and replaced by cacodylate buffer. This
was transferred to a 1% solution of osmium tetroxide in cacodylate buffer for 30
min, washed in water, and then dehydrated through a series of increasing con-
centrations of alcohol. The sample was finally dried at the critical point of carbon
dioxide and coated with a 2-nm-thick layer of osmium metal using an osmium
plasma coater. Images were collected in an SEM (Merlin, Zeiss NTS) at 1.8 kV
electron beam tension.
Correlative light and electron microscopy. For the correlative light and electron
microscopy (CLEM), 18 mm glass coverslips were used. These were coated with a
thin (10 nm) layer of carbon onto which an alphanumeric grid had been outlined
using a thicker, 20 nm, carbon layer. The coverslips were incubated with poly-D-
lysine hydrobromide (P6407, Sigma-Aldrich, Buchs, Switzerland) at a concentra-
tion of 100 µg/ml for 30 min at room temperature and then washed three times
with PBS. At 20 h p.p.c., colonized amoebae were detached from the tissue culture
flask using a cell scraper, plated onto coated coverslips, and allowed to adhere for
30 min at room temperature. The supernatant was removed, and a buffered
aldehyde solution of 1% glutaraldehyde and 2% paraformaldehyde was gently
added. After one hour at room temperature, these were washed in cacodylate
buffer. The corresponding confocal images were acquired. The samples were then
post-fixed and stained with 1% osmium tetroxide followed by 1% uranyl acetate.
After dehydration through increasing concentrations of alcohol, the coverslips were
embedded in EPON resin and polymerized at 65 °C for 48 h. Cells of interest were
located using the alphanumeric grid that remained on the resin surface after the
grid had been removed. Blocks were trimmed around the cell and between 200 and
300 serial thin sections, at a thickness of 50 nm, were cut from the entire structure
using a diamond knife and ultra-microtome. Sections were collected onto copper
slot grids, carrying a formvar support film, and then further stained with uranyl
acetate and lead citrate. Serial images of the cell were taken with a transmission
electron microscopy (TEM; Tecnai Spirit, Fischer Scientific) at a voltage of 80 kV.
Estimation of number of vacuolar bacteria. The number of bacteria in the
vacuole was estimated using an unbiased stereological approach31 by counting
bacteria in five probes across a series of 55 TEM sections cut through the middle of
a single vacuole. Each section was 50 nm thick and each probe consisted of a
reference section and a look up section that were five sections apart. The volume of
each probe was 8.3 cubic micrometers. From these counts we calculated a mean
density of 1.35 ± 0.42 bacteria per cubic micron. Given the approximate total
volume of the CV of 143.8 µm3, based on the assumption of a spherical shape, the
total number of V. cholerae cells was estimated to be 194 (±60). While this
experimental approach was elaborate and, therefore, not applicable to large
numbers of individual amoeba, an average number of 150–200 V. cholerae cells per
organelle is also theoretically supported given an average volume of ~1 µm3 (www.
BioNumber.org) and 150 µm3 (based on a maximum diameter of up to 6.6 µm78)
for bacteria and the CV of A. castellanii, respectively.
To generate a 3D model of the colonized CV, serial TEM images were first
aligned manually using image software (Photoshop, Adobe). Each structure was
then segmented using TrakEM279 operating in the FIJI software80 (www.fiji.sc).
A 
E 
C 
B 
2 
4 
5 
D 
1 
3 
6 
Fig. 7 Model depicting the herein-described molecular checkpoints of V.
cholerae’s amoebal infection cycle. After phagocytosis, V. cholerae cells
colonize the CV of A. castellanii trophozoites. The bacteria remain within
this replication niche upon amoebal encystation (1). After intra-vacuolar
growth, rupture of the vacuole occurs in a Vibrio polysaccharide-dependent
manner (2), which releases motile V. cholerae into the cyst’s cytosol (3)
where the bacteria proliferate further (4). Lecithinase-mediated membrane
permeabilization (5) eventually leads to the lysis of the cyst and the quick
release of the motile bacteria (6), which can undergo another round of
infection. Defined bacterial mutants are blocked at different checkpoints
and, therefore, impaired in the progression of the infection cycle: A,
protease-deficient and therefore hemolysis-overactive strain (ΔhapA); B,
Vibrio polysaccharide (VPS)-deficient strain (ΔvpsA25); C-D, non-motile
strains (ΔflaA and ΔpomB); and E, lecithinase-minus strain (Δlec)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3460 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
11
 The 3D models were then exported into the Blender software (www.blender.org)
for smoothing and rendering into a final image or movie.
Epifluorescence microscopy. To visualize T6SS production and assembly in V.
cholerae, epifluorescence microscopy images were acquired using a Zeiss Axio
Imager M2 microscope using standard settings50,76. Images in Fig. 4c were taken
with the same exposure times for the green (GFP) channel.
Interbacterial predation assay. T6SS-mediated killing of E. coli prey by diverse V.
cholerae strains was performed by co-incubation on solid LB agar surfaces.
Recovered prey was enumerated on selective medium50,51.
Statistical analysis. One-way ANOVA was performed using GraphPad Prism
version 7 for Mac (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA) followed by Tukey’s
post hoc test for multiple comparisons. Statistical analyses were performed on three
biologically independent experiments. *p ≤ 0.05; **p ≤ 0.01; ***p ≤ 0.001; ****p ≤
0.0001; ns (not significant), p > 0.05. The amoebal population counted manually
was each time 6000 (derived from three biologically independent experiments each
with n = 2000).
Data availability. All data supporting the findings of this study are available from
the corresponding author upon request.
Received: 16 December 2017 Accepted: 7 August 2018
References
1.
Faruque, S. M., Albert, M. J. & Mekalanos, J. J. Epidemiology, genetics, and
ecology of toxigenic Vibrio cholerae. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 62, 1301–1314
(1998).
2.
Clemens, J. D., Nair, G. B., Ahmed, T., Qadri, F. & Holmgren, J. Cholera.
Lancet 390, 1539–1549 (2017).
3.
Chen, L. et al. VFDB: a reference database for bacterial virulence factors.
Nucleic Acids Res. 33, D325–D328 (2005).
4.
Lee, S. H., Butler, S. M. & Camilli, A. Selection for in vivo regulators of
bacterial virulence. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 98, 6889–6894 (2001).
5.
Fullner, K. J. in Microbial Pathogenesis and the Intestinal Epithelial Cell (ed.
Hecht, G. A.) Ch. 26 (ASM Press, Washington, DC, 2003).
6.
Zampini, M. et al. Vibrio cholerae persistence in aquatic environments and
colonization of intestinal cells: involvement of a common adhesion
mechanism. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 244, 267–273 (2005).
7.
Kirn, T. J., Jude, B. A. & Taylor, R. K. A colonization factor links Vibrio
cholerae environmental survival and human infection. Nature 438, 863–866
(2005).
8.
Booth, B. A., Boesman-Finkelstein, M. & Finkelstein, R. A. Vibrio cholerae
soluble hemagglutinin/protease is a metalloenzyme. Infect. Immun. 42,
639–644 (1983).
9.
Burnet, F. M. & Stone, J. D. Desquamation of intestinal epithelium in vitro by
V. cholerae filtrates; characterization of mucinase and tissue disintegrating
enzymes. Aust. J. Exp. Biol. Med. Sci. 25, 219–226 (1947).
10. Finkelstein, R. A., Boesman-Finkelstein, M. & Holt, P. Vibrio cholerae
hemagglutinin/lectin/protease hydrolyzes fibronectin and ovomucin: F.M.
Burnet revisited. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 80, 1092–1095 (1983).
11. Wu, Z., Milton, D., Nybom, P., Sjo, A. & Magnusson, K. E. Vibrio cholerae
hemagglutinin/protease (HA/protease) causes morphological changes in
cultured epithelial cells and perturbs their paracellular barrier function.
Microb. Pathog. 21, 111–123 (1996).
12. Mel, S. F., Fullner, K. J., Wimer-Mackin, S., Lencer, W. I. & Mekalanos, J. J.
Association of protease activity in Vibrio cholerae vaccine strains with
decreases in transcellular epithelial resistance of polarized T84 intestinal
epithelial cells. Infect. Immun. 68, 6487–6492 (2000).
13. Benitez, J. A. et al. Preliminary assessment of the safety and immunogenicity
of a new CTXPhi-negative, hemagglutinin/protease-defective El Tor strain as a
cholera vaccine candidate. Infect. Immun. 67, 539–545 (1999).
14. Zhang, X. H. & Austin, B. Haemolysins in Vibrio species. J. Appl. Microbiol.
98, 1011–1019 (2005).
15. Menzl, K., Maier, E., Chakraborty, T. & Benz, R. HlyA hemolysin of Vibrio
cholerae O1 biotype E1 Tor. Identification of the hemolytic complex and
evidence for the formation of anion-selective ion-permeable channels. Eur. J.
Biochem. 240, 646–654 (1996).
16. Ichinose, Y. et al. Enterotoxicity of El Tor-like hemolysin of non-O1 Vibrio
cholerae. Infect. Immun. 55, 1090–1093 (1987).
17. Alm, R. A., Mayrhofer, G., Kotlarski, I. & Manning, P. A. Amino-terminal
domain of the El Tor haemolysin of Vibrio cholerae O1 is expressed in
classical strains and is cytotoxic. Vaccine 9, 588–594 (1991).
18. Olivier, V., Haines, G. K. 3rd, Tan, Y. & Satchell, K. J. Hemolysin and the
multifunctional autoprocessing RTX toxin are virulence factors during
intestinal infection of mice with Vibrio cholerae El Tor O1 strains. Infect.
Immun. 75, 5035–5042 (2007).
19. Olivier, V., Salzman, N. H. & Satchell, K. J. Prolonged colonization of mice by
Vibrio cholerae El Tor O1 depends on accessory toxins. Infect. Immun. 75,
5043–5051 (2007).
20. Ogierman, M. A. et al. Characterization of the Vibrio cholerae El Tor lipase
operon lipAB and a protease gene downstream of the hly region. J. Bacteriol.
179, 7072–7080 (1997).
21. Felsenfeld, O. The lecithinase activity of vibrio comma and the El Tor vibrio. J.
Bacteriol. 48, 155–157 (1944).
22. Fiore, A. E., Michalski, J. M., Russell, R. G., Sears, C. L. & Kaper, J. B. Cloning,
characterization, and chromosomal mapping of a phospholipase (lecithinase)
produced by Vibrio cholerae. Infect. Immun. 65, 3112–3117 (1997).
23. Vezzulli, L., Guzman, C. A., Colwell, R. R. & Pruzzo, C. Dual role colonization
factors connecting Vibrio cholerae’s lifestyles in human and aquatic
environments open new perspectives for combating infectious diseases. Curr.
Opin. Biotechnol. 19, 254–259 (2008).
24. Halpern, M. Novel insights into Haemagglutinin Protease (HAP) gene
regulation in Vibrio cholerae. Mol. Ecol. 19, 4108–4112 (2010).
25. Van der Henst, C., Scrignari, T., Maclachlan, C. & Blokesch, M. An
intracellular replication niche for Vibrio cholerae in the amoeba
Acanthamoeba castellanii. ISME J. 10, 897–910 (2016).
26. Chavez-Munguia, B. et al. Acanthamoeba castellanii cysts: new ultrastructural
findings. Parasitol. Res. 112, 1125–1130 (2013).
27. Abd, H., Saeed, A., Weintraub, A., Nair, G. B. & Sandström, G. Vibrio cholerae
O1 strains are facultative intracellular bacteria, able to survive and multiply
symbiotically inside the aquatic free-living amoeba Acanthamoeba castellanii.
FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 60, 33–39 (2007).
28. Allen, R. D. The contractile vacuole and its membrane dynamics. Bioessays 22,
1035–1042 (2000).
29. Stock, C., Gronlien, H. K., Allen, R. D. & Naitoh, Y. Osmoregulation in
Paramecium: in situ ion gradients permit water to cascade through the cytosol
to the contractile vacuole. J. Cell. Sci. 115, 2339–2348 (2002).
30. Doberstein, S. K., Baines, I. C., Wiegand, G., Korn, E. D. & Pollard, T. D.
Inhibition of contractile vacuole function in vivo by antibodies against
myosin-I. Nature 365, 841–843 (1993).
31. West, M. J. Stereological methods for estimating the total number of neurons
and synapses: issues of precision and bias. Trends Neurosci. 22, 51–61 (1999).
32. Lorenzo-Morales, J. et al. Glycogen phosphorylase in Acanthamoeba spp.:
determining the role of the enzyme during the encystment process using RNA
interference. Eukaryot. Cell 7, 509–517 (2008).
33. Dal Peraro, M. & van der Goot, F. G. Pore-forming toxins: ancient, but never
really out of fashion. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 14, 77–92 (2016).
34. Tsou, A. M. & Zhu, J. Quorum sensing negatively regulates hemolysin
transcriptionally and posttranslationally in Vibrio cholerae. Infect. Immun. 78,
461–467 (2010).
35. Yildiz, F. H. & Schoolnik, G. K. Role of rpoS in stress survival and virulence of
Vibrio cholerae. J. Bacteriol. 180, 773–784 (1998).
36. Blokesch, M. A quorum sensing-mediated switch contributes to natural
transformation of Vibrio cholerae. Mob. Genet. Elem. 2, 224–227
(2012).
37. Stutzmann, S. & Blokesch, M. Circulation of a quorum-sensing-impaired
variant of Vibrio cholerae strain C6706 masks important phenotypes. mSphere
1, e00098–16 (2016).
38. Heidelberg, J. F. et al. DNA sequence of both chromosomes of the cholera
pathogen Vibrio cholerae. Nature 406, 477–483 (2000).
39. Zhu, J. et al. Quorum-sensing regulators control virulence gene expression in
Vibrio cholerae. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 3129–3134 (2002).
40. Keymer, D. P., Miller, M. C., Schoolnik, G. K. & Boehm, A. B. Genomic
and phenotypic diversity of coastal Vibrio cholerae strains is linked to
environmental factors. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 73, 3705–3714 (2007).
41. Satchell, K. J. Multifunctional-autoprocessing repeats-in-toxin (MARTX)
Toxins of Vibrios. Microbiol. Spectr. 3, VE-0002-2014 (2015).
42. Fullner, K. J. & Mekalanos, J. J. In vivo covalent cross-linking of cellular actin
by the Vibrio cholerae RTX toxin. EMBO J. 19, 5315–5323 (2000).
43. Kim, Y. R. et al. Vibrio vulnificus RTX toxin kills host cells only after
contact of the bacteria with host cells. Cell Microbiol. 10, 848–862
(2008).
44. Miyata, S. T., Kitaoka, M., Brooks, T. M., McAuley, S. B. & Pukatzki, S. Vibrio
cholerae requires the type VI secretion system virulence factor VasX to kill
Dictyostelium discoideum. Infect. Immun. 79, 2941–2949 (2011).
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x
12
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3460 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 45. Miyata, S. T., Unterweger, D., Rudko, S. P. & Pukatzki, S. Dual expression
profile of type VI secretion system immunity genes protects pandemic Vibrio
cholerae. PLoS Pathog. 9, e1003752 (2013).
46. Dong, T. G., Ho, B. T., Yoder-Himes, D. R. & Mekalanos, J. J. Identification of
T6SS-dependent effector and immunity proteins by Tn-seq in Vibrio cholerae.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, 2623–2628 (2013).
47. Russell, A. B., Peterson, S. B. & Mougous, J. D. Type VI secretion system
effectors: poisons with a purpose. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 12, 137–148
(2014).
48. Ho, B. T., Dong, T. G. & Mekalanos, J. J. A view to a kill: the bacterial type VI
secretion system. Cell Host Microbe 15, 9–21 (2014).
49. Pukatzki, S. et al. Identification of a conserved bacterial protein secretion
system in Vibrio cholerae using the Dictyostelium host model system. Proc.
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 103, 1528–1533 (2006).
50. Borgeaud, S., Metzger, L. C., Scrignari, T. & Blokesch, M. The type VI
secretion system of Vibrio cholerae fosters horizontal gene transfer. Science
347, 63–67 (2015).
51. Metzger, L. C. et al. Independent regulation of type VI secretion in Vibrio
cholerae by TfoX and TfoY. Cell Rep. 15, 951–958 (2016).
52. Chun, J. et al. Comparative genomics reveals mechanism for short-term and
long-term clonal transitions in pandemic Vibrio cholerae. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA 106, 15442–15447 (2009).
53. Blokesch, M. & Schoolnik, G. K. Serogroup conversion of Vibrio cholerae in
aquatic reservoirs. PLoS Pathog. 3, e81 (2007).
54. Basler, M., Pilhofer, M., Henderson, G. P., Jensen, G. J. & Mekalanos, J. J. Type
VI secretion requires a dynamic contractile phage tail-like structure. Nature
483, 182–186 (2012).
55. Ulsamer, A. G., Wright, P. L., Wetzel, M. G. & Korn, E. D. Plasma and
phagosome membranes of Acanthamoeba castellanii. J. Cell. Biol. 51, 193–215
(1971).
56. Hunt, D. E. et al. Resource partitioning and sympatric differentiation among
closely related bacterioplankton. Science 320, 1081–1085 (2008).
57. Matthey, N. & Blokesch, M. The DNA-uptake process of naturally competent
Vibrio cholerae. Trends Microbiol. 24, 98–110 (2016).
58. Metzger, L. C. & Blokesch, M. Regulation of competence-mediated horizontal
gene transfer in the natural habitat of Vibrio cholerae. Curr. Opin. Microbiol.
30, 1–7 (2016).
59. Le Roux, F. & Blokesch, M. Eco-evolutionary dynamics linked to horizontal
gene transfer in Vibrios. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 72, 89–110 (2018).
60. Pernthaler, J. Predation on prokaryotes in the water column and its ecological
implications. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 3, 537–546 (2005).
61. Matz, C. & Kjelleberg, S. Off the hook—how bacteria survive protozoan
grazing. Trends Microbiol. 13, 302–307 (2005).
62. Silva, A. J., Leitch, G. J., Camilli, A. & Benitez, J. A. Contribution of
hemagglutinin/protease and motility to the pathogenesis of El Tor biotype
cholera. Infect. Immun. 74, 2072–2079 (2006).
63. Cinar, H. N. et al. Vibrio cholerae hemolysin is required for lethality,
developmental delay, and intestinal vacuolation in Caenorhabditis elegans.
PLoS ONE 5, e11558 (2010).
64. Yan, J., Nadell, C. D., Stone, H. A., Wingreen, N. S. & Bassler, B. L.
Extracellular-matrix-mediated osmotic pressure drives Vibrio cholerae biofilm
expansion and cheater exclusion. Nat. Commun. 8, 327 (2017).
65. Hatzios, S. K. et al. Chemoproteomic profiling of host and pathogen enzymes
active in cholera. Nat. Chem. Biol. 12, 268–274 (2016).
66. Adiba, S., Nizak, C., van Baalen, M., Denamur, E. & Depaulis, F. From grazing
resistance to pathogenesis: the coincidental evolution of virulence factors.
PLoS ONE 5, e11882 (2010).
67. De Souza Silva, O. & Blokesch, M. Genetic manipulation of Vibrio cholerae by
combining natural transformation with FLP recombination. Plasmid 64,
186–195 (2010).
68. Marvig, R. L. & Blokesch, M. Natural transformation of Vibrio cholerae as a
tool-optimizing the procedure. BMC Microbiol. 10, 155 (2010).
69. Blokesch, M. TransFLP—a method to genetically modify V. cholerae based on
natural transformation and FLP-recombination. J. Vis. Exp. 68, e3761
(2012).
70. Borgeaud, S. & Blokesch, M. Overexpression of the tcp gene cluster using the
T7 RNA polymerase/promoter system and natural transformation-mediated
genetic engineering of Vibrio cholerae. PLoS ONE 8, e53952 (2013).
71. Gurung, I., Berry, J. L., Hall, A. M. J. & Pelicic, V. Cloning-independent
markerless gene editing in Streptococcus sanguinis: novel insights in type IV
pilus biology. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, e40 (2017).
72. Miyazaki, K. Molecular engineering of a PheS counterselection marker for
improved operating efficiency in Escherichia coli. Biotechniques 58, 86–88
(2015).
73. Dunn, A. K., Millikan, D. S., Adin, D. M., Bose, J. L. & Stabb, E. V. New rfp-
and pES213-derived tools for analyzing symbiotic Vibrio fischeri reveal
patterns of infection and lux expression in situ. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72,
802–810 (2006).
74. Bao, Y., Lies, D. P., Fu, H. & Roberts, G. P. An improved Tn7-based system for
the single-copy insertion of cloned genes into chromosomes of Gram-negative
bacteria. Gene 109, 167–168 (1991).
75. Schneider, C. A., Rasband, W. S. & Eliceiri, K. W. NIH Image to ImageJ: 25
years of image analysis. Nat. Methods 9, 671–675 (2012).
76. Lo Scrudato, M. & Blokesch, M. The regulatory network of natural
competence and transformation of Vibrio cholerae. PLoS Genet. 8, e1002778
(2012).
77. Meibom, K. L., Blokesch, M., Dolganov, N. A., Wu, C.-Y. & Schoolnik, G. K.
Chitin induces natural competence in Vibrio cholerae. Science 310, 1824–1827
(2005).
78. Pal, R. A. The osmoregulatory system of the amoeba, Acanthamoeba
castellanii. J. Exp. Biol. 57, 55 (1972).
79. Cardona, A. et al. TrakEM2 software for neural circuit reconstruction. PLoS
ONE 7, e38011 (2012).
80. Schindelin, J. et al. Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis.
Nat. Methods 9, 676–682 (2012).
Acknowledgements
We thank members of the Blokesch group at EPFL and the Geneva/Lausanne amoeba
club for fruitful discussions. We also acknowledge J. Mekalanos (Harvard) for strain
C6706 (original stock) and former members of the Blokesch lab for provision of
genetically engineered V. cholerae strains. This work was supported by EPFL intramural
funding, a Starting Grant from the European Research Council (ERC; 309064-VIR4-
ENV), and a Consolidator Grant from the European Research Council (ERC; 724630-
CholeraIndex) to MB. M.B. is a Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) International
Research Scholar (grant 55008726).
Author contributions
C.V.d.H. and M.B. designed the study; C.V.d.H., A.S.V., N.C.D.D., G.K., and M.B.
planned the experiments; C.V.d.H., A.S.V., N.C.D.D., S.S., C.S., T.S., S.C., C.M., and M.B.
performed experiments; C.V.d.H., A.S.V., N.C.D.D., G.K., and M.B. analyzed the data;
C.V.d.H. and M.B. wrote the manuscript; M.B. revised the manuscript. All authors
approved the final version of the manuscript.
Additional information
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
018-05976-x.
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Reprints and permission information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/
reprintsandpermissions/
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2018
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3460 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05976-x | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
13
