 REVIEW
published: 10 January 2019
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2018.01033
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
1
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
Edited by:
Kenneth Joseph Friedman,
Medical School, Rutgers, The State
University of New Jersey,
United States
Reviewed by:
Dinesh Upadhya,
Manipal Academy of Higher
Education, India
Alberto Verrotti,
University of L’Aquila, Italy
*Correspondence:
Michael B. VanElzakker
vanelzak@nmr.mgh.harvard.edu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Pediatric Neurology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Neurology
Received: 26 August 2018
Accepted: 16 November 2018
Published: 10 January 2019
Citation:
VanElzakker MB, Brumfield SA and
Lara Mejia PS (2019)
Neuroinflammation and Cytokines in
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS): A
Critical Review of Research Methods.
Front. Neurol. 9:1033.
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2018.01033
Neuroinflammation and Cytokines in
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS): A
Critical Review of Research Methods
Michael B. VanElzakker*, Sydney A. Brumfield and Paula S. Lara Mejia
Division of Neurotherapeutics, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is the label given to
a syndrome that can include long-term flu-like symptoms, profound fatigue, trouble
concentrating, and autonomic problems, all of which worsen after exertion. It is unclear
how many individuals with this diagnosis are suffering from the same condition or
have the same underlying pathophysiology, and the discovery of biomarkers would
be clarifying. The name “myalgic encephalomyelitis” essentially means “muscle pain
related to central nervous system inflammation” and many efforts to find diagnostic
biomarkers have focused on one or more aspects of neuroinflammation, from periphery
to brain. As the field uncovers the relationship between the symptoms of this condition
and neuroinflammation, attention must be paid to the biological mechanisms of
neuroinflammation and issues with its potential measurement. The current review
focuses on three methods used to study putative neuroinflammation in ME/CFS: (1)
positron emission tomography (PET) neuroimaging using translocator protein (TSPO)
binding radioligand (2) magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) neuroimaging and
(3) assays of cytokines circulating in blood and cerebrospinal fluid. PET scanning
using TSPO-binding radioligand is a promising option for studies of neuroinflammation.
However, methodological difficulties that exist both in this particular technique and
across the ME/CFS neuroimaging literature must be addressed for any results to be
interpretable. We argue that the vast majority of ME/CFS neuroimaging has failed
to use optimal techniques for studying brainstem, despite its probable centrality to
any neuroinflammatory causes or autonomic effects. MRS is discussed as a less
informative but more widely available, less invasive, and less expensive option for imaging
neuroinflammation, and existing studies using MRS neuroimaging are reviewed. Studies
seeking to find a peripheral circulating cytokine “profile” for ME/CFS are reviewed, with
attention paid to the biological and methodological reasons for lack of replication among
these studies. We argue that both the biological mechanisms of cytokines and the
innumerable sources of potential variance in their measurement make it unlikely that a
consistent and replicable diagnostic cytokine profile will ever be discovered.
Keywords: myalgic encephalomyelitis, neuroimaging, glia, microglia, PBR28, cytokines, translocator protein,
positron emission tomography
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
INTRODUCTION
Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is an often-debilitating illness
that can feel like an ongoing flu that lasts for years.
Symptoms include reduced energy production, body aches, non-
refreshing sleep, and difficulty recovering from both physical
and mental exertion. Among many patients and some scientists,
the preferred name for chronic fatigue syndrome is myalgic
encephalomyelitis (ME), leading this condition to frequently be
referred to as ME/CFS (among some scientists, the preferred
name is “systemic exercise intolerance syndrome” [SEID; (1)]
but use of this term remains rare). While it is more commonly
used in Europe, the term “myalgic encephalomyelitis” is
almost unheard of in the United States outside of experts
and advocates, and “chronic fatigue syndrome” is generally
used instead. The current review is largely centered on some
of the research methods necessary for justifying the term
“myalgic encephalomyelitis,” which essentially means “muscle
pain (myalgia) related to central nervous system inflammation
(encephalomyelitis).”
For
this
condition
to
warrant
the
name
ME,
“encephalomyelitis” should be a consistent finding reported
by multiple groups using multiple methods. To move past a
defensive posture of “this is a real condition with biological
differences from healthy controls” toward diagnostic biomarkers
and effective treatment options, the field’s neuroimmunology
research must be able to answer:
• How would a measured component of neuroinflammation
lead to symptoms?
• How
do
we
accurately
measure
that
component
of
neuroinflammation?
• What can and cannot be concluded from the chosen method?
In this review, we focus on three specific methods that have been
used to study the neuroimmunology of ME/CFS:
• positron emission tomography (PET) using translocator
protein (TSPO) binding radioligand,
• magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS), and
• assays measuring cytokines in blood and cerebrospinal
fluid
We offer a particular focus on what can and cannot be concluded
by studies using these methods.
We review the above three methods because:
1) we
believe
that
PET
scanning
using
TSPO-binding
radioligand is the best-available and most direct option
for studies of neuroinflammation but that methods must be
optimized,
2) MRS is much more widely available than PET with
TSPO-binding radioligand and has good potential for a
less expensive and invasive option for indirectly imaging
neuroinflammation, and
3) studies commonly seek to find a distinct peripheral circulating
cytokine “profile” in ME/CFS, and we offer critiques of current
approaches.
“Encephalomyelitis”
There have been scores of historical outbreaks of viral-like
illnesses that lead to profound and lasting fatigue, perhaps
most famously in Los Angeles (1934), Iceland (1948), London
(1955), and Nevada (1984) (2–5). In 1955, an Icelandic doctor
suggested the name “benign myalgic encephalomyelitis” after
noting some similarities in cerebrospinal fluid abnormalities
between patients from the London Royal Free Hospital
outbreak and other putatively similar outbreaks, including
a 1948 outbreak in Akureyri, Iceland (Sigurdsson May 26,
1956, in The Lancet). A lack of consistent methods and
cerebrospinal fluid sample sizes precluded strong conclusions
about similarities, or lack thereof, across the outbreaks.
Sigurdsson (2) described “symptoms and signs of damage to
the brain and spinal cord, in a greater or lesser degree” and
“protracted muscle pain with paresis and cramp” in explaining
his choice of the term “benign myalgic encephalomyelitis.”
The term “benign” was included not because the symptoms
were mild, but rather for discriminant validity because this
“new clinical entity” was believed by Sigurdsson to have a
“relatively benign outcome” (including lack of fatalities), relative
to possibly similar conditions such as poliomyelitis. Another
seemingly similar outbreak occurred in 1984–5 in Incline
Village, Nevada. If there existed any connection to previous
outbreaks that connection was not made, and a new term,
“chronic fatigue syndrome,” was coined. This has contributed
to confusion over whether “chronic fatigue syndrome” and
“myalgic encephalomyelitis” are the same entity. The causes
of and connections among outbreaks remain incompletely
understood.
Despite the issues with name and diagnosis, there may be
a core/root condition “ME/CFS” that involves inflammation
of the central nervous system. Many studies, including those
reviewed below, have reported results consistent with a
neuroinflammatory process [e.g., (6–9)]. However, despite some
cases of direct evidence and a fair amount of indirect evidence
from case-control studies, consistent and well-replicated direct
evidence for nervous system inflammation is still somewhat
limited, relative to what one would expect for a condition named
after a mechanistic trait.
INFLAMMATION NEUROCIRCUITRY
Many patients with ME/CFS report having experienced a viral or
bacterial infection directly prior to the onset of their illness [e.g.,
(10–14)]. This has led researchers to investigate the hypothesis
that resulting inflammation may be a mechanism by which this
syndrome occurs [e.g., (9); (6)]. Given the putative centrality
of neuroinflammation in ME/CFS, dysregulation in peripheral
immune system to nervous system inflammation pathways
should be a target for hypotheses and research [e.g., (15)].
When an inflammatory response occurs in the periphery,
the brain is alerted to the presence of inflammation-associated
molecules such as proinflammatory cytokines circulating in
blood. While new potential neuroimmune pathways are still
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
2
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
being discovered [e.g., (16)], we know of three ways in which this
alert can occur. Immune proteins such as cytokines will:
1) be actively transported across the blood-brain barrier (BBB),
2) passively diffuse through the BBB via circumventricular
organs if present in high enough concentrations, or
3) be detected by chemoreceptors in the afferent (sensory) vagus
nerve, which synapses in the nucleus of the solitary tract
(NTS) of dorsal brainstem (17–21).
The process of afferent neuroimmune signaling triggers the
sickness response (sometimes called sickness behaviors), a general
innate immune system reaction [e.g., (22)] that includes
many symptoms that overlap with ME/CFS symptoms [e.g.,
(15)].
Cytokine signaling from the peripheral side of the BBB
triggers a “mirror response” of glial activation and cytokine
release on the brain side of the BBB (18). Glia are a class
of cells that function at the intersection of the nervous and
immune systems; the primary glia of the central nervous systems
are microglia, tissue-resident macrophages that are capable of
detecting danger-associated molecules such as alarmins and
mitochondrial DNA, or immune signaling molecules such as
chemokines and proinflammatory cytokines (23). When this
detection occurs, microglia and other glial cell types enter
a functional and morphological state of activation, and in
turn produce their own chemokines and proinflammatory
cytokines that can cause the activation and proliferation of
nearby glia. Importantly, a relatively large brain-side “mirror
response” of glial activation and cytokine release can be
triggered by a small quantity of proinflammatory cytokine,
if that small quantity of cytokine has been detected by the
chemoreceptors of the afferent vagus nerve. Mirror responses
may follow specific neural circuits (discussed below), as glia are
most dense along white matter tracts (24, 25). This explains
why, from the above-described three mechanisms of cytokine-
to-brain communication, neuroimmune signaling continues
along specific brain pathways. Basic neuroimmunology research
has begun to elucidate these pathways, which should be the
focus of ME/CFS neuroimaging studies. Kraynak et al. (19)
conducted a useful meta-analysis of this basic neuroimmunology
research. They synthesized results from studies that performed
neuroimaging during peripheral immune activation by either an
immune stimulating antigen (e.g., lipopolysaccharide [LPS]) or
proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., interferon alpha [IFN-α]). Such
challenges consistently activated known intrinsic brain networks
and specific structures. Consistent activation occurred in basal
ganglia (bilateral striatum), limbic structures (right amygdala,
bilateral hippocampus, and hypothalamus), brainstem/pons, and
neocortex (right anterior insular cortex, right temporal and left
parahippocampal gyri, subgenual and dorsal anterior cingulate
cortex [sgACC and dACC], and dorsomedial and ventromedial
prefrontal cortex [dmPFC and vmPFC]). The meta-analysis
also investigated functional connectivity patterns among the
above structures, finding especially strong connectivity between
brainstem and right anterior insula, anterior insula, and
amygdala/parahippocampal gyrus, and between brainstem and
sgACC/vmPFC.
Though
not
as
robust,
right
temporal
and
left
parahippocampal
gyri
also
showed
significant
functional
connectivity
with
the
above
structures.
Therefore,
these
could be considered a priori functional circuits of interest
in studies of putative neuroinflammatory conditions such as
ME/CFS. The dACC (which would be considered anterior
midcingulate cortex [aMCC] by some anatomists) did not
show functional connectivity with the above circuits but was
consistently activated and therefore could also be considered
an a priori region of interest in neuroinflammation studies.
Given the role of dACC in attention and cognitive control,
we suggest that its function in ME/CFS could be considered
particularly important for “brain fog” symptoms. Furthermore,
Kraynak et al. (19) reported that the thalamus was also
consistently
detected
across
multiple
study
designs,
but
not in a way that demonstrated functional connectivity.
However, we consider thalamus an important region of
interest in ME/CFS given its detection by Nakatomi et al.
(8) and given the role of thalamus in sensory filtering, a
likely mechanism for the common symptom of sensory
sensitivity (discussed further in section MRS studies in
ME/CFS).
In brainstem/pons, the meta-analysis did find functional
connectivity but failed to find consistent activation across
studies in the area of nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS) and
area postrema. This might be considered unexpected because
these neighboring structures are central to two of the three
cytokine-to-brain pathways described in section Inflammation
neurocircuitry: the NTS is where vagus nerve enters the
brainstem, and area postrema is a key circumventricular organ.
We suspect that the area of NTS and area postrema was
not consistently activated in all studies of this meta-analysis
because most neuroimaging studies do not use brainstem-specific
spatial registration techniques (discussed in more detail below
in section Brainstem-specific analyses and techniques). We
therefore strongly recommend that neuroimaging studies of
ME/CFS consider this area (at the dorsal surface of brainstem
just inferior to pons) as an a priori region of interest. In
addition to its role in afferent cytokine-to-brain signaling,
this area of brainstem may hold particular importance for
ME/CFS symptoms. In the afferent direction, area postrema
is dense with mast cells (26), which is perhaps important for
some ME/CFS patients, given comorbidity between ME/CFS
and mast cell activation disorder. In the efferent direction,
this area includes the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus
nerve (DMV), which is potentially important given its role
in autonomic functions [e.g., (27)] that are dysfunctional
in ME/CFS, such as appropriate heart rate adjustments to
postural changes and exertion. Furthermore, an efferent signal
from DMV should trigger an anti-inflammatory reflex, which
serves to limit the inflammatory response (28). Functional
analysis of this area critically relies upon brainstem-specific
techniques (see Figure 1) in order for signal to be detected
(27, 29).
Because neuroinflammation can affect normal function
and structure, even methods that do not directly measure
neuroinflammation (e.g., fMRI and structural MR) can be
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
3
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
FIGURE 1 | Ten structural MRI scans were aligned using two different standard neocortex-based spatial registration techniques. The brainstem of each individual
brain was then traced to demonstrate how poorly they are aligned by these methods. In functional neuroimaging, detection of activation in a given brain structure is
completely dependent upon the alignment of that structure across all subjects. No signal will be detected if the region of interest is not aligned. Reprinted from
Napadow et al. (29) with permission from Elsevier.
clarifying if their focus is on neuroinflammation-relevant
brain circuits and structures. However, there are neuroimaging
techniques that can more directly measure neuroinflammation,
such as PET and MRS. The current gold standard for in
vivo imaging of neuroinflammation is PET scanning using a
translocator protein-binding radioligand.
MEASURING MICROGLIAL ACTIVATION:
PET AND THE TRANSLOCATOR PROTEIN
Positron emission tomography (PET) is a neuroimaging method
that involves the injection of a radioactive tracer (radiotracer).
The radiotracer is biologically relevant in some manner; for
example it may mimic endogenous glucose or an endogenous
neurotransmitter, or it may bind to a receptor or other
molecule of interest. Radiotracers typically use a small amount
of rapidly-decaying radiation, and as its radiation decays its
location within the body or brain is calculated by the PET
scanner. This allows neuroscientists to determine where the
biological process of interest is occurring. Several radiotracers
have been developed to detect and localize microglial activation
by binding to the translocator protein [usually referred to as
TSPO but also sometimes referred to as TP-18; reviewed in
(30–32)].
First known as the peripheral benzodiazepine receptor (PBR),
what is now called the 18kD translocator protein (TSPO), is part
of a larger protein complex known as mitochondrial permeability
transition pore (MPTP). TSPO is expressed by non-neuronal
cells of the central nervous system, and is mostly localized to
the outer mitochondrial membrane. TSPO is of interest in the
functional imaging of neuroinflammation because it is produced
when microglia become activated, and microglial activation
is a key component of classically-defined neuroinflammation.
Importantly for its use as a proxy for neuroimmune functional
state, TSPO is not highly expressed by microglia at a constitutive
level but is upregulated upon microglial activation.
Some researchers argue that microglial activation is not a
perfect synonym for neuroinflammation and that classically-
defined inflammation is when circulating immune cells penetrate
into tissue [e.g., (21)]. However, microglial activation would be
a predictable correlate to classically-defined neuroinflammation,
which would be defined as the infiltration into brain parenchyma
of peripheral immune cells such as T cells, dendritic cells, and
peripheral mast cells (18). Microglial activation is central to
the increased permeability of the BBB that is necessary for this
process, and therefore the binding of radiotracer to TSPO is an
expected state during classically-defined neuroinflammation, and
an absence of such binding would be fairly good evidence for
a lack of classically-defined neuroinflammation. Other expected
changes during classically-defined neuroinflammation would
include activation of other resident immunocompetent cells in
addition to microglia (such as astrocytes), disruption of BBB,
penetration of peripheral immune cells to the brain side of
the BBB, and additional possible pathological consequences
such as cell loss, iron accumulation, and edema. Each of these
expected changes can be measured with neuroimaging [for
review of methods see (33)] and such studies would provide
concurrent validity for TSPO-binding radioligand studies. Here
we describe one PET TSPO study of healthy individuals, and one
of individuals with ME/CFS.
PET Scanning Using TSPO-Binding
Radioligand in Healthy Humans
Sandiego et al. (34) used PET scanning with TSPO-binding
radioligand to understand the effects of a peripheral immune
challenge on the brains of healthy humans. They used
lipopolysaccharide
(LPS,
sometimes
called
endotoxin),
a
molecule found in the outer membrane of gram-negative
bacteria, which triggers an immune response via TLR4 signaling.
LPS is a commonly-used experimental immune challenge, but
the effect of peripheral LPS injection on immune response in the
brain had previously only been studied in animal models.
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
4
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
Using a within-subjects design, Sandiego et al. (34) reported
significantly increased PBR28 signal in many brain structures
following LPS-injection, including bilateral caudate nucleus and
putamen of the basal ganglia, large areas of the neocortex,
amygdala, hippocampus, and thalamus. They also found a
significant increase in several peripherally-circulating cytokines;
however, these circulating cytokine levels correlated with
neither PBR28 signal nor subjective sickness symptoms such
as fatigue. This is an important concept found repeatedly in
the neuroinflammation literature and discussed further below:
circulating cytokine levels are often a poor measure for subjective
symptoms and often do not reflect what is happening on the brain
side of the BBB. For example, in a study of ME/CFS, Nakatomi
et al. (8) reported a lack of correlation between circulating
cytokine levels and TSPO-binding radioligand signal in ME/CFS
patients’ brains, along with a lack of correlation between
circulating cytokine levels and their subjective symptoms.
PET Scanning Using TSPO-Binding
Radioligand in ME/CFS
Nakatomi et al. (8) conducted the first case-control study
using PET to measure TSPO expression in the central nervous
system of ME/CFS patients vs. healthy controls. They found
significantly increased PET signal, especially in a region between
mid-pons and thalamus, in patients vs. controls. Based on how
the “mirror response” of peripheral-to-central nervous system
immune signaling works, this is the general pattern one would
expect based on a paper from our group, which hypothesizes that
some cases of ME/CFS could be explained by exaggerated afferent
neuroimmune signaling entering the central nervous system at
the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS) in dorsal brainstem (15).
Nakatomi et al. (8) remains an important, groundbreaking study
that should be replicated with complementary methods. Here, we
describe several specific ways to complement and improve upon
future studies using the same general method of PET scanning
using TSPO-binding radioligand.
Methods to Address Potential Confounds
in PET Studies Using TSPO-Binding
Radioligand
There are several potential ways to interpret differences in TSPO-
binding radioligand signal in patients vs. controls. Isolating
and addressing potential confounding variables will make
interpretation easier but also adds difficulty and considerable cost
to a study. Type 1 or type 2 errors in studies of TSPO-binding
PET radioligand uptake in brain could potentially be explained
by the following methodological confounds:
• Standard neuroimaging techniques were not designed for
brainstem study
• The first-generation radioligand PK11195 has high non-
specific binding and low signal-to-background ratio
• PET signal calculated with an anatomical reference brain
region relies on equal radioligand uptake in that region across
cases and controls
• Radioligand access to brain is modified by general metabolism,
which can differ across cases and controls
• Activated peripheral immune cells bind radioligand and can
differ in quantity across cases and controls
• A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the TSPO gene
causes differential radioligand binding
• Use of healthy controls harms discriminant validity
Here, we will address each of these issues and describe solutions.
Brainstem-Specific Analyses and Techniques
Standard neuroimaging techniques were not designed for
brainstem study
One
can
almost
consider
the
structural
and
functional
neuroimaging analysis of brainstem to be a separate technique
from the analysis of neocortex because brainstem analysis
has its own issues that must be resolved for the data to
be interpretable [e.g., (27, 29, 35)]. The vast majority of
neuroimaging
studies
do
not
use
brainstem-appropriate
techniques. Two prominent issues are (1) the need for
independent spatial registration of brainstem, and (2) the
unique susceptibility of brainstem to physiologically-based
movement artifact.
Standard MRI and fMRI analysis software platforms use
the neocortex for spatial registration. In neuroimaging, spatial
registration is the process of lining up all participant brains
so their anatomy overlaps, allowing structural differences or
functional activations to be meaningfully compared. Nakatomi
et al. (8) used Statistical Parametric Mapping 5 software (SPM5;
Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology), which is a
well-validated and widely-accepted technique in neuroimaging.
However, like most standard techniques, the brainstem is not
the focus of standard SPM5 spatial registration. Instead, the
neocortex of each individual brain in a study is lined up with
the neocortex of a canonical brain (see Figure 1). This is because
the vast majority of functional neuroimaging studies examine
the types of “higher” cognitive and emotional processes that
are associated with the neocortex, as opposed to studying the
types of “lower” processes that are associated with the brainstem
(e.g., autonomic, arousal, pain, neuroimmune communication).
Given the anatomical reality that the brainstem comprises many
densely-packed but functionally-heterogeneous nuclei, any small
errors in spatial registration caused by failure to use brainstem-
specific registration are highly likely to lead to decreased
sensitivity in signal and type 2 errors (29). It is likely a testament
to the strength of the PET signal in Nakatomi et al. (8) that
their results remained statistically significant despite the fact that
brainstem-specific analysis techniques were not used, however
it is also likely that the lack of dorsal signal is explained by this
confound.
Furthermore,
the
brainstem
is
especially
prone
to
physiologically-driven movement artifact given that it pulses
with every heartbeat [e.g., (36, 37)]. This is especially important
for fMRI studies as opposed to PET, but this artifact is rarely
considered in studies using either method. This can be corrected
by recording physiological measures during acquisition to use
as a movement artifact regressor during functional analysis.
It is important to note that failure to control for systematic
differences in movement between patients and controls has
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
5
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
caused significant confusion in some clinical neuroimaging fields
[e.g., (38)].
A large majority of neuroimaging studies in ME/CFS have not
used brainstem-specific spatial co-registration, normalization,
or
physiologically-derived
movement
artifact
regression
techniques. In a disorder defined by symptoms related to
fatigue, autonomic nervous system problems [e.g., (39–46)],
and putative neuroimmune signaling [e.g., (6, 9, 15)], brainstem
is an obvious region of interest. Standard analysis techniques
would surely fail to coregister the very small nuclei that may be
related to key ME/CFS symptoms (e.g., nucleus of the solitary
tract, area postrema, dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve,
periaqueductal gray, reticularis gigantocellularis, and others). It
is therefore quite likely that functional brainstem abnormalities
in this condition, if any, have been missed by those studies that
reported the results of standard techniques. It is noteworthy that
several studies that did deliberately focus on brainstem have
found abnormalities. For example, Costa et al. (47) reported
brainstem hypoperfusion in ME/CFS patients vs. depressive
and healthy controls. Barnden et al. (48) reported differential
regression values of seated pulse pressure (systolic–diastolic)
against brainstem total gray matter volume (measured by
voxel-based morphometry and centered on tegmental area)
in ME/CFS patients vs. healthy controls. Similarly, Barnden
et al. (39) reported an abnormal association between indicators
of autonomic function volumetric measures in the area of
the vasomotor center in the brainstem’s medulla oblongata,
which (along with glossopharangeal nerve) is innervated by the
neuroimmune and autonomic parasympathetic vagus nerve.
Barnden et al. (49) reported abnormal T1-weighted spin echo
MRI signal in brainstem of Fukuda criteria ME/CFS patients.
By using brainstem-specific spatial registration in addition
to standard neocortex spatial registration, neuroimaging studies
of ME/CFS are much more likely to detect any functional and
structural abnormalities that may be driving autonomic and
neuroimmune-related symptoms. We believe it likely that failure
to use brainstem-specific techniques has resulted in type 2 errors
in the ME/CFS neuroimaging field, in PET studies as well as other
modalities like MRI and fMRI.
PBR28 or Other Second-Generation Radioligands
Instead of PK11195
The first-generation radioligand PK11195 has high
non-specific binding and low signal-to-background ratio
Nakatomi et al. (8) used the first-generation TSPO-binding
radioligand,
[11C]-(R)-PK11195
(referred
to
hereafter
as
PK11195). The development of PK11195 in the 1980s led
to advances in the understanding of brain diseases with an
inflammatory component such as multiple sclerosis, Rasmussen’s
encephalitis, Huntington and Alzheimer’s diseases, and others
(31). However, PK11195 has fairly low brain penetrance and
also high non-specific binding in that it binds to other types of
immune cells and proteins, including those in the general blood
circulation [e.g., (50)]. If there are systematic differences in BBB
permeability or in the quality and quantity of PK11195-binding
antigens between cases and controls, this can lead to type 1 or
type 2 error. Since PK11195’s development, a newer, second-
generation family of TSPO-binding radioligands has been
created (33). Second-generation TSPO-binding radioligands,
including PBR28, FEPPA, and DPA-714 [reviewed in (51)],
feature a much higher signal-to-background ratio than PK11195.
Arterial Line (A-Line) Sampling During PET
Neuroimaging Allows Data Interpretation
PET signal calculated with an anatomical reference region
relies on equal radioligand uptake in that region across cases
and controls
Nakatomi et al. (8) used a cerebellar reference region to calculate
non-displaceable binding potential: in order to compare patients
to controls, each individual study participant had the amount of
PET signal in brain regions of interest compared to the amount
in the cerebellum. In other words, each person’s cerebellum
was used as their own “baseline” comparator to decide if
other regions were showing evidence of radioligand uptake and
therefore microglial activation. This is a standard and widely-
accepted technique for PET study analyses, however it is not
a quantitative analysis technique: the “signal” reported in such
studies is a relative signal and not a quantitative one. This may
be particularly important for studies of a poorly-understood
condition like ME/CFS because we cannot be certain that the
cerebella of patients are not affected by their condition. For
example, cerebellar folia (gyri) contain several large blood vessels
which could contain different amounts of TSPO-expressing
circulating immune cells in patients vs. controls. Furthermore,
a recent report found increased HHV-6 infection of cerebellum
Purkinje cells in mood disorders vs. controls (52); such an
infection would be likely to increase TSPO expression and render
invalid the cerebellum as a “baseline” reference region. The
gold standard for quantitative data would be arterial line (A-
line) sampling for kinetic modeling of TSPO, which counters
other potential confounds as well. Throughout the scan, blood
samples are extracted from the radial artery at regular timepoints.
Sample analysis allows determination of the exact quantity of free
radioligand available to enter the brain, which is used to interpret
brain signal.
Radioligand access to brain is modified by general
metabolism, which can differ across cases and controls
One common theory of ME/CFS is that it is, at root, a disorder
of mitochondrial dysfunction and reduced metabolism [e.g.,
(53, 54)]. This creates a possible alternative explanation for
the increased PK11195 uptake demonstrated in Nakatomi et al.
(8). If metabolism is reduced in ME/CFS patients relative to
healthy controls, the radioligand would be metabolized more
slowly in patients. This means that more radioligand would
reach the brain for the simple reason that more remains
circulating from the original injection. This problem is made
worse by low-brain-penetrance radioligand such as PK11195
as opposed to second-generation radioligands such as PBR28.
The use of A-line sampling during scanning can provide an
ongoing measure of arterial radioligand availability, allowing any
individual differences in radiotracer metabolism to be taken into
account.
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
6
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
Activated peripheral immune cells bind radioligand and can
differ in quantity across cases and controls
While PBR28 has improved non-specific binding, the antigen
that it binds to can occur in non-target tissues and in blood.
Neurologists, neuroimmunologists, and neuroscientists use PET
radioligands that bind to TSPO because TSPO is produced
by activated microglia, the resident tissue macrophages of the
central nervous system. However, there are many different
kinds of tissue macrophages as well as macrophages in general
circulation, and these cells also produce TSPO. Many medical
conditions are associated with changes in TSPO expression
within different peripheral organs [e.g., (55–58)]. Use of an A-
line protects against the possibility that group differences in
circulating cells, molecules, and tissue macrophages (possibly due
to comorbid conditions) cause differences in peripheral TSPO
binding, thereby leaving less TSPO-binding radioligand capable
of reaching the brain.
Genetic Analysis of the TSPO Gene
A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the TSPO gene
causes differential radioligand binding
In vitro studies demonstrate that PK11195 and second-
generation TSPO-binding radioligands have different binding
sites on the TSPO protein (59). The gene for TSPO (Ala147Thr)
can have different polymorphisms, including the rs6971 SNP
which significantly explains the binding affinity of second-
generation TSPO PET radioligands (60, 61). The literature has
therefore described a trimodal binding affinity distribution in
terms of high-affinity binder (HAB), low-affinity binder (LAB),
and mixed affinity binder (MAB) subjects. Because they used
PK11195, which binds to a different site on TSPO, Nakatomi et al.
(8) did not need to report genetic analysis of the rs6971 SNP.
Practically speaking, it is unlikely that replication efforts would be
confounded due to the accidental recruitment of all HAB patients
and all LAB controls but this is a potential confound that must
be ruled out. Therefore, all efforts to replicate and expand upon
the pioneering work of Nakatomi et al. (8) should report genetic
analyses.
Control Group Selection and Discriminant Validity
An important goal for the ME/CFS field is to find objective
biomarkers for both symptom severity and diagnosis; TSPO as
measured by PET radioligand binding is one such potential
biomarker. Diagnostic biomarkers must show discriminant
validity, that is (assuming for a moment that ME/CFS is one
entity), they must be able to differentiate ME/CFS from other
medical conditions. Nakatomi et al. (8) reported increased
PK11195 signal in ME/CFS patients relative to healthy controls,
as opposed to mechanistically relevant disease conditions or
sedentary controls. An important consideration is that PET
studies have shown increased TSPO radioligand uptake in
many different neurological and psychiatric conditions, such
as autism, traumatic brain injury, major depression, bipolar
disorder, Parkinson’s disease, chronic pain, multiple sclerosis,
and schizophrenia [e.g., (62–66)]. This represents another reason
to include non-healthy control groups in studies of putative
ME/CFS biomarkers. Furthermore, there is some evidence from
a rodent model that translocator protein radioligand uptake may
be influenced by exercise (67), which is another argument for
the importance of including sedentary controls in studies of
ME/CFS. The use of sedentary-matched controls is an important
consideration in all studies for which it is possible, not just PET
scan studies.
MAGNETIC RESONANCE
SPECTROSCOPY (MRS) IN
NEUROINFLAMMATION
MRS Can Complement PET for Studying
Neuroinflammation
PET is a highly sensitive neuroimaging method, capable of
detecting very subtle biological changes that would be missed
by other imaging modalities. PET is also capable of quantifying
specific neuroinflammation-relevant biological targets such as
TSPO. However, there are also multiple downsides to this
method, some of which are not present with magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (MRS), a neuroimaging technique that uses
the MRI modality. Like PET, MRS is capable of measuring
the concentration of specific biochemicals. We discuss the
mechanisms of MRS here, followed by some of the relative
advantages and disadvantages of MRS vs. PET in the study of
neuroinflammation.
MRS can measure the relative concentrations of a variety
of biochemicals, often referred to in the MRS literature as
“metabolites.” This can be accomplished with a powerful magnet
because chemicals vary in the density of electrons surrounding
their nuclei. Therefore, a strong magnetic field “bounces” back
from each metabolite in a signature way, and this can be
measured by the MR computer: differences in the reflected
magnetic fields can be converted into a readable output spectrum.
MRS methods are currently capable of detecting a few dozen
metabolites with known spectral properties, and MRS researchers
choose from this list of metabolites when designing their analyses.
After an a priori decision to focus on a particular part of the
spectrum, metabolites are generally reported as a ratio (one
metabolite vs. another reference metabolite) as opposed to an
absolute concentration. These are among the reasons that MRS
is not nearly as sensitive or specific as quantitative measurement
of PET radioligand uptake, but there are also some ways in which
MRS has advantages over or can complement PET when they are
acquired together.
PET is somewhat invasive because PET radioligands must
be injected; patient discomfort can increase if an arterial line
is used for quantitative measurement. MRS, on the other hand,
requires neither an injection nor radiation. Largely because PET
radioligands have a short radioactivity half-life, they must be
made on-site or near imaging facilities. This is a limiting factor
especially for radioligands that are not yet approved for clinical
use, because most hospitals with PET scanners would not have
access to experimental radioligands. These are among the reasons
PET studies are generally more than twice as expensive as studies
using MRI-based methods such as MRS. Furthermore, due to the
radiation involved in PET procedures, only a limited number of
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
7
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
research scans per year are allowed for each participant, whereas
there is no such limitation for MRI or MRS scanning. Relatedly,
study recruitment can be more difficult when a protocol calls
for an injection of radioligand or an A-line. A small number
of facilities have access to dual MR-PET scanners, which can
combine modalities in a single scanning session (68, 69). This
can allow the discovery of MRS correlates to sensitive PET signal.
As an example relevant to ME/CFS, in a neuroinflammatory
process, one would expect both microglia and astrocytes to
become activated. TSPO is produced by activated microglia but
most evidence shows that it is not as strongly produced by
astrocytes. MRS is capable of measuring inflammation-associated
chemical changes beyond only microglial activation, including in
astrocytes. With a dual MR-PET scanner, signal from MRS and
TSPO-binding radioligand can be measured in the same patient
at the same time, helping to better clarify the relationship between
their respective neuroimaging signals.
Importance of a Priori Decisionmaking in MRS
Studies
Similarly to how different colors occupy a different place along
the visible light spectrum, MRS-detectable metabolites each
occupy a different place along the magnetic resonance spectrum.
However, unlike the human eye’s ability to detect the entire visible
light spectrum at once, MRS must be somewhat targeted to a
limited window within the whole spectrum. If study participants
were capable of spending unlimited time in a scanner, all
metabolites could theoretically be measured in the entire brain
but in reality, researchers must make thoughtful hypothesis-
driven decisions about what spectra to measure and in which
specific brain regions. If researchers are interested in testing the
hypothesis of neuroinflammation in ME/CFS, these decisions
should be based in the human neuroinflammation literature.
In some cases two metabolites almost overlap on the spectrum,
while in other cases a given metabolite is quite distant from
the others. Each of these scenarios presents a unique problem
that must be considered before data acquisition begins. Two
relatively “distant” metabolites like lactate and NAA cannot be
captured with good resolution in the same scan sequence. On
the other hand, glutamine, glutamate, and gamma-aminobutyric
acid (GABA) are so close together that they can appear as
a single peak in the MRS output unless that region of the
spectrum is deliberately targeted. If a researcher is interested in
understanding the relative contributions of glutamine, glutamate,
and GABA, she must make that decision before the experiment
begins and focus acquisition directly on the area of the spectrum
where these metabolites exist. Furthermore, a priori decisions
about which brain structure to measure are also important.
MRS spectra can be recorded from a “slice” of brain or from a
single voxel (the 3-dimensional MRI analog to a “pixel”), each
of which takes about 15–25 min to acquire. Slices cover more
anatomy but have the disadvantage of including several different
types of tissue within the same slice (i.e., white matter, gray
matter, blood vessels, and ventricles/cerebrospinal fluid). This is
a problem because the spectral signal represents an average over
the measured area, and different types of tissue have different
metabolite concentrations. Therefore, if multiple tissue types
are in the same region, interpretation becomes difficult. With
thoughtful placement, single voxel MRS has the ability to include
only one tissue type, but only from a very tiny section of anatomy
(e.g., 1mm3). The spectra recorded from slice or single voxel MRS
is usually reported as a ratio of one metabolite relative to another,
which can then be compared across different brain regions or in
patients vs. controls.
MRS Studies in ME/CFS
Several MRS-detectable metabolites are fairly well validated
proxies for inflammation, metabolism, and brain health, and
are therefore of particular potential interest for studying
neuroinflammation in ME/CFS. A few studies have used MRS
imaging in ME/CFS (see Table 1). These studies have looked
in a wide variety of brain regions, measuring a wide variety
of metabolites (70, 72–79, 81). Brief descriptions of measured
metabolites are listed here.
Choline is important in the maintenance of membrane health,
and therefore is a potential marker of BBB status (82). It
is considered a marker for neuroinflammation because of its
relationship to glial activation and BBB permeability (33).
Creatine is a critical regulator of energy homeostasis in the
brain [e.g., (83)]. It is believed to have static levels throughout
the brain of healthy individuals and is therefore often used as
the standard to which other metabolites are normalized (33).
Creatine and phosphocreatine are close enough on the spectrum
that they are usually pooled.
Gamma-amino butyric acid (GABA) is an inhibitory
neurotransmitter and has been linked to reduced cognitive ability
(84).
Glutamate is the primary excitatory amino acid in the nervous
system, and is produced by activated glial cells. Glutamate levels
vary with a number of neurological disorders (85).
Glutathione is involved in the oxidative and nitrosative
stress pathways as an antioxidant (86). Oxidative damage and
inflammation are generally associated with low glutathione.
Lactate is an end-product of oxidative metabolism and is
therefore a potentially interesting biomarker for a metabolism-
associated illness such as ME/CFS. Lactate levels in healthy brain
tissue are so low as to be almost undetectable by conventional
MRS at 1.5T or 3T magnet strength, but when measured in
ventricular cerebrospinal fluid, elevated lactate is associated with
neuroinflammation (33, 87–92).
Myo-inositol is a carbocyclic sugar residing largely in
astrocytes, and is upregulated during astrocyte activation (33).
This makes myo-inositol a potentially interesting complement
to PET scan studies that use TSPO-binding radioligand to
measure microglial activation. Myo-inositol also upregulates
during myelin decay (93).
N-acetyl
acetate
(NAA)
production
occurs
in
the
mitochondria. Because this metabolite is found in the cytoplasm
of neurons, it is considered a marker of neuronal density and
therefore often used as a rough marker of brain health (82).
However, NAA’s normal metabolic and neurochemical functions
remain incompletely understood and therefore its relationship
to different disease states is controversial and complicated (94).
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
8
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
TABLE 1 | Brief review of brain magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) studies in ME/CFS.
Study procedures
Metabolites (reference)
Specific notes
Study
Criteria used
Method
Brain region
Increased
Decreased
No change
Notes
Natelson et al.
2017 (70)
Fukuda et al.
1994 (71)
3T Slice
(280 ms)
Ventricles
Lactate
Significant between
ME/CFS and control
groups (not among FM
only, ME/CFS only, or
FM/ME/CFS groups)
Van der Schaaf
et al. 2017 (72)
Fukuda et al.
1994 (71)
3T Single
voxel
(3.03 ms)
Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex,
primary visual cortex (V1)
NAA (creatine ref)
Shungu et al.
2012 (73)
Fukuda et al.
1994 (71)
3T Single
voxel
(280 ms)
Occipital cortex, ventricles
Lactate
Glutathione
Significant between
ME/CFS and control
groups (not versus
MDD)
Murrough et al.
2010 (74)
Fukuda et al.
1994 (71)
3T Single
voxel,
Slice
(280 ms)
Anterior cingulate cortex,
occipital cortex (single voxel);
ventricles (slice)
Lactate
GABA,
glutamate/glutamine
Significant between
ME/CFS and control
groups (not versus
MDD)
Puri et al. 2009
(75)
Fukuda et al.
1994 (71)
3T Single
voxel
(144 ms)
Cerebral cortex
Glutathione
Criteria listed as
“Revised CDC Criteria”
Mathew et al.
2008 (76)
Fukuda et al.
1994 (71)
3T Slice
(280 ms)
Corpus callosum, ventricles
Lactate
Choline, creatine,
NAA
Chaudhuri et al.
2003 (77)
Fukuda et al.
1994 (71)
1.5T
Single
voxel
(1500/135 ms)
Left basal ganglia
Choline
(creatine ref)
NAA
(total
choline
ref)
Puri et al. 2002
(78)
Fukuda et al.
1994 (71)
1.5T
Single
voxel
(135 ms)
Left motor cortex, occipital
cortex
Choline
(creatine ref)
Creatine, NAA
Choline only significant
in occipital cortex
Brooks et al. 2000
(79)
Holmes et al.
1988 (80)
1.5T
Slice (30,
72,
144 ms)
Right hippocampus
Choline,
creatine,
NAA
(total
creatine
ref)
Myo-Inositol results not
reported; Choline and
creatine trend-level
decrease only
Tomoda et al.
2000 (81)
Holmes et al.
1988 (80)
1.5T
Single
voxel
(500/11ms,
4000/100ms)
Frontal white matter
Choline (total
creatine ref)
NAA (total creatine
and total choline
refs)
Summary of methods and results in the ME/CFS MRS literature. Method column lists MRI scanner magnet strength and MRS acquisition details (single voxel or slice; echo time). Brain region column indicates regions of interest; with
the exception of lactate which is only measured in ventricles, all metabolite changes occurred in all listed regions (unless otherwise noted). Metabolites columns list changes relative to controls, with reference metabolite(s) noted in
parentheses. FM, fibromyalgia; MDD, major depressive disorder; NAA, N-acetylacetate.
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
9
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
As evident in Table 1, there is not a clear and consistent
characterization of metabolite alterations in ME/CFS. This is not
because of failed replication attempts, but rather due to wide
a variety of experimental designs, diagnostic criteria selection,
subject populations (e.g., juvenile vs. adult), comparison control
groups (e.g., healthy, fibromyalgia, or anxiety disorder), brain
regions examined, and metabolites targeted.
Regarding MRS metabolite targeting: change in a given
metabolite is usually reported as a ratio, relative to a chosen
reference baseline. For meaningful interpretation, this requires
the reference metabolite (i.e., the ratio denominator) to be
stable. Due to its stability in healthy individuals, creatine
is the most commonly used ratio reference metabolite, and
it is the most commonly used ratio reference in studies of
ME/CFS (see Table 1). However, creatine may not be ideal
to use in an undercharacterized condition such as ME/CFS.
Use of creatine as a ratio reference in case control studies is
based on the assumption that its levels will not differ between
cases and controls (i.e., interpretation of numerator changes
relies upon confidence that the denominator is constant).
However, creatine alterations have been reported in autism (95),
a condition that may have some mechanistic (and therefore
metabolite) similarities with ME/CFS. Autism, like ME/CFS,
is a neuroinflammation-associated condition with large sex
differences in prevalence, and sensory overload symptoms.
Interestingly, an MRS study found sensory sensitivity symptoms
in autism to correlate with phosphocreatine abnormalities in
thalamus, a brain structure central to sensory filtering and
processing (96).
Thalamus is one example of a neuroinflammation-associated a
priori region of interest (19) that remains relatively understudied
in ME/CFS. The choices of brain regions listed in Table 1
generally do not appear to be based in neuroinflammation-
specific hypotheses. Given the fact that early MRS studies
of ME/CFS have largely been exploratory, this is somewhat
understandable. However, given the putative importance of
neuroinflammation in this condition, we believe that the ME/CFS
neuroimaging field could benefit from basing a priori targeting
of brain regions of interest in the newly emerging human
neuroinflammation literature recently meta-analyzed by Kraynak
et al. (19), and described above. One MRS study from the human
neuroinflammation literature could be a particularly important
guide for a priori decisions regarding target brain regions,
given the field’s focus on the possible importance of peripheral
proinflammatory cytokine signaling.
Lessons for MRS Studies of ME/CFS FROM a Study
of Inflammatory Challenge in Healthy Humans
One study reviewed by Kraynak et al. (19) was Haroon et al. (97),
which investigated the brain response, as measured by MRS, to
injection of peripheral proinflammatory cytokine. This type of
translational research seems particularly relevant to the ME/CFS
field, which has long pursued evidence of neuroinflammation
driven by circulating proinflammatory cytokines.
Validating a large animal literature [e.g., (98)], newer human
studies have demonstrated that exogenous proinflammatory
cytokines (e.g., injected IFN-α) or other immune challenges
(e.g., injected typhoid vaccine) can influence behavior and fMRI
brain activity in otherwise healthy humans [e.g., (99–102)].
These papers each reported increased BOLD (blood oxygen level-
dependent) response in basal ganglia and dACC after challenge.
However, the specific biological basis of these BOLD response
alterations was not known. A clarifying question would be if
brain metabolites, as measured by MRS, were also altered by
exogenous proinflammatory cytokine injection or peripheral
immune challenge.
IFN-α is frequently used as a treatment for hepatitis-C, and
has a fairly common side effect of inducing depressive episodes or
a possibly ME/CFS-relevant neurovegetative syndrome including
profound fatigue (103). In order to better understand the
mechanisms behind this cytokine-induced side effect, Haroon
et al. (97) used MRS to investigate the effect of IFN-α injection
on basal ganglia and dACC. They recruited 31 hepatitis-
C virus positive individuals, who were separated into two
groups: IFN-α injection vs. no injection. Both groups were
assessed at baseline and again after a month. Relative to the
control group, the injection group experienced increases in
subjective depression and fatigue, peripheral blood inflammatory
cytokines TNF and sTNFR2, and increased MRS signal for
glutamate in the dACC and the left basal ganglia. No statistically
significant correlations were found between brain MRS signal and
inflammatory cytokines circulating in blood. Unfortunately, the
authors did not report brainstem results and did not conduct
brainstem-specific analysis. Based on this study and the Kraynak
et al. (19) meta-analysis, basal ganglia and dACC are attractive
a priori regions of interest in brain scan studies interested in
using MRS scans to examine neuroinflammation-related changes
in ME/CFS patients vs. matched controls.
PERIPHERAL CYTOKINES IN ME/CFS
Brain scans are expensive and require many hours of analysis
before they are interpretable. Therefore, the discovery of a cheap,
easy-to-obtain biomarker from peripheral blood would be an
attractive alternative. One common blood measure in ME/CFS
studies are cytokines, a broad class of inflammation-related
signaling molecules comprising interferon (IFN), tumor necrosis
factors (TNF), chemokines, lymphokines, and, most commonly,
interleukins (IL). The ME/CFS field has pursued cytokine
research in the hopes of finding a blood test that is capable of
diagnosing or measuring symptom severity. Blundell et al. (104)
recently reviewed this cytokine literature and explained their
motivation: “Here we focus on circulating cytokines and we seek
to determine whether a pro-inflammatory circulating cytokine
profile exists in patients with CFS in comparison to controls
and how this cytokine profile differs from controls following
stimulation such as exercise.” Thus, a consistent and replicable
“cytokine profile” would be a diagnostic biomarker, and further,
would be evidence for an inflammatory process at the root of
ME/CFS pathophysiology. However, at the conclusion of their
literature review, the authors reported that they did not find a
consistent “cytokine profile” in ME/CFS. In this section, we will
make the argument that a lack of consistent “cytokine profile” is
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
10
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
an inevitable result of 1) the way that cytokines actually function
biologically and 2) the methods used to measure cytokines.
We end with recommendations that will hopefully allow more
meaningful comparisons in the future.
Biological Mechanisms Limit the Value of
Peripheral Blood Cytokines as a Stable
Biomarker
Cytokines are a communication factor released by activated
innate immune cells such as macrophages and mast cells in
the periphery, as well as glia and endothelial cells on the brain
side of the BBB. This cytokine signaling is a key component
of the sickness response (22, 98), which has symptoms that
overlap with key ME/CFS symptoms (15). Relatedly, cytokines
are a key component of neuroinflammation; one of the key ways
peripheral inflammation triggers neuroinflammation is when
the vagus nerve detects peripheral cytokines [e.g., (105, 106)].
Thus, cytokines are a class of molecule that, at first blush,
seem to hold promise as a potential peripheral biomarker for
neuroinflammation in ME/CFS. However, the way that cytokines
actually function mechanistically tarnishes some of this promise.
The core problem with looking for cytokines in peripheral
blood is that cytokines generally do not function as endocrine
signalers, but are rather normally autocrine and paracrine
signalers (see Box 1). In other words, cytokines do not function
by flowing through blood (where many studies hope to
measure them due to easy access) but rather by acting locally,
directly in the vicinity of infection or injury. Cytokines do not
need to function as circulating endocrine molecules to drive
subjective sickness symptoms because they can be detected by
the sensitive and highly branched afferent vagus nerve, which
communicates their presence to the brain via brainstem and
triggers neuroinflammation and sickness responses (15, 105,
106). A large neuroimmunology literature consistently concludes
that cytokines do not have to be detectable in the periphery in
order to have an effect on sickness-related symptoms. For example,
Campisi et al. (107) stated, “Elevated levels of circulating
cytokines and endotoxin are not necessary for the activation of
the sickness or corticosterone response.” Another fact of cytokine
biology that makes a stable, predictable blood profile difficult
is that cytokine-cytokine interactions are in constant dynamic
flux and are exquisitely complicated (108), and their levels can
be affected by a huge number of variables (reviewed below).
Furthermore, as relatively large, lipophobic, polypeptide protein
molecules, cytokines generally do not easily diffuse across an
intact BBB and thus, circulating levels do not accurately reflect
brain cytokine levels. Therefore, a peripheral cytokine profile may
not be meaningful in informing any existing central nervous system
cytokine profile. This general point is made by many papers in the
cytokine methods literature: there is limited ability for a putative
“cytokine profile” to inform underlying disease processes.
Despite the limited value of measuring blood cytokine levels in
understanding pathophysiology and neuroinflammation, blood
cytokine levels are used as a dependent variable in many
ME/CFS studies, probably due to ease of collection. The cytokine
methods literature emphasizes the need for optimization and
standardization of collection, storage, and assay methods, but
these factors have varied widely in ME/CFS cytokine studies. For
this reason, previous studies of peripheral cytokines in ME/CFS
cannot be meaningfully compared as Blundell et al. (104) set out
to do.
Cytokine Studies in ME/CFS as Reviewed
by Blundell et al. 2015 (104)
The limitations of ME/CFS cytokine studies can be seen in the
recent literature review by Blundell et al. (104), which aimed
to “determine if a pro-inflammatory circulating cytokine profile
exists in ME/CFS patients relative to controls.” Here we give a
brief overview of the Blundell et al. review, and then we detail the
assay methodology used in the ME/CFS cytokine literature, using
the studies from the Blundell et al. review and studies published
since then (see Table A1).
Blundell et al. (104) published a systematic review but
were not able to conduct a conventional meta-analysis due
to dissimilarities among reviewed studies. The authors began
with a quality assessment, finding that 14 out of 38 reviewed
studies were of poor quality due to failure to control for one or
more items on a list of confounding factors that can influence
cytokine levels: age, subject activity level, BMI, gender, menstrual
cycle stage, comorbid diseases, antidepressant use, or diurnal
variation. However, beyond those confounds, the study designs
differ so much that any comparison may not be meaningful (e.g.,
comparing sleeping patients to exercising patients).
Despite the lack of consistent study design, the authors
concluded that there is “little or no evidence to support the
hypothesis that proinflammatory circulating cytokines are raised
in CFS” (104). They reasoned that a failure to find consistent
results across studies could be due to heterogeneity in the
ME/CFS population, or due to the local rather than systemic
role of cytokines in ME/CFS. While these are reasonable
explanations, we would argue that the reviewed studies show
such inconsistencies in cytokine measurement methods that
consistent findings would be impossible even if they shared
comparable research designs.
BOX 1 |
“The measurement of circulating concentrations of cytokines represents the main limitation of the present studies on fatigue
and inflammation. Given that cytokines are autocrine and paracrine communication factors, their circulating levels
have little functional value and represent mostly spillover from the site of cytokine production and action. Alternative
strategies are available. These are based on in vitro measurements of cytokines produced by peripheral blood mononuclear cells
or specific immune cell populations in response to well-identified immune stimuli” Dantzer et al. (224). The Neuroimmune Basis of
Fatigue. Trends in Neuroscience, 37.
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
11
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
Blundell et al. (104) briefly noted the different assay types (i.e.,
bioassay vs. immunoassay) and sample matrices (i.e., serum vs.
plasma) across studies. However, beyond these two measurement
issues (and the short list of potential confounds mentioned
above), a large cytokine methods literature demonstrates a
staggering number of potential confounds in the measure of
cytokines, with potential problems arising at every step of the
way. Here, we describe the importance of additional factors in
the collection, handling and processing, storage, and assaying of
cytokines (detailed in Table A1).
Methodological Confounds That Must Be
Considered Before Comparing Cytokine
Studies
The biological mechanisms of cytokines make a consistent
and stable circulating profile unlikely, which limits the ability
of peripheral cytokines to provide insight into underlying
pathophysiology in ME/CFS. Therefore, a peripheral cytokine
profile is unlikely to be a feasible and useful biomarker.
In addition to these biological factors, there are many
methodological problems.
• Even if cytokines were meaningful peripheral biomarkers:
Blood cannot be compared to cerebrospinal fluid
• Even within blood sampling: Venous and arterial blood
samples cannot be compared
• Even if blood sampling methods were equal: Plasma, serum,
and PBMC sample matrices cannot be compared
• Even if ME/CFS researchers use a consistent sample matrix:
Bioassay, ELISA, and multiplex assay results cannot be
compared, even across kits of the same assay type
• Even if ME/CFS researchers standardize their methods: The
same exact lab, personnel, and protocol will likely get different
results from the same manufacturer’s kit
The relevant details of methods used in previous studies of
cytokines in ME/CFS are listed in Table A1. Importantly, this
table adds to the number of factors that were listed by Blundell
et al. (104) to clearly display the widespread variance of cytokine
methodology in the ME/CFS literature. The intention of this
section is to show that (1) currently-existing studies in the
ME/CFS cytokine literature cannot be meaningfully compared
due to differences in methods and (2) the ME/CFS field must
consider the mechanisms of cytokines and establish some
consistency in methods for any role of cytokines in ME/CFS to
be elucidated.
Blood Cannot Be Compared to Cerebrospinal Fluid
Choosing between blood and cerebrospinal fluid is the first point
of potential variability in attempts to identify a cytokine profile,
as the concentrations of various cytokines are not necessarily
equivalent across body fluid sample types. Most ME/CFS studies
have analyzed cytokines from peripheral blood samples (see
Table A1). Less frequently, others have analyzed cytokines from
cerebrospinal fluid (118, 127, 167, 168). In addition to many
examples of this phenomenon in the rodent literature [e.g.,
(169–171)], human studies have also demonstrated that cytokine
concentration in cerebrospinal fluid vs. blood can differ, with
some examples showing a positive correlation, some showing
lack of correlation, and some showing anticorrelation [e.g., (172–
176)]. Because the presence of cytokines usually reflects local
rather than systemic conditions (see Box 1), measuring cytokines
from the cerebrospinal fluid is a more direct representation of the
central nervous system environment than from peripheral blood.
Therefore, for studies interested in ME/CFS neuroinflammation,
cerebrospinal fluid sampling is more likely to be useful. However,
because cytokines are locally-acting paracrine and autocrine
factors, one cannot assume that a sample of cerebrospinal fluid
taken during a lumbar puncture spinal tap accurately reflects
the entirety of the central nervous system cerebrospinal fluid.
For example, Milligan et al. (169) reported IL-1 detection in
cerebrospinal fluid samples taken from the lumbosacral region
but not from the cervical region.
Venous and Arterial Blood Samples Cannot Be
Compared
Because they are produced and removed in local tissues,
cytokines differ in concentration between venous blood samples
(which have been filtered through organs and tissues) and
arterial blood samples [taken before that filtration; (177)].
Additionally, there is a difference between blood samples taken
from an indwelling cannula and a single needle stick. An
indwelling cannula causes an immune response that can alter
local cytokine production, and thus the resulting cytokine
measurements may reflect local artifact rather than systemic
change in concentrations (178). These are important factors to
consider when designing and interpreting cytokine studies.
Plasma, Serum, and PBMC Sample Matrices Cannot
Be Compared
When using peripheral blood samples, assays can be conducted
on different sample matrices: whole blood, plasma, peripheral
blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) isolate, or serum.
Whole blood can be:
• Collected into a tube with anticoagulants and then centrifuged.
The resulting layers allow separation of plasma and of PBMCs.
• Collected into a tube without any additives and then
centrifuged. After clotting factors are removed, the resulting
liquid is serum.
During the processes required to make plasma or serum from
blood, cells in the blood secrete inflammatory mediators that can
alter cytokine measurements. For example, plasma preparation
involves the removal of many proteins (e.g., fibrinogen),
including the direct removal of circulating cytokines, obviously
altering sample cytokine levels (179). During the coagulation
process necessary for serum isolation, platelets release vascular
endothelial growth factor, which can significantly alter cytokine
levels (180). These are among the reasons that any attempt to
compare cytokine levels across studies must take type of sample
matrix into account.
Many other variables during sample handling and processing
can affect cytokine levels in the sample matrix, including glass
vs. plastic vials, type of anticoagulant (e.g., heparin, citrate,
or EDTA), and centrifugation speed (180). Many studies in
the ME/CFS cytokine literature differ in these details, limiting
their comparability. Perhaps the most important methodological
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
12
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
details involve time and temperature. Because both rapid
degradation and de novo production of cytokines and other
proteins occur inside of sample tubes (177, 181), without fast and
careful processing, cytokine measurements may reflect processes
that happened inside of a sample tube and not what happened
in the bodies of study participants. While there is no way
to completely avoid these confounds (182), these processes
are greatly curtailed at −80◦C but not at −20◦C, meaning
handling speed and storage temperature are crucial. The studies
reviewed in Blundell et al. (104) ranged from immediate to
4 h between collection and plasma/serum separation, with many
not reporting timing. Furthermore, 25 out of 57 studies in
the ME/CFS cytokine literature either stored samples at −20◦C
or failed to report storage temperature at all (see Table A1).
Thus, methodological details such as tubes, anticoagulants,
centrifugation, and delays in processing are likely sources of
type 2 error in the ME/CFS cytokine literature and limit the
comparability across studies.
Bioassay, ELISA, and Multiplex Assay Results Cannot
Be Compared, Even Across Kits of the Same Assay
Type
After cytokine study samples have been collected, processed, and
stored, they must be assayed. The assay methods for cytokine
measurement have evolved over the past decades, and that
evolution explains some current priorities in ME/CFS research.
Bioassays are a form of assay that utilizes the biological activity
of its target analyte to measure its concentration, while both
enzyme-linked-immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and multiplex are
immunoassays that usually use tagged antibodies. ELISA is the
most commonly used method in ME/CFS (in the ME/CFS
literature, all cytokine studies before 2007 were performed
using bioassay or ELISA methods), but multiplex are becoming
more common. ELISA formats are singleplex, meaning they
characterize a single analyte (i.e., a single cytokine) while
newer multiplex assays can measure many at the same time.
Historically, ELISA is considered the gold standard because
each kit can optimize sensitivity and specificity for the single
specific cytokine being measured, and optimize for an expected
concentration range (177).
Multiplex
immunoassay
methods
are
a
more
recent
development, allowing for a larger number of cytokines
(i.e., from 2 to 100+) to be characterized in the same assay.
This is a seemingly-appealing option with the potential for
identifying a putative cytokine profile in a complex multivariable
disease, such as ME/CFS, that likely cannot be characterized
by a single cytokine or other analyte. The ME/CFS literature
has followed the advancing technology, generally shifting to
multiplex. However, multiplex sacrifices quality for quantity.
Because all cytokines are measured in the same multiplex kit well,
there is inevitably cross-reactivity among the antibodies, and
non-specificity with other non-cytokine proteins in the sample.
Each manufacturer could theoretically optimize a select number
of cytokines, but not all of them (e.g., the most sensitive and
specific antibody for a given cytokine would have to be replaced
by another antibody that is less cross-reactive). Companies
also continuously develop new, revamped kits that cannot
necessarily be compared to previous versions manufactured by
the same company. In other words, one manufacturer’s newest
multiplex kit model may be particularly good at measuring
IL-1β and bad at measuring TNF-α, while the inverse is true for
that manufacturer’s previous model, or another manufacturer’s
newest kit model. Furthermore, there can be a large range of
concentrations among various cytokines in a given sample, and
multiplex kits are unable to maximize sensitivity across that
range. Therefore, a given kit may be relatively good at measuring
high concentrations of IL-1β but lack sensitivity at lower levels.
These forms of variance are true across the scores of cytokines
each manufacturer advertises an ability to measure.
Currently, there are no standardized regulatory guidelines for
the quality and validity of multiplex assays (183). Concordance
between ELISA and multiplex varies widely and is especially
poor if plasma or serum is used (179, 184); these are the most
common sample types in ME/CFS, meaning ME/CFS studies
using ELISA cannot be meaningfully compared to those using
multiplex. Until multiplex methods are standardized, the best-
case (but impractical) scenario for a researcher interested in
20 specific cytokines would be using 20 separate ELISA kits as
opposed to using a 20-cytokine multiplex kit. However, absolute
cytokine concentrations would not be comparable across
studies if different researchers were to use kits from different
manufacturers (185, 186). This is exactly what has happened in
the ME/CFS literature, where many different kit manufacturers
have been used (see Table A1). Cross-manufacturer differences
in reported absolute values of cytokines occur because they are
completely dependent on the standard curves from each kit, and
studies have shown significant variation in standard curves across
different manufacturers (185, 186). Taking all variables into
account, it is unsurprising that many studies have found profound
differences in absolute cytokine levels across manufacturers and
kits, even when compared on the same sample (186–191). This
clearly limits the ability for different studies in the ME/CFS
cytokine literature to be compared.
Table A1 lists the various manufacturers and kit models
used in the ME/CFS cytokine literature. Blundell et al. (104)
correctly identified the importance of bioassay vs. immunoassay
for a single cytokine (TGF-β), but this distinction was not
made for any other cytokine. Furthermore, the distinction was
not made between ELISA and multiplex immunoassays, nor
was manufacturer or kit model taken into account for any
cytokine. These details introduce enough variance as to make
any attempted comparison of absolute cytokine concentrations
in the ME/CFS literature indecipherable. A seemingly reasonable
solution would be for all research groups to use the same assay
kit model from the same manufacturer. However, we believe
that peripheral cytokines are a fundamentally noisy variable and
that this fact must be taken into account when considering the
implications of any cytokine study.
The Same Exact Lab, Personnel, and Protocol Will
Likely Get Different Results From the Same
Manufacturer’s Kit
Assuming that there actually is a predictable, consistent
peripheral “cytokine profile” in a complex illness such as
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
13
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
ME/CFS, one potential solution to some of the above-described
issues is if a single lab were to use the exact same techniques,
equipment, and procedures across multiple studies, or if different
labs standardized these procedures. However, empirical evidence
shows that this is not the case. An experienced immunology lab,
led by a PI with decades of experience and over 100 publications,
conducted a within- and between-lab comparison study. Breen
et al. (188) compared the ability of four multiplex kits to detect
13 cytokines in human plasma and serum. The four kits were
tested on the same sample across six different laboratories and
across multiple lots of the same kit. Their results showed a large
amount of variance both within the same lab and across multiple
labs. While all 13 cytokines were detected by at least one kit,
none of the kits were able to detect all 13 cytokines. Additionally,
their results alarmingly indicate that each cytokine within each
multiplex kit had at least one significant lab and/or lot effect. In
FIGURE 2 | Breen et al. (188) conducted an experiment to test whether widely-used cytokine assays yield consistent results for 13 different cytokines. The same
laboratories ran four different multiplex cytokine assay kits more than once on the same serum samples. Black and white bars represent assay kit data from different
lots. Bars indicate percentage of serum samples (n = 36) with detectable levels of the indicated cytokine. A-F denote the six different labs in which the assays were
conducted. NI: cytokines not included in each kit. Figure reproduced from Breen et al. (188). Reproduced with permission from American Society for Microbiology.
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
14
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
other words, measuring the same sample twice with the same kit
in the same laboratory following the same strict protocol yielded
significant differences in absolute cytokine values (Figure 2).
However, the results of the comparison demonstrated that
while each of the kits varied in their sensitivity to detect
the absolute concentration of cytokines, the kits detected
similar cytokine patterns (relative concentrations, as opposed
to absolute concentration). These findings contribute to our
recommendation that cytokine assays are best suited to
measuring relative changes in cytokine concentrations in a
within-subject study design, rather than comparing absolute
concentrations across groups (described below).
Cytokines Can Be Highly Influenced by
Individual Behavior
A final note of warning against overinterpreting studies of
peripheral cytokines is that study participants can contribute
noise in myriad ways. Factors that can significantly affect
circulating cytokine levels within an individual include: time of
day (192–194), status of alcohol, nicotine, or other drug use (195–
201), quality and amount of sleep (202), acute and chronic stress
(203), acute and chronic fitness habits specific to type of exercise
(204–206), sex (207, 208), phase of menstrual cycle (209, 210),
age (211), chronic dietary patterns (212), and acute differences
immediately following a meal (213, 214). Thus, even eating a
spicy burrito with extra guacamole the day of sample collection
will result in a different cytokine profile than eating Indian food
or a slice of chocolate cake. A research participant adding sour
cream to the mashed potatoes they had for lunch will alter
their cytokine profile. Capsaicin, the main source of heat in hot
peppers, alters levels of IL-6, IL-10, TNFα, NOx, and MDA (215),
and the natural sugars in avocado alter gene expression of IL-1α,
IL-6, and IL-8 (216, 217). The bacteria used in dairy (i.e., the sour
cream on the mashed potatoes) increase IL-1β, TNFα, and IFNγ
(218, 219). Cumin, a spice commonly used in Indian cuisine,
reduces expression of inflammatory cytokines CXL-1 and−2,
TNFα, IL-1β, IL-6, and IL-18 (220, 221). Chocolate increases IL-
10 and IL-1β (222). Clearly, cytokines can be affected by a huge
number of variables unrelated to disease.
This type of variance, driven by individual behaviors,
could be reasonably well explained in a single study using a
within-subjects design. However, it can prevent comparability
across studies that use different designs. For example, a
study that collects blood samples during fasting cannot be
compared to studies of non-fasting individuals undergoing
exercise challenge. This type of variability in study design
is
widespread
in
the
ME/CFS
cytokine
literature
(see
Table A1).
Are Peripheral Circulating Cytokines
Useful at All?
Given how cytokines work biologically, we do not believe that
a consistent and stable proinflammatory circulating cytokine
profile exists in patients with ME/CFS in comparison to controls,
nor do we believe that finding such a profile is a realistic goal.
Cytokines do not normally function as circulating endocrine
molecules, and their presence in the periphery mostly represents
spillover from their actual site of action. This biology also limits
the value of any peripheral cytokine profile in elucidating the
underlying pathophysiology of ME/CFS or any other chronic
inflammatory condition. Cytokine measurement in the periphery
is beset by innumerable confounds: biological, methodological,
and behavioral. Detailed reporting of methods will help inform
comparability across studies, while study designs with within-
subjects measurements across multiple timepoints can help
explain some of the behavioral variance.
We would argue that the most effective way to use peripheral
cytokines in the characterization of ME/CFS patients is through
within-subject or mixed-model challenge study designs (e.g.,
measuring before and after an exercise challenge, with BMI-
and daily activity-matched controls). In such a study, cytokine
levels would be most meaningful as a complementary measure,
as opposed to a primary outcome measure. For example,
cerebrospinal fluid could be sampled at both timepoints in a
study measuring cognitive performance at baseline and during
post-exercise symptom provocation. In such an example, if
cognitive performance negatively correlates with a general
increase in proinflammatory cytokines, this is indirect evidence
that neuroinflammation is part of “brain fog.” This approach
moves the focus of cytokine studies away from whether a
distinct cytokine profile exists in ME/CFS patients, and toward
the use of cytokines for understanding the mechanisms of key
symptoms.
CONCLUSION
The above review focused on neuroinflammation and the
methods used to measure it. We argued for the importance
of anchoring methodological details in known biological
mechanisms and existing research literature.
The ME/CFS research field has been stuck in a somewhat
defensive posture, with a focus on demonstrating “this is a
real condition” by showing significant biological differences
between patients and controls. We believe this has led
to a situation in which too much is made of the specifics
reported by descriptive studies (such as the average “cytokine
profile” present in cases vs. controls at the moment of assay)
and not enough emphasis has been placed on potential
mechanisms
driving
symptoms.
The
field
is
ready
to
move past proving “this is a real condition” and to start
elucidating the specific relationship of ME/CFS symptoms to
neuroinflammation.
Moving past a defensive posture and toward understanding
pathophysiology requires careful focus on research methods.
In designing a study, a goal of ME/CFS researchers should be
to determine if a significant result can actually inform disease
mechanisms, or if it is simply a reportable difference between
patients and controls. For example, a PET study of TSPO binding
may find differences between patients and controls when using
a cerebellum reference, and this holds some value for the “this
is a real condition” argument. But because of the difficulty in
interpretation, such a study is less valuable for discerning actual
pathophysiology.
In consideration of neuroinflammation-related mechanisms
and research methods, the following recommendations emerge:
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
15
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
• The relationship of ME/CFS to neuroinflammation is a
fundamental question that needs to be directly addressed from
multiple research angles.
• The existing neuroinflammation basic science literature
should serve as a guide for choosing ROIs in ME/CFS brain
scan studies.
• ME/CFS
causes
changes
to
patients’
lives
that
could
accidentally
be
explaining
some
study
results
(i.e.,
sedentary
lifestyle
or
diet
can
affect
cytokines).
This
makes
careful
selection
of
control
groups
particularly
important.
• Cytokines seem attractive because they are easy to collect and
measure, but are a very noisy variable and the specific findings
of any given study should not be overinterpreted.
• Some methodological details are so fundamental (e.g.,
brainstem
registration,
or
selection
of
a
“baseline”
reference brain region or metabolite, or choosing between
blood
serum
and
cerebrospinal
fluid)
that
they
can
be completely responsible for a study’s results or lack
thereof.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All
authors
listed
have
made
a
substantial,
direct
and
intellectual contribution to the work, and approved it for
publication.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the generous donors that have
supported our work, especially Mona Eliassen and an anonymous
family. Special thanks for the support of Lisa Shin Ph.D.,
Darin Dougherty MD, and the Martinos Center for Biomedical
Imaging.
REFERENCES
1. Cohen J. Goodbye Chronic Fatigue Syndrome, Hello SEID. Science.
(2015)
Available
online
at:
http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2015/02/
goodbye-chronic-fatigue-syndrome-hello-seid
(Accessed
February
10,
2015).
2. Sigurdsson
B.
A
new
clinical
entity?
Lancet
(1956)
267:789–790.
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(56)91252-1
3. Boffey
P.
Fatigue
‘Virus’
Has
Experts
More
Baffled
and
Skeptical
Than Ever. New York, NY: New York Times (1987) Available online
at: www.nytimes.com/1987/07/28/science/fatigue-virus-has-experts-more-
baffled-and-skeptical-than-ever.html (accessed July 28, 1987).
4. Steinbrook R. 160 Victims at Lake Tahoe: Chronic Flu-Like Illness a
Medical Mystery Story. Los Angeles, CA: Los Angeles Times. (1986)
Available online at: http://articles.latimes.com/1986-06-07/news/mn-9956_
1_lake-tahoe (Accessed June 7, 1986).
5. Hyde B. The Clinical and Scientific Basis of ME/CFS. Ottawa, ON:
Nightingale Research Foundation (1992).
6. Mensah FKF, Bansal AS, Ford B, Cambridge G. Chronic fatigue syndrome
and the immune system: where are we now? Neurophysiol Clin. (2017)
47:131–8.
7. Cader S, O’Donovan DG, Shepherd C, Chaudhuri A. Neuropathology of
post-infectious chronic fatigue syndrome. J Neurol Sci. (2009) 285:S60–1.
doi: 10.1016/S0022-510X(09)70274-6
8. Nakatomi Y, Mizuno K, Ishii A, Wada Y, Tanaka M, Tazawa S, et al.
Neuroinflammation in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic
encephalomyelitis: an 11C-(R)-PK11195 PET study. J Nucl Med. (2014)
55:945–50. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.113.131045
9. Komaroff AL, Cho TA. Role of infection and neurologic dysfunction
in
chronic
fatigue
syndrome.
Semin
Neurol.
(2011)
31:325–37.
doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1287654
10. Blomberg J, Gottfries CG, Elfaitouri A, Rizwan M, Rosén A. Infection
elicited autoimmunity and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue
syndrome:
an
explanatory
model.
Front
Immunol.
(2018)
9:229.
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00229
11. Magnus P, Gunnes N, Tveito K, Bakken IJ, Ghaderi S, Stoltenberg C,
et al. chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis (CFS/ME)
is associated with pandemic influenza infection, but not with an
adjuvanted
pandemic
influenza
vaccine.
Vaccine
(2015)
33:6173–7.
doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.10.018
12. Underhill
RA.
Myalgic
encephalomyelitis,
chronic
fatigue
syndrome: an infectious disease. Med Hypotheses (2015) 85:765–73.
doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2015.10.011
13. Hickie I, Davenport T, Wakefield D, Vollmer-Conna U, Cameron B,
Vernon SD, et al. Infection outcomes study group. Post-infective and
chronic fatigue syndromes precipitated by viral and non-viral pathogens:
prospective cohort study. BMJ (2006) 333:575. doi: 10.1136/bmj.38933.58
5764.AE
14. Tsai SY, Yang TY, Chen HJ, Chen CS, Lin WM, Shen WC, et al.
Increased risk of chronic fatigue syndrome following herpes zoster: a
population-based study. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. (2014) 33:1653–9.
doi: 10.1007/s10096-014-2095-x
15. VanElzakker MB. Chronic fatigue syndrome from vagus nerve infection: a
psychoneuroimmunological hypothesis. Med Hypotheses (2013) 81:414–23.
doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2013.05.034
16. Herisson F, Frodermann V, Courties G, Rohde D, Sun Y, Vandoorne K,
et al. Direct vascular channels connect skull bone marrow and the brain
surface enabling myeloid cell migration. Nat Neurosci. (2018) 21:1209–17.
doi: 10.1038/s41593-018-0213-2
17. Goehler LE, Park SM, Opitz N, Lyte M, Gaykema RPA. Campylobacter
jejuni
infection
increases
anxiety-like
behavior
in
the
holeboard:
possible
anatomical
substrates
for
viscerosensory
modulation
of
exploratory
behavior.
Brain
Behav
Immun.
(2008)
22:354–66.
doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2007.08.009
18. Kennedy RH, Silver R. Neuroimmune Signaling: Cytokines and the Central
Nervous System. In: Volkow ND, Pfaff DW, editors. Neuroscience in the 21st
Century. New York, NY: Springer (2016). p. 601–41.
19. Kraynak
TE,
Marsland
AL,
Wager
TD,
Gianaros
PJ.
Functional
neuroanatomy of peripheral inflammatory physiology: a meta-analysis
of human neuroimaging studies. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. (2018) 94:76–92.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2018.07.013
20. McCusker RH, Kelley KW. Immune-neural connections: how the immune
system’s response to infectious agents influences behavior. J Exp Biol. (2013)
216: 84–98. doi: 10.1242/jeb.073411
21. Graeber
MB,
Li
W,
Rodriguez
ML.
Role
of
microglia
in
CNS
inflammation. FEBS Lett. (2011) 585:3798–805. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.
08.033
22. Kelley KW, Bluthé RM, Dantzer R, Zhou J, Shen W, Johnson RW, et al.
Cytokine-induced sickness behavior. Brain Behav Immun. (2003) 17 (Suppl
1): S112–8. doi: 10.1016/S0889-1591(02)00077-6
23. Prinz M, Priller J. Microglia and brain macrophages in the molecular
age: from origin to neuropsychiatric disease. Nat Rev Neurosci. (2014) 15:
300–12. doi: 10.1038/nrn3722
24. Sheng JG, Mrak RE, Griffin WS. Enlarged and phagocytic, but not primed,
interleukin-1 alpha-immunoreactive microglia increase with age in normal
human brain. Acta Neuropathol. (1998) 95:229–34.
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
16
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
25. Hart AD, Wyttenbach A, Perry VH, Teeling JL. Age related changes
in
microglial
phenotype
vary
between
cns
regions:
grey
versus
white
matter
differences.
Brain
Behav
Immun.
(2012)
26:754–65.
doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2011.11.006
26. Hendriksen E, van Bergeijk D, Oosting RS, Redegeld FA. Mast cells in
neuroinflammation and brain disorders. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. (2017)
79:119–33. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.05.001
27. Sclocco R, Beissner F, Bianciardi M, Polimeni J, Napadow V. Challenges
and opportunities for brainstem neuroimaging with ultrahigh field MRI.
Neuroimage (2017) 168:412–26. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.02.052
28. Tracey KJ. Reflex control of immunity. Nature Rev Immunol. (2009) 9:418–
28. doi: 10.1038/nri2566
29. Napadow V, Dhond R, Kennedy D, Hui KKS, Makris N. Automated
brainstem co-registration (ABC) for MRI. Neuroimage (2006) 32:1113–9.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.05.050
30. Choi J, Ifuku M, Noda M, Guilarte T. Translocator protein (18kDa)
(TSPO)/peripheral benzodiazepine receptor (PBR) specific ligands induce
microglia functions consistent with an activated state. Glia (2011) 59:219–30.
doi: 10.1002/glia.21091
31. Cagnin
A,
Kassiou
M,
Meikle
SR,
Banati
RB.
Positron
emission
tomography imaging of neuroinflammation. Neurotherapeutics (2007)
4:443–52. doi: 10.1016/j.nurt.2007.04.006
32. Jaremko M, Jaremko T, Jaipuria G, Becker S, Zweckstetter M. Structure of
the mammalian TSPO/PBR protein. Biochem Soc Trans. (2015) 43:566–71.
doi: 10.1042/BST20150029
33. Albrecht DS, Granziera C, Hooker JM, Loggia ML. In vivo imaging
of human neuroinflammation. ACS Chem Neurosci. (2016) 7:470–83.
doi: 10.1021/acschemneuro.6b00056
34. Sandiego CM, Gallezot J, Pittman B, Nabulsi N, Lim K, Lin S, et al.
Imaging robust microglial activation after lipopolysaccharide administration
in humans with PET. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. (2015) 112:12468–73.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1511003112
35. Beissner
F.
Functional
MRI
of
the
brainstem:
common
problems
and
their
solutions.
Clin
Neuroradiol.
(2015)
25:251–7.
doi: 10.1007/s00062-015-0404-0
36. Terem I, Ni W, Goubran M, Salmani Rahimi M, Zaharchuk G, Yeom K, et al.
Revealing sub-voxel motions of brain tissue using phase-based amplified
MRI (aMRI). Magn Reson Med. (2018) 80:2549–59. doi: 10.1002/mrm.27236
37. Brooks
JC,
Faull
OK,
Pattinson
KT,
Jenkinson
M.
Physiological
noise
in
brainstem
MRI.
Front
Human
Neurosci.
(2013)
7:623.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00623
38. Yendiki A, Koldewyn K, Kakunoori S, Kanwisher N, Fischl B. Spurious group
differences due to head motion in a diffusion MRI study. Neuroimage (2014)
88:79–90. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.11.027
39. Barnden LR, Kwiatek R, Crouch B, Burnet R, Del Fante P. Autonomic
correlations
with
MRI
are
abnormal
in
the
brainstem
vasomotor
centre in chronic fatigue syndrome. Neuroimage Clin. (2016) 11:530–7.
doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2016.03.017
40. Gerrity TR, Bates J, Bell DS, Chrousos G, Furst G, Hedrick T, et al. Chronic
fatigue syndrome: what role does the autonomic nervous system play in the
pathophysiology of this complex illness? Neuroimmunomodulation (2002)
10:134–41. doi: 10.1159/000067176
41. Van Cauwenbergh D, Nijs J, Kos D, Van Weijnen L, Struyf F, Meeus M.
Malfunctioning of the autonomic nervous system in patients with chronic
fatigue syndrome: a systematic literature review. Eur J Clin Invest. (2014)
44:516–26. doi: 10.1111/eci.12256
42. Beaumont A, Burton AR, Lemon J, Bennett BK, Lloyd A, Vollmer-
Conna U. Reduced cardiac vagal modulation impacts on cognitive
performance in chronic fatigue syndrome. PLoS ONE (2012) 7:e49518.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049518
43. Burton A, Rahman K, Kadota Y, Lloyd A, Vollmer-Conna U. Reduced
heart rate variability predicts poor sleep quality in a case-control
study of chronic fatigue syndrome. Exp Brain Res. (2010) 204:71–8.
doi: 10.1007/s00221-010-2296-1
44. Newton J, Okonkwo O, Sutcliffe K, Seth A, Shin J, Jones E. Symptoms of
autonomic dysfunction in chronic fatigue syndrome. QJM (2007) 100:519–
26. doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hcm057
45. Boneva R, Decker M, Maloney E, Lin JM, Jones J, Helgason H, et al.
Higher heart rate and reduced heart rate variability persist during sleep in
chronic fatigue syndrome: a population-based study. Auton Neurosci. (2007)
137:94–101. doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2007.08.002
46. He J, Hollingsworth K, Newton J, Blamire A. Cerebral vascular control is
associated with skeletal muscle pH in chronic fatigue syndrome patients both
at rest and during dynamic stimulation. Neuroimage Clin. (2013) 2:168–73.
doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2012.12.006
47. Costa DC, Tannock C, Brostoff J. Brainstem perfusion is impaired in chronic
fatigue syndrome. QJM (1995) 88:767–73.
48. Barnden LR, Crouch B, Kwiatek R, Burnet R, Mernone A, Chryssidis S,
et al. A brain MRI study of chronic fatigue syndrome: evidence of brainstem
dysfunction and altered homeostasis. NMR Biomed. (2011) 24:1302–12.
doi: 10.1002/nbm.1692
49. Barnden L, Zack S, Donald S, Marshall-Gradisnik S, Finegan K, Ireland
T, et al. Hyperintense sensorimotor T1 spin echo MRI is associated with
brainstem abnormality in chronic fatigue syndrome. Neuroimage Clin.
(2018) 20:102–9. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2018.07.011
50. Lockhart DA, Matthews B, Rahmoune JC, Hog H, Gee G, Earnshaw A, et al.
The peripheral benzodiazepine receptor ligand PK11195 binds with high
affinity to the acute phase reactant alpha1-acid glycoprotein: implications for
the use of the ligand as a CNS inflammatory marker. Nucl Med Biol. (2003)
30:199–206. doi: 10.1016/S0969-8051(02)00410-9
51. Herrera-Rivero M, Heneka M, Papadopoulos V. Translocator protein and
new targets for neuroinflammation. Clin Transl Imaging (2015) 3:391–402.
doi: 10.1007/s40336-015-0151-x
52. Prusty BK, Gulve N, Govind S, Krueger GRF, Feichtinger J, Larcombe RL,
et al. Active HHV-6 infection of cerebellar purkinje cells in mood disorders.
Front Microbiol. (2018) 9:1955. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01955
53. Naviaux RK, Naviaux JC, Li K, Bright AT, Alaynick WA, Wang L, et al.
Metabolic features of chronic fatigue syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
(2016) 113:E5472–80. doi: 10.1042/CS20080444
54. Tomas
C,
Newton
J.
Metabolic
abnormalities
in
chronic
fatigue
syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis: a mini-review. Biochem Soc Trans.
(2018) 46:547–53. doi: 10.1042/BST20170503
55. Narayan N, Owen DR, Mandhair H, Smyth E, Carlucci F, Saleem A, et al.
Translocator protein as an imaging marker of macrophage and stromal
activation in rheumatoid arthritis pannus. J Nucl Med. (2018) 59:1125–32.
doi: 10.2967/jnumed.117.202200
56. Hernstadt H, Wang S, Lim G, Mao J. Spinal translocator protein (TSPO)
modulates pain behavior in rats with CFA-induced monoarthritis. Brain Res.
(2009) 1286:42–52. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.06.043
57. Bird J, Izquierdo-Garcia D, Davies J, Rudd J, Probst K, Figg N, et al.
Evaluation of translocator protein quantification as a tool for characterising
macrophage burden in human carotid atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis (2010)
210:388–91. doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2009.11.047
58. Narayan N, Carlucci F, Taylor PC. An investigation of translocator protein
as a tissue and peripheral blood biomarker of inflammation in rheumatoid
arthritis. Arthritis Rheum. (2016). 68 (Suppl. 10).
59. Owen DR, Howell OW, Tang SP, Wells LA, Bennacef I, Bergstrom M,
et al. Two binding sites for [3H]PBR28 in human brain: implications for
TSPO PET imaging of neuroinflammation. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. (2010)
30:1608–18. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2010.63
60. Mizrahi R, Rusjan PM, Kennedy J, Pollock B, Mulsant B, Suridjan I, et al.
Translocator protein (18 kDa) polymorphism (rs6971) explains in-vivo brain
binding affinity of the PET radioligand [(18)F]-FEPPA. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab. (2012) 32:968–72. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2012.46
61. Zanotti-Fregonara P, Zhang Y, Jenko K, Gladding R, Zoghbi S, Fujita M, et al.
Synthesis and evaluation of translocator 18 kDa protein (TSPO) positron
emission tomography (PET) radioligands with low binding sensitivity to
human single nucleotide polymorphism rs6971. ACS Chem Neurosci. (2014)
5:963–71. doi: 10.1021/cn500138n
62. Loggia ML, Chonde DB, Akeju O, Arabasz G, Catana C, Edwards RR, et al.
Evidence for brain glial activation in chronic pain patients. Brain (2015)
138:604–15. doi: 10.1093/brain/awu377
63. Turkheimer F, Rizzo G, Bloomfield P, Howes O, Zanotti-Fregonara
P,
Bertoldo
A,
et
al.
The
methodology
of
TSPO
imaging
with
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
17
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
positron emission tomography. Biochem Soc Trans. (2015) 43:586–92.
doi: 10.1042/BST20150058
64. Jacobs AH, Tavitian B, INMiND consortium. Noninvasive molecular
imaging of neuroinflammation J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. (2012) 32:1393–
415. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2012.53
65. Politis
M,
Su
P,
Piccini
P.
Imaging
of
microglia
in
patients
with
neurodegenerative
disorders.
Front
Pharmacol.
(2012)
3:96.
doi: 10.3389/fphar.2012.00096
66. Notter T, Coughlin J, Sawa A, Meyer U. Reconceptualization of Translocator
protein as a biomarker of neuroinflammation in psychiatry. Mol Psychiatry
(2018) 23:36–47. doi: 10.1038/mp.2017.232
67. Real C, Doorduin J, Feltes PK, Garcia DV, de Paula Faria D, Britto
L, et al. Evaluation of exercise-induced modulation of glial activation
and dopaminergic damage in a rat model of parkinson’s disease using
[11C]PBR28 and [18F]FDOPA PET. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. (2017).
doi: 10.1177/0271678X17750351. [Epub ahead of print].
68. Catana C, Procissi D, Wu Y, Judenhofer MS, Qi J, Pichler BJ, et al.
Simultaneous in vivo positron emission tomography and magnetic
resonance imaging. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. (2008) 105:3705–10.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0711622105
69. Catana C, Guimaraes AR, Rosen BR. PET and MR imaging: the odd
couple or a match made in heaven? J Nucl Med. (2013) 54:815–24.
doi: 10.2967/jnumed.112.112771
70. Natelson BH, Vu D, Coplan JD, Mao X, Blate M, Kang G, et al.
Elevations of ventricular lactate levels occur in both chronic fatigue
syndrome and fibromyalgia. Fatigue Biomed Health Behav. (2017) 5:15–20.
doi: 10.1080/21641846.2017.1280114
71. Fukuda K, Straus SE, Hickie I, Sharpe MC, Dobbins JG, Komaroff
A.
The
chronic
fatigue
syndrome:
a
comprehensive
approach
to
its
definition
and
study.
Ann
Internal
Med.
(1994)
121:953–9.
doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-121-12-199412150-00009
72. Van der Schaaf ME, De Lange FP, Schmits IC, Geurts DEM, Roelofs K,
van der Meer JWM, et al. Prefrontal structure varies as a function of pain
symptoms in chronic fatigue syndrome. Biol Psychiatry (2017) 81:358–65.
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.07.016
73. Shungu DC, Weiduschat N, Murrough JW, Mao X, Pillemer S, Dyke
JP, et al. Increased ventricular lactate in chronic fatigue syndrome. III
relationships to cortical glutathione and clinical symptoms implicate
oxidative stress in disorder pathophysiology NMR Biomed. (2012) 25:1073–
87. doi: 10.1002/nbm.2772
74. Murrough JW, Mao X, Collins KA, Kelly C, Andrade G, Nestadt P, et al.
Increased ventricular lactate in chronic fatigue syndrome measured by 1H
MRS imaging at 3.0 T. II: comparison with major depressive disorder. NMR
Biomed. (2010) 23:643–50. doi: 10.1002/nbm.1512
75. Puri BK, Agour M, Gunatilake KDR, Fernando KAC, Gurusinghe
AI, Treasaden IH. An in vivo proton neurospectroscopy study of
cerebral oxidative stress in myalgic encephalomyelitis (Chronic Fatigue
Syndrome). Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. (2009) 81:303–5.
doi: 10.1016/j.plefa.2009.10.002
76. Mathew SJ, Mao X, Keegan KA, Levine SM, Smith ELP, Heier LA, et al.
Ventricular cerebrospinal fluid lactate is increased in chronic fatigue
syndrome compared with generalized anxiety disorder: an in vivo 3.0 T (1)H
MRS imaging study. NMR Biomed. (2008) 22:251–8. doi: 10.1002/nbm.1315
77. Chaudhuri
A,
Condon
BR,
Gow
JW,
Brennan
D,
Hadley
DM.
Proton
magnetic
resonance
spectroscopy
of
basal
ganglia
in
chronic
fatigue
syndrome.
Neuroreport
(2003)
14:225–8.
doi: 10.1097/01.wnr.0000054960.21656.64
78. Puri BK, Counsell SJ, Zaman R, Main J, Collins AG, Hajnal JV,
et al. Relative increase in choline in the occipital cortex in chronic
fatigue syndrome. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica (2002) 106:224–6.
doi: 10.1034/j.1600-0447.2002.01300.x
79. Brooks JC, Roberts N, Whitehouse G, Majeed T. Proton magnetic resonance
spectroscopy and morphometry of the hippocampus in chronic fatigue
syndrome. Br J Radiol. (2000) 73:1206–8. doi: 10.1259/bjr.73.875.11144799
80. Holmes GP, Kaplan JE, Gantz NM, Komaroff AL, Schonberger LB, Straus SE,
et al. Chronic fatigue syndrome: a working case definition. Ann Internal Med.
(1988) 108:387–9. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-108-3-387
81. Tomoda A, Miike T, Yamada E, Honda H, Moroi T, Ogawa M.
Chronic fatigue syndrome in childhood. Brain Dev. (2000) 22:60–4.
doi: 10.1016/S0387-7604(99)00111-4
82. Soares DP, Law M. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy of the brain: review
of metabolites and clinical applications. Clin Radiol. (2009) 64:12–21.
doi: 10.1016/j.crad.2008.07.002
83. Allen AD. Is RA27 3 rubella immunization a cause of chronic fatigue? Med
Hypoth. (1988) 27:217–20.
84. Stagg CJ, Bachtiar V, Johansen-Berg H. What are we measuring with GABA
magnetic resonance spectroscopy? Commun Integr Biol. (2011) 4:573–5.
doi: 10.4161/cib.16213
85. Ramadan S, Lin A, Stanwell P. Glutamate and glutamine: a review of
in vivo MRS in the human brain. NMR Biomed. (2013) 26:1630–46.
doi: 10.1002/nbm.3045
86. Lapidus KAB, Gabbay V, Mao X, Johnson A, Murrough JW, Mathew SJ,
et al. In vivo 1H MRS study of potential associations between glutathione,
oxidative stress and anhedonia in major depressive disorder. Neurosci Lett.
(2014) 569:74–9. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2014.03.056
87. Pérez-Cerdá F, Sánchez-Gómez MV, Matute C. The link of inflammation and
neurodegeneration in progressive multiple sclerosis. Multiple Scler Demyel
Disord. (2016) 1:1. doi: 10.1186/s40893-016-0012-0
88. Urrila AS, Hakkarainen A, Heikkinen S, Vuori K, Stenberg D, Häkkinen,
et al. Metabolic imaging of human cognition: an FMRI/1H-MRS study of
brain lactate response to silent word generation. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab.
(2003) 23:942–8. doi: 10.1097/01.wcb.0000080652.64357.1d
89. Kozi´
c D, Bjelan M, Boban J, Ostoji´
c J, Turkulov V, Todorovi´
c A, et al. A
prominent lactate peak as a potential key magnetic resonance spectroscopy
(MRS) feature of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML):
spectrum pattern observed in three patients. Bosnian J Bas Med Sci. (2017)
17:349–54. doi: 10.17305/bjbms.2017.2092
90. Chow SL. The significance of elevated CSF lactate. Arch Dis Childh. (2005)
90:1188–9. doi: 10.1136/adc.2005.075317
91. Nagae-Poetscher LM, Mcmahon M, Braverman N, Lawrie WT, Fatemi A,
Degaonkar M, et al. Metabolites in ventricular cerebrospinal fluid detected
by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging. J Magn Reson Imag.
(2004) 20:496–500. doi: 10.1002/jmri.20128
92. Kaddah RO, Khalil ME. MR spectroscopy evaluation of white matter signal
abnormalities of different non-neoplastic brain lesions. Egypt J Radiol Nucl
Med. (2016) 47:233–42. doi: 10.1016/j.ejrnm.2015.10.010
93. Häussinger D, Laubenberger J, vom Dahl S, Ernst T, Bayer S, Langer M,
et al. Proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy studies on human brain myo-
inositol in hypo-osmolarity and hepatic encephalopathy. Gastroenterology
(1994) 107:1475–80.
94. Moffett JR, Ross B, Arun P, Madhavarao CN, Namboodiri MAA. N-
acetylaspartate in the CNS: from neurodiagnostics to neurobiology. Prog
Neurobiol. (2007) 81:89–131. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2006.12.003
95. Carvalho Pereira A, Violante IR, Mouga S, Oliveira G, Castelo-Branco M.
Medial frontal lobe neurochemistry in autism spectrum disorder is marked
by reduced N-acetylaspartate and unchanged gamma-aminobutyric acid
and glutamate + glutamine levels. J Auti Dev Disord. (2018) 48:1467–82.
doi: 10.1007/s10803-017-3406-8
96. Hardan AY, Minshew NJ, Melhem NM, Srihari S, Jo B, Bansal R, et al. An
MRI, and proton spectroscopy study of the thalamus in children with autism.
Psychiatry Res. (2008) 163:97–105. doi: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2007.12.002
97. Haroon E, Woolwine BJ, Chen X, Pace TW, Parekh S, Spivey JR,
et al. IFN-α-induced cortical and subcortical glutamate changes assessed
by magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Neuropsychopharmacology (2014)
39:1777–85. doi: 10.1038/npp.2014.25
98. Dantzer
R,
Kelley
KW.
Twenty
years
of
research
on
cytokine-
induced sickness behavior. Brain BehavImmunity (2007) 21:153–60.
doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2006.09.006
99. Capuron L, Pagnoni G, Demetrashvili M, Woolwine BJ, Nemeroff CB,
Berns GS, et al. Anterior cingulate activation and error processing
during
interferon-alpha
treatment.
Biol
Psychiatry
(2005)
58:190–6.
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2005.03.033
100. Capuron L, Pagnoni G, Drake DF, Woolwine BJ, Spivey JR, Crowe RJ, et al.
Dopaminergic mechanisms of reduced basal ganglia responses to hedonic
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
18
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
reward during interferon alfa administration. Arch Gen Psychiatry (2012)
69:1044–53. doi: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2011.2094
101. Brydon L, Neil, A. NA, Walker C, Steptoe S, Critchley HD. Peripheral
inflammation is associated with altered substantia nigra activity and
psychomotor slowing in humans. Biol Psychiatry (2008) 63:1022–9.
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.12.007
102. Harrison NA, Brydon L, Walker C, Gray MA, Steptoe A, Dolan
RJ,
et
al.
Neural
origins
of
human
sickness
in
interoceptive
responses
to
inflammation.
Biol
Psychiatry
(2009)
66:415–22.
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.03.007
103. Capuron
L,
Miller
AH.
Cytokines
and
psychopathology:
lessons
from
interferon-alpha.
Biol
Psychiatry
(2004)
56:819–24.
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2004.02.009
104. Blundell S, Ray KK, Buckland M, and White PD. Chronic fatigue syndrome
and circulating cytokines: a systematic review. Brain Behav Immunity (2015)
50:186–95. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2015.07.004
105. Watkins LR, Maier SF, Goehler LE. Cytokine-to-brain communication: a
review & analysis of alternative mechanisms. Life Sciences (1995) 57:1011–26.
106. Goehler LE, Gaykema RP, Hansen MK, Anderson K, Maier SF, Watkins LR.
Vagal immune-to-brain communication: a visceral chemosensory pathway.
Auton Neurosci. (2000) 85:49–59. doi: 10.1016/S1566-0702(00)00219-8
107. Campisi J, Hansen MK, O’Connor JA, Biedenkapp JC, Watkins LR,
Maier SF, et al. Circulating cytokines and endotoxin are not necessarily
for the activation of the sickness or corticosterone response produced
by peripheral, E. coli challenge. J Appl Physiol. (2003) 95:1873–82.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00371.2003
108. Turrin NP, Plata-Salamán CR. Cytokine-cytokine interactions and the brain.
Brain Res Bull. (2000) 51:3–9. doi: 10.1016/S0361-9230(99)00203-8
109. Lynn M, Maclachlan L, Finkelmeyer A, Clark J, Locke L, Todryk,
et al. Reduction of glucocorticoid receptor function in chronic fatigue
syndrome. Med Inflamm. (2018) 2018:3972104. doi: 10.1155/2018/39
72104
110. Richardson AM, Lewis DP, Kita B, Ludlow H, Groome NP, Hedger MP,
et al. Weighting of orthostatic intolerance time measurements with standing
difficulty score stratifies ME/CFS symptom severity and analyte detection. J
Transl Med. (2018) 16:97. doi: 10.1186/s12967-018-1473-z
111. Oka T, Tanahashi T, Sudo N, Lkhagvasuren B, Yamada YU. Changes in
fatigue, autonomic functions, and blood biomarkers due to sitting isometric
yoga in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. Biopsychos Med. (2018) 12:3.
doi: 10.1186/s13030-018-0123-2
112. Moneghetti KJ, Skhiri M, Contrepois K, Kobayashi Y, Maecker H, Davis
M, et al. Value of circulating cytokine profiling during submaximal exercise
testing in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Sci Rep.
(2018) 8:2779. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-20941-w
113. Wyller VB, Nguyen CB, Ludviksen JA, Mollnes TE. Transforming Growth
Factor Beta (TGF-β) in adolescent chronic fatigue syndrome. J Transl Med.
(2017) 15:245. doi: 10.1186/s12967-017-1350-1
114. Roerink ME, Knoop H, Bronkhorst EM, Mouthaan HA, Hawinkels LJAC,
Joosten LAB, et al. Cytokine signatures in chronic fatigue syndrome patients:
a case control study and the effect of anakinra treatment. J Transl Med. (2017)
15:267. doi: 10.1186/s12967-017-1371-9
115. Milrad SF, Hall DL, Jutagir DR, Lattie EG, Czaja SJ, Perdomo DM, et al.
Depression, evening salivary cortisol and inflammation in chronic fatigue
syndrome: a psychoneuroendocrinological structural regression model. Int J
Psychophysiol. (2018) 131:124–30. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2017.09.009
116. Montoya JG, Holmes TH, Anderson JN, Maecker HT, Rosenberg-Hasson
Y, Valencia IA, et al. Cytokine signature associated with disease severity
in chronic fatigue syndrome patients. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. (2017)
114:E7150–8. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1710519114
117. Nagy-Szakal D, Williams BL, Mishra N, Che X, Lee B, Bateman L,
et al. Fecal metagenomic profiles in subgroups of patients with myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Microbiome (2017) 5:44.
doi: 10.1186/s40168-017-0261-y
118. Hornig M, Gottschalk CG, Eddy ML, Che X, Ukaigwe JE, Peterson
DL, et al. Immune network analysis of cerebrospinal fluid in myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome with atypical and classical
presentations. Transl Psychiatry (2017) 7:e1080. doi: 10.1038/tp.2017.44
119. Hanevik K, Kristoffersen E, Mørch K, Rye KP, Sørnes S, Svärd S, et al.
Giardia-specific cellular immune responses in post-giardiasis chronic fatigue
syndrome. BMC Immunol. (2017) 18:5. doi: 10.1186/s12865-017-0190-3
120. Lidbury BA, Kita B, Lewis DP, Hayward S, Ludlow H, Hedger MP, et al.
Activin B is a novel biomarker for chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic
encephalomyelitis (CFS/ME) diagnosis: a cross sectional study. J Transl Med.
(2017) 15:60. doi: 10.1186/s12967-017-1161-4
121. Milrad SF, Hall DL, Jutagir DR, Lattie EG, Ironson GH, Wohlgemuth
W, et al. Poor sleep quality is associated with greater circulating pro-
inflammatory cytokines and severity and frequency of chronic fatigue
syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis (CFS/ME) symptoms in women. J
Neuroimmunol. (2017) 303:43–50. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2016.12.008
122. Lunde S, Kristoffersen EK, Sapkota D, Risa K, Dahl O, Bruland O,
et al. Serum BAFF and APRIL Levels, T-lymphocyte subsets, and
immunoglobulins after B-cell depletion using the monoclonal anti-CD20
antibody rituximab in myalgic encephalopathy/chronic fatigue syndrome.
PLoS ONE (2016) 11:e0161226. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0161226
123. Huth TK, Staines D, Marshall-Gradisnik S. ERK1/2, MEK1/2 and
P38 downstream signalling molecules impaired in CD56 Dim CD16+
and CD56 Bright CD16 dim/- natural killer cells in chronic fatigue
syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis patients. J Transl Med. (2016) 14:97.
doi: 10.1186/s12967-016-0859-z
124. Russell L, Broderick G, Taylor R, Fernandes H, Harvey J, Barnes Z, et al.
Illness progression in chronic fatigue syndrome: a shifting immune baseline.
BMC Immunol. (2016) 17:3. doi: 10.1186/s12865-016-0142-3
125. Landi
A,
Broadhurst
D,
Vernon
SD,
Tyrrell
DLJ,
Houghton
M.
Reductions in circulating levels of IL-16, IL-7 and VEGF-A in myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Cytokine (2016) 78:27–36.
doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.11.018
126. Hardcastle SL, Brenu EW, Johnston S, Nguyen T, Huth T, Ramos S, et al.
Longitudinal analysis of immune abnormalities in varying severities of
chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis patients. J Trans Med.
(2015) 13:299. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0653-3
127. Peterson D, Brenu EW, Gottschalk G, Ramos S, Nguyen T, Staines D,
et al. Cytokines in the cerebrospinal fluids of patients with chronic fatigue
syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis. Mediat Inflamm. (2015) 2015:929720.
doi: 10.1155/2015/929720
128. Khaiboullina SF, DeMeirleir KL, Rawat S, Berk GS, Gaynor-Berk RS,
Mijatovic T, et al. Cytokine expression provides clues to the pathophysiology
of gulf war illness and myalgic encephalomyelitis. Cytokine (2015) 72:1–8.
doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2014.11.019
129. Wyller VB, Sørensen Ø, Sulheim D, Fagermoen E, Ueland T, Mollnes TE.
Plasma cytokine expression in adolescent chronic fatigue syndrome. Brain
Behav Immun. (2015) 46:80–6. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2014.12.025
130. Hornig M, Montoya JG, Klimas NG, Levine S, Felsenstein D, Bateman L,
et al. Distinct plasma immune signatures in ME/CFS are present early in the
course of illness. Sci. Adv. (2015) 1:1400121. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.1400121
131. Neu D, Mairesse O, Montana X, Gilson M, Corazza F, Lefevre N, et al.
Dimensions of pure chronic fatigue: psychophysical, cognitive and biological
correlates in the chronic fatigue syndrome. Eur J Appl Physiol. (2014)
114:1841–51. doi: 10.1007/s00421-014-2910-1
132. Garcia MN, Hause AM, Walker CM, Orange JS, Hasbun R, Murray
KO. Evaluation of prolonged fatigue post-West Nile virus infection and
association of fatigue with elevated antiviral and proinflammatory cytokines.
Viral Immunol. (2014) 27:327–33. doi: 10.1089/vim.2014.0035
133. Nakamura T, Schwander S, Donnelly R, Cook DB, Ortega F, Togo F, et al.
Exercise and sleep deprivation do not change cytokine expression levels
in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. Clin Vacc Immunol. (2013)
20:1736–42. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00527-13
134. Maes M, Ringel K, Kubera M, Anderson G, Morris G, Galecki P,
et al. In myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome, increased
autoimmune activity against 5-HT is associated with immuno-inflammatory
pathways and bacterial translocation. J Affect Disord. (2013) 150:223–30.
doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2013.03.029
135. Lattie EG, Antoni MH, Fletcher MA, Penedo F, Czaja S, Lopez
C,
et
al.
Stress
management
skills,
neuroimmune
processes
and
fatigue
levels
in
persons
with
chronic
fatigue
syndrome.
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
19
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
Brain
Behav
Immun.
(2012)
26:849–58.
doi:
10.1016/j.bbi.2012.
02.008
136. Smylie AL, Broderick G, Fernandes H, Razdan S, Barnes Z, Collado
F, et al. A comparison of sex-specific immune signatures in Gulf War
illness and chronic fatigue syndrome. BMC Immunol. (2013) 14:29.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2172-14-29
137. Broderick G, Katz BZ, Fernandes H, Fletcher MA, Klimas N, Smith FA, et al.
Cytokine expression profiles of immune imbalance in post-mononucleosis
chronic fatigue. J Transl Med. (2012) 10:191. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-10-191
138. Maes M, Twisk FNM, Kubera M, Ringel K. Evidence for inflammation and
activation of cell-mediated immunity in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic
fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS): increased interleukin-1, tumor necrosis factor-
α, PMN-elastase, lysozyme and neopterin. J Affect Disord. (2012) 136:933–9.
doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2011.09.004
139. Nas K, Cevik R, Batum S, Sarac AJ, Acar S, Kalkanli S. Immunologic
and psychosocial status in chronic fatigue syndrome. Bratisl Med J. (2011)
112:208–12.
140. White AT, Light AR, Hughen RW, Bateman L, Martins TB, Hill HR, et al.
Severity of symptom flare after moderate exercise is linked to cytokine
activity in chronic fatigue syndrome. Psychophysiology (2010) 47:615–24.
doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8986.2010.00978.x
141. Nakamura T, Schwander S, Donnelly R, Cook DB, Ortega F, Togo
F, et al. Cytokines across the night in chronic fatigue syndrome
with and without fibromyalgia. Clin Vacc Immunol. (2010) 17:582–7.
doi: 10.1128/CVI.00379-09
142. Nijs J, Van Oosterwijck J, Meeus M, Lambrecht L, Metzger K, Frémont
M, et al. Unravelling the nature of postexertional malaise in myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic
fatigue
syndrome:
the
role
of
elastase,
complement C4a and interleukin-1beta. J Intern Med. (2010) 267:418–35.
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2009.02178.x
143. Robinson M, Gray SR, Watson MS, Kennedy G, Hill A, Belch JJF, et al.
Plasma IL-6, its soluble receptors and F2-isoprostanes at rest and during
exercise in chronic fatigue syndrome. Scand J Med Sci Sports (2010) 20:282–
90. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0838.2009.00895.x
144. Scully P, McKernan DP, Keohane J, Groeger D, Shanahan F, Dinan TG,
et al. Plasma cytokine profiles in females with irritable bowel syndrome
and extra-intestinal co-morbidity. Am J Gastroenterol. (2010) 105:2235–43.
doi: 10.1038/ajg.2010.159
145. Fletcher MA, Rong Zeng X, Barnes Z, Levis S, Klimas NG. Plasma cytokines
in women with chronic fatigue syndrome. J Transl Med. (2009) 7:96.
doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-7-96
146. Jammes
Y,
Steinberg
JG,
Delliaux
S,
Brégeon
F.
Chronic
fatigue
syndrome combines increased exercise-induced oxidative stress and
reduced cytokine and Hsp responses. J Intern Med. (2009) 266:196–206.
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2009.02079.x
147. Nater UM, Youngblood LS, Jones JF, Unger ER, Miller AH, Reeves WC, et al.
Alterations in diurnal salivary cortisol rhythm in a population-based sample
of cases with chronic fatigue syndrome. Psychosom Med. (2008) 70:298–305.
doi: 10.1097/PSY.0b013e3181651025
148. Spence VA, Kennedy G, Belch JJF, Hill A, Khan F. Low-grade inflammation
and arterial wave reflection in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. Clin
Sci. (2008) 114:561–6. doi: 10.1042/CS20070274
149. Vollmer-Conna U, Cameron B, Hadzi-Pavlovic D, Singletary K, Davenport
T, Vernon S, et al. Postinfective fatigue syndrome is not associated with
altered cytokine production. Clin Infect Dis. (2007) 45:732–5. doi: 10.1086/
520990
150. Kennedy G, Spence V, Underwood C, Belch JJF. Increased neutrophil
apoptosis in chronic fatigue syndrome. J Clin Pathol. (2004) 57:891–3.
doi: 10.1136/jcp.2003.015511
151. White PD, Nye KE, Pinching
AJ, Yap TM, Power N, Vleck V,
et
al.
Immunological
changes
after
both
exercise
and
activity
in
chronic fatigue syndrome. J Chronic Fatigue Syndr. (2004) 12:51–66.
doi: 10.1300/J092v12n02_06
152. Visser J, Graffelman W, Blauw B, Haspels I, Lentjes E, de Kloet
ER, et al. LPS-induced IL-10 production in whole blood cultures
from chronic fatigue syndrome patients is increased but supersensitive
to inhibition by dexamethasone. J Neuroimmunol. (2001) 119:343–9.
doi: 10.1016/S0165-5728(01)00400-3
153. Cheney PR. Interleukin-2 and the chronic fatigue syndrome. Ann Intern
Med. (1989) 110:321. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-110-4-321_1
154. Cannon JG, Angel JB, Ball RW, Abad LW, Fagioli L, Komaroff AL. Acute
phase responses and cytokine secretion in chronic fatigue syndrome. J Clin
Immunol. (1999) 19:414–21. doi: 10.1023/A:1020558917955
155. Buchwald D, Wener MH, Pearlman T, Kith P. Markers of inflammation
and immune activation in chronic fatigue and chronic fatigue syndrome. J
Rheumatol. (1997) 24:372–6.
156. Bennett AL, Chao CC, Hu S, Buchwald D, Fagioli LR, Schur PH, et al.
Elevation of bioactive transforming growth factor-beta in serum from
patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. J. Clin. Immunol. (1997) 17:160–6.
157. MacDonald KL, Osterholm MT, LeDell KH, White KE, Schenck CH, Chao
CC, et al. A case-control study to assess possible triggers and cofactors in
chronic fatigue syndrome. Am J Med. (1996) 100:548–54.
158. Chao CC, Janoff EN, Hu SX, Thomas K, Gallagher M, Tsang M,
et al. Altered cytokine release in peripheral blood mononuclear cell
cultures from patients with the chronic fatigue syndrome. Cytokine (1991)
3:292–8.
159. Swanink CM, Vercoulen JH, Galama JM, Roos MT, Meyaard L, van der Ven-
Jongekrijg J, et al. Lymphocyte subsets, apoptosis, and cytokines in patients
with chronic fatigue syndrome. J. Infect. Dis. (1996) 173:460–3.
160. Drenth JP, Van Uum SH, Van Deuren M, Pesman GJ, Van der Ven-Jongekrijg
J, Van der Meer JW. Endurance run increases circulating IL-6 and IL-1ra but
downregulates ex vivo TNF-Alpha and IL-1 beta production. J Appl Physiol.
(1995) 79:1497–503. doi: 10.1152/jappl.1995.79.5.1497
161. Peterson PK, Sirr SA, Grammith FC, Schenck CH, Pheley AM, Hu S,
et al. Effects of mild exercise on cytokines and cerebral blood flow
in chronic fatigue syndrome patients. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol. (1994)
1:222–6.
162. Patarca R, Klimas NG, Lugtendorf S, Antoni M, Fletcher MA. Dysregulated
expression of
tumor necrosis
factor in chronic
fatigue syndrome:
interrelations with cellular sources and patterns of soluble immune
mediator expression. Clin Infect Dis. (1994) 18 (Suppl. 1): S147–53.
doi: 10.1093/clinids/18.Supplement_1.S147
163. Lloyd A, Gandevia S, Brockman A, Hales J, Wakefield D. Cytokine
production and fatigue in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome and
healthy control subjects in response to exercise. Clin. Infect. Dis. (1994) 18
(Suppl. 1):S142–46. doi: 10.1093/clinids/18.Supplement_1.S142
164. Linde A, Andersson B, Svenson SB, Ahrne H, Carlsson M, Forsberg P,
et al. Serum levels of lymphokines and soluble cellular receptors in primary
epstein-barr virus infection and in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. J
Infect Dis. (1992) 165:994–1000. doi: 10.1093/infdis/165.6.994
165. Straus SE, Dale JK, Peter JB, Dinarello CA. Circulating lymphokine
levels in the chronic fatigue syndrome. J Infect Dis. (1989) 160:1085–6.
doi: 10.1093/infdis/160.6.1085
166. Stringer EA, Baker KS, Carroll IR, Montoya JG, Chu L, Maecker HT, et al.
Daily cytokine fluctuations, driven by leptin, are associated with fatigue
severity in chronic fatigue syndrome: evidence of inflammatory pathology.
J Transl Med. (2013)11:93. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-11-93
167. Lloyd A, Hickie I, Brockman A, Dwyer J, Wakefield D. Cytokine levels in
serum and cerebrospinal fluid in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome and
control subjects. J. Infect. Dis. (1991) 164:1023–4.
168. Natelson BH, Weaver SA, Tseng C, Ottenweller JE. Spinal fluid abnormalities
in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol. (2005)
12:52–5. doi: 10.1128/CDLI.12.1.52-55.2005
169. Milligan ED, O’Connor KA, Nguyen KT, Armstrong CB, Twining C,
Gaykema RP, et al. Intrathecal HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein Gp120
induces enhanced pain states mediated by spinal cord proinflammatory
cytokines. J Neurosci. (2001) 21:2808–19. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.21-08-
02808.2001
170. Conn CA, McClellan JL, Maassab HF, Smitka CW, Majde JA, Kluger MJ.
Cytokines and the acute phase response to influenza virus in mice. Am J
Physiol. (1995) 268:R78–84. doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.1995.268.1.R78
171. Chatzipanteli K, Vitarbo E, Alonso OF, Bramlett HM, Dietrich WD.
Temporal profile of cerebrospinal fluid, plasma, and brain interleukin-6
after normothermic fluid-percussion brain injury: effect of secondary
hypoxia.
Ther
Hypothermia
Temperature
Manag.
(2012)
2:167–75.
doi: 10.1089/ther.2012.0016
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
20
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
172. Backonja MM, Coe CL, Muller DA, Schell K. Altered cytokine levels in the
blood and cerebrospinal fluid of chronic pain patients. J Neuroimmunol.
(2008) 195:157–63. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2008.01.005
173. Zimmerman AW, Jyonouchi H, Comi AM, Connors SL, Milstien S, Varsou
A, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid and serum markers of inflammation in autism.
Pediatr Neurol. (2005) 33:195–201. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2005.03.014
174. Hestad KA, Engedal K, Whist JE, Aukrust P, Farup PG, Mollnes TE,
et al. Patients with depression display cytokine levels in serum and
cerebrospinal fluid similar to patients with diffuse neurological symptoms
without a defined diagnosis. Neuropsych Dis Treat. (2016) 12:817–22.
doi: 10.2147/NDT.S101925
175. Bromander S, Anckarsäter R, Kristiansson M, Blennow K, Zetterberg
H, Anckarsäter H, et al. Changes in serum and cerebrospinal fluid
cytokines in response to non-neurological surgery: an observational study.
J Neuroinflamm. (2012) 9:242. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-9-242
176. Šumanovi´
c-Glamuzina D, Culo F, Culo MI, Konjevoda P, Marjana Jerkovi´
c-
RaguŽ. A comparison of blood and cerebrospinal fluid cytokines (IL-1β,
IL-6, IL-18, TNF-α) in neonates with perinatal hypoxia. Bosn J Basic Med
Sci. (2017) 17:203–10. doi: 10.17305/bjbms.2017.1381
177. Zhou X, Fragala MS, McElhaney JE, Kuchel GA. Conceptual and
methodological issues relevant to cytokine and inflammatory marker
measurements in clinical research. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care (2010)
13:541–7. doi: 10.1097/MCO.0b013e32833cf3bc
178. Seiler W, Müller H, Hiemke C. Interleukin-6 in plasma collected with an
indwelling cannula reflects local, not systemic, concentrations. Clin Chem.
(1994) 40:1778–9.
179. Leng SX, McElhaney JE, Walston JE, Xie D, Fedarko NS, Kuchel GA. ELISA
and multiplex technologies for cytokine measurement in inflammation and
aging research. J Gerontol. (2008) 63:879–84. doi: 10.1093/gerona/63.8.879
180. Sapan CV, Lundblad RL. Considerations regarding the use of blood samples
in the proteomic identification of biomarkers for cancer diagnosis. Cancer
Genomics (2006) 3:227–30.
181. Banks
RE.
Measurement
of
cytokines
in
clinical
samples
using
immunoassays: problems and pitfalls. Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci. (2000)
37:131–82. doi: 10.1080/10408360091174187
182. Tighe PJ, Ryder RR, Todd I, Fairclough LC. ELISA in the multiplex
era:
potentials
and
pitfalls.
Prot
Clin
Appl.
(2015)
9:406–22.
doi: 10.1002/prca.201400130
183. Boja ES, Jortani SA, Ritchie J, Hoofnagle AN, Težak Z, Mansfield E, et al. The
journey to regulation of protein-based multiplex quantitative assays. Clin
Chem. (2011) 57:560–7. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2010.156034
184. Prabhakar U, Eirikis E, Reddy M, Silvestro E, Spitz S, Pendley C,
et al. Validation and comparative analysis of a multiplexed assay for the
simultaneous quantitative measurement of Th1/Th2 cytokines in human
serum and human peripheral blood mononuclear cell culture supernatants.
J Immunol Methods (2004) 291:27–38. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2004.04.018
185. Nechansky A, Grunt S, Roitt IM, Kircheis R. Comparison of the calibration
standards of three commercially available multiplex kits for human cytokine
measurement to WHO standards reveals striking differences. Biomarker
Insights (2008) 3:227–35.
186. Richens JL, Urbanowicz RA, Metcalf R, Corne J, O’Shea P, Fairclough L.
Quantitative validation and comparison of multiplex cytokine kits. J Biomol
Screen. (2010) 15:562–8. doi: 10.1177/1087057110362099
187. Khan SS, Smith MS, Reda D, Suffredini AF, McCoy JP. Multiplex bead
array assays for detection of soluble cytokines: comparisons of sensitivity
and quantitative values among kits from multiple manufacturers. Cytometry
(2004) 61B:35–9. doi: 10.1002/cyto.b.20021
188. Breen EC, Reynolds SM, Cox C, Jacobson LP, Magpantay L, Mulder CB, et al.
Multisite comparison of high-sensitivity multiplex cytokine assays. Clin Vacc
Immunol. (2011) 18:1229–42. doi: 10.1128/CVI.05032-11
189. Siawaya JF, Djoba TR, Babb C, Black G, Golakai HJ, Stanley K, et al. An
evaluation of commercial fluorescent bead-based luminex cytokine assays.
PLOS ONE (2008) 3:e2535. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002535
190. Chowdhury F, Williams A, Johnson P. Validation and comparison
of
two
multiplex
technologies,
luminex
and
mesoscale
discovery,
for human cytokine profiling. J Immunol Methods (2009) 340:55–64.
doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2008.10.002
191. Liu MY, Xydakis AM, Hoogeveen RC, Jones PH, Smith EO, Nelson KW,
et al. Multiplexed analysis of biomarkers related to obesity and the metabolic
syndrome in human plasma, using the Luminex-100 system. Clin Chem.
(2005) 51:1102–9. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2004.047084
192. Altara R, Manca M, Hermans KCM, Daskalopoulos EP, Brunner-
La Rocca HP, Hermans RJJ, et al. Diurnal rhythms of serum and
plasma cytokine profiles in healthy elderly individuals assessed using
membrane based multiplexed immunoassay. J Transl Med. (2015) 13:129.
doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0477-1
193. Haack M, Pollmächer T, Mullington JM. Diurnal and sleep-wake dependent
variations of soluble TNF- and IL-2 receptors in healthy volunteers. Brain
Behav Immunity (2004) 18:361–7. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2003.12.009
194. Scheff JD, Calvano SE, Lowry SF, Androulakis IP. Modeling the influence of
circadian rhythms on the acute inflammatory response. J Theor Biol. (2010)
264:1068–76. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2010.03.026
195. Neupane SP, Skulberg A, Skulberg KR, Aass HCD, Bramness JG. Cytokine
changes following acute ethanol intoxication in healthy men: a crossover
study. Med Inflamm. (2016) 2016:3758590. doi: 10.1155/2016/3758590
196. Achur RN, Freeman WM, Vrana KE. Circulating cytokines as biomarkers
of alcohol abuse and alcoholism. J Neuroimm Pharmacol. (2010) 5:83–91.
doi: 10.1007/s11481-009-9185-z
197. Madretsma S, Wolters LM, van Dijk JP, Tak CJ, Feyerabend C, Wilson JH,
et al. In-vivo effect of nicotine on cytokine production by human non-
adherent mononuclear cells. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. (1996) 8:1017–20.
198. Bao J, Liu Y, Yang J, Gao Q, Shi SQ, Garfield RE, et al. Nicotine inhibits
LPS-induced cytokine production and leukocyte infiltration in rat placenta.
Placenta (2016) 39:77–83. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2016.01.015
199. Revathikumar P, Bergqvist F, Gopalakrishnan S, Korotkova M, Jakobsson
P, Lampa J, et al. Immunomodulatory effects of nicotine on interleukin
1β
activated
human
astrocytes
and
the
role
of
cyclooxygenase
2
in
the
underlying
mechanism.
J
Neuroinflamm.
(2016)
13:256.
doi: 10.1186/s12974-016-0725-1
200. Nagarkatti P, Pandey R, Rieder SA, Hegde VL, Nagarkatti M. Cannabinoids
as novel anti-inflammatory drugs. Future Med Chem. (2009) 1:1333–49.
doi: 10.4155/fmc.09.93
201. Endres S, Whitaker RE, Ghorbani R, Meydani SN, Dinarello CA. Oral
aspirin and ibuprofen increase cytokine-induced synthesis of IL-1 beta
and of tumour necrosis factor-alpha ex vivo. Immunology (1996) 87:
264–70.
202. Vgontzas AN, Zoumakis E, Bixler EO, Lin HM, Follett H, Kales A, et al.
Adverse effects of modest sleep restriction on sleepiness, performance,
and inflammatory cytokines. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. (2004) 89:2119–26.
doi: 10.1210/jc.2003-031562
203. Kiecolt-Glaser JK, Preacher KJ, MacCallum RC, Atkinson C, Malarkey
WB,
Glaser
R.
Chronic
stress
and
age-related
increases
in
the
proinflammatory cytokine IL-6. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. (2003) 100:9090–5.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1531903100
204. Ostrowski K, Rohde T, Asp S, Schjerling P, Pedersen BK. Pro- and Anti-
inflammatory cytokine balance in strenuous exercise in humans. J Physiol.
(1999) 515(Pt 1):287–91.
205. Ostrowski K, Rohde T, Zacho M, Asp S, and Pedersen BK. Evidence
that interleukin-6 is produced in human skeletal muscle during prolonged
running. J Physiol. (1998) 508(Pt 3):949–53.
206. Steensberg A, Keller C, Starkie RL, Osada T, Febbraio MA, Pedersen
BK. IL-6 and TNF-alpha expression in, and release from, contracting
human skeletal muscle. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. (2002) 283:E1272–8.
doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00255.2002
207. Aulock SV, Deininger S, Draing C, Gueinzius K, Dehus O, Hermann K.
Gender difference in cytokine secretion on immune stimulation with LPS
and LTA. J Interf Cytok Res. (2006) 26:887–92. doi: 10.1089/jir.2006.26.887
208. Pellegrini P, Contasta I, Del Beato T, Ciccone F, Berghella AM. Gender-
specific cytokine pathways, targets, and biomarkers for the switch from
health to adenoma and colorectal cancer. Res Art. (2011) 2011:819724.
doi: 10.1155/2011/819724
209. Khosravisamani M, Maliji G, Seyfi S, Azadmehr A, Abd Nikfarjam B, Madadi
S, et al. Effect of the menstrual cycle on inflammatory cytokines in the
periodontium. J Period Res. (2014) 49:770–6. doi: 10.1111/jre.12161
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
21
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
210. Hayashida H, Shimura M, Sugama K, Kazue K, Suzuki K. Effects of the
menstrual cycle and acute aerobic exercise on cytokine levels. J Sports Med
Doping Stud. (2015) 6:1–5. doi: 10.4172/2161-0673.1000173
211. Barrientos RM, Frank MG, Watkins LR, Maier SF. Memory impairments
in healthy aging: role of aging-induced microglial sensitization. Aging Dis.
(2010) 1:212–31.
212. Dai G, McMurray DN. Altered cytokine production and impaired
antimycobacterial immunity in protein-malnourished guinea pigs. Infect
Immun. (1998) 66:3562–8.
213. Grimble RF, Tappia PS. Modulation of pro-inflammatory cytokine biology
by unsaturated fatty acids. Zeitschrift Fur Ernahrungswissenschaft (1998)
37(Suppl 1):57–65.
214. Payette C, Blackburn P, Lamarche B, Tremblay A, Bergeron J, Lemieux I,
et al. Sex differences in postprandial plasma tumor necrosis factor-alpha,
interleukin-6, and C-reactive protein concentrations. Metabolism (2009)
58:1593–601. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2009.05.011
215. Demirbilek S, Ozcan Ersoy M, Demirbilek S, Karaman A, Gurbuz
N,
Bayraktar
N,
et
al.
Small-dose
capsaicin
reduces
systemic
inflammatory responses in septic rats. Anesth Analg. (2004) 1501–7.
doi: 10.1213/01.ANE.0000132975.02854.65
216. Donnarumma G, Buommino E, Baroni A, Auricchio L, De Filippis
A, Cozza V, et al. Effects of AV119, a natural sugar from avocado,
on Malassezia furfur invasiveness and on the expression of HBD-2
and cytokines in human keratinocytes. Exp Dermatol. (2007) 16:912–9.
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2007.00613.x
217. Henrotin YE, Labasse AH, Jaspar JM, De Groote DD, Zheng SX, Guillou
GB, et al. Effects of three avocado/soybean unsaponifiable mixtures on
metalloproteinases, cytokines and prostaglandin E2 production by human
articular chondrocytes. Clin Rheumatol. (1998) 17:31–9.
218. Solis
Pereyra
B,
Lemonnier
D.
Induction
of
human
cytokines
by
bacteria
used
in
dairy
foods.
Nutr
Res.
(1993)
13:1127–40.
doi: 10.1016/S0271-5317(05)80737-7
219. Manning PJ, Sutherland WHF, McGrath MM, de Jong SA, Walker
RJ,
Williams
MJA.
Postprandial
cytokine
concentrations
and
meal
composition in obese and lean women. Obesity (2008) 16:2046–52.
doi: 10.1038/oby.2008.334
220. Bachmeier BE, Mohrenz IV, Mirisola V, Schleicher E, Romeo F, Höhneke,
et al. Curcumin downregulates the inflammatory cytokines CXCL1
and−2 in breast cancer cells via NFκB. Carcinogenesis (2008) 29:779–89.
doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgm248
221. Silva LS, da, Catalão CHR, Felippotti TT, de Oliveira-Pelegrin GR,
Petenusci S, de Freitas LAP, et al. Curcumin suppresses inflammatory
cytokines and heat shock protein 70 release and improves metabolic
parameters during experimental sepsis. Pharmaceut Biol. (2017) 55:269–276.
doi: 10.1080/13880209.2016.1260598
222. Netea SA, Janssen SA, Jaeger M, Jansen T, Jacobs L, Miller-Tomaszewska
G, et al. Chocolate consumption modulates cytokine production in healthy
individuals. Cytokine (2013) 62:40–3. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2013.02.003
223. Carruthers BM, Jain AK, De Meirleir KL, Peterson DL, Klimas NG, Lerner
AM, et al. Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. J Chron
Fatig Syndr. (2003) 11:7–115. doi: 10.1300/J092v11n01_02
224. Dantzer
R,
Heijnen
CJ,
Kavelaars
A,
Laye
S,
Capuron
L.
The
neuroimmune
basis
of
fatigue.
Trends
Neuroscie.
(2014)
37:39–46.
doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2013.10.003
225. Carruthers BM, van de Sande MI, De Meirleir KL, Klimas NG, Broderick G,
Mitchell T, et al. Myalgic encephalomyelitis: international consensus criteria.
J Internal Med. (2011) 270:327–38. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2011.02428.x
226. Jason LA, Jordan K, Miike T, Bell DS, Lapp C, Torres-Harding S, et al. A
pediatric case definition for myalgic encephalomyelitis and chronic fatigue
syndrome. J Chron Fatig Syndr. (2006) 13:1–44. doi: 10.1300/J092v13n02_01
227. Roerink ME, van der Schaaf ME, Dinarello CA, Knoop H, van der Meer
JWM. Interleukin-1 as a mediator of fatigue in disease: a narrative review.
J Neuroinflamm. (2017) 14:6. doi: 10.1186/s12974-017-0796-7
228. Sharpe MC, Archard LC, Banatvala JE, Borysiewicz LK, Clare AW, David
A, et al. A report–chronic fatigue syndrome: guidelines for research. J R Soc
Med. (1991) 84:118–21.
229. RACP. Working Group of the Royal Australasian College of Physicians.
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. Clinical Practice Guidelines–2002. Med J Austr.
(2002) 176(Suppl.):S23–56.
230. SEID.
Committee
on
the
Diagnostic
Criteria
for
Myalgic
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome, Board on the Health
of
Select
Populations,
and
Institute
of
Medicine.
Beyond
Myalgic
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: Redefining an Illness. The
National Academies Collection: Reports Funded by National Institutes of
Health. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US) (2015).
231. Reeves WC, Wagner D, Nisenbaum R, Jones JF, Gurbaxani B, Solomon
L, et al. Chronic fatigue syndrome - a clinically empirical approach to its
definition and study. BMC Med. (2005) 3:19. doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-3-19
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2019 VanElzakker, Brumfield and Lara Mejia. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC
BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided
the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
22
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
TABLE A1 | Cytokine studies of ME/CFS.
Sample handling and processing
Assays
Assay results
Study
Diagnostic
criteria
Sample
matrix
Collection
(Specifications
of note)
Time of
collection
Storage
Method
Manufacturer
Kits
Increase
Decrease
No difference
Lynn et al. 2018 (109) Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Plasma
samples taken at 30 min
intervals on two
consecutive days
10:00 a.m.−12:00
p.m.
−80◦C
Multiplex
BD Biosciences
Human CBA kit
IL-6, TNFα
(response to low
dose dex, LPS)
IP-10, IL-12/23p40
Richardson et al.
2018 (110)
Carruthers et al.
2003 (223)
Serum
non-fasting blood
samples collected after
20-min standing test
–
–
Both
BD Biosciences;
activin ELISA
supplied by Oxford
Brookes University
Human CBA kit 560484
serum activin B
IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10,
TNF, IFN γ, IL-17A,
activin A
Oka et al. 2018 (111)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71), Carruthers et al.
2011 (225), and
SEID, 2015 (230)
Serum and
plasma (TGF-β1,
BDNF)
after 8 weeks of
intervention, blood
sampling before and
after the last session
2:00–4:00 p.m.
−80◦C
ELISA
Fujirebio, R&D, pbl
assay science,
BioSource Europe
S.A.; R&D
IL-6 CLEIA cartridge; Quantikine
high-sensitivity ELISA human
TNF-α immunoassay; VeriKine
Human Interferon Alpha
Multi-Subtype Serum ELISA kit;
MEDGENIX human IFNγ EASIA
kit; Quantikine; Quantikine
ELISA human TGF-β1 kit, BDNF
kit
TNF-α
IL-6; IFN-α, IFN-γ;
TGF-β1, BDNF
Moneghetti et al.
2018 (112)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71) and Carruthers
et al. 2011 (225) for
PEM
Serum
fasting blood sample
morning
−80◦C
Multiplex
Affymetrix
51-Plex Luminex bead kit
CXCL 10
IL-8, CXCL10, CCL4,
TNF-β, ICAM-1
IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-1RA,
IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6,
IL-7, IL-8, IL-10,
IL12p40, IL12p70,
IL-13, IL-15, IL-17,
IL-17F, IL-18, LIF
Milrad et al. 2018
(115)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Plasma
–
11:00 a.m.−3:00
p.m.
−80◦C
Multiplex
Quansys (R&D)
Q-plex Human cytokine screen
IL-2, IL-6, TNF-α
Wyller et al. 2017
(113)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71) and Carruthers
et al. 2003 (223)
Plasma
fasting blood sample, no
tobacco
7:30–9:30 a.m.
−80◦C
Multiplex
Bio-Rad Laboratories Bio-Plex Human TGF-β 3-Plex
TGF-β1, TGF-β2,
TGF-β3
Roerink et al. 2017
(114)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71) and Carruthers
et al. 2003 (223)
Plasma
before and after 4 weeks
of treatment
–
−80◦C
Multiplex
Olink Proteomics AB;
R&D
Proseek Multiplex Inflammation
panel; TGF-β duo-set DY240
Positively
associated with
risk of being an
ME/CFS patient:
CCL4, 1L12β,
CCL11, FGF5, IL6,
CCL23, CX3CL1,
IL10, CXCL5
Negatively associated
with risk of being an
ME/CFS patient: CXCL6,
CXCL10, CXCL9,
CCL28, CCL25, CCL20,
CCL19, TRAIL, TNFβ,
FGF23
IFN-γ, IL-1α, IL-2, IL-4,
IL17A, TNF, MCP-3,
IL-17c, TSLP
, PD-L1,
IL-24, IL-13, IL-20,
IL-33, LIF, IL-5
Montoya et al. 2017
(116)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Serum
–
8:30 a.m.−3:30 p.m.
−80◦C
Multiplex
Affymetrix
51-multiplex array
TGF-β; IL-13 in
severe group
(when stratified by
severity); significant
upward linear trend
across severity:
CCL11, CXCL1,
CXCL10, G-CSF,
GM-CSF, IFN-γ,
IL-4, IL-5, IL-7,
IL-12p70, IL-13,
IL-17F, leptin, LIF,
NGF, SCF, TGF-α
resistin; significant
nonlinear inverted trend:
ICAM1, resistin
34 others from
51-multiplex array
(Continued)
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
23
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
TABLE A1 | Continued
Sample handling and processing
Assays
Assay results
Study
Diagnostic
criteria
Sample
matrix
Collection
(Specifications
of note)
Time of
collection
Storage
Method
Manufacturer
Kits
Increase
Decrease
No difference
Nagy-Szakal et al.
2017 (117)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71) and Carruthers
et al. 2003 (223)
Plasma
–
–
−80◦C
Multiplex
Affymetrix
Customized Procarta
immunoassay (61-plex)
IL1α, IL1β, IL1RA, IL18,
IL2, IL4, IL7, IL9, IL13,
IL15, IL5, IL6, LIF, IL31,
IL10, IL21, IL22,
IL12p40, IL12p70, IL23,
IL27, IL17A, IL17F,
IFNα2, IFNβ, IFNγ,
TNFα (TNFSF2), TNFβ
(TNFSF1), sFasL
(TNFSF6), TRAIL
(TNFSF10), CCL2
(MCP1), CCL3 (MIP1a),
CCL4 (MIP1b), CCL5
(RANTES), CCL7
(MCP3), CCL11
(eotaxin), CXCL1
(GROa), CXCL8 (IL8),
CXCL9 (MIG), CXCL10
(IP10), CXCL12a
(SDF1a), PDGFBB,
VEGFA, VEGFD,
sICAM1 (CD54),
VCAM1 (CD106), serpin
E1 (PAI1), leptin,
resistin, TGFα, TGFβ,
FGFβ, βNGF, HGF, SCF,
MCSF (CSF1),
GMCSF(CSF2), GCSF
(CSF3), PlGF1, EGF,
BDNF
Hornig et al. 2017
(118)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71) and /or
Carruthers et al.
2003 (223)
CSF
CSF samples from
biobank
–
−80◦C
Multiplex
Affymetrix
Customized Procarta
immunoassay (51-plex)
FGFb in Classical-
ME/CFS-short
duration compared
to Atypical-
ME/CFS-short
duration; SCF in
Atypical-ME/CFS
compared to
Classical-ME/CFS
irrespective of
illness duration
IL1β, IL5, IL7, IL13,
IL17A, IFNα2, IFNγ,
TNFα, TRAIL (TNFSF10),
CCL2, CCL7, CXCL5,
CXCL9, CSF3 (GCSF),
βNGF, resistin, serpin E1
(PAI1) in
Atypical-ME/CFS-short
duration compared to
Classical-ME/CFS-short
duration; IL7, IL17,
CXCL9, serpin E1 in
Atypical-ME/CFS-short
duration compared to
Classical-ME/CFS-long
duration; IL5, IL13, IL17,
CXCL9, in
Atypical-ME/CFS-long
duration compared to
Classical-ME/CFS-short
duration; IL6, IL17 in
Atypical-ME/CFS-long
duration compared to
Classical-ME/CFS-long
duration
IL1ra, IL1α, IL2, IL4,
CXCL8 (IL8), IL10,
IL12p40, IL12p70, IL15,
IL17F, TNFβ, CD40L,
sFasL, CCL3 (MIP1α),
CCL4 (MIP1β), CCL5
(RANTES), CCL11
(eotaxin), CXCL1
(GROα), CXCL10 (IP10),
TGFα, TGFβ, CSF1
(MCSF), CSF2
(GMCSF), PDGFBB,
HGF, VEGFA, LIF, leptin,
sICAM1 (CD54),
VCAM1 (CD106)
(Continued)
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
24
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
TABLE A1 | Continued
Sample handling and processing
Assays
Assay results
Study
Diagnostic
criteria
Sample
matrix
Collection
(Specifications
of note)
Time of
collection
Storage
Method
Manufacturer
Kits
Increase
Decrease
No difference
Hanevik et al. 2017
(119)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
PBMC
fasting blood samples
8:00–9:00 a.m.
−80◦C
Multiplex
Bio-Rad Laboratories Bioplex assays, kits not
specified
sCD40L in
Giardia-exposed
vs. unexposed
ME/CFS subjects,
and in post-
infective-ME/CFS
vs. no
post-infective
fatigue group
IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-1β,
IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-9,
IL-10, IL-13, IL-17A,
IL-22, MIP-1α, MIP-1β,
TGFβ1, TGFβ2, TGFβ3,
GM-CSF
Lidbury et al. 2017
(120)
Carruthers et al.
2003 (223)
Serum
non-fasting samples
collected after 20-min
standing test
–
–
Both
BD Biosciences;
activin kit supplied by
Oxford Brookes
University
Human CBA kit 560484
Activin B
IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10,
IL-17A, TNF, IFN-α,
activin A, follistatin
Milrad et al. 2017
(121)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Plasma
x
11:00 a.m.−3:00
p.m.
−80◦C
ELISA
Quansys Biosciences Q-plex Human cytokine screen
IL-1β, IL-6, TNF-a
within CFS patients
associated with
poor sleep quality
in ME/CFS
Lunde et al. 2016
(122)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71) and Carruthers
et al. 2003 (223)
Serum and
plasma
x
–
−80◦C
ELISA
R&D; Invitrogen/Life
technologies
BAFF and APRIL kits
BAFF in
intervention group
relative to baseline
APRIL
Huth et al. 2016 (123) Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
PBMC
x
7:30–10:00 a.m.
–
Neither
BD Biosciences;
Biolegend
intracellular staining of
stimulated and unstimulated
PBMC cultures
IFN-γ, TNF-α and
GM-CSF increased in
culture after challenge,
but no difference
between groups
Russell et al. 2016
(124)
Jason et al. 2006
(226) and Fukuda
et al. 1994 (71) and
ICD
Plasma
fasting blood sample
morning
−80◦C
ELISA
Quansys Biosciences Q-plex Human cytokine screen
(16-plex)
IL-4, IL-5, IL-12,
LTα in ME/CFS
patients relative to
healthy controls;
IL-8 in ME/CFS
adolescents
IL-8, IL-15 ME/CFS
patients relative to
healthy controls; IL-23 in
ME/CFS adolescents
IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-6,
IL-10, IL-13, IL-17,
IFNγ, TNFα
Landi et al. 2016
(125)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71) and Carruthers
et al. 2003 (223)
Plasma
samples from Solve
ME/CFS BioBank
–
−80◦C
ELISA
Meso Scale
Discovery
MSD Human V-PLEX Plus Kits:
Chemokine Panel
1, Cytokine Panel 1, and
Pro-inflammatory Panel 1;
Human Eotaxin-2 Kit, a
custom-designed 3-Plex kit, a
custom-designed 1-Plex kit
CCL24 univariate
analysis
IL-16, IL-7, VEGF-A,
CXCL9, CX3CL1
univariate analysis; IL-16,
IL-7, VEGF-A by
multivariate cluster
analysis
IL-17A, TNFβ, CCL19,
CCL11, IL-1β, TNFα,
CCL3, CCL17, CCL2,
IFN-g, IL-15, CCL26,
IL-6, IL-12/23p40,
CCL22, IL-5, CCL13,
IL-1α, CCL4, GM-CSF,
IL-10, IL-4, IL-13, IL-2,
CXCL10, IL-12p70,
IL-8, B2M
Hardcastle et al.
2015 (126)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Serum
non-fasting blood
sample
8:30–11:30 a.m.
–
Multiplex
BioRad
BioPlex Pro human cytokine
IL-1β in moderate
compared to
severe ME/CFS;
IL-7, IL-8, RANTES
in moderate
compared to
severe ME/CFS
and healthy
controls; IFN-γ in
severe compared
to moderate
ME/CFS
IL-6 in moderate
compared to severe
ME/CFS and healthy
controls,
IL-1ra, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5,
IL-6, IL-9, IL-10,
IL-12p70, IL-13, IL-17,
FGF, eotaxin, G-CSF,
GM-CSF, IP-10,
PDGF-BB, TNF-α and
VEGF
(Continued)
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
25
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
TABLE A1 | Continued
Sample handling and processing
Assays
Assay results
Study
Diagnostic
criteria
Sample
matrix
Collection
(Specifications
of note)
Time of
collection
Storage
Method
Manufacturer
Kits
Increase
Decrease
No difference
Peterson et al. 2015
(127)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
CSF
CSF samples via lumbar
puncture
–
−80◦C
Multiplex
BioRad
BioPlex Pro human cytokine
IL-10
IL-1rα, IL-2, IL-6, IL-7,
IL-8, IL-9, IL-12p70,
IL-13, IL-15, IL-17,
basic FGF, eotaxin,
G-CSF, GM-CSF, IFN-γ,
IP-10, MCP-1,
RANTES, TNF-α, and
PDGF-BB
Khaiboullina et al.
2015 (128)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71) or ICC 2011
Serum
x
–
−80◦C
Multiplex
Bio-Rad Laboratories Bio-Plex Human Cytokine
27-Plex Panel
CCL1, CCL2,
CCL20, CCL3,
CXCL10, IFNc,
IL-1, IL-10, IL13,
IL-1β, IL25, IL-31,
IL-4, IL-6, IL-7,
IL12 (p75), TNF
CCL11, CCL17, CCL19,
CCL21, CCL25, CCL26,
CCL3, CCL4, CCL5,
CCL8, CSF1, CSF3,
CX3CL1, CXCL1,
CXCL13, CXCL6,
CXCL8, HGF, IL-17F, IL5,
IL-9, LIF, MIF, PDGF,
TRAIL, VEGF
CCL13, CCL22,
CCL23, CCL24,
CCL27, CCL7,
CXCL11, CXCL12a,
CXCL12ab, CXCL13,
CXCL16, CXCL2,
CXCL5, CXCL9, FGF,
GMCSF, IFN-α, IL-12
(p40), IL-15, IL-16,
IL17A, IL-18, IL-1RA,
IL-1α, IL-1b, IL-2, IL-21,
IL-22, IL-23, IL-3, IL-33,
IL-6, IL-2RA, LIF,
sCD40L, SCF, SCGF-b,
TNF-β, b-NGF
Wyller et al. 2015
(129)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Plasma
fasting bood samples
7:30–9:30 a.m.
−80◦C
Multiplex
Bio-Rad Laboratories Bio-Plex Human Cytokine
27-Plex Panel
IL-1β, IL-1RA, IL-2,
IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-7.
IL8, IL-9, IL-10, IL-12,
IL-13, IL-17, IFN-c,
CCL2, CCL3, CCL4,
CCL5, CXCL10,
PDGF-BB, VEGF, FGF,
TNF
Hornig et al. 2015
(130)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71) and Carruthers
et al. 2003 (223)
Plasma
–
10:00 a.m.−2:00
p.m.
−80◦C
ELISA
Affymetrix
customized Procarta
immunoassay
Leptin
Il-6, IL-8, IL-10, LT-a,
IL17A, sFasL, CXCL10,
MCSF,
TGF-β, IL-1β, IL-1α,
TNF, IFN-α, IL-2, IL-12,
IFN-c, IL-4, IL-13, IL-5,
IL-15, IL-7, IL-13, IL-9,
GMCSF, LIF, CD40L,
TRAIL, CCL2, CCL3,
CCL4, CCL5, CCL7,
CCL11, CXCL1,
CXCL5, CXCL9,
PDGF-BB, VEGFA,
sICAM-1, VCAM-1,
TGF-α, FGFb, bNGF,
HGF, SCF, GCSF
Neu et al. 2014 (131)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Serum
samples collected after
2nd night of
polysomnography
(indwelling cannula)
early morning
−20◦C
Multiplex
BD Biosciences
CBA Human flex-set kit
IL-1β, TNF, IL8,
IL-10
IL-6, IFNc
Nakatomi et al. 2014
(8)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71) and ICC 2011
Serum
–
–
−80◦C
–
analyzed by the
Mitsubishi Chemical
Mediance Corps
–
IL-1β, IL-6, TNF, IFN-c
Garcia et al. 2014
(132)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Serum
x
–
–
Multiplex
Millipore
–
IL-6, IL-2, IL12,
IFN-c, GMCSF,
CXCL10
IL-1β, IL-1α, IL-6, TNF,
IL-8, IL-10, IFN-α, IL-4,
LT-a, IL-5, IL-7, CCL2,
CCL3, CCL4
(Continued)
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
26
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
TABLE A1 | Continued
Sample handling and processing
Assays
Assay results
Study
Diagnostic
criteria
Sample
matrix
Collection
(Specifications
of note)
Time of
collection
Storage
Method
Manufacturer
Kits
Increase
Decrease
No difference
Nakamura et al. 2013
(133)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Plasma
venous sampling
throughout two nights,
twice asleep and once
awake (indwelling
cannula)
1:00, 3:00, 5:00,
8:00 a.m.
−80◦C
Multiplex
Millipore
Milliplex human multicytokine
detection system
IL-1β, IL-6, TNF, IL-8,
IL-10, IL-4
Maes et al. 2013
(134)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Plasma
fasting blood samples
8:30–11:30 a.m.
–
ELISA
R&D, GE Healthcare
UK Ltd.
Quantikine Human TNF-α
Immunoassay; Amersham
Interleukin-1 alpha [(h) IL-1α];
Amersham Interleukin-1 beta [(h)
IL-1β]
IL-1β, IL-1α, IFN-α
Lattie et al. 2012
(135)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Plasma
x
11:00 a.m.−3:00
p.m.
−80◦C
ELISA
Quansys Biosciences
and R&D
Q-Plex Human Cytokine Screen;
assayed in duplicate with R&D
standard
IL-1β, IL-6
TNF, IL-10, IL-2
Smylie et al. 2013
(136)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Plasma
blood drawn 3x during
exercise challenge
–
−80◦C
ELISA
Quansys Biosciences Q-Plex Human Cytokine Screen
(16-plex)
Males: IL-2, IL23
Females: IL-1b, IL-1α,
IL-6, TNF, IL-8, IL-10,
IL-2, IL-12, IFN-c, IL-4,
IL-13, TNF-β, IL-5,
IL-23, IL-17, IL-15;
Males: IL-1b, IL-1α,
IL-6, TNF, IL-8, IL-10,
IL-12, IFN-c, IL-4,
IL-13, TNF-β, IL-5,
IL-17, IL-15
Broderick et al. 2012
(137)
ICD (Reeves et al.
2005 (231) and
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71))
Plasma
fasting blood samples
Morning
−80◦C
ELISA
Quansys Biosciences Q-Plex Human Cytokine Screen
(16-plex)
IL-8
IL-23
IL-1b, IL-1α, IL-6, TNF,
IL-10, IFN-α, IL-2,
IL-12, IFN-c, IL-4,
IL-13, TNF-β, IL-5,
IL-17, IL-15
Maes et al. 2012
(138)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Plasma
fasting blood samples
8:30–11:30 a.m.
–
ELISA
R&D, GE Healthcare
UK Ltd.
Quantikine Human TNF-α
Immunoassay; Amersham
Interleukin-1 alpha [(h) IL-1α];
Amersham Interleukin-1 beta [(h)
IL-1β]
IL-1β, IL-1α, TNF
Nas et al. 2011 (139)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Serum
–
–
–
ELISA
DPC Immulite 1,000
Chemistry Analyzer
IMMULITE 10,00 analyzers, kits
not specified
IL-6
IL-8
White et al. 2010
(140)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Plasma
blood samples at
baseline, 0.5, 8, 24, and
48 h post exercise
–
−80◦C
Multiplex
Developed at the
ARUP Institute for
Clinical and
Experimental
Research (Salt Lake
City, UT)
–
IL-1β, IL-6, TNF, IL-8,
IL-10, IL-2, IL-12,
IFN-c, IL-4, IL-13
Nakamura et al. 2010
(141)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Plasma
venous sampling
throughout the night
while asleep (indwelling
cannula)
1:00, 3:00, 5:00,
8:00 a.m.
−80◦C
Multiplex
Millipore
Beadlyte human multicytokine
detection system 2
IL-1β, IL-6, TNF, IL-8,
IL-10, IL-4
Nijs et al. 2010 (142)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Plasma
blood samples taken
before and 1 h after
exercise
–
–
ELISA
Amersham
Biosciences Europe
GmbH, Pierce
Biotechnology Inc.
Biotrak Easy ELISA RPN5971),
Endogen Human IL-1β ELISA kit
IL-1β
(Continued)
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
27
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
TABLE A1 | Continued
Sample handling and processing
Assays
Assay results
Study
Diagnostic
criteria
Sample
matrix
Collection
(Specifications
of note)
Time of
collection
Storage
Method
Manufacturer
Kits
Increase
Decrease
No difference
Robinson et al. 2010
(143)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Plasma
blood sampled at rest, at
point of exhaustion, and
24 h post exercise
(indwelling cannula); after
overnight fast
–
–
ELISA
BD Biosciences
OptEIA
IL-6
Scully et al. 2010
(144)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Plasma
x
–
−80◦C
Multiplex
Meso Scale
Discovery
–
IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8
TNF, IL-10, IFN-c,
IL-12p70, IL-13
Fletcher et al. 2009
(145)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Plasma
x
Morning
−80◦C
Multiplex
Quansys Biosciences Q-Plex Human Cytokine-Screen
(16-plex)
IL-1β, IL-1α, IL-6,
IL-12, IL4, IL-5
IL-8, TNF-β, IL-15
TNF, IL-10, IL-2, IFN-c,
IL-13, IL-23, IL-17
Jammes et al. 2009
(146)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Plasma
sampling throughout
exercise protocol
(indwelling cannula)
–
–
ELISA
R&D
Quantikine HS Human IL-6
Immunoassay D6050;
Quantikine HS Human TNF-α
DTA00C
IL-6, TNF
Nater et al. 2008
(147)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Plasma
fasting blood samples
taken 30 minutes after
indwelling cannula was
placed
7:30 a.m.
−80◦C
ELISA
R&D
Quantikine HS Human IL-6
Immunoassay
Il-6
Spence et al. 2008
(148)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Plasma and
Serum
x
–
−70◦C
ELISA
Mercodia, Kalon
Biological, R&D
–
IL-1β, TNF
Vollmer-Conna et al.
2007 (149)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
PBMC, Serum
blood samples taken 1,
2, 3, 6, and 12 months
after infection onset
–
−80◦C
Multiplex
Bioplex, BioRad
–
IL-1β, IL-2, IL-6, IL-10,
IL-12, TNF, IFN-c
Kennedy et al. 2004
(150)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Platelet poor
plasma
x
same time of day
–
ELISA
R&D
–
TGF-β
White et al. 2004
(151)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
Plasma
blood collected 3 days
after exercise
9:30 a.m.−12:30
p.m.
–
ELISA
R&D
–
TGF-β
Visser et al. 2001
(152)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71)
WBC
x
–
−20◦C
ELISA
Pharmingen, R&D,
Biorad
method from
Cheney et al. 1989 (153)
TNFα, IL-10, IL-12,
IFN-c
Cannon et al. 1999
(154)
Holmes et al. 1988
(80)
Plasma
collected 24 h post
exercise
9:00 a.m.
–
ELISA, radio-
immunoassay
(IL-1β)
R&D
–
IL-6
Buchwald et al. 1997
(155)
Fukuda et al. 1994
(71) and Holmes
et al. 1988 (80)
Serum
x
–
–
ELISA
Genzyme
Diagnostics
Predicta
IL-6
Bennett et al. 1997
(156)
Holmes et al. 1988
(80)
Serum
samples shipped on dry
ice for 1 year before
analysis
–
−20◦C
Bioassay
R&D (IL-4-dependent
HT-2 cell proliferation
bioassay)
–
TGF-β
MacDonald et al.
1996 (157)
Holmes et al. 1988
(80)
Serum
x
7:00–10:00 a.m.
–
ELISA
CCC (158)
For TGFβ: specially developed in
a co-investigators lab; others
not specified
TGF-β, IL-1β, IL-6, TNF
Swanink et al. 1996
(159)
Sharpe et al. 1991
(228)
WBC, Serum
(TGFβ)
x
8:30–11:00 a.m.
–
ELISA
R&D, Endogen
Measured as previously
described in Drenth et al. 1995
(160); Quantikine (TGFβ)
TGF-β, IL-1β, IL-1α,
TNF
Peterson et al. 1994
(161)
Holmes et al. 1988
(80)
Serum
blood collected at rest,
immediately after
exercise, and 40 min
after exercise
–
−70◦C
ELISA,
bioassay
(TGFβ)
R&D (ELISA and
IL-4-dependent HT-2
cell proliferation
bioassay)
Measured as previously
described in Chao et al. 1991
(158)
TGF-β
IL-1β, IL-6, TNFα
(Continued)
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
28
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
 VanElzakker et al.
Neuroinflammation Methods in ME/CFS
TABLE A1 | Continued
Sample handling and processing
Assays
Assay results
Study
Diagnostic
criteria
Sample
matrix
Collection
(Specifications
of note)
Time of
collection
Storage
Method
Manufacturer
Kits
Increase
Decrease
No difference
Patarca et al. 1994
(162)
Holmes et al. 1988
(80)
Plasma
once a month for 3
months
7:30–10:30 a.m.
−20◦C
ELISA
Endogen, R&D,
Amersham, Genzyme
Intertest-4, Biokine
TNF
IL-1β, IL-1α, IL-6, IL-2,
IL-4
Lloyd et al. 1994
(163)
RACP
, 2002 (229)
Serum
blood was collected prior
to, during, 15 min after,
4, 24 h post exercise
(indwelling cannula)
–
−70◦C
ELISA
Sucrosep; Centocor;
Cistron
Biotechnology;
Biokine TNF
–
IL-1β, TNF, IFN-α, IFN-c
Linde et al. 1992
(164)
Holmes et al. 1988
(80)
Serum
serum collected <7 days
and 6 months after onset
of mono
–
–
ELISA
T-Cell Sciences;
IMMUNOtest
Neopterin; Delfia;
Medgenix; Quantikine
R&D
–
IL-1α
IL-1β, IL-6, IFN-c
Chao et al. 1991
(158)
Holmes et al. 1988
(80)
PBMC, Serum
(TGFβ)
1x a day, 5 consecutive
days
8:00–9:00 a.m.
−20◦C
ELISA,
bioassay
(TGFβ)
R&D (ELISA and
IL-4-dependent HT-2
cell proliferation
bioassay)
–
TGF-β
IL-1β, IL-6, TNF, IL-2,
IL-4
Straus et al. 1989
(165)
Holmes et al. 1988
(80)
Serum
x
–
−20◦C
ELISA
Genzyme
sent to same laboratory as in
Cheney et al. 1989 (153), no
specifications
IL-1β, TNF, IFN-α, IL-2,
IFN-c
Cheney et al. 1989
(153)
Holmes et al. 1988
(80)
Serum
biobank samples
–
–
ELISA
Genzyme
sent to Specialty Laboratories,
LA, no specifications
IL-2
The articles compared in the table include the studies reviewed by Blundell et al. (104), as well as studies published since then (distinguished by the horizontal double line in the table). Stringer et al. (166) was not reviewed by Blundell et al.
(104) but is included in the table. The newer studies were found by searching “myalgic encephalomyelitis,” “chronic fatigue syndrome,” or “myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome” with “cytokine.” Studies were selected
if they included an ME/CFS group and used a cytokine assay. Though not a systematic literature review, the studies in the table serve to show the variance in methodology (from sample collection and storage to assay selection) and
reported results across cytokine studies. –, not specified/reported; x, no specifications of note for sample collection; CCC, Canadian Consensus Criteria; ICC, International Consensus Criteria; ICD, International Case Definition; RACP
,
Royal Australasian College of Physicians; SEID, Systemic Exertion Intolerance disease.
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
29
January 2019 | Volume 9 | Article 1033
