 The new engl and jour nal of medicine
n engl j med 375;21 nejm.org November 24, 2016
2060
Brief Report
Summary
Options for people with severe paralysis who have lost the ability to communicate 
orally are limited. We describe a method for communication in a patient with late-
stage amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), involving a fully implanted brain–com-
puter interface that consists of subdural electrodes placed over the motor cortex 
and a transmitter placed subcutaneously in the left side of the thorax. By attempt-
ing to move the hand on the side opposite the implanted electrodes, the patient 
accurately and independently controlled a computer typing program 28 weeks after 
electrode placement, at the equivalent of two letters per minute. The brain–com-
puter interface offered autonomous communication that supplemented and at 
times supplanted the patient’s eye-tracking device. (Funded by the Government of 
the 
Netherlands 
and 
the 
European 
Union; 
ClinicalTrials.gov 
number, 
NCT02224469.)
L
ocked-in syndrome is characterized by a loss of voluntary mus-
cular control, resulting in quadriplegia and aphonia, with retention of nor-
mal cognition.1 The syndrome is typically linked to brainstem stroke, but 
degenerative disorders such as ALS, which affects approximately 5 persons per 
100,000 population,2 progress to the same state.3 Despite their predicament, 
people in the locked-in state often report a high quality of life,4 which is corre-
lated with the ability to communicate.5 Current strategies for communication de-
pend mainly on eye movements that are followed by a camera, which enables selec-
tion of items on a computer screen (“eye tracker”); when that fails, communication 
may depend on eye movements or blinks in response to closed-ended questions, 
which limits the options for independent and private communication.
Recent developments in brain–computer interfaces capitalize on the neuroelec-
trical properties of the brain and the localized somatic activation by these brain 
regions.6,7 These systems take advantage of the observation that mental acts, such 
as an attempt to move a limb, lead to reproducible signals in corresponding corti-
cal regions.8 The detection of signals from the cortex requires computational 
processing to separate (“decode”) them from background noise. Decoding of suf-
ficient quality provides the input for a computer system that directs typing soft-
ware, thereby enabling communication.9
Decoding of neuronal signals from brain implants has yielded achievements 
such as the control of a robotic or paralyzed limb by patients with quadriplegia.10-12 
In spite of such achievements, it is difficult to implement independent communica-
tion for daily use at home. To accomplish this, a brain–computer interface must 
A Quick Take 
is available at 
NEJM.org
From the Department of Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, Brain Center Rudolf Mag-
nus (M.J.V., E.G.M.P., M.P.B., Z.V.F., P.G., 
S.L., M.A.V.D.B., P.C.V.R., E.J.A., N.F.R.), 
and the Department of Anesthesiology 
(T.H.O.), University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands; the Neu-
ropsychology Laboratory, Department of 
Psychology, European Medical School, 
Cluster of Excellence Hearing4all, Univer-
sity of Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany 
(M.G.B.); and Neuromodulation Core Tech-
nology, Medtronic, Minneapolis (T.D.). 
Address reprint requests to Dr. Ramsey 
at the Department of Neurology and Neu-
rosurgery, Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Heidel-
berglaan 100, 3584 CX Utrecht, the Nether-
lands, or at  
n 
. 
f 
. 
ramsey@ 
umcutrecht 
. 
nl.
Drs. Vansteensel, Pels, and Aarnoutse 
contributed equally to this article.
This article was published on November 12, 
2016, at NEJM.org.
N Engl J Med 2016;375:2060-6.
DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1608085
Copyright © 2016 Massachusetts Medical Society.
Fully Implanted Brain–Computer Interface 
in a Locked-In Patient with ALS
Mariska J. Vansteensel, Ph.D., Elmar G.M. Pels, M.Sc., 
Martin G. Bleichner, Ph.D., Mariana P. Branco, M.Sc., Timothy Denison, Ph.D., 
Zachary V. Freudenburg, Ph.D., Peter Gosselaar, M.D., Sacha Leinders, M.Sc., 
Thomas H. Ottens, M.D., Max A. Van Den Boom, M.Sc., Peter C. Van Rijen, M.D., 
Erik J. Aarnoutse, Ph.D., and Nick F. Ramsey, Ph.D. 
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY LIBRARY UTRECHT on January 26, 2017. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2016 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 375;21 nejm.org November 24, 2016
2061
Brief Report
allow for user autonomy and continuous func-
tionality and must reliably detect only intended 
actions.13 Furthermore, permanent availability of 
the interface for communication requires sen-
sors that are connected to the cerebral cortex but 
do not cause discomfort or disfiguration.14
We report on a communication system that 
involves a totally implantable brain–computer 
interface for home use by a locked-in patient 
with ALS. The implant, combined with auto-
mated decoding software, enabled independent 
communication with the use of typing software.
Methods
Patient
The patient is a woman who was 58 years old at 
the time that informed consent was obtained in 
September 2015. She was in a locked-in state 
from late-stage ALS, which was diagnosed in 
2008, and required positive-pressure mechanical 
ventilation through a tracheostomy. She was able 
to communicate using eye movements (with an 
eye tracker) and blinks denoting yes and no but 
was otherwise completely paralyzed (a score of 
2 on the ALS functional rating scale, which rates 
functional impairment on a scale of 0 to 40, 
with higher scores indicating less disability). We 
report on the period from implantation of the 
brain–computer interface in October 2015 to the 
most recent observations in July 2016. The study 
was approved by the ethics committee at the 
University Medical Center Utrecht in accordance 
with the 2013 provisions of the Declaration of 
Helsinki. Informed consent was obtained (see the 
Supplementary Appendix, available with the full 
text of this article at NEJM.org). This is the first 
patient to be enrolled in this program. Since the 
inception and registration of this study, two addi-
tional patients have been evaluated, but they died 
from their underlying condition (ALS) before 
electrodes were implanted.
Medtronic provided all components of the 
implant, plus the antenna and receiver, free of 
charge to the University Medical Center Utrecht. 
Medtronic contributed funds to the Dutch gov-
ernment agency that funded this study but did 
not provide funds directly to the institution, the 
researchers, or the patient. The fifth author, who 
is an employee of Medtronic and holds shares in 
the company, directed the team that was respon-
sible for developing the implanted parts and the 
receiver; he also wrote portions of the “Implant 
Components” subsection of the Supplementary 
Appendix. He was not involved in the interpreta-
tion of the results.
Implantation and Description of Electrodes 
and Device
On day 0 (October 27, 2015), four subdural elec-
trode strips (Resume II, Medtronic), which were 
designed for epidural spinal cord stimulation but 
have been tested for acceptable endotoxin levels 
in cerebral subdural implantation, were implant-
ed through burr holes (1 cm in diameter) by 
means of a frameless stereotaxic procedure, guid-
ed by functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) and neuronavigation. There were four 
electrodes on each strip (each electrode was 4 mm 
in diameter, with a 1-cm interelectrode distance). 
Two strips were placed over each target region 
(see below). Extension leads were connected to 
the electrode leads, tunneled subcutaneously to the 
abdomen, and externalized through the abdom-
inal skin for temporary connection to electrocor-
ticography equipment (Micromed; sampling rate, 
512 Hz; high-pass filter at 0.15 Hz and low-pass 
filter at 134.4 Hz). Three days later, the external-
ized extension leads were removed, and two of 
the electrode strips (Figs. S1 and S3 in the 
Supplementary Appendix) were connected to an 
amplifier and transmitter device (Activa PC+S, 
Medtronic) that was placed subcutaneously be-
neath the left clavicle. The device was designed 
for deep-brain stimulation and biopotential re-
cording, which allows for long-term electrocor-
ticography with two strips; it is currently certified 
according to Conformité Européene for use in 
patients with Parkinson’s disease, essential tremor, 
or epilepsy (Fig. 1, and Fig. S2 in the Supplemen-
tary Appendix). The leads of the other two strips 
were capped subcutaneously and left in place as 
a backup. During use of the system, an antenna 
is placed on the chest over the device.
The two procedures, which lasted 6.75 hours 
and 1.5 hours, respectively, were performed with 
the patient under general anesthesia. The patient 
became febrile on day 5, and the fever resolved 
without treatment. She was discharged from the 
hospital on day 6.
Determination of Activated Cortical Region
The subdural electrodes were placed over the hand 
region of the left motor cortex, on the basis of 
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY LIBRARY UTRECHT on January 26, 2017. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2016 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 375;21 nejm.org November 24, 2016
2062
The new engl and jour nal of medicine
Figure 1. Electrode Placement and System Setup in the Brain–Computer Interface System.
Panel A shows the contact points of the electrode strips, which are indicated by white dots, over the sensorimotor and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; 
the positions of electrodes were based on postoperative computed tomographic (CT) scans merged with the presurgical MRI. Electrodes e2 and e3 
on the electrode strip were chosen for brain–computer interface feedback. Panel B shows a postoperative chest radiograph displaying the trans-
mitter device (Activa PC+S, Medtronic), which was placed subcutaneously in the chest, and wires leading to the electrodes. Two of four wires were 
connected to the device. Panel C shows the postoperative CT scan with the locations of four electrode strips. The dots on the four wires are connec-
tors. Panel D shows the components of the brain–computer interface system, including the transmitter, receiving antenna, receiver, and tablet.
B
RIGHT
LEFT
C
ANTERIOR
POSTERIOR
Electrodes
(implanted)
Transmitter
(implanted device)
Ventilator
Antenna
Receiver
Tablet
A
D
e3
e1
e2
e4
ANTERIOR
POSTERIOR
Electrode strip
Antenna
Tablet
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY LIBRARY UTRECHT on January 26, 2017. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2016 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 375;21 nejm.org November 24, 2016
2063
Brief Report
previous work showing that patients with quad-
riplegia can generate neuroelectrical activity by 
trying to move their hands.10-12 Since the motor 
cortex may be affected in ALS, as a backup, elec-
trodes were also placed on a second region — 
the left prefrontal region, which is activated by 
mental calculation.15 Two strips were positioned 
on each target area to guarantee the best possi-
ble coverage of activated regions, the locations of 
which were determined with the use of fMRI.15-17 
Electrocorticography was used to select the two 
optimal strips for further use. Details of the 
fMRI and electrode selection are provided in the 
Supplementary Appendix. We present results 
from the patient’s activation of the sensorimotor 
area, because it showed the best brain signals in 
early testing and yielded consistent control of the 
brain–computer interface. We have not investi-
gated the prefrontal region extensively.
Decoding and Training
For 28 weeks after implantation, several com-
puter tasks were used to test and improve the 
algorithms and parameters in the decoding soft-
ware for control of the brain–computer inter-
face. Each setting that yielded good control was 
fixed for the rest of the study. The patient then 
trained with the tasks to improve control over 
her brain signal.
First, the patient practiced activating the mo-
tor cortex with a task in which she attempted to 
hit a target on a video screen by trying to move 
her right hand to move a cursor upward and 
then relaxing her hand to move the cursor down-
ward18 (target task) (Video 1, and Fig. S4A in the 
Supplementary Appendix). Next, she tried to 
regulate the magnitude and timing of her brain 
signal by moving an image of a ball up and 
down on the computer screen at specific mo-
ments indicated by the computer (ball task) (Fig. 
S4C in the Supplementary Appendix). She then 
learned to select specific items, shown in rows 
and columns on the screen, by generating “brain 
clicks,” which are analogous to mouse clicks 
(click task) (Video 2, and Fig. S4E in the Supple-
mentary Appendix). The patient made a brain 
click by trying to move her hand for approxi-
mately 1 second. She had to withhold brain 
clicks until the correct item was highlighted. 
Details of these tasks and of the signal process-
ing are provided in the Supplementary Appendix. 
During every research visit (two visits per week), 
the patient was asked to rate her mood and mo-
tivation on separate 21.5-cm visual-analogue 
scales, with higher scores on the motivation 
scale indicating higher motivation and higher 
scores on the mood scale indicating more de-
pressive feelings.19
Communication and Home Use
Spelling was accomplished by the selection, with 
brain clicks, of individual or grouped letters that 
were highlighted automatically and sequentially 
(Video 3, and Fig. S4 in the Supplementary Ap-
pendix). Similar to the click task, spelling in-
volved brain clicks being consciously withheld by 
the patient until the desired letter (or group of 
letters) was highlighted. To quantify perfor-
mance, the patient was asked to spell dictated 
words. Further details of this task are provided 
in the Supplementary Appendix. After every run, 
mental effort was rated by the patient on a scale 
of 1 to 5 (with higher scores indicating greater 
mental effort).
When settings had been established that made 
reliable spelling possible, a home-use system 
was provided to the patient; the system included 
automated decoding, fixed settings, and a com-
mercial spelling program (Communicator-5, Tobii 
Dynavox), all running on a tablet (Microsoft Sur-
face Pro 4). On day 197, she started using the 
entire system without assistance from the inves-
tigators.
Home use of the system — and of the eye 
tracker, for comparison — were evaluated 7 to 
9 months after surgery with the use of two user-
satisfaction questionnaires: the modified Que-
bec User Evaluation of Satisfaction with Assistive 
Technology (QUEST 2.0)20 and Psychosocial Im-
pact of Assistive Devices Questionnaire (PIADS).21 
Possible responses on QUEST 2.0 (12 items) range 
from very unsatisfied to very satisfied (5 options), 
and responses on PIADS (26 items) range from 
a very negative to a very positive effect of the 
device (7-point scale, ranging from −3 to 3).
Results
Determination of the Activated Cortical 
Region
The patient’s attempts to move her right hand 
resulted in consistent fMRI activity in the left 
sensorimotor hand area (Fig. S1 in the Supple-
mentary Appendix). Electrocorticography revealed 
that in each electrode strip, two specific elec-
trodes recorded a consistent signal when the 
Videos showing 
the performance 
of the tasks are 
available at 
NEJM.org
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY LIBRARY UTRECHT on January 26, 2017. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2016 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 375;21 nejm.org November 24, 2016
2064
The new engl and jour nal of medicine
patient attempted to move her hand (Figs. S1 and 
S3 in the Supplementary Appendix). The elec-
trode strip located immediately over the hand 
motor area was selected for further use (Fig. 1, 
and Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix).
Decoding and Training
The patient performed 67 sessions (2 per week), 
each 2 hours in duration, at her home over the 
262 days after surgery. Training and home-use 
sessions overlapped for several weeks. Sessions 
were used to test the algorithms that translated 
cortical activity to computer actions, to investi-
gate the stability of the performance of the sys-
tem over time, and to practice spelling (Fig. 2).
The patient’s performance on the target task 
was correct a mean (±SD) of 91±6% of the time 
(83 runs were performed between day 15 and 
day 262). Her performance on the click task was 
correct 87±7% of the time (37 runs were per-
formed between day 157 and day 238). Inhibit-
ing unintended brain clicks22 while preserving 
sensitivity to intended actions required several 
months of refining the algorithms. When the 
parameter testing was completed (day 157), the 
control signal was stable and the software set-
tings were fixed. Additional details regarding 
the results of these tests and the setting of filter 
parameters are provided in Figs. S4, S5, and S6 
in the Supplementary Appendix. Data from one 
target-task run and one click-task run are avail-
able at http://dx 
. 
doi 
. 
org/ 
10 
. 
5061/ 
dryad 
. 
k9f10.
Visual-analogue scores for mood, for which 
higher scores indicate greater depression, were 
consistently below 30% (the lower limit for mild 
depression).23 An exception occurred during a 
short period of unrelated medical problems, but 
the visual-analogue scores for motivation during 
this period remained above 80% (Fig. S7 in the 
Supplementary Appendix).
Communication and Independent Home Use
From day 168 to day 262, a total of 44 spelling 
runs were performed during research visits, and 
the patient’s performance was correct 89±6% of 
the time (Fig. 3, and Fig. S4 in the Supplemen-
tary Appendix). Half the incorrect clicks occurred 
just before or just after the target letter, which 
indicated that they were caused by small timing 
errors. The mental effort required during spell-
ing, rated by the patient on a scale from 1 to 5, 
declined from an initial value of 5 to a mean of 
Figure 2. Overview of Training Sessions.
Two training sessions were conducted every week at the home of the patient. A total of 357 runs (with tasks that were 
2 to 5 minutes in duration) were performed in 67 sessions. Shading indicates the types of tasks that were performed. 
Spelling was attempted in week 8, but the patient reported that excessive mental effort was required. Better decod-
ing enabled spelling starting from week 25. Arrows with the same shading as the bars indicate the time at which pa-
rameter settings for the respective task were established, marking the onset of actual training on the task. The ball 
task was used only for parameter adjustment and was not subsequently used for training after the parameter set-
tings had been fixed.
No. of Runs
25
15
20
10
5
0
2
4
6
8
10
30
Weeks since Implantation
Ball task
Click task
Target task
Spelling
12
14
16
18
22
24
26
28
32
34
36
38
20
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY LIBRARY UTRECHT on January 26, 2017. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2016 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 375;21 nejm.org November 24, 2016
2065
Brief Report
2.8. Spelling initially took 52 seconds per letter; 
the time required dropped to 33 seconds per let-
ter when word prediction was used.
The home-use system was used at will with 
minimal assistance. Setting up the system re-
quired assistance in positioning the antenna, 
positioning and switching on the receiver and 
tablet, and connecting the cables; these tasks 
did not require any special skills (Fig. 1D). Logs 
from the patient’s system indicated that from 
day 197 (when she received the home-use sys-
tem) through day 266, she used the system for 
communication on 32 days (Fig. 3B) and for 86 
minutes per day on average. She used the system 
whenever she went outside, where lighting con-
ditions made eye tracking impossible; in those 
circumstances, she relied on the system as the 
only means of communication and also used it 
to draw the attention of her caregiver by using 
the brain click to select a button that generated 
a sound.
Satisfaction with the home-use system was 
similar to that with the eye tracker. For both 
systems, the modified QUEST 2.0 scores for all 
aspects of use were “satisfied/very satisfied,” 
with the exception of “adaptability to your spe-
cific situation” for the eye tracker (for which the 
score was “unsatisfied”). PIADS items were 
grouped into three domains (competence, adapt-
ability, and self-esteem); the resulting scores for 
the system and the eye tracker were 1.1 and 1.3, 
2.2 and 1.5, and 1.0 and 0.6, respectively.
Discussion
We describe a method for autonomous commu-
nication, involving a fully implanted brain–com-
puter interface, for use by a locked-in patient with 
late-stage ALS. By attempting to move her hand 
and by using software that automatically extract-
ed electrocortical signal features, the patient was 
able to control commercial communication soft-
ware that could type, albeit at a slow rate. She 
was able to use the system at home with mini-
mal assistance; the assistance that was required 
mainly involved placement of the antenna in 
proximity to the implanted transmitter. The 
patient was able to use the system to replace an 
eye tracker when lighting conditions made the 
eye tracker impossible to use. She reported high 
levels of satisfaction with the device and used it 
multiple times per week. Scores for both systems 
were slightly lower than those previously reported 
for eye trackers by patients with ALS (a score of 
approximately 2 on the three PIADS domains 
and high satisfaction on the QUEST 2.0).24
These results show that the system is capable 
of meeting the requirements for independent 
communication and could be a method of com-
munication for patients who are unable to use 
Figure 3. Spelling Performance.
Panel A shows spelling performance aggregated over all 44 spelling runs, with the mean percentage of correct and 
incorrect responses indicated; T bars indicate standard deviations. Correct responses included the selection of the 
correct letters (“active” trial) and omission of a brain click when other letters were highlighted (“inactive” trial); 
more inactive than active trials were performed. Panel B shows the hours per day of use of the home-use system 
for spelling (the system was not used daily; therefore, days are not consecutive).
Percentage of All Trials
100
80
90
70
60
40
30
10
50
20
0
Correct
Incorrect
A
Inactive
Active
Hours of Use
8
7
6
4
3
1
5
2
0
Days after Implantation
B
197
241
258
266
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY LIBRARY UTRECHT on January 26, 2017. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2016 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 375;21 nejm.org November 24, 2016
2066
Brief Report
conventional communication tools such as eye 
trackers. Factors that may limit the use of the 
system by future patients include cortical dam-
age, cognitive impairment, and unsupportive care-
giving.
Supported by government grants from the Netherlands 
(UGT7685, Economic Affairs SSM06011 and STW 12803, cospon-
sored by Medtronic) and the European Union (ERC-Adv 320708).
Disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with 
the full text of this article at NEJM.org.
We thank Tineke Gebbink and Bert Kamphuis for their help 
with the electrocorticographic recordings during and after the 
first surgery; Gerrit Melis and Guus Wisse for their help in set-
ting up and performing the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
experiments; Martine van Zandvoort for neuropsychological 
evaluation and monitoring of the psychological health of the 
patients in the study; Tom Snijders for preoperative and postop-
erative neurologic evaluation; Janine Ophorst for help in sched-
uling and for the postoperative medical evaluation; Jurgen de 
Graaff for providing anesthesiologic support during the design 
of the study and during the MRI scans and surgical procedures; 
Leo van Wolfswinkel for anesthesiologic support during the MRI 
scans and surgical procedures; Bert Jansen for placing the fidu-
cial markers; Femke Nijboer for advice on the informed consent 
procedure with locked-in patients and for serving as an indepen-
dent observer during this procedure; Ghislaine van Thiel for help-
ful discussions on the ethical aspects of implants for locked-in 
patients; Diederik van Dijk, Meggy Peters, Roland Burgers, and 
the intensive care unit nurses at University Medical Center 
Utrecht for hosting and care of our patient; Michael Gaytant for 
help and advice regarding mechanical ventilation; Herke Jan 
Noordmans for assistance in neuronavigational issues; Bon Ver-
weij for helpful discussions about neurosurgery and brain–com-
puter interfaces for locked-in patients; Gaetano Leogrande, Scott 
Stanslaski, and Randy Jensen for technical support before and 
during the implantation of the device; Mark Bruurmijn, Efraïm 
Salari, and Julia Berezutskaya for helpful discussion and for help 
with data analysis during the implantation week; Meron Vermaas 
for his help in developing a user-friendly software platform for 
training games and communication; Quido de Valk for advice on 
assistive technology to potential and excluded patients; and the 
patient in this study, for her time, effort, and helpful feedback.
References
1. American Congress of Rehabilitation 
Medicine. Recommendations for use of 
uniform nomenclature pertinent to pa-
tients with severe alterations in conscious-
ness. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1995; 
76: 
205-9.
2. Chiò A, Logroscino G, Traynor BJ, et 
al. Global epidemiology of amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis: a systematic review of 
the published literature. Neuroepidemiol-
ogy 2013; 
41: 
118-30.
3. Laureys S, Pellas F, Van Eeckhout P, et 
al. The locked-in syndrome: what is it 
like to be conscious but paralyzed and 
voiceless? Prog Brain Res 2005; 
150: 
495-
511.
4. Bruno MA, Bernheim JL, Ledoux D, 
Pellas F, Demertzi A, Laureys S. A survey 
on self-assessed well-being in a cohort 
 
of chronic locked-in syndrome patients: 
happy majority, miserable minority. BMJ 
Open 2011; 
1(1): 
e000039.
5. Rousseau MC, Baumstarck K, Ales-
sandrini M, Blandin V, Billette de Ville-
meur T, Auquier P. Quality of life in pa-
tients with locked-in syndrome: evolution 
over a 6-year period. Orphanet J Rare Dis 
2015; 
10: 
88.
6. Wolpaw JR. Brain-computer interfac-
es as new brain output pathways. J Physiol 
2007; 
579: 
613-9.
7. Leuthardt EC, Schalk G, Wolpaw JR, 
Ojemann JG, Moran DW. A brain-comput-
er interface using electrocorticographic 
signals in humans. J Neural Eng 2004; 
1: 
63-71.
8. Pfurtscheller G, Flotzinger D, Pregen-
zer M, Wolpaw JR, McFarland D. EEG-
based brain computer interface (BCI): 
search for optimal electrode positions and 
frequency components. Med Prog Technol 
1995-1996; 
21: 
111-21.
9. Kennedy PR, Bakay RA. Restoration 
of neural output from a paralyzed patient 
by a direct brain connection. Neuroreport 
1998; 
9: 
1707-11.
10. Hochberg LR, Serruya MD, Friehs 
GM, et al. Neuronal ensemble control of 
prosthetic devices by a human with tetra-
plegia. Nature 2006; 
442: 
164-71.
11. Collinger JL, Wodlinger B, Downey JE, 
et al. High-performance neuroprosthetic 
control by an individual with tetraplegia. 
Lancet 2013; 
381: 
557-64.
12. Bouton CE, Shaikhouni A, Annetta 
NV, et al. Restoring cortical control of 
functional movement in a human with 
quadriplegia. Nature 2016; 
533: 
247-50.
13. Huggins JE, Wren PA, Gruis KL. What 
would brain-computer interface users 
want? Opinions and priorities of potential 
users with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. 
Amyotroph Lateral Scler 2011; 
12: 
318-24.
14. Nijboer F. Technology transfer of brain-
computer interfaces as assistive technol-
ogy: barriers and opportunities. Ann Phys 
Rehabil Med 2015; 
58: 
35-8.
15. Vansteensel MJ, Hermes D, Aarnoutse 
EJ, et al. Brain-computer interfacing based 
on cognitive control. Ann Neurol 2010; 
67: 
809-16.
16. Hermes D, Miller KJ, Vansteensel MJ, 
Aarnoutse EJ, Leijten FS, Ramsey NF. 
Neurophysiologic correlates of fMRI in 
human motor cortex. Hum Brain Mapp 
2012; 
33: 
1689-99.
17. Siero JC, Hermes D, Hoogduin H, 
Luijten PR, Ramsey NF, Petridou N. BOLD 
matches neuronal activity at the mm scale: 
a combined 7T fMRI and ECoG study in 
human sensorimotor cortex. Neuroimage 
2014; 
101: 
177-84.
18. Schalk G, McFarland DJ, Hinterberger 
T, Birbaumer N, Wolpaw JR. BCI2000: 
 
a general-purpose brain-computer inter-
face (BCI) system. IEEE Trans Biomed 
Eng 2004; 
51: 
1034-43.
19. Kleih SC, Riccio A, Mattia D, et al. 
Motivation affects performance in a P300 
Brain Computer Interface. Int J Bioelec-
tromagn 2011; 
13: 
46-7.
20. Kübler A, Holz EM, Riccio A, et al. 
The user-centered design as novel per-
spective for evaluating the usability of 
BCI-controlled applications. PLoS One 
2014; 
9(12): 
e112392.
21. Day H, Jutai J. Measuring the psycho-
social impact of assistive devices: the 
PIADS. Can J Rehabil 1996; 
9: 
159-68.
22. Torres Valderrama A, Paclik P, Van-
steensel MJ, Aarnoutse EJ, Ramsey NF. 
Error probability of intracranial brain com-
puter interfaces under non-task elicited 
brain states. Clin Neurophysiol 2012; 
123: 
2392-401.
23. Bech P, Timmerby N, Martiny K, Lunde 
M, Soendergaard S. Psychometric evalua-
tion of the Major Depression Inventory 
(MDI) as depression severity scale using 
the LEAD (Longitudinal Expert Assess-
ment of All Data) as index of validity. BMC 
Psychiatry 2015; 
15: 
190.
24. Caligari M, Godi M, Guglielmetti S, 
Franchignoni F, Nardone A. Eye tracking 
communication devices in amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis: impact on disability and 
quality of life. Amyotroph Lateral Scler 
Frontotemporal Degener 2013; 
14: 
546- 
52.
Copyright © 2016 Massachusetts Medical Society.
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY LIBRARY UTRECHT on January 26, 2017. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2016 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
