 Bert B. Vargas, MD
Morgan Shepard, BS
Joseph G. Hentz, MS
Cherisse Kutyreff, ATC
L. George Hershey, DO
Amaal J. Starling, MD
Correspondence to
Dr. Vargas:
bert.vargas@UTSouthwestern.edu
Feasibility and accuracy of teleconcussion
for acute evaluation of suspected
concussion
ABSTRACT
Objective: To assess the feasibility and accuracy of telemedical concussion evaluations (telecon-
cussion) for real-time athletic sideline assessment of concussion, as such assessment may
address the gap in access some populations of athletes have to providers with expertise in con-
cussion evaluation.
Methods: A cohort of 11 consecutive male collegiate football players with suspected concussion
was assessed using Standardized Assessment of Concussion (SAC), King-Devick test (K-D), and
modified Balance Error Scoring System (mBESS). A remote neurologist assessed each athlete
using a telemedicine robot with real-time, 2-way audiovisual capabilities, while a sideline provider
performed a simultaneous face-to-face assessment. After the assessment, a remove-from-play
(RFP) determination was made. The remote and the face-to-face providers were blinded to each
other’s examination findings and RFP decision until the end of the assessment.
Results: The teleconcussion and face-to-face SAC were in agreement 100% of the time (6/6;
95% confidence interval [CI] 54%–100%). The mean (SD) difference between remote and side-
line K-D times was 0.7 (1.4) seconds. Remote and sideline K-D times were within a 3-second
difference 100% of the time (11/11; 95% CI 72%–100%). Remote and sideline mBESS scores
were within 3 points 100% of the time (6/6; 95% CI 54%–100%). RFP decisions were in
agreement 100% of the time (11/11; 95% CI 72%–100%).
Conclusions: The aim of this study was to investigate the feasibility of teleconcussion for sideline
concussion assessments. These data suggest a high level of agreement between remote and
face-to-face providers with regard to examination findings and RFP determinations. Neurology®
2017;88:1580–1583
GLOSSARY
CI 5 confidence interval; K-D 5 King-Devick test; mBESS 5 modified Balance Error Scoring System; RFP 5 remove-from-
play; SAC 5 Standardized Assessment of Concussion; TBI 5 traumatic brain injury.
An estimated 1.6–3.8 million traumatic brain injuries (TBIs) occur annually in the United
States among 38 million children and adolescents and 170 million adults engaged in organized
physical and sports-related activities.1 To help improve concussion and TBI identification and
postinjury care, some sports organizations have employed unaffiliated neurotrauma consultants
to provide sideline evaluation for suspected injuries.2
This same level of care is not available for most youth and collegiate-level athletes. Of more
than 4,000 US colleges and universities,3 most have qualified medical staff providing care for
elite-level sports teams; however, most have no access to neurotrauma experts on the sideline.
Moreover, among the 37,000 US public and private secondary schools,4 58% do not have access
to any sideline medical personnel (including athletic trainers).5 This problem may be com-
pounded by geographic disparities as rural colleges, universities, and high schools may have even
less access to specialty care than schools in major metropolitan areas.
Telemedicine has been shown to be a safe and effective means to evaluate and treat numerous acute
neurologic conditions, including stroke,6 in populations with limited access to subspecialty care.
From the Department of Neurology and Neurotherapeutics (B.B.V.), University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas; Departments of
Neurology (M.S., A.J.S.) and Biostatistics (J.G.H.), Mayo Clinic in Arizona, Scottsdale; and Department of Sports Medicine (C.K., L.G.H.),
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff.
Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures. Funding information and disclosures deemed relevant by the authors, if any, are provided at the end of the article.
1580
© 2017 American Academy of Neurology
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Similarly, telemedicine evaluation for concussion
(hereafter referred to as teleconcussion) may also
allow the higher-level care seen in professional
sports to be delivered to underserved populations
including high school, collegiate, and rural
athletes.3,7 The present study aimed to assess
the feasibility and accuracy of teleconcussion
evaluations of male collegiate football players
evaluated for suspected concussion.
METHODS A cohort of adult male collegiate athletes was re-
cruited and enrolled from the active roster of the Northern Arizona
University football team during preseason sports physical examina-
tions. All consenting athletes received face-to-face baseline exami-
nations from the study team, including a symptom severity checklist,
Standardized Assessment of Concussion (SAC), King-Devick test
(K-D), and modified Balance Error Scoring System (mBESS). Over
the course of 2 seasons of competition, all athletes with suspected
concussion were evaluated by the Northern Arizona University
medical team in the athletic training room or on the sideline. For the
duration of the face-to-face history and examination, a remote
neurologist was present and independently scored the same
examination via telemedicine robot (VGo; VGo Communications,
Inc., Nashua, NH) (figure 1). During each football game, the
remote neurologist was logged on continuously to the tele-
medicine robot so as to provide rapid and efficient evaluations of
the athlete while simultaneously monitoring athletes for possible
injuries through live game broadcast (figure 2).
After the face-to-face examination, the remote neurologist
had the ability to ask additional questions and repeat any portion
of the physical examination. Final, blinded remove-from-play
(RFP) determinations were made by the face-to-face evaluator
and the remote evaluator. Both the face-to-face and the remote
examiners were blinded to each other’s examination findings
and RFP determinations until the face-to-face medical staff ren-
dered a final diagnosis and disposition.
For the purposes of this study, the face-to-face examination
and clinical decisions of the primary medical team were both final
and the gold standard against which teleconcussion assessments
and decision-making were compared. Confidence intervals
(CIs) were calculated by using the exact binomial method.
Figure 1
Telepresence robot used for the
remote evaluation of concussion
VGo remote telepresence robot at Northern Arizona Univer-
sity’s J. Lawrence Walkup Skydome. Image used with per-
mission from Vecna Technologies, Inc.
Figure 2
Remote neurologist engagement during football game
(A) Remote neurologist logged into the telepresence robot using a laptop computer while simultaneously watching live game
broadcast. Image of King-Devick Test used with permission. (B) Remote neurologist point of view, showing an on-field per-
spective from sideline telepresence via tablet device and a secondary on-field perspective via live game broadcast. Image
reproduced with permission of Springer, © Springer Science1Business Media New York 2015. (The emerging role of
telemedicine in the evaluation of sports-related concussion. In: Tsao JW, Demaerschalk, BM, editors. Teleneurology in
Practice: A Comprehensive Clinical Guide. New York: Springer; 2015:159 –165.)
Neurology 88
April 18, 2017
1581
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Standard protocol approvals, registrations, and patient
consents. Before participant recruitment, the Mayo Clinic Insti-
tutional Review Board provided approval for this study.
RESULTS In total, 123 athletes were enrolled in the
study, 50 of whom participated through 2 athletic
seasons. Over these 2 seasons, 11 consecutive ath-
letes with suspected concussion were evaluated.
The specific tests and testing protocols used for each
assessment were made by the face-to-face providers.
Because of the efficiency needed for game time as-
sessments, some athletes were removed from play
based only on history and K-D performance. K-D
scores and RFP decisions were obtained from remote
and sideline assessments for all 11 athletes evaluated
for suspected concussion. SAC and mBESS scores
were obtained for 6 of the 11 athletes who were not
removed from play on the basis of history and K-D
scores.
The mean (SD) difference between remote and side-
line K-D times was 0.7 (1.4) seconds and the times were
within a 3-second difference in 100% of cases (11/11;
95% CI 72%–100%). The teleconcussion and face-to-
face SACs were in agreement 100% of the time (6/6;
95% CI 54%–100%). Remote and sideline mBESS
scores were within 3 points 100% of the time (6/6;
95% CI 54%–100%). RFP decisions were in agreement
100% of the time (11/11; 95% CI 72%–100%).
DISCUSSION This
aim
of
this
study
was
to
objectively determine the accuracy of teleconcussion as-
sessments compared with the gold standard of face-to-
face assessments in real-world scenarios during compe-
tition. This feasibility study suggests that teleconcussion
evaluations are safe and effective for providing accurate
and rapid assessments of athletes and RFP determi-
nations at the time of suspected injury.
The authors acknowledge some limitations in this
study. The sample size is small; however, the aim of
the study was to provide pilot data for formulating
larger, more comprehensive future studies, which will
be necessary to reach more definitive conclusions. The
remote and face-to-face examiners were not the same
for every assessment (examinations were conducted
among a pool of 2 remote and 2 face-to-face examiners).
Another limitation is that the examiners were not com-
pared with each other at baseline to demonstrate stan-
dardization
and
agreement
of
examination
interpretation and scoring. However, this lack of com-
parison did not likely affect the outcome because the
agreement level on examination scoring was high (even
on subjective measures such as mBESS), with full agree-
ment on final RFP decision making. This study did not
address whether using a robotic unit vs less-expensive,
more portable technology influences the ease and accu-
racy of assessments. Although the authors infer that tele-
concussion assessments can be conducted in the absence
of face-to-face personnel, this hypothesis was not meant
to be supported with these data.
Previously, telemedicine has been shown to be
potentially effective for the remote neurologic evalua-
tion of TBI.8 A body of evidence now exists that
telerehabilitiation is potentially effective at directing
functional
recovery
in
patients
with
TBI.9
Videoconference-based telemedical neuropsychologi-
cal assessments have been shown to be as accurate as
face-to-face interactions.10 Furthermore, the first
published teleconcussion evaluation noted an ability
to perform a neurologic examination of the athlete in
Figure 3
Additional after-injury assessment capabilities of remote neurologist
Remote evaluation of additional clinical data, including computerized cognitive testing and imaging studies.
1582
Neurology 88
April 18, 2017
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 the emergency department while remotely reviewing
pertinent imaging studies and performance on after-
injury computerized cognitive testing3 (figure 3).
The conclusions from these studies suggest that
teleconcussion is an accurate tool that may be used
throughout the course of an athlete’s concussion
care—from the hyperacute and acute stages (on the
sideline or in the emergency department) through
recovery (with clinical assessments of neurologic and
neuropsychometric function paired with physical and
cognitive rehabilitation). The authors hypothesize
that eventual return-to-play decisions can be made
telemedically because these decisions are frequently
based on interpretation of histories and physical
examination components similar to those used for
RFP decision-making. The accuracy of teleconcus-
sion for return-to-play decisions is beyond the scope
of this study and should be examined in greater detail
with future research.
This study quantitatively examines the feasibility
and accuracy of telemedicine for sports-related concus-
sion at the time of injury. It addresses possible solutions
for existing gaps in medical care for youth athletes in
particular who are not only more susceptible to the ef-
fects of concussion but who also have fewer resources
than elite-level athletes for proper concussion educa-
tion, identification, and care. In addition to the need
for more research demonstrating the safety and efficacy
of teleconcussion for RFP and return-to-play decisions,
the cost-effectiveness of these assessments, and the need
for a face-to-face provider to assist with the examina-
tion, should also be appraised critically.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Bert Vargas: study concept and design, acquisition of data, and drafting/revision
of manuscript for content. Morgan Shepard: acquisition of data, critical revision
of manuscript for intellectual content. Joseph Hentz: analysis and interpretation
of data, critical revision of manuscript for intellectual content. Cherisse
Kutyreff: study concept and design, acquisition of data, and drafting/revision
of manuscript for content. L. George Hershey: study concept and design,
acquisition of data, critical revision of manuscript for intellectual content.
Amaal Starling: study concept and design, acquisition of data, and
drafting/revision of manuscript for content.
STUDY FUNDING
No governmental sponsorship or funding was used for this study. This
study was funded by the Mayo Clinic Center for Innovation.
DISCLOSURE
B. Vargas received honoraria for serving on scientific and clinical research
advisory boards for Pernix Therapeutics and Alder Biopharmaceuticals.
He has also agreed to receive honoraria from Eli Lilly and Company
and Avanir Pharmaceuticals for clinical research consulting and participa-
tion on clinical research advisory boards. He serves on the speakers’
bureau for Avanir Pharmaceuticals. M. Shepard, J. Hentz, C. Kutyreff,
G. Hershey, and A. Starling report no disclosures relevant to the manu-
script. Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures.
Received July 17, 2016. Accepted in final form January 24, 2017.
REFERENCES
1.
Daneshvar DH, Nowinski CJ, McKee AC, Cantu RC.
The epidemiology of sport-related concussion. Clin Sports
Med 2011;30:1–17.
2.
Goodell R, Batjer HH, Ellenbogen RG. Accelerating prog-
ress on the road to safer sports: based on remarks of NFL
Commissioner Roger Goodell in the Neurosurgical Society
of America (NSA) medal lecture. Neurosurgery 2014;75
(suppl 4):S119–S121.
3.
Vargas BB, Channer DD, Dodick DW, Demaerschalk
BM. Teleconcussion: an innovative approach to screening,
diagnosis, and management of mild traumatic brain injury.
Telemed J E Health 2012;18:803–806.
4.
Snyder TD, Dillow SA. Digest of Education Statistics
2013 (NCES2015–011). [Internet]. Washington, DC:
US Department of Education; 2015. Available at: nces.
ed.gov/pubs2015/2015011.pdf. Accessed October 28,
2015.
5.
Chrisman SP, Quitiquit C, Rivara FP. Qualitative study of
barriers to concussive symptom reporting in high school
athletics. J Adolesc Health 2013;52:330–335.
6.
Mutgi SA, Zha AM, Behrouz R. Emerging subspecialties
in neurology: telestroke and teleneurology. Neurology
2015;84:e191–e193.
7.
Kutcher JS, McCrory P, Davis G, Ptito A, Meeuwisse
WH, Broglio SP. What evidence exists for new strategies
or technologies in the diagnosis of sports concussion
and assessment of recovery? Br J Sports Med 2013;47:
299–303.
8.
Yurkiewicz IR, Lappan CM, Neely ET, et al. Outcomes
from a US military neurology and traumatic brain injury
telemedicine program. Neurology 2012;79:1237–1243.
9.
Ng EM, Polatajko HJ, Marziali E, Hunt A, Dawson
DR. Telerehabilitation for addressing executive dysfunc-
tion after traumatic brain injury. Brain Inj 2013;27:
548–564.
10.
Grosch MC, Weiner MF, Hynan LS, Shore J, Cullum
CM. Video teleconference-based neurocognitive screen-
ing
in
geropsychiatry.
Psychiatry
Res
2015;225:
734–735.
Neurology 88
April 18, 2017
1583
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 DOI 10.1212/WNL.0000000000003841
2017;88;1580-1583 Published Online before print March 24, 2017
Neurology 
Bert B. Vargas, Morgan Shepard, Joseph G. Hentz, et al. 
Feasibility and accuracy of teleconcussion for acute evaluation of suspected concussion
This information is current as of March 24, 2017
Services
Updated Information &
 
http://n.neurology.org/content/88/16/1580.full
including high resolution figures, can be found at:
References
 
http://n.neurology.org/content/88/16/1580.full#ref-list-1
This article cites 9 articles, 3 of which you can access for free at: 
Subspecialty Collections
 
http://n.neurology.org/cgi/collection/clinical_neurology_examination
Clinical neurology examination
 
http://n.neurology.org/cgi/collection/brain_trauma
Brain trauma
following collection(s): 
This article, along with others on similar topics, appears in the
  
Permissions & Licensing
 
http://www.neurology.org/about/about_the_journal#permissions
its entirety can be found online at:
Information about reproducing this article in parts (figures,tables) or in
  
Reprints
 
http://n.neurology.org/subscribers/advertise
Information about ordering reprints can be found online:
rights reserved. Print ISSN: 0028-3878. Online ISSN: 1526-632X.
1951, it is now a weekly with 48 issues per year. Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Neurology. All 
® is the official journal of the American Academy of Neurology. Published continuously since
Neurology 
