 Default mode contributions to automated
information processing
Deniz Vatansevera,b,c,1, David K. Menona,d, and Emmanuel A. Stamatakisa,b,d
aDivision of Anaesthesia, School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, United Kingdom; bDepartment of Clinical
Neurosciences, School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, United Kingdom; cDepartment of Psychology, University of York,
Heslington, York YO10 5DD, United Kingdom; and dWolfson Brain Imaging Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, United Kingdom
Edited by Marcus E. Raichle, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, and approved September 28, 2017 (received for review June 13, 2017)
Concurrent with mental processes that require rigorous computa-
tion and control, a series of automated decisions and actions
govern our daily lives, providing efficient and adaptive responses
to environmental demands. Using a cognitive flexibility task, we
show that a set of brain regions collectively known as the default
mode network plays a crucial role in such “autopilot” behavior,
i.e., when rapidly selecting appropriate responses under predict-
able behavioral contexts. While applying learned rules, the default
mode network shows both greater activity and connectivity. Fur-
thermore, functional interactions between this network and hip-
pocampal and parahippocampal areas as well as primary visual
cortex correlate with the speed of accurate responses. These find-
ings indicate a memory-based “autopilot role” for the default
mode network, which may have important implications for our
current understanding of healthy and adaptive brain processing.
default mode network | cognitive flexibility | functional magnetic
resonance imaging | functional connectivity | autopilot
E
ssential to our survival, the human brain has evolved a re-
markable ability to deal with multiple, ever-changing de-
mands in the environment (1). Often termed cognitive flexibility,
this capacity to adjust our behavior under variable contexts helps us
generate appropriate responses to attain goals or to avoid danger
(2). For instance, rerouting a car due to heavy traffic, updating our
beliefs in the face of new information, or shifting from one con-
versation to another all constitute daily examples of such flexible
thinking. Converging evidence from healthy control studies as well
as patients with psychopathology suggests that this type of a mental
process is mediated by the interactions between corticostriatal
brain regions (3).
However, the successful pursuit of goals for adaptive purposes
also requires a level of cognitive stability or maintenance (4). In
fact, a considerable portion of our daily lives comprises learned,
automatic, reflexive or habitual behaviors under specific contexts
in stable environments, as opposed to the controlled and ef-
fortful processes commonly scrutinized in experimental settings
(5). Taking a leisurely stroll in the park, driving to work, or
knowing how to behave at a dinner table all involve adaptive
decisions and actions based on learned constructs of the world
around us. Complementary to cognitive flexibility, this type of
memory-based behavior allows us to provide context-specific,
fast, and efficient responses to environmental demands.
A set of brain regions, collectively known as the default mode
network (DMN), may play a crucial role in such “autopilot” be-
havior (6, 7). Extensive evidence suggests that regions belonging to
this large-scale, associative brain network display their highest
engagement under stable environmental conditions (8), including
task-free resting state scanning (9). Although early investigations
have mainly highlighted the DMN’s contribution to spontaneous
internal thoughts that arise during such unconstrained states of rest
(10), greater DMN activity/connectivity has also been observed
when participants were required to access their memory stores
during task-based functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
studies. Retrieval of autobiographical memory (11), ignition of
strong semantic associations (12), and higher demands for working
memory (13) have all been related to the recruitment of specific
DMN regions.
In this regard, with its strategic positioning along functional
gradients of cortical organization (14), the DMN reportedly ex-
emplifies the neural center for a mental map of associative mem-
ory, which is learned from regularities in the environment (15, 16).
As such, the automated use of this internalized information to deal
with routine “worldly” demands may constitute an important as-
pect of this network’s contribution to human cognition. However,
whether the DMN embodies the neural correlate of memory-
based, automated information processing that aids fast, efficient,
and context-specific responses requires further investigation.
In this experiment, we tailored a variant of a commonly used
cognitive flexibility task, the Wisconsin Card Sorting Task (WCST),
to create experimental contexts with varying levels of demand for
access to learned information to be used in automated decision-
making. A total of 28 healthy participants were presented with four
permanent reference cards as well as one alternating target card,
drawn from a pool of 60 cards. The goal of this task was to sort the
target card to one of the reference cards using a set of rules (i.e.,
sorting dimensions) and feedback indicating choice accuracy (Fig.
1A). While the sorting dimensions for the task included color,
shape, and number, the rule for the control condition was identity;
i.e., the target card was identical to one of the reference cards.
Significance
In addition to dealing with variable demands of the environment
in everyday life, we are continuously faced with routine, pre-
dictable challenges that require fast and effective responses. In
an fMRI-based cognitive flexibility task, we show greater activ-
ity/connectivity centered on the default mode network during
such automated decision-making under predictable environ-
mental demands. Furthermore, we report on a significant corre-
lation between this network and hippocampal connectivity and
individual differences in the participants’ ability to make auto-
mated, fast, and accurate responses. Together, these results
suggest an “autopilot” role for this network that may have im-
portant theoretical implications for our understanding of healthy
brain processing in meeting worldly demands.
Author contributions: D.V., D.K.M., and E.A.S. designed research; D.V. performed re-
search; D.V. and E.A.S. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; D.V. and E.A.S. analyzed
data; and D.V., D.K.M., and E.A.S. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Published under the PNAS license.
Data deposition: All statistical images associated with this article were deposited to the
Neurovault open access repository (https://neurovault.org/collections/2969/). All raw data
are archived at the Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre, Cambridge, and Division of Anaesthe-
sia, School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
See Commentary on page 12641.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: ddsv2@cam.ac.uk.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1710521114/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1710521114
PNAS
|
November 28, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 48
|
12821–12826
NEUROSCIENCE
SEE COMMENTARY
 Each rule was repeated four times with the total task consisting
of 16 (4 blocks × 4 rules) blocks of 10 trials. Importantly, although
the participants were notified when the rule had changed (i.e., after
every 10 trials), they were not told the new sorting dimension.
Thus, during the first few trials following the rule change, partici-
pants had to rely on feedback to deduce the context and make
appropriate selections. This trial-and-error stage was defined as the
“acquisition” (learning) phase of each block. Once the rule was
firmly established, participants could then rely on the learned re-
sponses from memory for choosing the appropriate card, here
referred to as the “application” phase. We operationally stratified
the task into these two phases after completion of half the trials to
produce separate subsets: trials 1–5 and trials 6–10, maximized for
“acquisition” and “application” content, respectively.
Based on the autopilot account of DMN function, we hypoth-
esized that (i) the DMN regions would be more active in the ap-
plication phase relative to the rule acquisition phase of the
paradigm, i.e., when the task demanded greater access to learned,
memory-based information for fast, automated, and efficient re-
sponses; (ii) the connectivity of the DMN regions would be altered
to reflect this network’s differential contribution during the rule-
application phase of the cognitive flexibility task; and (iii) greater
functional interaction of the DMN regions would be predictive of
faster and more accurate decision making, specifically in the ap-
plication phase. In addition, this performance relationship would
be dissociated from that of the dorsal attention network (DAN),
traditionally linked to the controlled and effortful processing of
attention-demanding, external information (17, 18).
Results
Differential Brain Activity During Cognitive Flexibility Task. In line
with our expectations for the behavioral stratification of the task,
participants were less accurate in the acquisition phase, with an
average of 91.92% correct responses, than in the application phase,
with an average of 98.94% correct responses [t(27) = 17.64, P <
0.0001] (Fig. 1B and SI Appendix, Table S2). Similarly, the correct
response latency was longer for the acquisition phase (1,252.31 ms)
in comparison with the application (1,119.30 ms) phase of the task
condition [t(27) = 8.28, P < 0.0001]. This phase-specific result of a
slower response was also significant in the control conditions
[t(27) = 6.82, P < 0.0001]; however, after multiple comparison
correction, no significant difference was observed in accuracy
[t(27) = −2.12, P = 0.17]. These results indicate that the participants
were less accurate and slower in finding the correct response under
novel environmental demands, whereas once the rule was acquired,
the responses were faster and more accurate, demonstrating
context-specific, learned decision-making.
Having demonstrated the expected differentiation in behavioral
performance, the next step was to examine the relative differences
in brain activity between the acquisition and application phases of
the cognitive flexibility task. Similar to the brain areas observed in
effortful task performance (Fig. 1C and SI Appendix, Table S3), in
a given environmental context (i.e., task rule) we postulated that a
greater number of regions commonly associated with controlled,
effortful processing would be more active in the acquisition phase
compared with the application phase (1, 18). This would allow
more perceptual information to be extracted from the environment
to aid the decision-making process. In contrast, greater DMN ac-
tivity would be observed during the application phase in compar-
ison with the acquisition phase, allowing the use of memory-based
information for responding to environmental demands.
Comparable to this hypothesis, the results revealed a highly
symmetrical bilateral set of frontoparietal, insular, subcortical, and
cerebellar brain regions more active in the acquisition compared
with the application phase of the task (Fig. 2A and SI Appendix,
Table S4). These areas, often referred to as the multiple-demand
network (19), have been previously shown to engage during the
WCST (20) as well as other tests of cognitive flexibility (2). From a
Fig. 1.
Experimental design, behavioral, and brain activation results for the cognitive flexibility task. (A) During a single trial, in addition to four permanent
reference cards, participants were presented with a target card chosen from a pool of 60 cards. Following the “Sort” prompt, a block of 10 trials commenced
for a given sorting dimension (color, shape, number, or identity) that was undisclosed to the participants. In each trial, they were presented with feedback
indicating choice accuracy. (B) In comparison with the control condition, the percentage of correct responses was lower, and correct response latency was
longer, in the task condition. Further dividing these results, the participants performed worse in the acquisition in comparison with the application phases of
both the task and control conditions (SI Appendix, Table S2) (**** denotes P < 0.0001, and the error bars represent SE). (C) The conventional contrast of task >
control blocks revealed activity centered on an extensive system of brain areas encompassing regions commonly associated with the frontoparietal, dorsal
attention, cingulo-opercular, salience, and visual networks (SI Appendix, Table S3). There were no significant results in the task < control contrast. The
reported clusters are uncorrected at the voxel level (P = 0.001), and Family Wise Error (FWE)-corrected for multiple comparisons at the cluster level (P = 0.05).
12822
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1710521114
Vatansever et al.
 large-scale brain network organization perspective, these coac-
tivating brain regions have been largely associated with the fron-
toparietal, dorsal attention, cingulo-opercular, salience, and visual
networks (21), which have been denoted as “externally directed”
networks. More specifically, the dorsal attention network (DAN)
activity has been previously shown to anticorrelate with that of the
DMN during resting state conditions (17).
On the other hand, compared with the acquisition phase, the
application phase displayed greater activity centered on the default
mode as well as somatomotor network regions including the ventro-
medial (orbitofrontal) prefrontal cortex; parts of the ventral anterior
cingulate cortex, posterior cingulate cortex, and precuneus; medial
temporal lobe structures including the hippocampal formation and
parahippocampal gyrus as well as the right amygdala, superior, and
middle temporal gyri, posterior insula, Heschl’s gyri, and rolandic
operculum; middle cingulate and paracentral lobule; postcentral
and precentral gyri; parts of the left angular gyrus; and the left
middle occipital gyrus (Fig. 2B and SI Appendix, Table S5).
Although the DMN has not been extensively studied in tasks
of cognitive flexibility, emerging evidence suggests its contribu-
tion to tasks associated with this function (22, 23), i.e., our ability
to apply learned rules. For instance, Provost and colleagues have
investigated the brain’s responses to changing or continuous
application of WCST rules in an experiment in which the par-
ticipants were explicitly informed about the relevant rules to be
applied (24). In line with findings from our experiment, in which
the participants had to implicitly deduce the rule via trial-and-
error, the continuous application of the same rule was linked to
greater activity in regions commonly associated with the DMN,
suggesting the potential contribution of this set of brain regions
to memory-based, automated phases of goal-oriented tasks.
Altered Brain Network Connectivity During Cognitive Flexibility Task.
Following this observed differential activity of brain regions
commonly associated with controlled, effortful processing (e.g.,
DAN) and those belonging to the DMN in the acquisition and
application phases of the WCST task, respectively, our next
objective was to determine the extent of the dorsal attention
and default mode networks’ interactions with the rest of the
brain during task performance. Specifically, we aimed to assess
any changes in the functional connectivity of these two net-
works, which are commonly anticorrelated at rest (17) and are
purported to mediate externally and internally directed cognition,
respectively (25).
First, we examined DAN connectivity during the acquisition
and application phases of the WCST, using a seed on the left
frontal eye field (FEF) (26). In both phases of the task condition,
the results revealed an extensive DAN that encompassed the
FEF and inferior parietal lobule as has been previously discussed
in the literature (17). However, the DAN illustrated altered con-
nectivity with the middle/superior temporal and inferior/superior
parietal gyri in the acquisition phase compared with the appli-
cation phase (Fig. 3A and SI Appendix, Tables S6–S8), i.e., re-
gions which have all been previously implicated in attentional
control relevant to the task at hand (27, 28).
Next, we investigated DMN connectivity in the two phases of
the task using a seed that was placed on the left posterior cin-
gulate cortex/precuneus (PCC/PCUN) region, a main hub of the
DMN. In both the acquisition and the application phases, the
results revealed an extensive DMN as defined in the literature
(29). However, the DMN showed greater connectivity to a range
of areas in the application phase compared with the acquisition
phase, including the PCC/PCUN, ventromedial prefrontal cor-
tices, and left angular gyrus. In addition, reduced connectivity
was observed with the bilateral insular gyri and right presupple-
mentary motor area as well as increased anticorrelation with
regions commonly linked to the DAN (Fig. 3B and SI Appendix,
Tables S9–S11). These findings indicate the robust temporal
correlations of these two networks throughout the two phases of
the WCST, with alterations in their functional connectivity in re-
sponse to the variable demands for access to external or memory-
based information to be used in the decision-making. Most im-
portantly, the results indicate continuous DMN engagement in a
goal-oriented task with alterations in its spatial topography in
response to changing demands for access to learned information.
Double Dissociation of Brain and Behavior Relationships. Following
these results on the altered, yet continuous engagement of DAN
and DMN regions during the two phases of the WCST, the final
question we asked was whether the connectivity of these two
networks in their respective phases would differentially relate to
behavioral performance. Beyond the DMN’s usual association
with task-unrelated internal mentation (30), our aim was to il-
lustrate this network’s contribution to WCST performance via
memory-based, automated decision-making that is differentiated
from the contribution of the DAN (traditionally associated with
controlled, effortful information processing).
For that purpose, we first investigated the relationship be-
tween DAN connectivity and reaction time to correct responses
in the acquisition and application phases of the WCST. The
results indicated that greater connectivity between FEF and
somatomotor regions (precentral and postcentral gyrus and the
paracentral lobule) in the acquisition phase correlated with
faster reaction times and thus better performance (Fig. 4A and
SI Appendix, Table S12). However, no such correlation between
the FEF and any brain regions was found in the application
phase (Fig. 4B). This connectivity between the FEF and the
precentral gyrus is believed to control saccades when processing
visual information (28, 31), which is an important component of
this task, i.e., facilitating an extensive visual search and extraction
of information during rule acquisition.
For the DMN, greater connectivity of the PCC/PCUN with the
parahippocampal gyrus, hippocampal formation, amygdala, and
primary visual cortices correlated with faster reaction time to
correct responses and thus better performance in the application
phase of the WCST (Fig. 4D and SI Appendix, Table S13).
Nevertheless, no such correlation of the PCC/PCUN with any
other brain region was found in the acquisition phase (Fig. 4C). Given
the vast amount of literature that indicates the role of medial tem-
poral lobe structures in context-specific, memory-based information
Fig. 2.
Differential task-evoked activity profiles of distinct brain regions in the
acquisition and application phases of the cognitive flexibility task. While the
(A) acquisition > application contrast revealed regions commonly associated
with the frontoparietal, dorsal attention [e.g., frontal eye fields (FEF); inferior
parietal sulcus (IPS)], cingulo-opercular, salience, and visual networks from a
large-scale brain network organization perspective, the (B) acquisition < application
contrast showed greater activity in regions commonly associated with the
default mode [e.g., posterior cingulate cortex (CC); ventromedial prefrontal
cortex (vmPFC)] and somatomotor networks (SI Appendix, Tables S4 and S5).
The reported clusters are uncorrected at the voxel level (P = 0.001), and FWE-
corrected for multiple comparisons at the cluster level (P = 0.05).
Vatansever et al.
PNAS
|
November 28, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 48
|
12823
NEUROSCIENCE
SEE COMMENTARY
 processing (32, 33) and the visual nature of the task at hand, it is
plausible that the observed correlation indicates the participants’
ability to access and utilize learned responses in dealing with stable
environmental contexts during the application phase of the WCST.
In summary, these brain and behavioral results reveal a double
dissociation in which the relative DAN and DMN connectivity in
the acquisition and application phases of the WCST, respec-
tively, correlate with enhanced behavioral performance. Specif-
ically, these results strongly suggest the DMN’s task relevance in
the application phase of the WCST, indicating its ongoing con-
tribution to learned, automated, and fast responses for decision-
making under a given behavioral context (or rule).
Discussion
Despite the mounting evidence on its extensive structural and
functional connections (34) and implication in a variety of neu-
ropsychiatric as well as neurodegenerative disorders (35), the
exact functional role of the DMN in human cognition remains
elusive. To this end, the major aim of this study was to provide
evidence for this network’s positive contribution to the performance
of an externally directed, attention-demanding, goal-oriented, non–
self-referential task of cognitive flexibility and to outline a general
framework within which it may operate to contribute to adaptive
cognition. Overall, the findings allude to the involvement of the
DMN in automated information processing, i.e., when rapidly
selecting appropriate responses under specific, predictable envi-
ronmental demands.
Recent models of brain function suggest that our brains are wired
in a way that maximizes the anticipation of external events (36). The
internalization of statistical regularities through worldly experiences
forms the foundations of our expectations (priors or best guesses),
which can then be used to interpret, predict, and act upon envi-
ronmental demands (36–38). Indeed, the intrinsic activity of the
brain, specifically that of the DMN, which uses a considerable
portion of our brain energy supplies (9), is suggested to reflect such
internal models of the world that could aid in the interpretation of
our surroundings (16, 39–41). Although such predictive processing
may constitute the common mechanism by which the brain pro-
cesses information as a whole, what may distinguish the DMN is its
ability to provide a common workspace for convergence of infor-
mation with its extensive functional and structural connections to
the rest of the brain and specifically its access to memory-based
information (34). This integrative capacity of the DMN (13) is
thought to be a hallmark of consciousness (42), the levels of
which have been previously associated with DMN integrity (43).
From this perspective, the relatively increased activity/connectivity
of the DMN in the application phase of the WCST observed in this
study may indicate this network’s ability to integrate memory-based
information (13), generating top-down associative predictions under
stable environmental contexts (16) for automated, fast, and efficient
Fig. 3.
Altered functional connectivity patterns of
the dorsal attention and default mode networks in
the acquisition and application phases of the cognitive
flexibility task. Both networks revealed expected
connectivity maps in both phases of the task. While
(A) DAN included the frontal eye fields and the in-
ferior parietal sulcus, (B) DMN encompassed the
posterior cingulate, medial prefrontal cortex, bilateral
angular gyri, superior frontal gyrus, medial temporal
lobe structures, and the temporal poles. (A) Compared
with the application phase, in the acquisition phase,
DAN illustrated reduced connectivity with the left
middle/superior temporal and inferior/superior parie-
tal gyri (SI Appendix, Tables S6–S8). (B) In comparison
with the acquisition phase, in the application phase
the DMN showed greater connectivity with the pos-
terior cingulate cortex/precuneus, ventromedial pre-
frontal cortices, and left angular gyrus and reduced
connectivity with bilateral insular gyri and right pre-
supplementary motor area (SI Appendix, Tables S9–
S11). The reported clusters are uncorrected at the
voxel level (P = 0.001), and FWE-corrected for multiple
comparisons at the cluster level (P = 0.05). The bar
charts display the connectivity values (beta weights) of
the clusters that showed a significant change between
the acquisition and application phases of the task.
12824
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1710521114
Vatansever et al.
 decision-making. In contrast, unpredictable, novel, or salient events,
beyond the scope of the DMN’s memory-based processing, such
as the one required in the acquisition phase of this task, may
demand further external attention and perceptual information
for making decisions. This would increase the involvement of net-
works commonly associated with controlled, effortful processing
such as the frontoparietal, cingulo-opercular, salience, and dorsal
attention networks (18). Thus, the anticorrelation previously re-
ported between the DMN and DAN (17) might represent these
networks’ differential but complementary roles in facilitating the
theorized predictive processing of the brain. Therefore, the spec-
trum of differential involvement of these two networks may not be
based on the dichotomy of internally versus externally directed
cognition, but may rather be dependent on the predictability of the
environmental demands, requiring either learned (memory-based)
or novel (perception-based) responses. Indeed, recent evidence
suggests a dynamic interplay between the DMN and DAN in the
redirection of attention, potentially controlled by the salience and/
or frontoparietal network’s influence on determining the saliency
and predictability of incoming information (44–46).
Such duality in decision-making under varying levels of pre-
dictability in the environment has been extensively discussed in the
scientific literature. Norman and Shallice have argued for stored
schemas that automatically take over processing in familiar envi-
ronmental contexts, while the supervisory attentional system was
postulated to play an intentional inhibitory role when the en-
vironmental rules changed (47). Along a similar line of thought,
Kahneman and Tversky have also devised an influential two-system
view of brain processing (48); one (System 1) required to carry out
automated decision-making to provide fast best-guesses, and an-
other (System 2) used to make calculated and effortful decisions.
Based on our results, we propose that the DMN may contribute
to an “autopilot mode” that makes memory-based predictions to
aid decision-making under established behavioral contexts, whereas
control networks are involved in a “manual mode” that overrides
the automatic system when the DMN fails to reliably predict the
environment. This proactive framework of brain function may
provide an all-important scaffold to explain not only the DMN’s
ongoing activity in stable “rest” conditions, but also its contribution
to social interactions (e.g., theory of mind, intuition, and stereo-
typing), a conscious sense-of-self, creativity, and a variety of other
cognitive domains (49) that all require the stable use of learned
information for predicting the world around us. Hence, future
studies will be required to assess the potential role that the DMN
may play in the formation of habitual behavior for the neuro-
economics of decision-making and its potential breakdown in dis-
orders such as addiction, obsessive-compulsive disorder, or clinical
depression.
Materials and Methods
Participants. Ethical approval was obtained from the Cambridge Psychology
Research Ethics committee in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. All
volunteers gave informed consent before their participation. Following the
exclusion criteria, this right-handed, healthy control group consisted of 28 par-
ticipants (22–34 y old, mean = 26.8, SD = 2.8, 13/15 female to male ratio) with
an average National Adult Reading Test (NART) score of 121.22 (SD = 3.17).
Experimental Paradigm Specifications. The experimental paradigm was a
variant of the WCST (50) that was modified for the scanner environment,
utilizing a mixed design. Stimuli were delivered, and responses were recor-
ded, using an open source software package called PsychoPy (Version 1.83).
In addition to the task and control blocks conventionally used in this para-
digm, we operationally stratified the task into “acquisition” and “applica-
tion” phases. Full details about the experimental paradigm and procedures
followed for the preprocessing and analysis of both the behavioral and
imaging data are provided in the SI Appendix, SI Materials and Methods.
MRI Data Acquisition. The participants were scanned in a Siemens MAGNETOM
Tim Trio 3T scanner (32-channel head coil) at the Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre,
Cambridge. The scanning session started with a high-resolution T1-weighted,
magnetization-prepared rapid gradient-echo (MPRAGE) structural scan (TR =
2,300 ms, TE = 2.98 ms, slice thickness = 1.00 mm). The echo planar imaging (EPI)
sequence parameters for the WCST functional data acquisition were as
follows: 37 slices in each volume, 3.0 mm slice thickness, 3.0 × 3.0 × 3.0 voxel
size, TR = 2,000 ms, TE = 30 ms, flip angle = 78°. The number of 3D volumes
varied according to the speed of the participants’ responses to the task
(mean = 347 volumes, SD = 12).
MRI Data Preprocessing. MRI data preprocessing and statistical analyses were
carried out using the SPM software package (Version 12.0), based on the
MATLAB platform (Version 15a). For preprocessing, functional volumes were
slice-time and motion-corrected, coregistered to the high-resolution structural
image, spatially normalized to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space
using the unified-segmentation algorithm (51), smoothed with an 8 mm
FWHM Gaussian kernel, and carried forward onto statistical analyses.
MRI Data Analysis.
Task-evoked activation analysis. Subject-level analyses with the appropriate
contrasts were set up using the general linear model (GLM). For the task >
control and task < control contrasts the design matrix included the onsets and
durations of the task and control conditions. When comparing the acquisition
and application phases of the task, the events were modeled as impulses, in-
cluding the onsets of the correct/incorrect responses for the two phases of the
task with zero duration. The resulting subject-specific contrast maps were car-
ried forward onto group-level analyses using one-sample t tests.
Functional connectivity analysis. For the seed-based functional connectivity
analysis, the MNI coordinates of two seed regions representing the DAN and
the DMN (17, 26) were selected from the literature. The closest local peaks to
these coordinates (in terms of Euclidean distance) were identified in the
acquisition > application (for the DAN) and acquisition < application (for the
Fig. 4.
Double dissociation of the brain and behavior correlations in the ac-
quisition and application phases of the cognitive flexibility task. (A) While the
DAN (FEF seed) connectivity with a left-lateralized cluster (shown in red) on the
pre/post central gyrus, paracentral lobule (PreCG) correlated with better per-
formance (i.e., faster reaction time) in the acquisition phase (P < 0.0001), (B) no
such correlation with any brain regions was found in the application phase.
(The correlation between FEF and PreCG in the application phase is shown for
illustration purposes.) (D) In contrast, connectivity of the DMN (PCC/PCUN seed)
with both the left-lateralized medial temporal lobe (MTL) structures (hippo-
campal/parahippocampal gyri and amygdala) (shown in red) as well as the bi-
lateral primary visual cortices correlated with better performance in the
application phase (P < 0.0001). (C) However, no such correlation was found in
the acquisition phase with any brain region (The correlation between PCC/
PCUN and MTL in the acquisition phase is shown for illustration purposes.) (SI
Appendix, Tables S12 and S13). The reported clusters were uncorrected at the
voxel level (P = 0.001) and multiple-comparison–corrected at the cluster level
using the FWE detection technique (P = 0.05).
Vatansever et al.
PNAS
|
November 28, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 48
|
12825
NEUROSCIENCE
SEE COMMENTARY
 DMN) contrasts of the group-level task-evoked activation analysis. Sub-
sequently, spheres with 6-mm radius were constructed around the MNI co-
ordinates of the left FEF [−25 −8 50] for the DAN and left PCC/PCUN [−12 −54
18] for the DMN. A strict temporal preprocessing pipeline of nuisance re-
gression included motion and CompCor components attributable to the signal
from white matter and cerebrospinal fluid (52) as well as a linear detrending
term. The subject-specific six realignment parameters, the main effect of task-
conditions, and their first-order derivatives were also included in the analysis as
potential confounds. Given the mixed design of this WCST variant, a low-pass
temporal filter was not employed. The Conn functional connectivity toolbox
(Version 15.h) (53) was used to assess phase-specific changes in functional
connectivity (i.e., acquisition versus application) using the weighted GLM
method. Following this procedure, seed-based functional connectivity analyses
were performed for each subject using the average signal from the spheres
placed on the MNI coordinates for the two regions of interest (ROIs) described
above. Group-level analyses were carried out using t-statistics in which a one-
sample t test assessed the group-level spatial extent of DMN and DAN con-
nectivity in the acquisition and application phases, whereas a paired t test
between these phases examined any changes in these networks’ functional
connectivity.
Brain and behavior correlation analysis. The voxel-based correlation analysis
involved using the connectivity maps obtained from the seed-based func-
tional connectivity analyses for the two phases in separate linear regressions
with the reaction times to correct responses used as the variable of interest.
All reported findings for the MRI data analyses were uncorrected at the voxel
level (P = 0.001) and multiple-comparison–corrected at the cluster level using
the FWE detection technique (P = 0.05).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Mrs. Victoria Lupson, Ms. Karen Welsh,
Dr. Marius Mada, and the rest of the staff in the Wolfson Brain Imaging
Centre (WBIC) at Addenbrooke’s Hospital for their assistance in MRI scan-
ning. In addition, we thank all the participants for their contribution to this
study. This study was funded by the Yousef Jameel Academic Program grant
(awarded to D.V.). Additionally, D.K.M. is supported by the National Insti-
tute for Health Research (NIHR) Cambridge Biomedical Centre (RCZB/004)
and an NIHR Senior Investigator Award (RCZB/014), and E.A.S. is funded by
the Stephen Erskine Fellowship Queens’ College, Cambridge.
1. Duncan J (2010) The multiple-demand (MD) system of the primate brain: Mental
programs for intelligent behaviour. Trends Cogn Sci 14:172–179.
2. Kehagia AA, Murray GK, Robbins TW (2010) Learning and cognitive flexibility: Frontos-
triatal function and monoaminergic modulation. Curr Opin Neurobiol 20:199–204.
3. Cools R, Clark L, Robbins TW (2004) Differential responses in human striatum and
prefrontal cortex to changes in object and rule relevance. J Neurosci 24:1129–1135.
4. Armbruster-Genç DJ, Ueltzhöffer K, Fiebach CJ (2016) Brain signal variability differ-
entially affects cognitive flexibility and cognitive stability. J Neurosci 36:3978–3987.
5. Hélie S, Waldschmidt JG, Ashby FG (2010) Automaticity in rule-based and in-
formation-integration categorization. Atten Percept Psychophys 72:1013–1031.
6. Elton A, Gao W (2015) Task-positive functional connectivity of the default mode
network transcends task domain. J Cogn Neurosci 27:2369–2381.
7. Raichle ME (2015) The brain’s default mode network. Annu Rev Neurosci 38:433–447.
8. Kucyi A, Esterman M, Riley CS, Valera EM (2016) Spontaneous default network activity
reflects behavioral variability independent of mind-wandering. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 113:13899–13904.
9. Raichle ME, et al. (2001) A default mode of brain function. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:
676–682.
10. Binder JR, et al. (1999) Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A
functional MRI study. J Cogn Neurosci 11:80–95.
11. Spreng RN, et al. (2014) Goal-congruent default network activity facilitates cognitive
control. J Neurosci 34:14108–14114.
12. Krieger-Redwood K, et al. (2016) Down but not out in posterior cingulate cortex:
Deactivation yet functional coupling with prefrontal cortex during demanding se-
mantic cognition. Neuroimage 141:366–377.
13. Vatansever D, Menon DK, Manktelow AE, Sahakian BJ, Stamatakis EA (2015) Default
mode dynamics for global functional integration. J Neurosci 35:15254–15262.
14. Margulies DS, et al. (2016) Situating the default-mode network along a principal gradient
of macroscale cortical organization. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113:12574–12579.
15. Constantinescu AO, O’Reilly JX, Behrens TEJ (2016) Organizing conceptual knowledge
in humans with a gridlike code. Science 352:1464–1468.
16. Bar M (2009) The proactive brain: Memory for predictions. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B
Biol Sci 364:1235–1243.
17. Fox MD, et al. (2005) The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anti-
correlated functional networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:9673–9678.
18. Hugdahl K, Raichle ME, Mitra A, Specht K (2015) On the existence of a generalized
non-specific task-dependent network. Front Hum Neurosci 9:430.
19. Fedorenko E, Duncan J, Kanwisher N (2013) Broad domain generality in focal regions
of frontal and parietal cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110:16616–16621.
20. Buchsbaum BR, Greer S, Chang WL, Berman KF (2005) Meta-analysis of neuroimaging
studies of the Wisconsin card-sorting task and component processes. Hum Brain Mapp
25:35–45.
21. Smith SM, et al. (2009) Correspondence of the brain’s functional architecture during
activation and rest. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:13040–13045.
22. Vatansever D, Manktelow AE, Sahakian BJ, Menon DK, Stamatakis EA (2015) Cogni-
tive flexibility: A default network and basal ganglia connectivity perspective. Brain
Connect 6:201–207.
23. Dang LC, Donde A, Madison C, O’Neil JP, Jagust WJ (2012) Striatal dopamine influ-
ences the default mode network to affect shifting between object features. J Cogn
Neurosci 24:1960–1970.
24. Provost JS, Monchi O (2015) Exploration of the dynamics between brain regions as-
sociated with the default-mode network and frontostriatal pathway with regards to
task familiarity. Eur J Neurosci 41:835–844.
25. Boly M, et al. (2008) Intrinsic brain activity in altered states of consciousness: How
conscious is the default mode of brain function? Ann N Y Acad Sci 1129:119–129.
26. Vincent JL, Kahn I, Snyder AZ, Raichle ME, Buckner RL (2008) Evidence for a fronto-
parietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity. J Neurophysiol
100:3328–3342.
27. Ciaramelli E, Grady CL, Moscovitch M (2008) Top-down and bottom-up attention to
memory: A hypothesis (AtoM) on the role of the posterior parietal cortex in memory
retrieval. Neuropsychologia 46:1828–1851.
28. Ptak R, Schnider A (2010) The dorsal attention network mediates orienting toward
behaviorally relevant stimuli in spatial neglect. J Neurosci 30:12557–12565.
29. Andrews-Hanna JR, Smallwood J, Spreng RN (2014) The default network and self-
generated thought: Component processes, dynamic control, and clinical relevance.
Ann N Y Acad Sci 1316:29–52.
30. McKiernan KA, D’Angelo BR, Kaufman JN, Binder JR (2006) Interrupting the “stream
of consciousness”: An fMRI investigation. Neuroimage 29:1185–1191.
31. Vernet M, Quentin R, Chanes L, Mitsumasu A, Valero-Cabré A (2014) Frontal eye field,
where art thou? Anatomy, function, and non-invasive manipulation of frontal regions
involved in eye movements and associated cognitive operations. Front Integr Nuerosci 8:66.
32. Eichenbaum H (2004) Hippocampus: Cognitive processes and neural representations
that underlie declarative memory. Neuron 44:109–120.
33. Smith DM, Mizumori SJ (2006) Hippocampal place cells, context, and episodic mem-
ory. Hippocampus 16:716–729.
34. Horn A, Ostwald D, Reisert M, Blankenburg F (2014) The structural-functional con-
nectome and the default mode network of the human brain. Neuroimage 102:142–151.
35. Whitfield-Gabrieli S, Ford JM (2012) Default mode network activity and connectivity
in psychopathology. Annu Rev Clin Psychol 8:49–76.
36. Friston K (2010) The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nat Rev Neurosci
11:127–138.
37. Clark A (2013) Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of
cognitive science. Behav Brain Sci 36:181–204.
38. Hohwy J (2014) The Predictive Mind (Oxford Univ Press, Oxford, UK), 1st Ed, 282 pp.
39. Raichle ME (2006) Neuroscience. The brain’s dark energy. Science 314:1249–1250, and
erratum (2007) 315:187.
40. Carhart-Harris RL, Friston KJ (2010) The default-mode, ego-functions and free-energy:
A neurobiological account of Freudian ideas. Brain 133:1265–1283.
41. Northoff G, Duncan NW, Hayes DJ (2010) The brain and its resting state activity–Ex-
perimental and methodological implications. Prog Neurobiol 92:593–600.
42. Tononi G (2008) Consciousness as integrated information: A provisional manifesto.
Biol Bull 215:216–242.
43. Guldenmund P, Vanhaudenhuyse A, Boly M, Laureys S, Soddu A (2012) A default
mode of brain function in altered states of consciousness. Arch Ital Biol 150:107–121.
44. Menon V, Uddin LQ (2010) Saliency, switching, attention and control: A network
model of insula function. Brain Struct Funct 214:655–667.
45. Gao W, Lin W (2012) Frontal parietal control network regulates the anti-correlated
default and dorsal attention networks. Hum Brain Mapp 33:192–202.
46. Uddin LQ (2015) Salience processing and insular cortical function and dysfunction. Nat
Rev Neurosci 16:55–61.
47. Norman D, Shallice T (1986) Attention to action. Consciousness and Self-Regulation,
eds Davidson R, Schwartz G, Shapiro D (Springer, New York), pp 1–18.
48. Tversky A, Kahneman D (1974) Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.
Science 185:1124–1131.
49. Buckner RL, Andrews-Hanna JR, Schacter DL (2008) The brain’s default network:
Anatomy, function, and relevance to disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1124:1–38.
50. Berg EA (1948) A simple objective technique for measuring flexibility in thinking.
J Gen Psychol 39:15–22.
51. Ashburner J, Friston KJ (2005) Unified segmentation. Neuroimage 26:839–851.
52. Behzadi Y, Restom K, Liau J, Liu TT (2007) A component based noise correction
method (CompCor) for BOLD and perfusion based fMRI. Neuroimage 37:90–101.
53. Whitfield-Gabrieli S, Nieto-Castanon A (2012) Conn: A functional connectivity toolbox
for correlated and anticorrelated brain networks. Brain Connect 2:125–141.
12826
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1710521114
Vatansever et al.
