 H E A L T H A N D M E D I C I N E
2017 © The Authors,
some rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. Distributed
under a Creative
Commons Attribution
NonCommercial
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Combining contact tracing with targeted indoor
residual spraying significantly reduces
dengue transmission
Gonzalo M. Vazquez-Prokopec,1,2* Brian L. Montgomery,3,4 Peter Horne,3
Julie A. Clennon,5 Scott A. Ritchie6,7
The widespread transmission of dengue viruses (DENV), coupled with the alarming increase of birth defects and
neurological disorders associated with Zika virus, has put the world in dire need of more efficacious tools for
Aedes aegypti–borne disease mitigation. We quantitatively investigated the epidemiological value of location-
based contact tracing (identifying potential out-of-home exposure locations by phone interviews) to infer trans-
mission foci where high-quality insecticide applications can be targeted. Space-time statistical modeling of data
from a large epidemic affecting Cairns, Australia, in 2008–2009 revealed a complex pattern of transmission driven
primarily by human mobility (Cairns accounted for ~60% of virus transmission to and from residents of satellite
towns, and 57% of all potential exposure locations were nonresidential). Targeted indoor residual spraying with
insecticides in potential exposure locations reduced the probability of future DENV transmission by 86 to 96%, com-
pared to unsprayed premises. Our findings provide strong evidence for the effectiveness of combining contact tracing
with residual spraying within a developed urban center, and should be directly applicable to areas with similar char-
acteristics (for example, southern USA, Europe, or Caribbean countries) that need to control localized Aedes-borne virus
transmission or to protect pregnant women’s homes in areas with active Zika transmission. Future theoretical and
empirical research should focus on evaluation of the applicability and scalability of this approach to endemic areas
with variable population size and force of DENV infection.
INTRODUCTION
Current efforts to contain the global spread of dengue viruses (DENV)
and the recent emergence of Chikungunya and Zika viruses are
proving futile. Most tropical and subtropical countries experience var-
iable levels of endemic dengue transmission and are vulnerable to the
occurrence of large and rapidly propagating outbreaks primarily
vectored by the endophilic mosquito Aedes aegypti (1–4). Limited
availability and efficacy of a dengue vaccine (5, 6), coupled with the
cocirculation of dengue with Chikungunya and Zika viruses, are push-
ing policy-makers to keep vector control as an indispensable tool for
disease mitigation (7). Unfortunately, although there are a few well-
documented historical examples of A. aegypti being eliminated or sig-
nificantly reduced through vector control (for example, hemispheric
yellow fever eradication plan and dengue control in Singapore and
Cuba), implementing these large-scale vertical programs in contempo-
raneous urban environments is now considered unfeasible (1). Thus,
achieving the World Health Organization’s goal of reducing global
dengue mortality by 50% and morbidity by 25% by 2020 (8) and
preventing the severe health outcomes associated with Zika virus infec-
tion will require adoption of integrated approaches combining multiple
tools that can act synergistically, particularly vector control and (when
they become widely available) vaccines (7). Theoretically, vaccination
increases herd immunity, increasing the sustainability of vector control,
whereas vector control reduces the force of infection by mosquitoes,
leading to lower vaccination thresholds needed to sustain long protection.
Contemporaneous dengue vector control tends to be reactive in nature,
responding to clinically apparent disease manifestations [which suffer
from delays inherent to passive surveillance systems (9)], focusing on
the cases’ primary residence, and depending strongly on area-wide inter-
ventionssuchasultralowvolumeorthermalfoggingofinsecticidessprayed
from streets; vector control is further limited by constraints in public
health personnel and resources during large outbreaks (10). Unfortunately,
there is little epidemiological evidence that existing methods, which have
beeninspiredbytheverticalyellowfeverinterventionsimplementedinthe
1950s, are adequate to prevent or contain virus transmission (7, 10–13).
A. aegypti mosquitoes predominantly rest indoors, primarily in hanging
objects, inside bedrooms, and on various surface materials (14, 15), a trait
that severely limits the efficacy of interventions such as truck-mounted
ultralow volume insecticide sprays or thermal fogging (16, 17). Indoor
spacesprayingwithportableultralowvolumesprayershasgreaterefficacy
at reaching resting adult mosquitoes, but its impact is transient because of
the lack of residual effect (18, 19). When properly performed, indoor
residualsprayingofinsecticides(IRS)canhaveasignificantimpactonadult
A. aegypti populations and likely also on dengue prevention (15, 20–23).
A recent meta-analysis concluded that there is need for more empirical
evidence on the potential utility of IRS for dengue prevention (13). The
fact that IRS is time-consuming and dependent on specialized human
resources has also hindered its adoption by policy-makers. Scalability of
highly effective but time-consuming methods such as IRS will remain a se-
rious challenge unless novel approaches for delivery are developed.
Recent field observational studies and mathematical models outline
the relevance of human movement in city-wide DENV propagation
(20, 24–26). However, public health interventions respond reactively
to clinically apparent cases of dengue disease by relying on the residential
addresses of each confirmed (or suspected) case to trigger interventions
1Department of Environmental Sciences, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322,
USA. 2Global Health Institute, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. 3Tropical
Public Health Unit Network, Queensland Health, Cairns, Queensland 4870, Austra-
lia. 4Metro South Public Health Unit, Metro South Health, Coopers Plains, Brisbane,
Queensland 4113, Australia. 5Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Rollins
School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. 6College of Public
Health, Medical and Veterinary Sciences, James Cook University, Cairns, Queensland
4878, Australia. 7Australian Institute of Tropical Health and Medicine, James Cook
University, Cairns 4878, Australia.
*Corresponding author. Email: gmvazqu@emory.edu
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Vazquez-Prokopec et al. Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1602024
17 February 2017
1 of 9
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 (16, 27). Although this approach likely prevents an important fraction of
all transmission events, it does not address transmission in places other
than homes (24, 28). Given that human exposure to infectious mosquitoes
and virus transmission by viremic individuals can be spatially disassociated
(25), focusing surveillance efforts in reconstructing dengue transmission
chains can be a more efficient means of proactively responding to disease
outbreaks. Contact tracing is a well-established public health surveillance
and control strategy that aims at following chains of infection rather than
isolated cases, with the ultimate goal of performing targeted control in
them (29). Theory and empiric evidence indicate that, for pathogens that
do not propagate randomly across populations, contact tracing can
increase both efficiency and effectiveness of interventions in comparison
to blanket application (29–33). While movement-focused contact tracing
is routinely performed to characterize travel history and identify dengue
importations, its applicability to identification of likely places of infection
within metropolitan areas has not yet been evaluated.
The goals of this study were to investigate the relevance of location-
based contact tracing in reconstructing metropolitan dengue trans-
mission chains of a large DENV-3 outbreak that occurred in Cairns,
Australia, between 2008 and 2009 and to evaluate the epidemiological
impact of IRS targeted at A. aegypti resting locations [targeted IRS
(TIRS)] on the occurrence of dengue symptomatic disease.
RESULTS
Characterizing human exposure patterns using contact
tracing data
Contact tracing performed on 902 laboratory-confirmed DENV
cases identified 2064 premises (home and other residential or work
Fig. 1. Metropolitan DENV epidemic transmission evidenced through contact tracing. (A) Total of 902 confirmed DENV cases during the 2008–2009 outbreak and
associated exposure locations reported through contact tracing. Blue dots show the contact locations of the epidemic’s index case, which initiated outbreaks both in
Cairns and Clifton Beach. (B) Relative connectivity between towns, measured as the proportion of all contact locations of DENV cases residing in a given town that
occurred at the other towns and thickness proportional to relative frequency of total locations (range, 0.1 to 1). For instance, an arrow going from Palm Cove (north) to
Cairns shows that 50% of all contact locations occurred in Cairns (and the remaining 50% locations in Palm Cove, as no other lines connect Palm Cove to other towns).
Location of towns in the network is proportional to their geographic location. (C) Probability density distribution (Pb) showing that a confirmed DENV case moved a given
distance from his or her residence (Dd), calculated both for Cairns and satellite town residents. (D) Same as (C), showing detail for the distance range of 0 to 500 m.
(E) Proportion of all contact locations of a given town that were found in the city of Cairns as a function of the Euclidian distance of each town to Cairns. The linear
relationship was statistically significant (P = 0.03).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Vazquez-Prokopec et al. Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1602024
17 February 2017
2 of 9
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 sites, from now on named “locations”) (Fig. 1A). An average of
2.9 (SD, 1.3) contact locations (including home residences) were
visited within each case’s period of virus exposure, with 32.7% of all
cases reporting their home as their only mosquito contact location
(fig. S1). The inferred town connectivity network shows Cairns as a
potential central hub for DENV exposure and transmission in the
metropolitan area (Fig. 1B). Most (92%) contact locations of Cairns
residents were found within the city, and up to 60% of all contact
locations in satellite towns were found within Cairns (Fig. 1B). This
uneven distribution of contact locations gave rise to different move-
ment kernels between Cairns and satellite town residents (Fig. 1, C
and D). While only 10% of all movements of Cairns residents
occurred more than 6 km from their home, most (73%) movements
of residents of satellite towns occurred more than 6 km from their
residence, primarily into Cairns. Most movements of Cairns residents
were found within the city, and the occurrence of contact locations in
close proximity (that is, within 200 m) of their residence was rare (only
2.3% of all movements; Fig. 1D). Finally, distance to Cairns was nega-
tively correlated with the proportion of contact locations of each town
that occurred in Cairns (Fig. 1E).
Space-time analyses of contact tracing data
Space-time analyses allowed reconstruction of the epidemic throughout
metropolitan Cairns by statistically identifying the most likely transmission
pathway of 823 of 902 (91%) symptomatic dengue cases. The Knox
test yielded the same number of spatiotemporally linked contact locations
and symptomatic cases (1207 and 823, respectively) when run using tem-
poral windows of 20 and 30 days. The epidemics’ index case (a Cairns
resident who introduced the virus from Indonesia) was also likely re-
sponsible for initiating a localized outbreak in the town of Clifton
Beach, 22 km north of Cairns (see the Supplementary Text). From
the two virus introduction points (Cairns and Clifton Beach), DENV
propagated throughout the metropolitan area (Fig. 2). On average,
39.6% (SD, 27.2%; range, 0 to 81.8%) of putative virus transmission
locations of residents of satellite towns were local (occurred within
their respective town). The remaining putative transmission locations
of residents of satellite towns could be tracked to locations found with-
in Cairns (Fig. 2). However, for Cairns residents, putative transmission
locations were found primarily (95.2%) within the city (Fig. 2). Areas
such as Trinity Park/Palm Cove and Gordonvale lacked significant lo-
cal transmission (all cases were linked to transmission in Cairns) (Fig.
2). This may be due to the prevalence of new housing with screened
windows in the former area, and, in Gordonvale, to low vector popu-
lations resulting from source reduction campaigns during a dengue
outbreak 3 years earlier (2006).
A total of 420 geographically independent space-time clusters of local
DENV transmission were identified (fig. S2). Exclusion of contact loca-
tions (that is, using solely the home residence to infer transmission
chains) decreased the number of space-time clusters (420 to 276) and
the overall connectivity of the transmission network (fig. S3). A large
proportion (273 of 420, 65%) of clusters were generated by two or
more cases residing in or visiting the same location (focal transmission
areas). It is worth noting a large cluster within a multifamily housing unit
where more than 30 cases were spatiotemporally linked (fig. S3). The size
of clusters that extended beyond isolated houses was heterogeneous and
ranged from 2 to 65 locations connected in space-time (Fig. 3). The ge-
ographic progression of space-time clusters showed a rapid spread from
the index cases’ neighborhood to the entire city, with a high concen-
tration of transmission chains in the neighborhood where the index
case lived (Fig. 3). Throughout metropolitan Cairns, 359 of 839 (42.8%)
cases were spatiotemporally linked to their residence only, while the
remaining 57.2% of cases included both their home and other out-of-
home contact locations (394 of 839, 47.0%) or only to out-of-home loca-
tions (86 of 839, 10.2%) as components of their putative transmission
chain (Fig. 4). This high out-of-home virus activity was consistent across
towns (Fig. 4).
Impact of TIRS at putative transmission sites
As the epidemic progressed, TIRS applications were scaled up to
contain the spread of the virus, reaching a total of 5428 locations treat-
ed over a 31-week period (figs. S4 and S5). All DENV case contact
locations and immediate neighboring premises were used to quantify
the effectiveness of TIRS in preventing symptomatic DENV transmis-
sion in comparison with untreated controls. The distribution of TIRS
and control houses was comparable both in time (both treatments being
incorporated proportionally within the same period; fig. S6) and space
(control and TIRS blocks were mixed within neighborhoods; fig. S7).
Fig. 2. Sources and sinks of metropolitan DENV transmission. Space-time in-
teraction tests identified putative virus transmission sites for 823 of 902 sympto-
matic laboratory-confirmed DENV cases during the 2008–2009 outbreak. The
resulting DENV transmission network shows Cairns as the primary virus transmis-
sion hub. Direction of arrows indicates residents of a locality (origin) whose ex-
posure occurred on a different locality (destination) and the thickness of edges is
proportional to the total number of locations that occurred on a given destination
locality. Numbers inside each pink circle point to the proportion of putative trans-
mission locations that occurred within that locality. For instance, for residents of
Palm Cove (north), none of the contact locations in the town were associated with
local DENV transmission. Instead, all transmission locations of Palm Cove residents
occurred within Cairns.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Vazquez-Prokopec et al. Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1602024
17 February 2017
3 of 9
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 The time to the next DENV case was significantly lower in houses treat-
ed with TIRS versus untreated houses (mixed-effects Cox proportional
hazards model, coeff = −0.99 ± 0.17; Z = −5.8; P < 0.001; SD of ran-
dom effects, 0.72; Fig. 5). While the proportion of houses without
DENV cases remained high for control houses, a significant reduction
in DENV was detected in TIRS houses for at least 100 days after treat-
ment (Fig. 5). The two curves showed no significant difference within
the first 10 days (mixed-effects Cox proportional hazards model, coeff =
0.35 ± 0.31; Z = 1.12; P = 0.26; Fig. 5), likely because of the occurrence
of cases in treated houses whose exposure may have occurred before
spraying (10 days can be considered an upper limit from infection to
onset of symptoms). Most (73.3%) locations receiving TIRS had one
additional case spatiotemporally linked to them, while control houses
had a much larger number of additional cases (fig. S8). When all cases
were considered, the calculated effectiveness of TIRS in preventing symp-
tomatic DENV infections, compared to control houses, was 0.861, and
0.961 using conservative estimates that excluded cases occurring within
10 days after intervention (Table 1).
DISCUSSION
When pathogen transmission occurs in a nonrandom fashion through
specific contact chains, there are significant benefits to modification of
surveillance and control programs to account for this transmission
heterogeneity (29–33). In Cairns, enhancing DENV passive surveillance
by incorporation of location-based contact tracing and TIRS provided
an unprecedented level of detail for understanding and responding to
a virus outbreak. Although this approach may be effective in similar
settings (for example, urban centers affected by sporadic outbreaks and
with strong public health infrastructure in southern USA, Europe, or
the Caribbean), the potential for implementation of contact tracing and
TIRS in less-developed DENV endemic areas will need to be evaluated.
Fig. 3. Spatiotemporal pattern of DENV propagation within Cairns. Locations that were statistically linked in space-time and where DENV transmission was likely to
occur (that is, putative transmission locations). Colors show the week of onset of symptoms (measured as time since the onset of symptoms of the epidemic’s index
case). Panels on the right show the same data but in temporal cuts as the epidemic progressed.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Vazquez-Prokopec et al. Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1602024
17 February 2017
4 of 9
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Reconstructing the full DENV transmission network during an ep-
idemic is virtually impossible because not all links are detectable by sur-
veillance system, particularly asymptomatic infections [some of which
with the ability to contribute to transmission (34)] and symptomatic
individuals not seeking health care (35). By capitalizing on the addition-
al information obtained through contact tracing, we were able to gain a
higher empirical insight into the complexity inherent to the epidemic
transmission of DENV compared to studies that use the home residence
as the unit of analysis. Human mobility was a major mechanism respon-
sible for long-distance virus propagation, while within close proximity of
the home residence (<200 m), the probability of detecting contact loca-
tions was negligible (<5%). These findings agree with previous research
from urban areas in the Peruvian Amazon and Vietnam that show high-
ly focal transmission of DENV (24, 28). The role of humans as dispersers
of infection was demonstrated by our observations of the structure of the
resulting DENV metropolitan transmission networks, which presented a
strong source-sink structure in which most transmission events occurred
within the city of Cairns. This pattern, also described when analyzing data
at coarser spatialscales (36, 37), has important publichealthimplications
because vector control activities are generally deployed on those satellite
towns that are potentially serving as sinks for transmission.
The recent Ebola outbreak in West Africa has provided solid evi-
dence for the utility of incorporating contact tracing within resource-
poor countries (38) but also points to significant gaps in local public
health infrastructure (39). In large urban centers (for example, mega-
cities) or areas that experience a high force of DENV infection, track-
ing the mobility of every case and using this information to inform
control actions may not be feasible because of the limitations in per-
sonnel and the need to simultaneously cover multiple areas with re-
ported contact locations. Thus, there is a need to assess the scalability
and cost-effectiveness of contact tracing for DENV and other Aedes-
borne viruses. For sexually transmitted pathogens, network models have
been elegantly used to evaluate how contact structure, population size,
the presence of asymptomatic infections, and spatial heterogeneity affect
the efficacy of contact-based interventions (29, 33). Given the strong
spatial heterogeneity in vector distribution (40) and the potential syner-
gistic connections between human mobility, symptoms, and mosquito
exposure (41), translating findings from directly transmitted to vector-
borne pathogens may not be realistic. Mathematical or simulation models
that account for human movement and out-of-home human-mosquito
contacts [for example, see studies by Perkins et al. and Hladish et al.
(42, 43)] could be used to theoretically evaluate the context within
which contact tracing and targeted control may be more efficient at
preventing virus transmission. Because both mosquito distribution
and human mobility define the contact structure for DENV transmission
(25), theoretical explorations could address key knowledge gaps, such as
the impact of contact-based control across a wide range of DENV trans-
mission intensity scenarios, the ability to detect and prevent inapparent
infections able to contribute to transmission, and the critical population
size beyond which contact-based interventions are ineffective.
Fig. 4. Location types involved in DENV transmission chains. Proportion of participants whose putative transmission locations identified by space-time interaction
tests included their home only, one or more out-of-home locations, or both the home and out-of-home locations.
0
20
40
60
80
100
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Days post intervention
Proportion with DENV cases
Control
TIRS
Fig. 5. Impact of TIRS performed on contact locations on the occurrence of
future dengue cases. Expressed as the proportion of locations with DENV cases
at a given time after intervention (treatment locations; dashed line) or onset of
symptoms of the first DENV case (control locations; solid line).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Vazquez-Prokopec et al. Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1602024
17 February 2017
5 of 9
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 We acknowledge that our approach has several limitations, but
nonetheless consider it valuable for understanding the spatial di-
mension of dengue transmission and control. Because of confidential-
ity issues, we were not able to analyze information on the specific
attributes of each location (for example, type of premises, time spent
there). This information could have provided a better description of
“risky” premises. We are aware of one case where an automobile re-
pair shop with a large number of A. aegypti containers (tires and car
fenders) located east of Cairns served as an important transmission
focus. A multifamily housing unit located near the index case’s home
was also a large contributor to transmission, with more than 30 cases
being spatiotemporally linked to it. We identified transmission chains
by linking records of symptomatic cases, ignoring the occurrence of
asymptomatic (or underreported) cases. An independent blood donor
study performed on Cairns residents during the outbreak estimated
clinical/subclinical ratios of 1:0.59. We consider this a highly conserv-
ative estimate. Longitudinal DENV cohort studies have provided esti-
mates of clinical/subclinical ratios orders of magnitude higher than
what was reported in Cairns (44). Thus, because asymptomatic indi-
viduals have the potential to infect A. aegypti (34), we consider our
inferred transmission chain as a subset of the full transmission
network. The lack of entomological information was another limita-
tion. While BG-Sentinel trap data from a few Cairns neighborhoods
showed high-vector abundance at the beginning of the outbreak (45),
the lack of records for the entire city limited our ability to estimate the
entomologic impact of interventions and to refine our space-time in-
teraction analyses by validating our identification of transmission
areas with measures of vector abundance/presence.
There is a paucity of information about the efficacy of current
vector control methods in preventing DENV or other Aedes-borne
viruses (7, 13). This lack of evidence has led to widespread imple-
mentation of vector control tools irrespective of the context within
which they are effective (for example, use of truck-mounted ultralow
volume to control indoor-resting A. aegypti mosquitoes). Likewise, al-
though our calculations of effectiveness for TIRS show an impressive
level of household-level protection, there are several challenges in
widespread implementation of this methodology across endemic set-
tings. The method is laborious and, thus, not especially suited as a
reactive program to cases in large urban centers or areas that experi-
ence a large force of infection; quite simply, there is insufficient time
and staff to treat all houses. TIRS may be more suitable within reactive
programs in areas with an established public health structure that em-
phasize case detection and rapid containment. Insecticide resistance,
another challenge in A. aegypti control (46), can be mitigated by im-
plementation of TIRS using an insecticide to which mosquitoes are
susceptible [like the organophosphate pirimiphos-methyl (47) or carba-
mates such as bendiocarb (48)].
To further enhance the potential of TIRS and to increase coverage
and applicability, new means of delivery will have to be developed.
During the Cairns outbreak, emergency funding used an additional
50 vector control staff (a three-person spray team treats 20 to 30 houses
in a day). However, even with additional resources, it took 3 months to
control DENV in the city (after local resources were overwhelmed with
the amount of premises they had to spray). A yet to be evaluated
alternative is proactive use of TIRS in a strategic campaign performing
prophylactic control before the advent of the transmission season tar-
geting high-risk areas (for example, neighborhoods). Evidence from
Iquitos, Peru, shows that indoor space spraying early in the transmission
season can significantly reduce transmission of DENV (49). Prophylactic
preseason control would involve identifying high-risk areas (areas iden-
tified from passive surveillance with history of high dengue occurrence)
where source reduction/cleanup campaigns can be combined with TIRS
at high coverage. These interventions can be performed during the month
that precedes the beginning of the transmission season. For the case of
Zika virus, premises (or frequented places such as day care centers and
schools) of pregnant women could also be targeted for long-term pro-
phylactic protection using TIRS. Undoubtedly, there is a need to rethink
the control of Aedes-borne pathogens within the context of an integrated
vector management program that takes local eco-epidemiological
conditions and available resources into full consideration.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study area
The city of Cairns is the port of entry for most DENV introductions in
Queensland, Australia (50). Surrounding Cairns are small coastal towns
(population, <10,000) that are part of the metropolitan Cairns area
(total 2011 population, ~154,000). After a large outbreak of DENV-2
early in the 1990s, Queensland Health developed the Dengue Fever
Management Plan (see the Supplementary Text), focused on early de-
tection of DENV importations, characterization of likely exposure sites
of locally acquired cases by performing phone interviews (location-
based contact tracing), TIRS application (see below for a detailed de-
scription of the methodology) of pyrethroid insecticides in households
within 50 to 100 m of suspected transmission foci (residence and high-
risk contact areas), larviciding (using s-methoprene, an insect growth
regulator) within a 200-m radius of these premises, the deployment
of lethal ovitraps in selected premises (51), and community education.
Diagnosis of all clinically suspected DENV cases was performed
at local laboratories using rapid immunochromatographic tests and
Table 1. Effectiveness of TIRS applied at contact locations in preventing dengue symptomatic infections during the 2008–2009 DENV outbreak that
occurred in Cairns, Australia.
Scenario
Treatment
Total locations
No. of DENV-positive locations
Proportion infection
Effectiveness
All cases
IRS
1007
52
0.052
0.861
Control
369
137
0.371
Excluding first 10 days*
IRS
817
11
0.013
0.961
Control
325
113
0.348
*This scenario excludes the first 10 days after intervention to exclude transmission events likely originated before the intervention.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Vazquez-Prokopec et al. Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1602024
17 February 2017
6 of 9
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to detect dengue im-
munoglobulin M (IgM). All positive serum samples were forwarded to
the reference laboratory, where they were screened for the presence of
anti-dengue IgM and IgG using a combined pool of flavivirus antigens
in capture enzyme immunoassay. Positive IgM samples were further
analyzed using flavivirus-specific IgM ELISA capture assays to identify
the serotype of the infecting DENV (52). Additionally, real-time TaqMan
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction was performed on
samples collected early in the acute illness to detect DENV RNA (53).
Location-based contact tracing was performed on every confirmed
or suspected case of dengue by public health nurses who performed
phone interviews asking specific questions about the locations that
accounted for most of the daytime activities during the 2 to 4 weeks
before the onset of symptoms (the procedures for contact tracing are
described in the Supplementary Text). Interviews were also performed
with the persons each patient identified as potential primary or sec-
ondary contacts (for example, workmates, relatives, friends) to enhance
the detection of secondary infections (20). All contact tracing locational
data were promptly mapped in a geographic information system (GIS)
(ArcGIS 9.1) and used to target vector control activities, with the goal
of rapidly containing virus propagation at its source (20). The Dengue
Action Response Team (DART), the branch responsible for all vector
control activities, prioritizes insecticide applications on each case’s like-
ly transmission site (home and places identified by the public health
nurses as high-risk transmission areas based on contact tracing data)
as information enters their decision support system, generally within a
few days of notification of each DENV case.
TIRS was performed using pyrethroid insecticides (SC 2.5%
lambda-cyhalothrin, Demand) applied on A. aegypti resting sites, such
as on exposed low walls (<1.5 m), under furniture, inside closets, and
on any dark and moist surface where mosquitoes may be found
resting (27). Unlike IRS, which requires complete removal of furniture
and spraying of all exposed surfaces, TIRS was selectively applied in
areas known to be resting sites for mosquitoes, markedly reducing
application time (an average Cairns house is treated in 30 min) and
insecticide use. This study focuses on the Cairns DENV-3 outbreak
that occurred between November 2008 and May 2009 (45), to date
the largest in record for Northern Queensland [a total number of
902 confirmed cases in metropolitan Cairns and 1025 in the entire
North Queensland for the 2008–2009 outbreak and a total capital in-
vestment of over 1.1 million U.S. dollars in vector control and asso-
ciated prevention activities (9)]. The human population characteristics,
entomologic conditions, virus genotype, and virulence descriptions for
the 2008–2009 Cairns outbreak were presented previously (9, 45). This
study focuses on the spatiotemporal dynamics of such outbreak as well
as the impact of interventions on virus transmission.
Data analysis plan
The study involved four interrelated analytical goals. First, we ana-
lyzed the reported contact locations from each confirmed case to
characterize the connectivity between towns and to quantify key mo-
bility parameters. A mobility network (expressing the proportion of all
contact locations occurring between pairs of towns) was calculated
from the contact tracing data set and plotted using the igraph package
in the R statistical software (54). We also used R to calculate the
cumulative probability density of the distance of each contact location
to the home residence of each case.
Second, we applied a local space-time interaction test (local Knox
test) to contact tracing data (house and contact locations for each case)
to identify the locations statistically identified as most likely DENV
transmission sites. This method tests whether the number of location
pairs found in a particular time-space window (for example, pairs
separated by M meters and T days) are significantly different from
the number of locations expected in the same window given the total
number of locations, considering the period over which the epidemic
took place and the extent of the study area (55). Significance was as-
sessed by comparing the observed values of the test statistic [run using
a spatial window of 100 m and a temporal window of 20 days as upper
limits for mosquito dispersal and virus cumulative incubation periods
in humans and mosquitoes, respectively (56)], with the expected
values under the null hypothesis of random case occurrence (in space
and time) by performing 999 Monte Carlo simulations. Contact loca-
tions of cases were spatiotemporally linked if they were found within
100 m of each other and also if the onset of symptoms of each case
within that spatial window occurred within 20 days (that is, our pre-
defined threshold between the onset of symptoms of one case and the
occurrence of symptoms in secondary cases that originated by mos-
quitoes infected by the initial case). The Knox test was also run using a
temporal window of 30 days to evaluate the sensitivity of the results to
the possibility of longer exposure times to infectious mosquitoes. The
Knox test was run using the software ClusterSeer (TerraSeer). The
output from the space-time interaction test was then characterized.
Specifically, we estimated the metropolitan DENV transmission
network as the proportion of contact locations statistically linked in
space-time that occurred between pairs of towns using the same
methods as for the mobility network. We also mapped the location
of all statistically significant space-time clusters and determined, for
each confirmed DENV case, who was linked in space-time to other
cases, whether his or her putative transmission locations were his or
her residence, an out-of-home location, or both (given that we were
analyzing transmission chains, a case can be linked to more than one
location).
The fourth analytical step involved querying those locations
identified with the Knox test to evaluate the impact of TIRS performed
on contact locations on DENV transmission. Specifically, given the
magnitude of the outbreak, not all likely transmission sites were
reached by DART. The main causes of not spraying a home included
the lack of sufficient personnel to perform TIRS on all locations sched-
uled for control on a given week, the finding of closed premises at the
time of visit, home residents denying TIRS treatment because of per-
sonal concerns, or the fact that some locations were mistakenly not
identified as “at risk” by DART after visually querying the information
from contact tracing in the Cairns GIS. This uneven intervention cov-
erage (normal in outbreak situations) allowed us to innovatively quan-
tify the likelihood of future DENV cases in houses that received TIRS
and in houses that did not. Specifically, we noted the number of days
that elapsed between the onset of symptoms of the first case and the
onset of symptoms of future cases in houses receiving TIRS (treat-
ment) or not receiving TIRS (control). These data were then treated
as a time-to-event data set and analyzed using a mixed-effects Cox
proportional hazard model with the package coxme in R (57). For this
analysis, we used neighborhood (fig. S7) as a random intercept of the
model to account for potential nonindependence of observations with-
in close proximity from each other. During the outbreak, DART only
performed TIRS once in each premise because residual effect of the
insecticide was assumed to last for at least 2 to 3 months.
We consider this not to be a fully controlled study but more an
evaluation of TIRS under natural operational conditions. We thus
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Vazquez-Prokopec et al. Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1602024
17 February 2017
7 of 9
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 used the results of our spatial analyses to calculate the effectiveness of
TIRS, expressed as the proportional reduction in the occurrence of fu-
ture DENV cases at locations receiving the intervention, and calculated
as the equation described in Halloran et al. (58): effectiveness = 1 − (risk
of infection in treatment group)/(risk of infection in control group),
where the risk of infection was calculated as the proportion of locations
that had at least one infection after treatment or the onset of symptoms
of the first DENV case in control houses (that is, our evaluation was
based on transmission at a location rather than seroconversions).
The protocols for storing, analyzing, and reporting the results on the
2008–2009 Cairns dengue epidemic data were approved by Queensland
Health’s Human Research Ethics Committee (protocol HREC/09/
QCH/52/AM01).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/3/2/e1602024/DC1
Supplementary Text
fig. S1. Distribution of contact locations (including the home residence) reported by each
confirmed case of DENV.
fig. S2. Results from local space-time interaction test, showing the contact locations and
significant space-time links found within prespecified windows of 100 m and 20 days.
fig. S3. DENV transmission chains.
fig. S4. The cumulative number of confirmed symptomatic cases of DENV reported (blue) and
the cumulative number of targeted indoor residual sprays performed (orange) during the
2008–2009 outbreak that affected the metropolitan Cairns area, Australia.
fig. S5. Distribution of interventions performed in Cairns in response to the 2009 DENV-3
epidemic: TIRS with pyrethroid insecticides, the placement of lethal A. aegypti ovitraps, and
community education (State Emergency Service).
fig. S6. Temporal distribution of the number of locations analyzed in the Cox proportional
hazards model evaluating the impact of TIRS on dengue transmission.
fig. S7. Spatial distribution of locations analyzed in the Cox proportional hazards model
evaluating the impact of TIRS on dengue transmission.
fig. S8. Number of secondary dengue cases spatiotemporally linked to locations TIRS-sprayed
or not sprayed at all (control).
fig. S9. Form used by Queensland’s medical general practitioners reporting suspected or
confirmed cases to the Tropical Public Health Unit.
fig. S10. Dengue case report forms used by the Tropical Public Health Unit nurses to interview
suspected or confirmed dengue cases (and their contacts) and ascertain the locations visited
while viremic and, ultimately, the most likely place of transmission (called “acquired where” in
the form).
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. D. J. Gubler, Epidemic dengue/dengue hemorrhagic fever as a public health, social and
economic problem in the 21st century. Trends Microbiol. 10, 100–103 (2002).
2. W. G. van Panhuis, M. Choisy, X. Xiong, N. S. Chok, P. Akarasewi, S. Iamsirithaworn,
S. K. Lam, C. K. Chong, F. C. Lam, B. Phommasak, P. Vongphrachanh, K. Bouaphanh,
H. Rekol, N. T. Hien, P. Q. Thai, T. N. Duong, J.-H. Chuang, Y.-L. Liu, L.-C. Ng, Y. Shi,
E. A. Tayag, V. G. Roque Jr., L. L. Lee Suy, R. G. Jarman, R. V. Gibbons, J. M. S. Velasco,
I.-K. Yoon, D. S. Burke, D. A. T. Cummings, Region-wide synchrony and traveling waves of
dengue across eight countries in Southeast Asia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112,
13069–13074 (2015).
3. S. Bhatt, P. W. Gething, O. J. Brady, J. P. Messina, A. W. Farlow, C. L. Moyes, J. M. Drake,
J. S. Brownstein, A. G. Hoen, O. Sankoh, M. F. Myers, D. B. George, T. Jaenisch, G. R. Wint,
C. P. Simmons, T. W. Scott, J. J. Farrar, S. I. Hay, The global distribution and burden of
dengue. Nature 496, 504–507 (2013).
4. D. J. Musso, D. J. Gubler, Zika virus. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 29, 487–524 (2016).
5. S. B. Halstead, Dengue vaccine development: A 75% solution? Lancet 380, 1535–1536
(2012).
6. K. S. Vannice, J. T. Roehrig, J. Hombach, Next generation dengue vaccines: A review of the
preclinical development pipeline. Vaccine 33, 7091–7099 (2015).
7. N. L. Achee, F. Gould, T. A. Perkins, R. C. Reiner Jr., A. C. Morrison, S. A. Ritchie, D. J. Gubler,
R. Teyssou, T. W. Scott, A critical assessment of vector control for dengue prevention.
PLOS Neglected Trop. Dis. 9, e0003655 (2015).
8. World Health Organization (WHO), Global strategy for dengue prevention and control
2012-2020 (WHO, 2012); http://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/75303.
9. G. M. Vazquez-Prokopec, L. F. Chaves, S. A. Ritchie, J. Davis, U. Kitron, Unforeseen costs of
cutting mosquito surveillance budgets. PLOS Neglected Trop. Dis. 4, e858 (2010).
10. A. C. Morrison, E. Zielinski-Gutierrez, T. W. Scott, R. Rosenberg, Defining challenges
and proposing solutions for control of the virus vector Aedes aegypti. PLOS Med.
5, e68 (2008).
11. L. George, A. Lenhart, J. Toledo, A. Lazaro, W. W. Han, R. Velayudhan, S. Runge Ranzinger,
O. Horstick, Community-effectiveness of temephos for dengue vector control: A
systematic literature review. PLOS Neglected Trop. Dis. 9, e0004006 (2015).
12. O. Horstick, S. Runge-Ranzinger, M. B. Nathan, A. Kroeger, Dengue vector-control services:
How do they work? A systematic literature review and country case studies. Trans. R. Soc.
Trop. Med. Hyg. 104, 379–386 (2010).
13. L. R. Bowman, S. Donegan, P. J. McCall, Is dengue vector control deficient in effectiveness
or evidence?: Systematic review and meta-analysis. PLOS Neglected Trop. Dis. 10,
e0004551 (2016).
14. M. J. Perich, G. Davila, A. Turner, A. Garcia, M. Nelson, Behavior of resting Aedes aegypti
(Culicidae: Diptera) and its relation to ultra-low volume adulticide efficacy in Panama City,
Panama. J. Med. Entomol. 37, 541–546 (2000).
15. D. D. Chadee, Resting behaviour of Aedes aegypti in Trinidad: With evidence for the
re-introduction of indoor residual spraying (IRS) for dengue control. Parasites Vectors 6,
255 (2013).
16. P. Reiter, D. J. Gubler, Surveillance and control of urban dengue vectors, in Dengue and
Dengue Hemorragic Fever, D. J. Gubler, G. Kuno, Eds. (CAB International, 1997).
17. T. Castle, M. Amador, S. Rawlins, J. P. Figueroa, P. Reiter, Absence of impact of aerial
malathion treatment on Aedes aegypti during a dengue outbreak in Kingston, Jamaica.
Rev. Panam. Salud Publica 5, 100–105 (1999).
18. C. J. Koenraadt, J. Aldstadt, U. Kijchalao, A. Kengluecha, J. W. Jones, T. W. Scott, Spatial and
temporal patterns in the recovery of Aedes aegypti (Diptera: Culicidae) populations after
insecticide treatment. J. Med. Entomol. 44, 65–71 (2007).
19. C. P. Pant, H. L. Mathis, Residual effectiveness of ULV aerosols against Aedes aegypti in
Bangkok: A study of sumithion and malathion applied by a portable ULV machine.
Southeast Asian J. Trop. Med. Public Health 4, 231–237 (1973).
20. G. M. Vazquez-Prokopec, U. Kitron, B. Montgomery, P. Horne, S. A. Ritchie, Quantifying the
spatial dimension of dengue virus epidemic spread within a tropical urban environment.
PLOS Neglected Trop. Dis. 4, e920 (2010).
21. G. Giglioli, An investigation of the house-frequenting habits of mosquitoes of the British
Guiana coastland in relation to the use of DDT. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 28, 43–70 (1948).
22. M. B. Nathan, M. E. Giglioli, Eradication of Aedes aegypti on Cayman Brac and Little
Cayman, West Indies, with Abate (Temephos) in 1970-1971. Bull. Pan Am. Health Organ.
16, 28–39 (1982).
23. J. N. Hanna, S. A. Ritchie, D. A. Phillips, I. L. Serafin, S. L. Hills, A. F. van den Hurk, A. T. Pyke,
W. J. McBride, M. G. Amadio, R. L. Spark, An epidemic of dengue 3 in far North
Queensland, 1997-1999. Med. J. Aust. 174, 178–182 (2001).
24. S. T. Stoddard, B. M. Forshey, A. C. Morrison, V. A. Paz-Soldan, G. M. Vazquez-Prokopec,
H. Astete, R. C. Reiner Jr., S. Vilcarromero, J. P. Elder, E. S. Halsey, T. J. Kochel, U. Kitron,
T. W. Scott, House-to-house human movement drives dengue virus transmission.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 994–999 (2013).
25. R. C. Reiner Jr., S. T. Stoddard, T. W. Scott, Socially structured human movement shapes
dengue transmission despite the diffusive effect of mosquito dispersal. Epidemics 6,
30–36 (2014).
26. M. P. Mammen Jr., C. Pimgate, C. J. M. Koenraadt, A. L. Rothman, J. Aldstadt, A. Nisalak,
R. G. Jarman, J. W. Jones, A. Srikiatkhachorn, C. A. Ypil-Butac, A. Getis, S. Thammapalo,
A. C. Morrison, D. H. Libraty, S. Green, T. W. Scott, Spatial and temporal clustering of
dengue virus transmission in Thai villages. PLOS Med. 5, e205 (2008).
27. S. A. Ritchie, J. N. Hanna, S. L. Hills, J. P. Piispanen, W. J. H. McBride, A. Pyke, R. L. Spark,
Dengue control in North Queensland, Australia: Case recognition and selective indoor
residual spraying. Dengue Bull. 26, 7–13 (2002).
28. K. L. Anders, L. H. Nga, N. T. V. Thuy, T. V. Ngoc, C. T. Tam, L. T. Tai, N. T. Truong,
H. T. Le Duyen, V. T. Trung, D. T. H. Kien, M. Wolbers, B. Wills, N. V. V. Chau, N. D. Tho,
C. P. Simmons, Households as foci for dengue transmission in highly urban Vietnam.
PLOS Neglected Trop. Dis. 9, e0003528 (2015).
29. K. T. D. Eames, M. J. Keeling, Contact tracing and disease control. Proc. Biol. Sci. 270,
2565–2571 (2003).
30. J. O. Lloyd-Smith, S. J. Schreiber, P. E. Kopp, W. M. Getz, Superspreading and the effect of
individual variation on disease emergence. Nature 438, 355–359 (2005).
31. G. P. Garnett, R. M. Anderson, Contact tracing and the estimation of sexual
mixing patterns: The epidemiology of gonococcal infections. Sex. Transm. Dis. 20,
181–191 (1993).
32. J. V. Ross, A. J. Black, Contact tracing and antiviral prophylaxis in the early stages of a
pandemic: The probability of a major outbreak. Math. Med. Biol. 32, 331–343 (2015).
33. K. T. D. Eames, M. J. Keeling, Modeling dynamic and network heterogeneities in the spread of
sexually transmitted diseases. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 13330–13335 (2002).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Vazquez-Prokopec et al. Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1602024
17 February 2017
8 of 9
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 34. V. Duong, L. Lambrechts, R. E. Paul, S. Ly, R. S. Lay, K. C. Long, R. Huy, A. Tarantola,
T. W. Scott, A. Sakuntabhai, P. Buchy, Asymptomatic humans transmit dengue virus to
mosquitoes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 14688–14693 (2015).
35. E. Sarti, M. L’Azou, M. Mercado, P. Kuri, J. B. Siqueira Jr., E. Solis, F. Noriega, R. L. Ochiai,
A comparative study on active and passive epidemiological surveillance for dengue in
five countries of Latin America. Int. J. Infect. Dis. 44, 44–49 (2016).
36. A. Wesolowski, T. Qureshi, M. F. Boni, P. R. Sundsøy, M. A. Johansson, S. B. Rasheed,
K. Engø-Monsen, C. O. Buckee, Impact of human mobility on the emergence of dengue
epidemics in Pakistan. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 11887–11892 (2015).
37. K. M. Pepin, C. B. Leach, C. Marques-Toledo, K. H. Laass, K. S. Paixao, A. D. Luis,
D. T. S. Hayman, N. G. Johnson, M. G. Buhnerkempe, S. Carver, D. A. Grear, K. Tsao,
A. E. Eiras, C. T. Webb, Utility of mosquito surveillance data for spatial prioritization of
vector control against dengue viruses in three Brazilian cities. Parasites Vectors 8, 98
(2015).
38. M. G. Dixon, M. M. Taylor, J. Dee, A. Hakim, P. Cantey, T. Lim, H. Bah, S. M. Camara,
C. B. Ndongmo, M. Togba, L. Y. Touré, P. Bilivogui, M. Sylla, M. Kinzer, F. Coronado,
J. E. Tongren, M. Swaminathan, L. Mandigny, B. Diallo, T. Seyler, M. Rondy, G. Rodier,
W. A. Perea, B. Dahl, Contact tracing activities during the Ebola virus disease epidemic in
Kindia and Faranah, Guinea, 2014. Emerging Infect. Dis. 21, 2022–2028 (2015).
39. A. L. Greiner, K. M. Angelo, A. M. McCollum, K. Mirkovic, R. Arthur, F. J. Angulo, Addressing
contact tracing challenges—Critical to halting Ebola virus disease transmission. Int. J.
Infect. Dis. 41, 53–55 (2015).
40. G. LaCon, A. C. Morrison, H. Astete, S. T. Stoddard, V. A. Paz-Soldan, J. P. Elder,
E. S. Halsey, T. W. Scott, U. Kitron, G. M. Vazquez-Prokopec, Shifting patterns
of Aedes aegypti fine scale spatial clustering in Iquitos, Peru. PLOS Neglected Trop. Dis.
8, e3038 (2014).
41. G. M. Vazquez-Prokopec, T. A. Perkins, L. A. Waller, A. L. Lloyd, R. C. Scott Jr., T. W. Reiner Jr.,
U. Kitron, Coupled heterogeneities and their impact on parasite transmission and control.
Trends Parasitol. 32, 356–367 (2016).
42. T. A. Perkins, T. W. Scott, A. Le Menach, D. L. Smith, Heterogeneity, mixing, and the spatial
scales of mosquito-borne pathogen transmission. PLOS Comput. Biol. 9, e1003327 (2013).
43. T. J. Hladish, C. A. B. Pearson, D. L. Chao, D. P. Rojas, G. L. Recchia, H. Gómez-Dantés,
M. E. Halloran, J. R. C. Pulliam, I. M. Longini, Projected impact of dengue vaccination in
Yucatán, Mexico. PLOS Neglected Trop. Dis. 10, e0004661 (2016).
44. T. Endy, I. Yoon, M. P. Mammen, Prospective cohort studies of dengue
viral transmission and severity of disease, in Dengue virus, A. L. Rothman
Ed. (Springer, 2010), pp. 1–14.
45. S. A. Ritchie, A. T. Pyke, S. Hall-Mendelin, A. Day, C. N. Mores, R. C. Christofferson,
D. J. Gubler, S. N. Bennett, A. F. van den Hurk, An explosive epidemic of DENV-3 in Cairns,
Australia. PLOS ONE 8, e68137 (2013).
46. H. Ranson, J. Burhani, N. Lumjuan, W. C. Black IV, Insecticide resistance in dengue vectors.
TropIKAnet 1, 1–12 (2010).
47. R. M. Oxborough, J. Kitau, R. Jones, E. Feston, J. Matowo, F. W. Mosha, M. W. Rowland,
Long-lasting control of Anopheles arabiensis by a single spray application of micro-
encapsulated pirimiphos-methyl (Actellic® 300 CS). Malar. J. 13, 37 (2014).
48. R. Ossè, R. Aikpon, G. G. Padonou, O. Oussou, A. Yadouléton, M. Akogbéto, Evaluation of
the efficacy of bendiocarb in indoor residual spraying against pyrethroid resistant malaria
vectors in Benin: Results of the third campaign. Parasites Vectors 5, 163 (2012).
49. S. T. Stoddard, H. J. Wearing, R. C. Morrison Jr., A. C. Reiner, H. Astete, S. Vilcarromero,
C. Alvarez, C. Ramal-Asayag, M. Sihuincha, C. Rocha, E. S. Halsey, T. W. Scott, T. J. Kochel,
B. M. Forshey, Long-term and seasonal dynamics of dengue in Iquitos, Peru.
PLOS Neglected Trop. Dis. 8, e3003 (2014).
50. J. N. Hanna, S. A. Ritchie, Outbreaks of dengue in North Queensland, 1990-2008.
Commun. Dis. Intell. 33, 32–33 (2009).
51. S. A. Ritchie, T. S. Buhagiar, M. Townsend, A. Hoffmann, A. F. Van Den Hurk, J. L. McMahon,
A. E. Eiras, Field validation of the gravid Aedes trap (GAT) for collection of Aedes aegypti
(Diptera: Culicidae). J. Med. Entomol. 51, 210–219 (2014).
52. C. Taylor, R. Simmons, I. Smith, Development of immunoglobulin M capture enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay to differentiate human flavivirus infections occurring in
Australia. Clin. Diagn. Lab. Immunol. 12, 371–374 (2005).
53. D. Warrilow, J. A. Northill, A. Pyke, G. A. Smith, Single rapid TaqMan fluorogenic
probe based PCR assay that detects all four dengue serotypes. J. Med. Virol. 66, 524–528
(2002).
54. G. Csardi, T. Nepusz, The igraph software package for complex network research.
InterJ. Compl. Syst. 1695, 1–9 (2006).
55. E. G. Knox, M. S. Barlett, The detection of space-time interactions. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. C.
Appl. Stat. 13, 25–30 (1964).
56. M. Chan, M. A. Johansson, The incubation periods of dengue viruses. PLOS ONE 7, e50972
(2012).
57. T. M. Therneau, coxme: Mixed effects Cox models. R package version 2.2–5 (The
Comprehensive R Archive Network, 2015); https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/
coxme/index.html.
58. M. E. Halloran, I. M. Longini Jr., C. J. Struchiner, Design and Analysis of Vaccine Studies
(Springer, 2010), 390 pp.
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank all those who assisted with the investigation and
management of the 2008–2009 DENV outbreak in North Queensland. They include personnel
from the Tropical Public Health Unit (including A. Richards, J. Hanna, R. Spencer, D. Brookes,
R. Spark, S. Heggie, P. Endres, L. Thomson, B. McCulloch, and the members of the DART)
and all those who were involved with the mosquito control responses in the field. This study is
dedicated to the late R. Spark, whose faith in the Queensland dengue control program has
sustained it for over 20 years. Funding: G.M.V.-P. received support from the Emory Global
Health Institute and Marcus Foundation (project #00052002) and the NSF (NSF/DEB/
EEID:1640698) to perform this research. S.A.R. is funded by National Health and Medical
Research Council Senior Research Fellowship 1044698. Author contributions: G.M.V.-P.
performed analyses and wrote the manuscript; B.L.M., P.H., and S.A.R. performed the research
and wrote the manuscript; and J.A.C. performed analyses and wrote the manuscript.
Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Data and
materials availability: Original data used in this manuscript are subject to human subjects
identification and cannot be made freely available. Contact the lead author (G.M.V.-P.) if
interested in signing a data sharing agreement to gain access to the data set.
Submitted 25 August 2016
Accepted 2 November 2016
Published 17 February 2017
10.1126/sciadv.1602024
Citation: G. M. Vazquez-Prokopec, B. L. Montgomery, P. Horne, J. A. Clennon, S. A. Ritchie,
Combining contact tracing with targeted indoor residual spraying significantly reduces
dengue transmission. Sci. Adv. 3, e1602024 (2017).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Vazquez-Prokopec et al. Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1602024
17 February 2017
9 of 9
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 dengue transmission
Combining contact tracing with targeted indoor residual spraying significantly reduces
Gonzalo M. Vazquez-Prokopec, Brian L. Montgomery, Peter Horne, Julie A. Clennon and Scott A. Ritchie
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.1602024
 (2), e1602024.
3
Sci Adv 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/3/2/e1602024
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/02/13/3.2.e1602024.DC1
REFERENCES
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/3/2/e1602024#BIBL
This article cites 53 articles, 6 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
registered trademark of AAAS.
is a
Science Advances 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
(ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New
Science Advances 
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
