 Prevalence of Pregnancy Involvement Among Canadian 
Transgender Youth and its Relation to Mental Health, Sexual 
Health, and Gender Identity
Jaimie Veale, PhDa, Ryan J. Watson, PhDb, Jones Adjei, PhDc, and Elizabeth Saewyc, PhD, 
RN, FSAHM, FCAHSd
Stigma and Resilience Among Vulnerable Youth Centre, School of Nursing, University of British 
Columbia, T222-2211 Wesbrook Mall, Vancouver, British Columbia, V6T 2B5
Abstract
While little research has been conducted into the reproductive experiences of transgender people, 
available evidence suggests that like cisgender people, most transgender people endorse a desire 
for these experiences. This study explores the pregnancy experiences and related health factors 
among transgender and gender-diverse 14–25 year olds using a national Canadian sample (N = 
923). Results indicated that 26 (5%) transgender youth reported a pregnancy experience in the past 
and the prevalence among 14–18 year olds was comparable to population-based estimates using 
the same question in the British Columbia Adolescent Health Survey. Transgender youth with a 
history of pregnancy involvement reported a diverse range of gender identities, and this group did 
not differ from the remainder of the sample on general mental health, social supports, and living in 
felt gender. This group did report over six times greater likelihood of having been diagnosed with 
a sexually transmitted infection by a doctor (19%), but did they not differ in reported contraception 
use during last sexual intercourse. These findings suggest that pregnancy involvement is an issue 
that should not be overlooked by health professionals working with transgender youth and that this 
group has particular sexual health needs.
Keywords
pregnancy; youth; transgender; hormones; sexual health
Introduction
Little is known about the reproductive experiences of transgender and gender diverse people 
and even less is known about this among transgender and gender diverse youth specifically. 
It is known that physical transitions that transgender people undertake through hormonal and 
surgical interventions generally disrupt their reproductive functioning (De Sutter, Kira, 
Verschoor, & Hotimsky, 2002). Those who take puberty blockers (in early adolescence) and 
Correspondence should be addressed to: Jaimie Veale, Stigma and Resilience Among Vulnerable Youth Centre, School of Nursing, 
University of British Columbia, T222-2211 Wesbrook Mall, Vancouver, British Columbia, V6T 2B5. jveale@psych.ubc.ca.
bjones.adjei@ubc.ca;
cryan.watson@ubc.ca
delizabeth.saewyc@ubc.ca
Int J Transgend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 08.
Published in final edited form as:
Int J Transgend. 2016 ; 17(3-4): 107–113. doi:10.1080/15532739.2016.1216345.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 then gender-affirming hormones (in later adolescence) may never develop the ability for any 
reproductive capacity. Generally, this loss of fertility resulting from hormone blockers, 
hormones, and surgeries has been considered the “price to pay” for transition (Meyer et al., 
2001, De Sutter et al., 2002).
Medical perspectives of transgender people describe the distress and discomfort that they 
have with their reproductive and sexual bodies, or gender dysphoria (American Psychiatric 
Association, 2013). From this perspective, it might be expected that transgender people 
would not want to engage in sexual activities that would result in them becoming pregnant 
or inseminating someone else. We know, however, that it is not uncommon for transgender 
people to report a history of being pregnant or getting someone else pregnant prior to their 
transition. Also, evidence suggests that the desire for children is common among transgender 
individuals at similar rates to cisgender people (i.e. those whose gender identity is 
concordant with the gender they were assigned at birth) (T’Sjoen et al., 2013). In a survey of 
121 transgender women from eleven countries, De Sutter et al. (2002) observed that among 
those with no children, 40% would like to have their own biological children one day, while 
among those with children, half of them would like to have children again. Most of the 
study’s participants (77%) felt sperm freezing should be discussed and offered by healthcare 
providers to all trans women before the onset of hormonal treatment. Just as recent advances 
in reproductive techniques are helping to fulfill the reproductive needs of postmenopausal 
women, infertile heterosexual couples, and same-sex couples, fertility options for trans 
people are increasingly being explored (Murphy, 2010).
Because transgender people are sometimes required to undergo medical procedures that 
remove their reproductive capacity (i.e., hormones or surgery) in order to get access to legal 
documentation that aligns with their gender, human rights advocates have argued that 
transgender people should retain their rights to reproduction when accessing appropriate 
legal documentation (Nixon, 2013).
In spite of the manifest reproductive intentions and ability of many trans people, very few 
studies have been conducted examining the health and wellbeing of parents who are trans 
(e.g., De Sutter et al., 2002; Light et al., 2014). No study has looked specifically at the 
sexual and reproductive experiences of trans and gender variant youth, nor have any studies 
examined contraceptive use and sexual health among trans youth who have had a history of 
pregnancy involvement. This is troubling because clinicians and policymakers are missing a 
vulnerable population in their design and implementation of sexual and reproductive health 
care practices, sexual health education, sexual health policies, and pregnancy support 
services. Studies have shown that transgender youth are at high risk for experiencing a wide 
range of discrimination, harassment, and exclusion (Kosciw, Diaz, & Greytak, 2008). A 
study of the school experiences of 108 Canadian trans high school students found around 
three quarters reported feeling unsafe at school and having been verbally harassed about 
their gender expression, and 37% had been physically harassed or assaulted because of their 
gender expression (Taylor et al., 2010). This suggests that transgender youth may be 
vulnerable to emotional distress as a result of such harassment—a situation that could 
adversely affect their sexual health behaviors.
Veale et al.
Page 2
Int J Transgend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 08.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 It is therefore important to understand the sexual and reproductive health issues of 
transgender and gender variant youth, including pregnancy involvement. The purpose of this 
study is to explore the health of trans youth who reported experiences with pregnancy 
involvement. We report the support resources, living arrangements, sexual health, and 
mental health outcomes for this group.
Method
Sample
Our data come from the Canadian Trans Youth Health Survey, a large online survey open to 
people identifying as trans or genderqueer, currently living in Canada, aged 14–25, who 
were able to read and respond to the survey in English or French. Transgender youth were 
asked about a wide range of health-related topics. The survey was conducted from October 
2013 to May 2014. Participants (N = 923) were recruited through youth advisory councils 
(YACs), community organizations, health professionals, social media, and word of mouth. 
To recruit, we utilized social media sites such as Facebook and Twitter, networks of YACs 
and study investigators from across the country, and networks of LGBTQ youth 
organizations across Canada. In addition, we approached clinical services and health care 
providers in several provinces that work with trans and gender diverse youth and some of 
these service providers shared the survey with their clients.
Youth participated in the survey from every province and territory in Canada except for the 
Yukon and Nunavut. Most participants lived in either Ontario (29%) or British Columbia 
(23%) and many were from Québec (15%) and Alberta (12%).
A minority of participants (14%) were born outside of Canada and 2% were recent 
immigrants. More than three quarters (76%) of the sample spoke English only at home, 7% 
spoke French only, and 7% spoke both English and French at home. Similarly, 7% of the 
sample took the survey in French. Nearly three-quarters (74%) of the sample identified as 
White, and nearly 1 in 10 identified as Aboriginal. For more details of the sample, see Veale 
et al., (2015).
Measures
There were different versions of the questionnaire for younger (14–18 year old) and older 
(19–25 year old) youth. Most items used in the survey were drawn from existing population-
based adolescent health surveys, such as the British Columbia Adolescent Health Survey 
(see Saewyc, Konishi, Rose & Homma, 2014) or health surveys participated in by young 
adults, such as the Canadian Community Health Survey (Cui, Shooshtari, Forget, Clara, & 
Cheung, 2014).
Pregnancy Involvement—To assess pregnancy involvement, an item asked youth, How 
many times have you been pregnant or gotten someone pregnant? Response options were 0 
times, 1 time, 2 or more times, or not sure. Participants who had never had sex (n = 111) 
skipped the question. Older participants were also asked whether or not they were currently 
pregnant.
Veale et al.
Page 3
Int J Transgend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 08.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 Sexual Health—Participants were asked if they had ever had genital sex (i.e. vaginal or 
front hole sex). If they answered yes to this, they were asked what one contraceptive method 
they had used the last time they had had sex. Most participants responded with an effective 
contraception technique (e.g., condoms, birth control pills), and those who responded to this 
question with No method was used to prevent pregnancy or Withdrawal were coded as 
having used an ineffective contraceptive technique. Participants were also asked if they had 
been told by a doctor or nurse that they had a sexually transmitted infection.
Gender Transition Questions—Participants were asked if they were currently living in 
their felt gender part-time or full-time. They were also asked if they had ever taken 
hormones for trans-related reasons.
Mental Health—Participants were asked how they would describe their mental health in 
general. Response options were Excellent, Good, Fair, and Poor.
Social Supports—Older participants were asked, How often is each of the following 
kinds of support available to you if you need it? Twelve items that assessed social support 
were summed together; an example of an item was, Someone to help you if you were 
confined to bed? Responses options were 0 (None of the time), 1 (A little of the time), 2 
(Some of the time), 3 (Most of the time), and 4 (All of the time). Scores ranged from 0 to 48 
(alpha = 0.92), where higher scores indicated more social support (see Giesfield, Greeno, & 
Kim, 2008 for an overview on the 12-item Medical Outcome Study Social Support Survey 
measure). Participants were also asked who lives with them in their main home.
Procedure
The study received ethics approval from several university ethics boards across Canada. Data 
analyses were conducted using SPSS version 22. Frequency differences between groups 
were assessed using crosstabulations and χ2 tests.
Results
Pregnancy Involvement
Five hundred and forty trans youth responded to the question asking about pregnancy 
involvement and a further 111 skipped this question because they reported they had never 
had sex. Of these, 26, reported pregnancy involvement at least once: 22 youth (3%) reported 
involvement one time and 4 youth (1%) reported two or more times. Five youth (1%) 
answered that they were not sure.
In terms of the living arrangements for trans youth with a history of pregnancy involvement, 
half (50%) reported living with roommates, a minority reported living with their partners as 
parents (17%), and 13% lived alone.
Younger trans youth (14–18 year olds) were less likely (2%) to have reported a history of 
pregnancy involvement than older (19–25 year old) participants (5%). Comparing to 
population-based estimates of pregnancy involvement among the general population, the 
2013 British Columbia Adolescent Health Survey asked the same question: It was estimated 
Veale et al.
Page 4
Int J Transgend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 08.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 that 1% of the British Columbia adolescent population had a history of pregnancy 
involvement and this rate was 5% among those who had ever had sexual intercourse (Smith 
et al., 2014). In comparison, 4 out of 237 (2%) younger trans youth in our sample had ever 
been pregnant or made someone pregnant and this number was 6% (4 out of 88) among 
those who had ever had genital sex.
Over half of trans youth who reported a history of pregnancy involvement reported that they 
had ever taken gender-affirming hormones (58%). Only one of the 418 older participants 
who responded to the pregnancy question reported they are currently pregnant, and three 
(1%) reported they were not sure.
Gender Identities
The youth who reported pregnancy involvement reported a diverse responses range of 
gender identities. In response to a gender identity question in which participants could check 
multiple boxes, nearly half (48%) reported they identified as a boy or man, 36% of the 
sample identified as a trans boy or trans man, 8% identified as a girl or woman, 12% as a 
trans girl or trans woman, 12% as Two-spirit, 32% as genderqueer, and 16% as gender-fluid.
Differences Among Those Reporting Pregnancy Involvement
We compared transgender youth reporting pregnancy involvement with the remainder of the 
sample on a variety of health experiences. Results of these comparisons are presented in 
Table 1. As outlined in the table, almost 1 in 5 transgender youth with a history of pregnancy 
involvement reported ever being told they had an STI, significantly higher than the less than 
1 in 30 transgender youth without a history of pregnancy involvement. There were no 
significant differences between the groups though in hormone use, living in felt gender, 
overall self-reported mental health, and level of social support.
Discussion
Among our large Canadian sample, we found that nearly 1 in 20 trans youth reported at least 
one experience of pregnancy involvement. This rate of pregnancy involvement seems to be 
about the same as the general population. The best population-based comparisons available 
were from adolescents in British Columbia (Smith et al., 2014), and these were at 
comparable levels to those reported among adolescents our national sample (1–2%). This 
finding may be surprising to some because it might be assumed that trans youth have fewer 
experiences with pregnancy compared to cisgender youth due to hormone and/or surgical 
treatments reducing or eliminating fertility. Health professionals may also make assumptions 
about trans people only being interested in having sex with people assigned the same sex at 
birth as them (with whom pregnancy involvement would not be biologically possible). The 
results of our study, however, provided no evidence that this is actually the case. These 
findings mirror those of studies that have examined the prevalence of pregnancy experiences 
among lesbian, gay, and bisexual youth which have found these are at the same level or even 
higher than for heterosexual youth (Herrick, Matthews, & Garofalo, 2010; Saewyc, 
Bearinger, Blum, & Resnick, 1999; Saewyc, Poon, Homma, & Skay, 2008), despite 
Veale et al.
Page 5
Int J Transgend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 08.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 pregnancy involvement also likely to be overlooked by health professionals working with 
these groups.
Trans youth who reported a history of pregnancy involvement reported a wide range of 
gender identities. The distribution of these gender identities was very similar to that reported 
in the wider sample (Veale et al., 2015). This study did not find any differences in whether 
those with a history or pregnancy involvement reported living in their felt gender or whether 
they were taking hormones, suggesting that assumptions that these experiences only occur in 
those who are yet to transition are likely to be unfounded. We also did not see any difference 
between trans youth with and without a history of pregnancy involvement in reported mental 
health and social supports. Overall, these findings suggest that, like with cisgender youth, 
pregnancy involvement among trans youth occurs across a diverse range of the population.
In addition, in our sample, almost 1 in 5 trans youth who reported a history of pregnancy 
involvement reported that they had ever been told they had a STI. This was more than six 
times the rate of those who had never reported pregnancy involvement. While no significant 
differences emerged on contraception use between these groups, these findings indicate that 
sexual health needs are very important for trans youth with a history of pregnancy 
involvement.
A major strength of our study was the large sample size with the inclusion of participants 
from every province and territory in Canada except for the Yukon and Nunavut. This was the 
first study to make comparisons between transgender young people with a history of 
pregnancy involvement and those without. We were able to make these comparisons on both 
general health and transgender-specific measures.
Limitations and Future Directions
Though we collected data from transgender participants from across Canada, we utilized a 
convenience online sampling framework, meaning our data may not be representative of the 
Canadian transgender population. A limitation of quantitative data research is the lack of 
depth in description of the experiences of participants. In this study, we did not assess any of 
the reasons or contexts of the pregnancy involvement among this sample. Interesting 
questions for this group would be what stage of transgender identity development this 
pregnancy involvement occurred at and what the circumstances of the pregnancy were (e.g., 
whether it was from assault or consensual, accidental or wanted).1 Another limitation of this 
study is that we only asked participants if they had ever taken gender-affirming hormones. 
This meant that we were not able to assess whether this pregnancy involvement occurred 
prior to the participant taking hormones or whether the participant had been taking gender-
affirming hormones at the time of the pregnancy involvement. Clearly, more research is 
needed into the past or current hormone usage in transgender people who report pregnancy 
involvement using clinical samples of youth and young adults, rather than community 
samples that cover a wide array of topics in brief (Feldman et al., 2016). Given the small 
number of participants who reported that they were currently pregnant, our findings suggest 
that most of the transgender youth in our sample who reported a history of pregnancy 
1We thank an anonymous reviewer for suggesting to assess circumstance.
Veale et al.
Page 6
Int J Transgend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 08.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 involvement had this involvement occur in their past. Finally, with 26 transgender youth 
reporting a history of pregnancy involvement in our sample, this study had limited power to 
detect group differences.
This study has implications for healthcare practitioners who work with transgender youth. 
Health practitioners may be likely to overlook the issue of pregnancy involvement when 
providing care to transgender youth because of assumptions that this group will not be 
engaging in activities that will result in pregnancy involvement. Pregnancy involvement was 
reported among Canadian transgender youth with a wide range of gender identities and 
transition experiences and this group also appears to have important sexual health needs. 
Because the relationship between healthcare providers and transgender youth has 
traditionally been a gatekeeper approach (Shield, 2007), transgender youth may be 
understandably reluctant to discuss having been pregnant or made someone pregnant as 
these things are traditionally understood to be contradictory to a desire to gender transition. 
Health care providers may also be reluctant to talk about these topics with their patients/
clients for these reasons too, but the findings of this study suggest that these assumptions are 
likely to be false.
Health care providers should ensure that youth have received, and understand, basic sexual 
health information about how pregnancy can occur, and the various hormonal and barrier 
methods can be used to prevent pregnancy. It is possible that youth did not actually receive 
adequate sexual health education at school, as many schools provide extremely limited 
content around sex education, and even the general population of students demonstrates 
significant gaps in knowledge about sexual health among Canadian high school students 
(Kumar et al., 2013). For transgender youth who are experiencing significant gender 
dysphoria, content about pubertal development and sexual practices is usually provided in a 
binary gender framework, and focuses on genitals that transgender youth may actively want 
to avoid thinking about. As a result, transgender youth they may not attend the class, or may 
not absorb the information in a general class. Health care providers can offer a gender-
affirming approach to the sexual health information, paying attention to avoid gendered 
terms, using terminology that does not directly link genital parts to a specific gender, i.e., 
saying “people with a penis” instead of “young men with a penis.” It is also important to 
remind youth that gender-affirming hormones might not eliminate their ability to cause 
pregnancy or to become pregnant, and to help them choose among different barrier methods 
to prevent unintended pregnancy if they are engaging in sexual behaviors. This has the added 
benefit of protecting against sexually transmitted infections.
To our knowledge, this is the first study to document the prevalence of pregnancy 
involvement among transgender youth, and to further examine the health issues of 
transgender young people who have been involved in a pregnancy. According to WHO, all 
young people have a right to sexual and reproductive health. Transgender and gender variant 
youth have as much need of appropriate sexual health education and supportive health care 
as their cisgender peers, yet the barriers they face to gender-affirming health care may create 
barriers to disclosure of sexual risks. Clinicians should consider the sexual and reproductive 
health needs, in addition to other health needs, when providing care for trans and gender 
variant youth.
Veale et al.
Page 7
Int J Transgend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 08.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge funding support for this research from the Canadian Institutes of Health (MOP 119472) 
awarded to Dr. Elizabeth Saewyc at the University of British Columbia. We acknowledge our study co-investigators 
and research team from across the country and give special thanks to the Trans Youth Advisory Councils, to the 
LGBTQ youth-serving agencies and clinical services who spread the word, and to all survey participants
References
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. 5. 
Washington, DC: Author; 2013. 
Cui Y, Shooshtari S, Forget EL, Clara I, Cheung KF. Smoking during pregnancy: findings from the 
2009–2010 Canadian Community Health Survey. PloS. 2014:9.
De Sutter P, Kira K, Verschoor A, Hotimsky A. The desire to have children and the preservation of 
fertility in transsexual women: A survey. International Journal of Transgenderism. 2002; 6:97–03.
Kosciw, JG., Diaz, EM., Greytak, EA. 2007 National school climate survey: The experiences of 
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender youth in our nation’s schools. New York, NY: GLSEN; 2008. 
Feldman J, Brown GR, Deutsch MB, Hembree W, Meyer W, Meyer-Bahlburg HFL, … Safer JD. 
Priorities for transgender medical and healthcare research. Current Opinion in Endocrinology & 
Diabetes and Obesity. 2016; 23:180–187.
Gjesfjeld CD, Greeno CG, Kim KH. A confirmatory factor analysis of an abbreviated social support 
instrument: The MOS-SSS. Research on Social Work Practice. 2008; 18:231–237.
Herrick AL, Matthews AK, Garofalo R. Health risk behaviors in an urban sample of young women 
who have sex with women. Journal of Lesbian Studies. 2010; 14:80–92. [PubMed: 20077268] 
Kumar MM, Lim R, Langford C, Seabrook JA, Speechley KN, Lynch T. Sexual knowledge of 
Canadian adolescents after completion of high school sexual education requirements. Paediatrics & 
Child Health. 2013; 18:74–80. [PubMed: 24421660] 
Light AD, Obedin-Maliver J, Sevelius JM, Kerns JL. Transgender men who experienced pregnancy 
after female-to-male gender transitioning. Obstetrics & Gynecology. 2014; 124:1120–1127. 
[PubMed: 25415163] 
Meyer, W., III, Bockting, W., Cohen-Kettenis, P., Coleman, E., Di Ceglie, D., Devor, H., Gooren, L., 
Hage, J., Kirk, S., Kuiper, B., Laub, D., Lawrence, A., Menard, Y., Patton, J., Schaefer, L., Webb, 
A., Wheeler, C. The standards of care for gender identity disorders – sixth version; International 
Journal of Transgenderism. 2001. p. 5http://www.symposion.com/ijt/soc_2001/index.htm
Murphy TF. The ethics of helping transgender men and women have children. Perspectives in Biology 
and Medicine. 2010; 53:46–60. [PubMed: 20173295] 
Nixon L. Right to (trans) parent: A reproductive justice approach to reproductive rights, fertility, and 
family-building issues facing transgender people. William & Mary Journal of Women and the Law. 
2013; 20:73–103.
Saewyc EM, Bearinger LH, Blum RW, Resnick MD. Sexual intercourse, abuse and pregnancy among 
adolescent women: Does sexual orientation make a difference? Family Planning Perspectives. 
1999; 31:127–131. [PubMed: 10379429] 
Saewyc E, Konishi C, Rose H, Homma Y. School-based strategies to reduce suicidal ideation, suicide 
attempts, and discrimination among sexual minority and heterosexual adolescents in Western 
Canada. International Journal of Child, Youth and Family Studies. 2014; 5:89–112.
Saewyc EM, Poon CS, Homma Y, Skay CL. Stigma management? The links between enacted stigma 
and teen pregnancy trends among gay, lesbian, and bisexual students in British Columbia. The 
Canadian Journal of Human Sexuality. 2008; 17:123–139. [PubMed: 19293941] 
Shield S. Doctor won’t see you now: Rights of transgender adolescents to sex reassignment treatment. 
New York University Review of Law & Social Change. 2007; 31:361–433. [PubMed: 17450668] 
Smith, A., Stewart, D., Poon, C., Peled, M., Saewyc, EM. McCreary Centre Society. From Hastings 
Street to Haida Gwaii: Provincial results of the 2013 BC Adolescent Health Survey. Vancouver, 
BC: McCreary Centre Society; 2014. Retrieved from http://www.mcs.bc.ca/pdf/
From_Hastings_Street_To_Haida_Gwaii.pdf
Veale et al.
Page 8
Int J Transgend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 08.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 Taylor, C., Peter, T., McMinn, TL., Schachter, K., Beldom, S. Every Class in Every School: The First 
National Climate Survey on Homophobia in Canadian Schools: Final report. Toronto: Egale; 2010. 
T’Sjoen G, Van Caenegem E, Wierckx K. Transgenderism and reproduction. Current Opinion in 
Endocrinology, Diabetes and Obesity. 2013; 20:575–579.
Veale, JF., Saewyc, EM., Frohard-Dourlent, H., Dobson, S., Clark, B. the Canadian Trans Youth Health 
Survey Research Group. Being safe, being me: Results of the Canadian Trans Youth Health 
Survey. Vancouver, BC: Stigma and Resilience Among Vulnerable Youth Centre; 2015. Retrieved 
from https://saravyc.sites.olt.ubc.ca/files/2015/05/SARAVYC_Trans-Youth-Health-
Report_EN_Final_Web2.pdf
Veale et al.
Page 9
Int J Transgend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 08.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
Veale et al.
Page 10
Table 1
Comparisons between trans youth with and without a reported history of pregnancy involvement.
Pregnancy involvement n (%)
χ2
df
p
Yes
No
Ever had an STI
48.08
2
< .01
 Yes
5 (19%)
20 (3%)
 No
19 (73%)
484 (97%)
 Don’t Know
1 (8%)
2 (0%)
Contraception use
1.69
3
.64
 Effective
10 (77%)
116 (73%)
 Ineffective
1 (8%)
15 (9%)
 Not Sure
1 (8%)
25 (15%)
 None Used
1 (8%)
4 (3%)
Ever taken hormones
0.70
1
.40
 Yes
15 (58%)
213 (34%)
 No
11 (42%)
407 (66%)
Living in felt gender
2.53
2
.28
 Yes, full-time
15 (60%)
220 (48%)
 Yes, part-time
7 (28%)
164 (36%)
 No
3 (12%)
72 (16%)
Mental health
1.38
3
.71
 Excellent
0 (0%)
16 (3%)
 Good
4 (16%)
114 (22%)
 Fair
13 (52%)
231 (45%)
 Poor
8 (32%)
141 (31%)
Social Support
t = 2.39
409
.12a
26.41b
29.14b
Note:
adenotes the use of a two-tailed t-test;
bdenotes the mean value of Social Support
Int J Transgend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 08.
