 toxins
Review
Trimethylamine N-Oxide: The Good, the Bad and
the Unknown
Manuel T. Velasquez, Ali Ramezani, Alotaibi Manal and Dominic S. Raj *
Division of Renal Diseases and Hypertension, The George Washington University School of Medicine,
2150 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20037, USA; mvelasquez@mfa.gwu.edu (M.T.V.);
ramezani@gwu.edu (A.R.); malotaibi@email.gwu.edu (A.M.)
* Correspondence: draj@mfa.gwu.edu; Tel.: +1-202-741-2283; Fax: +1-202-741-2285
Academic Editor: Raymond Vanholder
Received: 30 September 2016; Accepted: 3 November 2016; Published: 8 November 2016
Abstract: Trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) is a small colorless amine oxide generated from choline,
betaine, and carnitine by gut microbial metabolism. It accumulates in the tissue of marine animals
in high concentrations and protects against the protein-destabilizing effects of urea. Plasma level
of TMAO is determined by a number of factors including diet, gut microbial flora and liver flavin
monooxygenase activity. In humans, a positive correlation between elevated plasma levels of TMAO
and an increased risk for major adverse cardiovascular events and death is reported. The atherogenic
effect of TMAO is attributed to alterations in cholesterol and bile acid metabolism, activation of
inflammatory pathways and promotion foam cell formation. TMAO levels increase with decreasing
levels of kidney function and is associated with mortality in patients with chronic kidney disease.
A number of therapeutic strategies are being explored to reduce TMAO levels, including use of oral
broad spectrum antibiotics, promoting the growth of bacteria that utilize TMAO as substrate and the
development of target-specific molecules with varying level of success. Despite the accumulating
evidence, it is questioned whether TMAO is the mediator of a bystander in the disease process. Thus, it
is important to undertake studies examining the cellular signaling in physiology and pathological
states in order to establish the role of TMAO in health and disease in humans.
Keywords: microbiome; dysbiosis; uremic toxin; cardiovascular disease
1. Introduction
Trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) is a small organic compound in the class of amine oxides
with a molecular mass 75.1 Daltons. It is frequently found in the tissues of a variety of marine
organisms [1] including marine elasmobranch, in which TMAO is known to protect against the adverse
effects of temperature, salinity, high urea and hydrostatic pressure. For instance, urea destabilizes
many macromolecular structures and inhibits cellular functions such as ligand binding, which is
counteracted by TMAO [2]. TMAO can be metabolized to small methylated amines such as tri-, di-,
and monomethylamine, which are precursors of marine aerosols and the greenhouse gas nitrous oxide
in the marine atmosphere. Although known to marine biologists for a long time, TMAO came into the
limelight recently with the reported association with cardiovascular disease in humans [3].
In organisms that concentrate urea as an osmolyte and buoyancy factor, TMAO has been shown
to restore proteins to their native structure and allow them to regain their enzyme function that has
been lost because of the presence of urea [4,5]. Furthermore, in deep see creatures, TMAO, and,
to a lesser extent, betaine, counteract the inhibitory effects of hydrostatic pressure on proteins [6].
Although it is widely known that TMAO stabilizes the folded state of proteins, the mechanism by
which TMAO interacts with proteins remains speculative. One hypothesis is that the amphiphilic
Toxins 2016, 8, 326; doi:10.3390/toxins8110326
www.mdpi.com/journal/toxins
 Toxins 2016, 8, 326
2 of 11
structural arrangement of TMAO allows it to form H bonds with water and preferentially exclude or
interact with certain protein functional groups [7].
2. Biosynthesis of TMAO
TMAO is formed from trimethylamine (TMA), which is generated by the action of gut microbiota
from dietary choline and phosphatidylcholine (lecithin) [8,9]. Koeth et al. described another pathway
which involves the catabolism of L-carnitine through two sequential microbial reactions. According to
this, L-carnitine is first converted into the intermediate metabolite γ-butyrobetaine and then into TMA,
which is subsequently converted into TMAO by host hepatic flavin monooxygenases 3 (FMO3) [10].
Red meat, eggs, dairy products and salt-water fish are rich in choline, lecithin, and carnitine and,
hence, are a potential source of TMAO. TMA is a gas which is oxygenated within living animals to
form TMAO by flavin monooxygenases (FMO1 and FMO3) [11,12]. TMAO is then either transported
to the tissues for accumulation as an osmolyte or, more commonly, cleared by the kidney [3,9,13,14].
In humans, a mutation of the FMO3 causes trimethylaminuria, a condition wherein individuals excrete
TMA, rather than TMAO. This condition known as fish odor syndrome is characterized by a fishy
body odor in urine, sweat, breath and other bodily excretions [15].
3. Role of Microbiome in TMAO Generation
TMAO is commonly found in a variety of marine microbiota, where it serves as an important
substrate in the anaerobic metabolism of a number of bacteria [16]. Studies in gnotobiotic mice have
shown that TMAO accumulates in the serum of animals colonized with TMA-producing bacteria,
but not in animals colonized with bacteria that do not generate TMA from choline in vitro [17].
Further evidence that the production of TMAO is dependent on metabolism by intestinal microbiota is
provided by studies in healthy humans given phosphatidylcholine challenge, in which the plasma
levels of TMAO were suppressed by oral administration of broad spectrum antibiotics [14].
Human and animal studies suggest that several families of bacteria are involved in
TMA/TMAO production, namely, Deferribacteraceae, Anaeroplasmataceae, Prevotellaceae [3]
and Enterobacteriaceae [18,19].
Recent studies using isolates of commensal bacteria in the
human
intestine
have
identified
nine
strains
capable
of
producing
TMA
from
choline
in vitro:
eight species representing two different phyla (Firmicutes and Proteobacteria) and
six genera that showed significant choline consumption and TMA production including
Anaerococcus hydrogenalis, Clostridium asparagiforme, C. hathewayi, C. sporogenes, Escherichia fergusonii,
Proteus penneri, Providencia rettgeri, and Edwardsiella tarda [17].
Recently, experiments with the
choline-degrading sulfate reducing bacterium Desulfovibrio desulfuricans identified a gene cluster
(including cutD) involved in radical C–N bond cleavage of choline leading to generation of TMA [18].
4. Determinants of TMAO Level
The plasma TMAO levels show wide inter- and intra-individual variations. Circulating levels of
TMAO are determined by a number of factors, including diet, gut microbial flora, liver FMO enzymes
and kidney function [17]. Heritability of TMAO was studied in a genome-wide association study
involving 1973 humans, which concluded that genes play only a marginal role in determining TMAO
levels [20]. Wang et al. measured fasting plasma levels of TMAO in 349 apparently healthy subjects
using stable isotope dilution liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) and
reported a median concentration of 3.45 µM (Interquartile Range 2.25–5.79), which did not differ by sex,
but the levels increased with advancing age [21]. Kühn et al. measured fasting plasma levels of TMAO
at two time points in the European Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC)-Heidelberg study
participants and noted a significant intra-individual variation in TMAO levels [22]. In a crossover
feeding trial, consumption of diet containing TMAO precursors such as eggs, beef and fish increased
the blood and urine levels of TMAO [23]. Circulating TMAO concentrations in response to the fish
meal was increased within 15 min of food consumption, suggesting that TMAO itself can be absorbed
 Toxins 2016, 8, 326
3 of 11
without undergoing processing by the gut microbes [23]. However, not all studies found an association
between diet and TMAO levels [22]. In a study involving 271 participants, consumption of meat, egg,
or fish was not associated with TMAO, choline, or betaine concentrations [24].
Studies on pharmacokinetics [25] and renal clearance of TMAO [26] in healthy human subjects
suggest that TMAO has a small volume of distribution—about one half that of urea—but a
higher renal clearance compared to urea and creatinine. In normal subjects, the urinary clearance
of TMAO was 219 ± 78 mL/min compared to the urinary urea and creatinine clearances 55 ± 14 and
119 ± 21 mL/min, respectively. The high renal clearance rate of TMAO indicates that in addition to
glomerular filtration, at least 50% of its renal excretion possibly occurs through tubular secretion.
Missailidis et al. measured plasma concentration of TMAO in 80 controls and 179 CKD patients
and reported that that elevated TMAO levels are strongly associated with degree of renal function [27].
Kaysen et al. measured serum levels of TMAO in 235 hemodialysis patients and reported that
serum TMAO concentrations (median 43, (25th–75th percentile 28–67 µM/L)) were elevated in these
patients compared to persons with normal or near normal kidney function (1.41 ± 0.49 µM/L) [8].
Bain et al. noted that the concentrations of TMA and TMAO in pre-dialysis plasma (1.39 ± 0.483
and 99.9 ± 31.9 mM, respectively) were significantly higher than the corresponding levels in healthy
subjects (0.418 ± 0.124 and 37.8 ± 20.4 mM, respectively) [28]. There was a significant reduction
(about 60%) in plasma TMA and TMAO during a single hemodialysis session and the post-dialysis
levels were not significantly different from that in control subjects. As expected, successful kidney
transplantation resulted in substantial reductions in TMAO concentrations [29].
5. TMAO and Cardiovascular Disease
The concept of the meta-organism was first proposed by an insightful German zoologist,
Karl Möbius, to describe the inter-dependency between animal species [30]. To date, a number of
meta-organismal metabolic pathways involving interactions between the gut microbiome and the
human host have been discovered. Indeed, TMAO generated by gut microbiome exacerbates impaired
glucose tolerance, inhibits hepatic insulin signaling, and promotes adipose tissue inflammation in mice
that are maintained on a high-fat high-sugar diet [17]. In animals and humans, TMAO has also been
suggested as a strong candidate molecule mediating the development of type-2 diabetes mellitus [31].
Using a metabolomics approach, Wang et al. discovered a cluster of three phospholipid-associated
molecules choline, betaine, and TMAO, associated with atherosclerosis [32]. Further studies in a murine
model of atherosclerosis demonstrated that plasma TMAO levels in apoE−/− mice positively correlated
with atheroma burden [32]. Choline diet increased the foam cell formation with accompanying increase
in scavenger receptor CD36 and SRA1 protein in murine macrophages. In 3903 sequential stable
subjects undergoing elective diagnostic coronary angiography, elevated plasma levels of choline and
betaine were each associated with poor prognosis even after adjusting for traditional cardiovascular
risk factors. However, high choline and betaine levels are associated with higher risk of future major
cardiac events only with concomitant increased levels of TMAO [33]. In another study, TMAO levels
were increased in patients with stable heart failure and elevated levels were associated with increased
risk of death [34]. Thus, substantial evidence indicates that elevated TMAO levels are associated with
cardiovascular disease (CVD).
Not all studies have demonstrated an association between TMAO and atherosclerotic vascular
disease. Mueller et al. measured plasma concentrations of TMAO, betaine and choline in a cohort
of 339 patients undergoing coronary angiography and noted that plasma concentrations of TMAO
were higher in diabetics compared to euglycemic patients [35]. The plasma levels of TMAO or betaine
were not found to be associated with a history of myocardial infarction, the angiographically-assessed
presence of coronary heart disease, or the incident cardiovascular events during 8 years of follow-up.
In a case-control study of patients with large-artery atherosclerotic ischemic stroke and transient
ischemic attack, participants with asymptomatic atherosclerosis did not exhibit an obvious change in
 Toxins 2016, 8, 326
4 of 11
gut microbiota and blood TMAO levels; however, stroke and transient ischemic attack patients showed
significant dysbiosis of the gut microbiota, and their blood TMAO levels were decreased [36].
Although elevated plasma levels of TMAO have been associated with atherosclerotic vascular
diseases and increased risk of adverse cardiovascular events, seafood, which contains high levels of
TMAO, is generally considered beneficial for health. Another contradictory finding was reported by
Bjørnda et al. who demonstrated that feeding male Wistar rats a phospholipid-protein complex (PPC)
from Antarctic krill increased the plasma levels of TMAO, choline, and carnitine. However, there was
no correlation between plasma choline and TMAO in rats fed PPC [37].
6. Mechanism of TMAO Associated Atherogenesis
The mechanism by which TMAO promotes atherosclerosis also remains speculative. The proposed
mechanisms include changes in cholesterol and sterol metabolism, promotion of foam cell formation
by increasing expression of scavenger receptors on macrophages, and causing alternations in bile acid
metabolism and sterol transporters in the liver and intestine (Figure 1).
Toxins 2016, 8, 326  
4 of 11 
 
Although elevated plasma levels of TMAO have been associated with atherosclerotic vascular 
diseases and increased risk of adverse cardiovascular events, seafood, which contains high levels of 
TMAO, is generally considered beneficial for health. Another contradictory finding was reported by 
Bjørnda et al. who demonstrated that feeding male Wistar rats a phospholipid‐protein complex (PPC) 
from Antarctic krill increased the plasma levels of TMAO, choline, and carnitine. However, there was 
no correlation between plasma choline and TMAO in rats fed PPC [37].  
6. Mechanism of TMAO Associated Atherogenesis 
The mechanism by which TMAO promotes atherosclerosis also remains speculative. The 
proposed mechanisms include changes in cholesterol and sterol metabolism, promotion of foam cell 
formation by increasing expression of scavenger receptors on macrophages, and causing alternations 
in bile acid metabolism and sterol transporters in the liver and intestine (Figure 1).  
 
Figure 1. Schematic representation of the link between diet, gut microbiota, TMAO and the clinical 
manifestations of this uremic toxin. Both host and gut microbial metabolism of trimethylammonium‐
containing nutrients (e.g., choline, phosphatidylcholine, and L‐carnitine) result in the formation of 
TMA. In liver, FMOs convert TMA into TMAO. Clinical effects of TMAO includes alteration of 
cholesterol and sterol metabolism, progression of CKD, atherosclerosis, heart attack, metabolic 
syndrome, type II DM, and alternations in bile acid metabolism and sterol transporters both within 
the liver and intestine. TMA, Trimethylamine; TMAO, Trimethylamine N‐Oxide; FMOs, flavin‐
containing monooxygenases. 
Wang et al. showed that diet containing choline, TMAO or betaine could enhance up‐regulation 
of multiple macrophage scavenger receptors that are linked to atherosclerosis [32,38]. In mice with 
an intact intestinal microbiota, dietary supplementation with TMAO, carnitine or choline reduced in 
vivo reverse cholesterol transport [3]. Interestingly, dietary supplementation with TMAO markedly 
reduces the expression of intestinal cholesterol transporters Niemann‐Pick C1‐like1 (Npc1L1), and 
Abcg5/8, which transport cholesterol into and out of enterocytes, respectively [3]. However, the levels 
of cholesterol transporters in macrophages did not change significantly following TMAO treatment [3]. 
Figure 1.
Schematic representation of the link between diet, gut microbiota, TMAO and
the clinical manifestations of this uremic toxin.
Both host and gut microbial metabolism of
trimethylammonium-containing nutrients (e.g., choline, phosphatidylcholine, and L-carnitine) result in
the formation of TMA. In liver, FMOs convert TMA into TMAO. Clinical effects of TMAO includes
alteration of cholesterol and sterol metabolism, progression of CKD, atherosclerosis, heart attack,
metabolic syndrome, type II DM, and alternations in bile acid metabolism and sterol transporters
both within the liver and intestine. TMA, Trimethylamine; TMAO, Trimethylamine N-Oxide; FMOs,
flavin-containing monooxygenases.
Wang et al. showed that diet containing choline, TMAO or betaine could enhance up-regulation
of multiple macrophage scavenger receptors that are linked to atherosclerosis [32,38]. In mice with an
intact intestinal microbiota, dietary supplementation with TMAO, carnitine or choline reduced in vivo
reverse cholesterol transport [3]. Interestingly, dietary supplementation with TMAO markedly reduces
the expression of intestinal cholesterol transporters Niemann-Pick C1-like1 (Npc1L1), and Abcg5/8,
which transport cholesterol into and out of enterocytes, respectively [3]. However, the levels of
cholesterol transporters in macrophages did not change significantly following TMAO treatment [3].
 Toxins 2016, 8, 326
5 of 11
Also, mice supplemented with dietary TMAO showed a significant reduction in cholesterol absorption,
as well as liver expression of bile acid synthetic enzymes cytochrome P450, family 7, subfamily a,
polypeptide 1 (Cyp7a1) and cytochrome P450, family 27, subfamily a, polypeptide 1 (Cyp27a1) [3].
The bile acid pathway plays a major role in cholesterol elimination and blocking this pathway may
promote atherogenesis. The liver’s levels of bile acid synthetic enzymes (Cyp7a1 and Cyp27a1) and
bile acid transporters (Oatp1, Oatp4, Mrp2, and Ntcp) were reduced in mice that were treated with
TMAO [3].
Both in vivo studies in mice and in vitro studies in cultured human aortic endothelial and vascular
smooth muscle cells have shown that physiological levels of TMAO induce expression of inflammatory
cytokines and adhesion molecules. This activation was mediated, in part, by the NF-κB signaling
pathway [39]. In a series of studies in animals employing dietary choline, or TMAO, germ-free
mice, and microbial transplantation, Zhu and colleagues [40] showed that gut microbe-derived
TMAO enhances platelet responsiveness and thrombosis in vivo. In addition, studies in humans
also showed that plasma TMAO levels independently predicted incident thrombosis (heart attack,
stroke) risk [40]. Direct exposure of platelets to TMAO enhanced sub-maximal stimulus-dependent
platelet activation from multiple agonists through augmented Ca2+ release from intracellular stores.
Collectively, these findings provide evidence for a mechanistic link between gut microbes, platelet
function, and thrombosis risk [40]. On the contrary, Collins et al. showed that TMAO at concentrations
up to 10-fold the Cmax reported in humans did not affect in vitro foam cell formation in apoE−/−
mice transfected with human cholesteryl ester transfer protein [41]. Surprisingly, TMAO levels were
inversely correlated with atherosclerotic lesion size in aorta. This study suggests that TMAO may
confer a protective and not a causative effect on atherosclerosis development. Thus, further studies are
needed to conclusively prove the role of TMAO in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis.
7. TMAO in Chronic Kidney Disease
Uremic toxins are organic solutes normally metabolized and excreted by the kidneys, but they
often accumulate in the presence of impaired kidney function, causing toxicity. They can be classified
based on their size and clearance by dialysis, as well as their source such as food, endogenous
metabolism and gut microbiota [42]. Gut microbial profile is altered in patients with chronic kidney
disease (CKD). Dysbiosis in CKD has been touted to be due to slow intestinal transit time, delivery of
undigested protein to the colon, decreased dietary fiber intake, iron therapy, frequent use of proton
pump inhibitors and antibiotics [43]. Vaziri et al. noted that 190 microbial operational taxonomic units
differed significantly in abundance between patients with end-stage renal disease and apparently
healthy controls. Abundant evidence indicates that gut microbiome is the source of a number of
retention solutes in patients with CKD [43].
TMAO and choline levels increase with decreasing renal function [35]. However, it is unclear
whether dysbiosis leads to increased generation of TMAO in CKD. Hai et al. showed that the
production rate of TMAO is not higher in end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients compared to
control subjects [26]. Under normal physiologic conditions, circulating TMAO is rapidly cleared
almost exclusively by urinary excretion [44]. Niwa et al. proposed the protein metabolite hypothesis
that endogenous protein metabolites play a significant role in the progression of CKD [45]. Tang et al.
showed that C57BL/6J mice fed with choline or TMAO exhibited tubulointerstitital fibrosis, collagen
deposition and phosphorylation of Smad3; an important regulator of the profibrotic transforming
growth factor-β/Smad3 signaling pathway [9]. A prospective cohort study of 521 stable subjects with
CKD found elevated plasma TMAO levels which were associated with a 2.8-fold increased mortality
risk [9]. Stubbs et al. showed that TMAO concentration is an independent predictor for coronary
atherosclerosis burden and predicted long-term mortality independent of traditional cardiac risk
factors [29]. TMAO concentrations in ESRD patients on dialysis are 40-fold higher compared with
control subjects [26]. Fortunately, the small volume of distribution enables adequate clearance by
dialysis. In HEMO study participants, higher TMAO concentrations were associated with a higher risk
 Toxins 2016, 8, 326
6 of 11
of sudden cardiac death, first cardiovascular event, and any-cause death, particularly in whites [46].
A cross-sectional study by Aki Mafune et al. observed elevated TMAO levels in CKD patients who
underwent cardiovascular surgery (n = 227) [47]. Patients with the highest levels of TMAO had a
higher number of infarcted coronary arteries compared to those with the lowest levels [47]. On the
other hand, Kaysen et al., did not find any significant association between serum TMAO concentrations
and all-cause mortality, cardiovascular death, or hospitalizations in 235 hemodialysis patients [8].
Thus, it remains unclear whether elevated TMAO levels in CKD are due to increased generation or
decreased elimination, and whether it is just a surrogate for other retention solutes.
8. TMAO: Toxin, Marker or Bystander?
Emerging evidence indicates that consumption of diet high in carnitine or rich in choline
could potentially lead to increased cardiovascular disease through generation of TMAO [3].
The Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities study [48] and the European Prospective Investigation
into Cancer and Nutrition study [49] did not report increased cardiovascular risk with increasing
dietary intake of choline. In addition, fish, which is an important source of trimethylamine in the
diet [50], is not associated with risk of cardiovascular disease in the Physicians’ Health Study [51].
On the contrary, a meta-analysis concluded that fish consumption is inversely associated with fatal
coronary heart disease [52].
Sharks must continually balance their internal osmotic pressure with that of the external
marine environment by accumulating urea and TMAO as osmotic agents. The latter counters the
protein-destabilizing effects of urea and thus has beneficial effect. However, concentrated TMAO is
responsible for the toxicity of fresh Greenland Shark (Somniosus microcephalus) meat. On digestion,
TMAO breaks down to trimethylamine, which induces severe gastrointestinal and neurological effects
similar to extreme drunkenness. It is unknown whether chronic consumption of Greenland Shark meat
will increase the risk of cardiovascular disease. It is possible that the marine animals have developed
adaptive mechanisms to TMAO, which is poorly developed in humans.
9. Therapeutic Strategies
Several lines of evidence indicate that the gut microbiota plays a role in systemic inflammation,
metabolic syndrome, vascular dysfunction and atherosclerosis. Thus, investigators have explored
the possibility of modulating gut microbes and their metabolites for health benefits. However, such
efforts have been hampered by the complexity of the interaction of microbiome with host genetics,
host diet, and other unknown factors. The discovery of TMAO as a potential gut derived toxin with
cardiovascular disease has energized such efforts. A number of therapeutic strategies have been
tested from a broad spectrum of antibiotics to target-specific molecules with varying levels of success.
(Table 1).
Table 1. Therapeutic approaches to reducing TMAO concentration.
Therapy
The Effects
Remarks
Antibiotics [14]
Decreased TMAO plasma levels
Nonspecific, chronic use impossible and emergence of
antibiotic resistance is likely
Microbiomes [16,53,54]
Decreased TMA formation in the gut
Safety and engraftment unclear in human
Reducing TMAO to TMA
Reduced L-carnitine and choline
consumption [3]
Decrease TMAO level
L-carnitine is found to reduce all-cause mortality, cardiac
symptoms in patients with myocardial infarction
Resveratrol [55]
Decreased TMA and TMAO plasma levels
It also changed the quantities of microbes
Meldonium [56]
Reduced TMA production by the intestinal
microbiota bacteria
Targeting bacterial TMA-production.
3,3-dimethyl-1-butanol [38]
Inhibition of TMA formation through inhibition
of microbial TMA lyases
Other inhibitory mechanisms e.g.,: changes in microbial
taxa or inhibition of foam cell formation and
atherosclerotic lesion
FMO3 enzyme inhibition [57]
Prevented the oxidization of TMA to TMAO
It has other effects on the regulation of both lipid
metabolism and inflammation
 Toxins 2016, 8, 326
7 of 11
Assuming the microbiome is the source of TMAO, antibiotic treatment should reduce its
circulating levels. Indeed, in health participants, suppression of intestinal microbiota with oral
broad spectrum antibiotic reduced plasma TMAO levels after a phosphatidylcholine challenge [14].
TMAO levels increased one month after stopping antibiotics [14]. However, antibiotics is not an ideal
treatment since it could have other unwanted consequences, and also chronic treatment is likely to
lead to emergence of resistant bacteria.
Besides removing TMAO producing bacteria, use of selected bacteria to increase its metabolism
has also been attempted. TMA could be depleted in vivo by bioconversion into a molecule with
no undesirable properties.
Brugere et al. [58] proposed the use of archaeobiotics to prevent
trimethylaminuria accumulation and cardiovascular disease. This is based on the concept of reducing
TMA formation in the gut by converting it into an inert molecule, such as methane [58]. A number
of methanogenic bacteria belonging to the order Methanobacteriales have been identified as natural
inhabitants in the human gut. These archaea utilize only methyl compounds including TMA as
substrate [58]. Various bacteria grow anaerobically using TMAO as an alternative terminal electron
acceptor of a respiratory transport chain [16]. During this energy-yielding reaction, TMAO is reduced to
volatile TMA. The bacteria capable of reducing TMAO to TMA are found in different ecological niches
such as the marine environment (Photobacterium, Shewanella and Vibrio species), in photosynthetic
bacteria living in ponds (Rhodobacter species), and is also found among many enterobacteria [16,53,54].
Thus, colonizing human gut with such bacteria could reduce TMAO levels, but this concept needs to
be further explored.
Reduced intake of dietary precursors of TMAO is a potential approach. Dietary L-carnitine has
been shown to induce gut microbiota-dependent production of TMA and TMAO in an animal study [3].
Thus, decreased consumption of L-carnitine and choline could decrease TMAO levels [3]. A systematic
review and meta-analysis of 13 controlled trials showed that L-carnitine is associated with a 27%
reduction in all-cause mortality, a 65% reduction in ventricular arrhythmias and a 40% reduction in
anginal symptoms in patients experiencing an acute myocardial infarction compared to controls [59].
Resveratrol (RSV) is a natural polyphenol with prebiotic benefit that mainly occurs in grapes and
berries. Chen et al. examined the effects of RSV on TMAO induced atherosclerosis, gut microbiota
and TMAO synthesis in C57BL/6J and apoE−/− mice. Treatment with RSV resulted in an increase
in Bacteroidetes abundance at the expense of Firmicutes in choline-treated apoE−/− mice. Serum TMA
and TMAO levels were much lower in RSV-treated mice fed with choline than in those in the control
group [55].
Meldonium, an aza-analogue of gamma-butyrobetaine (GBB), competes with quaternary amines,
including L-carnitine and GBB, for selected enzymes and transport proteins in the body. It decreased
intestinal microbiota-dependent production of TMA/TMAO from L-carnitine in Wistar rats [56].
Meldonium, however, did not influence bacterial growth and bacterial uptake of L-carnitine [56].
3,3-dimethyl-1-butanol (DMB) is a structural analog of choline and an inhibitor for TMA formation
through inhibition of microbial TMA lyases. DMB is found in some balsamic vinegar, red wines, and in
some olive oils and grape seed oils. DMB inhibited choline diet-enhanced endogenous macrophage
foam cell formation and atherosclerotic lesion development in apoE−/− mice without alterations
in circulating cholesterol levels [38]. Furthermore, DMB promoted reduction in microbial taxa that
are associated with plasma TMA and TMAO levels and also reduced the choline-diet-dependent
enhancement in aortic root atherosclerotic lesion development [38].
FMO3 is the member of the FMO enzyme family with the highest activity level and is capable of
oxidizing TMA to TMAO. A potential site of therapeutic intervention could be at the level of the host
enzyme machinery necessary for the conversion of TMA to TMAO. The knockdown of FMO3 using
antisense oligonucleotide in mice has been shown to attenuate atherosclerosis [57]. The knockdown
of FMO3 not only resulted in decreased TMAO levels but also regulated both lipid metabolism and
inflammation, thereby attenuating atherosclerosis. It is important to recall that individuals without
functional FMO3 often exhibit a fishy odor, which is caused by trimethylaminuria.
 Toxins 2016, 8, 326
8 of 11
To summarize, recent studies point to the potential contribution of gut microbiota-derived
production of TMAO from the metabolism of dietary choline and L-carnitine and the increased
risk of developing atherosclerotic heart disease. Interestingly, TMAO plays an important physiological
role in lower animals, but in humans it is merely a remnant of the evolution of the osmolyte system.
It is possible that accumulation of TMAO in humans in disease state may be an adaptation of cells to
stress and, hence, a marker rather than a mediator of disease. On the other hand, there is accumulating
clinical and laboratory-based studies attributing a pathogenic role to this molecule. It is important to
undertake studies examining intracellular concentrations of TMAO in mammals, cellular signaling
and also determine the effects of TMAO on enzymes and other proteins in order to establish the role of
TMAO in health and disease in humans.
Acknowledgments: Dominic S. Raj is supported by National Institutes of Health grants 1R01DK073665-01A1,
1U01DK099924-01, and 1U01DK099914-01.
Author Contributions: All authors contributed to writing the manuscript and reviewing the final version.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1.
Lidbury, I.; Murrell, J.C.; Chen, Y. Trimethylamine N-oxide metabolism by abundant marine heterotrophic
bacteria. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2014, 111, 2710–2715. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.
Yancey, P.H. Organic osmolytes as compatible, metabolic and counteracting cytoprotectants in high
osmolarity and other stresses. J. Exp. Biol. 2005, 208, 2819–2830. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Koeth, R.A.; Wang, Z.; Levison, B.S.; Buffa, J.A.; Org, E.; Sheehy, B.T.; Britt, E.B.; Fu, X.; Wu, Y.; Li, L.; et al.
Intestinal microbiota metabolism of L-carnitine, a nutrient in red meat, promotes atherosclerosis. Nat. Med.
2013, 19, 576–585. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Lin, T.Y. Timasheff SN: Why do some organisms use a urea-methylamine mixture as osmolyte?
Thermodynamic compensation of urea and trimethylamine N-oxide interactions with protein. Biochemistry
1994, 33, 12695–12701. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Yancey, P.H.; Siebenaller, J.F. Trimethylamine oxide stabilizes teleost and mammalian lactate dehydrogenases
against inactivation by hydrostatic pressure and trypsinolysis. J. Exp. Biol. 1999, 202, 3597–3603. [PubMed]
6.
Yancey, P.H.; Blake, W.R.; Conley, J. Unusual organic osmolytes in deep-sea animals: Adaptations to
hydrostatic pressure and other perturbants. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. A Mol. Integr. Physiol. 2002, 133, 667–676.
[CrossRef]
7.
Ma, J.; Pazos, I.M.; Gai, F. Microscopic insights into the protein-stabilizing effect of trimethylamine N-oxide
(TMAO). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2014, 111, 8476–8481. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.
Kaysen, G.A.; Johansen, K.L.; Chertow, G.M.; Dalrymple, L.S.; Kornak, J.; Grimes, B.; Dwyer, T.; Chassy, A.W.;
Fiehn, O. Associations of trimethylamine N-oxide with nutritional and inflammatory biomarkers and
cardiovascular outcomes in patients new to dialysis. J. Ren. Nutr. 2015, 25, 351–356. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.
Tang, W.H.; Wang, Z.; Kennedy, D.J.; Wu, Y.; Buffa, J.A.; Agatisa-Boyle, B.; Li, X.S.; Levison, B.S.; Hazen, S.L.
Gut microbiota-dependent trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) pathway contributes to both development of
renal insufficiency and mortality risk in chronic kidney disease. Circ. Res. 2015, 116, 448–455. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
10.
Koeth, R.A.; Levison, B.S.; Culley, M.K.; Buffa, J.A.; Wang, Z.; Gregory, J.C.; Org, E.; Wu, Y.; Li, L.;
Smith, J.D.; et al. γ-Butyrobetaine is a proatherogenic intermediate in gut microbial metabolism of L-carnitine
to TMAO. Cell Metab. 2014, 20, 799–812. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.
Anthoni, U.; Christophersen, C.; Gram, L.; Nielsen, N.H.; Nielsen, P. Poisonings from flesh of the Greenland
shark Somniosus microcephalus may be due to trimethylamine. Toxicon 1991, 29, 1205–1212. [CrossRef]
12.
Marzo, A.; Curti, S. L-Carnitine moiety assay: An up-to-date reappraisal covering the commonest methods
for various applications. J. Chromatogr. B Biomed. Sci. Appl. 1997, 702, 1–20. [CrossRef]
13.
Ierardi, E.; Sorrentino, C.; Principi, M.; Giorgio, F.; Losurdo, G.; Di, L.A. Intestinal microbial metabolism of
phosphatidylcholine: A novel insight in the cardiovascular risk scenario. Hepatobiliary Surg. Nutr. 2015, 4,
289–292. [PubMed]
 Toxins 2016, 8, 326
9 of 11
14.
Tang, W.H.; Wang, Z.; Levison, B.S.; Koeth, R.A.; Britt, E.B.; Fu, X.; Wu, Y.; Hazen, S.L. Intestinal microbial
metabolism of phosphatidylcholine and cardiovascular risk. N. Engl. J. Med. 2013, 368, 1575–1584. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
15.
Dolphin, C.T.; Janmohamed, A.; Smith, R.L.; Shephard, E.A.; Phillips, I.R. Missense mutation in
flavin-containing mono-oxygenase 3 gene, FMO3, underlies fish-odour syndrome. Nat. Genet. 1997,
17, 491–494. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Barrett, E.L.; Kwan, H.S. Bacterial reduction of trimethylamine oxide. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 1985, 39, 131–149.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
17.
Romano, K.A.; Vivas, E.I.; Amador-Noguez, D.; Rey, F.E. Intestinal microbiota composition modulates
choline bioavailability from diet and accumulation of the proatherogenic metabolite trimethylamine-N-oxide.
MBio 2015, 6, e02481. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.
Craciun, S.; Balskus, E.P. Microbial conversion of choline to trimethylamine requires a glycyl radical enzyme.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2012, 109, 21307–21312. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19.
Zhu, Y.; Jameson, E.; Crosatti, M.; Schafer, H.; Rajakumar, K.; Bugg, T.D.; Chen, Y. Carnitine metabolism to
trimethylamine by an unusual Rieske-type oxygenase from human microbiota. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
2014, 111, 4268–4273.
20.
Wang, Z.; Levison, B.S.; Hazen, J.E.; Donahue, L.; Li, X.M.; Hazen, S.L. Comparative genome-wide association
studies in mice and humans for trimethylamine N-oxide, a proatherogenic metabolite of choline and
L-carnitine. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 2014, 34, 1307–1313.
21.
Wang, Z.;
Levison, B.S.;
Hazen, J.E.;
Donahue, L.;
Li, X.M.;
Hazen, S.L. Measurement of
trimethylamine-N-oxide by stable isotope dilution liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry.
Anal. Biochem. 2014, 455, 35–40. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22.
Kuhn, T.; Rohrmann, S.; Sookthai, D.; Johnson, T.; Katzke, V.; Kaaks, R.; von, E.A.; Muller, D. Intra-individual
variation of plasma trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO), betaine, and choline over 1 year. Clin. Chem. Lab. Med.
2016. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Cho, C.E.; Taesuwan, S.; Malysheva, O.V.; Bender, E.; Tulchinsky, N.F.; Yan, J.; Sutter, J.L.; Caudill, M.A.
Trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO) response to animal source foods varies among healthy young men and is
influenced by their gut microbiota composition: A randomized controlled trial. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2016.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Rohrmann, S.;
Linseisen, J.;
Allenspach, M.;
von, E.A.;
Muller, D. Plasma concentrations of
trimethylamine-N-oxide are directly associated with dairy food consumption and low-grade inflammation
in a german adult population. J. Nutr. 2016, 146, 283–289. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.
Akesson, B.; Vinge, E.; Skerfving, S. Pharmacokinetics of triethylamine and triethylamine-N-oxide in man.
Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 1989, 100, 529–538. [CrossRef]
26.
Hai, X.; Landeras, V.; Dobre, M.A.; DeOreo, P.; Meyer, T.W.; Hostetter, T.H. Mechanism of prominent
trimethylamine oxide (TMAO) accumulation in hemodialysis patients. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0143731.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.
Missailidis, C.; Hallqvist, J.; Qureshi, A.R.; Barany, P.; Heimburger, O.; Lindholm, B.; Stenvinkel, P.;
Bergman, P. Serum trimethylamine-N-oxide is strongly related to renal function and predicts outcome
in chronic kidney disease. PLoS ONE 2016, 11, e0141738. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.
Bain, M.A.; Faull, R.; Fornasini, G.; Milne, R.W.; Evans, A.M. Accumulation of trimethylamine
and
trimethylamine-N-oxide
in
end-stage
renal
disease
patients
undergoing
haemodialysis.
Nephrol. Dial. Transplant. 2006, 21, 1300–1304. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29.
Stubbs, J.R.; House, J.A.; Ocque, A.J.; Zhang, S.; Johnson, C.; Kimber, C. Serum trimethylamine-N-oxide is
elevated in CKD and correlates with coronary atherosclerosis burden. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 2016, 27, 305–313.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
30.
Möbius, K. Die Auster und dieAusternwirthschaft; Wiegandt, Hempel & Parey: Berlin, Germany, 1877.
31.
Kim, Y.; Keogh, J.; Clifton, P. A review of potential metabolic etiologies of the observed association between
red meat consumption and development of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Metabolism 2015, 64, 768–779. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
32.
Wang, Z.; Klipfell, E.; Bennett, B.J.; Koeth, R.; Levison, B.S.; Dugar, B.; Feldstein, A.E.; Britt, E.B.; Fu, X.;
Chung, Y.M.; et al. Gut flora metabolism of phosphatidylcholine promotes cardiovascular disease. Nature
2011, 472, 57–63. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Toxins 2016, 8, 326
10 of 11
33.
Wang, Z.; Tang, W.H.; Buffa, J.A.; Fu, X.; Britt, E.B.; Koeth, R.A.; Levison, B.S.; Fan, Y.; Wu, Y.;
Hazen, S.L. Prognostic value of choline and betaine depends on intestinal microbiota-generated metabolite
trimethylamine-N-oxide. Eur. Heart J. 2014, 35, 904–910. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.
Tang, W.H.; Wang, Z.; Fan, Y.; Levison, B.; Hazen, J.E.; Donahue, L.M.; Wu, Y.; Hazen, S.L. Prognostic value
of elevated levels of intestinal microbe-generated metabolite trimethylamine-N-oxide in patients with heart
failure: Refining the gut hypothesis. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 2014, 64, 1908–1914. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.
Mueller, D.M.; Allenspach, M.; Othman, A.; Saely, C.H.; Muendlein, A.; Vonbank, A.; Drexel, H.; Von, E.A.
Plasma levels of trimethylamine-N-oxide are confounded by impaired kidney function and poor metabolic
control. Atherosclerosis 2015, 243, 638–644. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.
Yin, J.; Liao, S.X.; He, Y.; Wang, S.; Xia, G.H.; Liu, F.T.; Zhu, J.J.; You, C.; Chen, Q.; Zhou, L.; et al. Dysbiosis
of gut microbiota with reduced trimethylamine-N-oxide level in patients with large-artery atherosclerotic
stroke or transient ischemic attack. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 2015, 4, e002699. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37.
Bjorndal, B.; Ramsvik, M.S.; Lindquist, C.; Nordrehaug, J.E.; Bruheim, I.; Svardal, A.; Nygard, O.; Berge, R.K.
A phospholipid-protein complex from antarctic krill reduced plasma homocysteine levels and increased
plasma trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO) and carnitine levels in male wistar rats. Mar. Drugs 2015, 13,
5706–5721. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38.
Wang, Z.; Roberts, A.B.; Buffa, J.A.; Levison, B.S.; Zhu, W.; Org, E.; Gu, X.; Huang, Y.; Zamanian-Daryoush, M.;
Culley, M.K.; et al. Non-lethal Inhibition of gut microbial trimethylamine production for the treatment of
atherosclerosis. Cell 2015, 163, 1585–1595. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39.
Seldin, M.M.; Meng, Y.; Qi, H.; Zhu, W.; Wang, Z.; Hazen, S.L.; Lusis, A.J.; Shih, D.M. Trimethylamine
N-oxide promotes vascular inflammation through signaling of mitogen-activated protein kinase and nuclear
factor-kappaB. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 2016, 5, e002767.
40.
Zhu, W.; Gregory, J.C.; Org, E.; Buffa, J.A.; Gupta, N.; Wang, Z.; Li, L.; Fu, X.; Wu, Y.; Mehrabian, M.; et al. Gut
microbial metabolite TMAO enhances platelet hyperreactivity and thrombosis risk. Cell 2016, 165, 111–124.
41.
Collins, H.L.; Drazul-Schrader, D.; Sulpizio, A.C.; Koster, P.D.; Williamson, Y.; Adelman, S.J.; Owen, K.;
Sanli, T.; Bellamine, A. L-Carnitine intake and high trimethylamine N-oxide plasma levels correlate with
low aortic lesions in apoE(−/−) transgenic mice expressing CETP. Atherosclerosis 2016, 244, 29–37. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
42.
Duranton, F.; Cohen, G.; De, S.R.; Rodriguez, M.; Jankowski, J.; Vanholder, R.; Argiles, A. Normal and
pathologic concentrations of uremic toxins. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 2012, 23, 1258–1270. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43.
Ramezani, A.; Massy, Z.A.; Meijers, B.; Evenepoel, P.; Vanholder, R.; Raj, D.S. Role of the gut microbiome in
uremia: A potential therapeutic target. Am. J. Kidney Dis. 2016, 67, 483–498. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44.
Al-Waiz, M.; Mitchell, S.C.; Idle, J.R.; Smith, R.L. The metabolism of 14C-labelled trimethylamine and its
N-oxide in man. Xenobiotica 1987, 17, 551–558. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.
Niwa, T. Organic acids and the uremic syndrome: Protein metabolite hypothesis in the progression of chronic
renal failure. Semin. Nephrol. 1996, 16, 167–182. [PubMed]
46.
Shafi, T.; Powe, N.R.; Meyer, T.W.; Hwang, S.; Hai, X.; Melamed, M.L.; Banerjee, T.; Coresh, J.; Hostetter, T.H.
Trimethylamine N-oxide and cardiovascular events in hemodialysis patients. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 2016.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
47.
Mafune, A.; Iwamoto, T.; Tsutsumi, Y.; Nakashima, A.; Yamamoto, I.; Yokoyama, K.; Yokoo, T.; Urashima, M.
Associations among serum trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO) levels, kidney function and infarcted coronary
artery number in patients undergoing cardiovascular surgery: A cross-sectional study. Clin. Exp. Nephrol.
2016, 20, 731–739. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.
Bidulescu, A.; Chambless, L.E.; Siega-Riz, A.M.; Zeisel, S.H.; Heiss, G. Usual choline and betaine dietary
intake and incident coronary heart disease: The Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study.
BMC Cardiovasc. Disord. 2007, 7, 20. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49.
Dalmeijer, G.W.; Olthof, M.R.; Verhoef, P.; Bots, M.L.; van der Schouw, Y.T. Prospective study on dietary
intakes of folate, betaine, and choline and cardiovascular disease risk in women. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 2008, 62,
386–394. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50.
Zeisel, S.H.; daCosta, K.A. Increase in human exposure to methylamine precursors of N-nitrosamines after
eating fish. Cancer Res. 1986, 46, 6136–6138. [PubMed]
 Toxins 2016, 8, 326
11 of 11
51.
Morris, M.C.; Manson, J.E.; Rosner, B.; Buring, J.E.; Willett, W.C.; Hennekens, C.H. Fish consumption and
cardiovascular disease in the physicians’ health study: A prospective study. Am. J. Epidemiol. 1995, 142,
166–175. [PubMed]
52.
He, K.; Song, Y.; Daviglus, M.L.; Liu, K.; Van, H.L.; Dyer, A.R.; Greenland, P. Accumulated evidence on fish
consumption and coronary heart disease mortality: A meta-analysis of cohort studies. Circulation 2004, 109,
2705–2711. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53.
Clarke, G.; Ward, F. Purification and properties of trimethylamhe N-oxide reductase from ShewuneIIu sp.
NCMB 400. J. Gen. Microbiol. 1988, 133, 319–386.
54.
Gram, L.; Huss, H.H. Microbiological spoilage of fish and fish products. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 1996, 33,
121–137. [CrossRef]
55.
Chen, M.L.; Yi, L.; Zhang, Y.; Zhou, X.; Ran, L.; Yang, J.; Zhu, J.D.; Zhang, Q.Y.; Mi, M.T. Resveratrol
attenuates trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO)-induced atherosclerosis by regulating TMAO synthesis and bile
acid metabolism via remodeling of the gut microbiota. MBio 2016, 7, e02210–e02215. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56.
Kuka, J.; Liepinsh, E.; Makrecka-Kuka, M.; Liepins, J.; Cirule, H.; Gustina, D.; Loza, E.; Zharkova-Malkova, O.;
Grinberga, S.; Pugovics, O.; et al.
Suppression of intestinal microbiota-dependent production of
pro-atherogenic trimethylamine N-oxide by shifting L-carnitine microbial degradation. Life Sci. 2014,
117, 84–92. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.
Shih, D.M.; Wang, Z.; Lee, R.; Meng, Y.; Che, N.; Charugundla, S.; Qi, H.; Wu, J.; Pan, C.; Brown, J.M.; et al.
Flavin containing monooxygenase 3 exerts broad effects on glucose and lipid metabolism and atherosclerosis.
J. Lipid Res. 2015, 56, 22–37. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58.
Brugere, J.F.; Borrel, G.; Gaci, N.; Tottey, W.; O’Toole, P.W.; Malpuech-Brugere, C. Archaebiotics: Proposed
therapeutic use of archaea to prevent trimethylaminuria and cardiovascular disease. Gut Microbes 2014, 5,
5–10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59.
Dinicolantonio, J.J.; Lavie, C.J.; Fares, H.; Menezes, A.R.; O’Keefe, J.H. L-Carnitine in the secondary
prevention of cardiovascular disease: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Mayo Clin. Proc. 2013, 88,
544–551. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
© 2016 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC-BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
