 Article
A tale of two moralities: Politicians,
doctors, use of addictive substances
and lobbying
Ashwin Venkataraman and David Nutt
Abstract
Alcohol use during the day is common amongst British MPs and Parliamentary staff even when Parliament is in session.
MPs are frequently under the influence of alcohol when deciding on important bills, potentially affecting their judgement.
Lobbying from the alcohol and the tobacco industries is rife in Parliament. What hope is there to change alcohol and
tobacco policy in a more rational and healthy direction if the companies responsible for their harms are corrupting the
political process in this fashion? We propose recommendations in line with the standards required for doctors.
Keywords
addictive substances, alcohol, doctors, lobbying, politicians, tobacco, transparency
Alcohol use during the day is common amongst British
Members of Parliament (MPs) and Parliamentary staff
even when Parliament is in session. No less than eight
Parliamentary bars facilitate this. MPs are frequently
under the influence of alcohol when deciding on
important bills, potentially affecting their judgement.
In the past, it has been noted that MPs were too
drunk to vote in Commons debates. This is deeply con-
cerning for the health and welfare of millions of people
across
the
United
Kingdom
who
are
potentially
affected as a result of poor decision-making from our
representatives when under the influence of alcohol. It
also encourages alcohol dependence amongst MPs and
their support staff.
Lobbying from the alcohol and the tobacco indus-
tries is rife in Parliament. Parliamentary assistants
receive monthly gifts of cigarettes and the latest
vaping products. One of the world’s largest alcohol
consortiums, Diageo, with revenues of over £10 billion
last year, holds regular parties within Parliament itself,
not to mention countless sponsoring of Parliamentary
events. What hope is there to change alcohol and
tobacco policy in a more rational and healthy direction
if the companies responsible for their harms are cor-
rupting the political process in this fashion?
Given recent pressure by politicians for doctors
to be more transparent, these revelations show how
duplicitous some politicians are: ‘‘do as we say not as
we do’’. As society increasingly wishes for transpar-
ency, shouldn’t politicians be held to account in terms
of receiving hospitality and being under the influence of
alcohol at work the same way doctors are by the
General Medical Council?
If a doctor turns up to work under the influence of
alcohol in the morning, they will be sent home. They
are not allowed to drink during the day because even a
small level of intoxication could impair their clinical
judgements. Doctors as professionals have a duty of
care to their patients and anything less than performing
at an optimum level is a potential risk to patients.
GMC Guidance (2013b) states that we must raise and
act on concerns that patients might be at risk of serious
harm. Furthermore, there is a system in process to pro-
tect the public from these individuals in the future and
rehabilitate them (GMC Guidance, 2012).
In contrast, MPs, their assistants and their guests
within Parliament have adopted a drinking culture
that is prevalent throughout the day. Subsidised
Imperial College London, UK
Corresponding author:
Ashwin Venkataraman, Imperial College London, 5th Floor, Burlington
Danes Building, 160 Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK.
Email: a.venkataraman@imperial.ac.uk
Drug Science, Policy and Law
Volume 4: 1–3
! The Author(s) 2018
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/2050324518789219
journals.sagepub.com/home/dsp
 alcoholic drinks worth £1.3 million were sold in the
House of Commons bars in one year alone (House of
Commons, 2011). At lunch and throughout the day,
they entertain guests, drink alcohol, and many return
to Parliamentary duties afterwards, though some fail as
for example one MP admitted being too drunk to get
through the chamber to vote in 2010 (Walters, 2010).
This will impact on their decision-making ability. In
addition to their parties with free alcohol for MPs
and Parliamentary staff, Diageo also give tours of vine-
yards in the South of France. The most popular club in
Parliament is the Beer Club to which over 60% of MPs
are members (House of Commons, n.d.). What this
club offers is simply two free cases of beer every
Christmas; this seems a small price to pay to stop
MPs voting in favour of measures to reduce drinking.
A politician ‘‘under the influence’’ also has the
potential to cause serious harm or loss of life through
their impaired Parliamentary judgement. The British
government, unlike many other political establishments
worldwide, operates within a drinking culture that is
deleterious to the electorate they are accountable to.
We know alcohol causes cognitive impairment, and
we know a quarter of the adult population in the UK
consume alcohol in a way that is potentially or actually
harmful (NICE Clinical Guidelines, 2011). Members of
Parliament are surely not different from the rest of soci-
ety they represent. Given how prevalent alcohol use is
during the working day at Parliament, we suggest MPs
should be breathalysed before being allowed to vote;
surely the making of a decision to go to war should
be treated as seriously as that of driving a car?
Although
tobacco
does
not
impair
judgement
acutely, smoking of cigarettes is still the leading cause
of premature death in the UK. MPs’ declaration of
interests mean that tobacco companies do not directly
provide freebies. However, we have learned that
Imperial Tobacco circumvents MPs declared interests
by providing up to 200 free cigarettes and tobacco
vaporisers per month to Parliamentary assistants.
That these gifts are made to the group of people who
can influence MPs and Cabinet Ministers thinking,
including speech writing, and yet is free from the
requirement
for
declaration
is
deeply
concerning.
Such covert lobbying is a potentially toxic influence
to the people privileged enough to hold Parliamentary
office.
Candour and transparency are required of doctors.
When conducting their day-to-day practice they must
be honest and declare all financial and commercial deal-
ings that might affect the way they prescribe, treat or
commission services for patients. This also applies
to financial dealings with patients, employers, insurers
or other organisations or individuals (GMC Guidance,
2013a). If we are faced with a conflict of interest we
must be open about this, declare it and be prepared
to exclude ourselves from the decision-making. We
are also not able to accept any inducement, gift or hos-
pitality or offer these to the detriment of the above. We
are held highly accountable for this, and when publish-
ing research, attending conferences and acting on com-
missioning decisions we must declare these interests.
The British parliamentary system needs to operate in
an alcohol-free environment to stop the risk of intoxi-
cation clouding their judgements. They also need to be
more accountable and transparent about external inter-
ests and stop allowing alcohol and tobacco companies
to influence their systems of governance. The Code of
Conduct for Members of Parliament (Parliament, 2015)
is flouted by MPs and circumvented by lobbyists who
target other staff. Parliamentary staff need to follow
examples from doctors, and from the City of London
and progress to 21st century thinking by ensuring their
workplace is drug and alcohol free. The health and
safety of millions is dependent on it.
Recommendations for MPs – if it is good enough for
doctors . . .
1. MPs should be breathalysed before being allowed to
vote – with same level of expectation (low-to-zero
alcohol concentration) as per doctors.
2. Alcohol subsidies in Parliament should stop.
3. The serving hours in the Parliamentary bars should
be reduced.
4. Freebies to staff from all companies especially those
involved
with
alcohol
and
tobacco
should
be
stopped.
Author contributions
Both authors have contributed equally to the article.
Permission to reuse statement
The corresponding author has the right to grant on behalf of
all authors and does grant on behalf of all authors, a world-
wide licence to the Publishers and its licensees in perpetuity, in
all forms, formats and media (whether known now or created
in the future), to (i) publish, reproduce, distribute, display and
store the Contribution, (ii) translate the Contribution into
other languages, create adaptations, reprints, include within
collections and create summaries, extracts and/or, abstracts
of the Contribution, (iii) create any other derivative work(s)
based on the Contribution, (iv) to exploit all subsidiary rights
in the Contribution, (v) the inclusion of electronic links from
the Contribution to third party material wherever it may be
located and (vi) licence any third party to do any or all of the
above.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The views expressed are those of the authors alone. We have
read and understood the policy on declaration of interests
2
Drug Science, Policy and Law 0(0)
 and declare the following interests: AV reports previous
grants from Alzheimer’s Research UK, NIHR and BRC.
He has worked on a GSK funded study and receives no finan-
cial or other support from them. He has received non-finan-
cial support from Eli-Lilly. All these are outside the remit of
this article. DN has received financial support and grants
from a range of pharmaceutical companies. He is the director
of Alcarelle and Equasy Enterprises Ltd.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
References
GMC Guidance (2012) Your Health Matters. UK: General
Medical Council.
GMC Guidance (2013a) Financial and Commercial Arrangements
and Conflicts of Interest. UK: General Medical Council.
GMC Guidance (2013b) Good Medical Practice: Working
with Doctors Working for Patients. UK: General Medical
Council.
House of Commons (2011) Alcohol consumption in the
House of Commons. UK Parliament. Available at: www.
parliament.uk/site-information/foi/foi-and-eir/commons-
foi-disclosures/catering-services-retail/alcohol-consump-
tion-in-the-house-of-commons/ (accessed 24 November
2016).
House of Commons (n.d.) Memorandum from the all-party
parliamentary beer group. UK Parliament. Available at:
www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm199900/cmselect/
cmtreasy/953/953ap16.htmhtm (accessed 2 July 2018).
NICE Clinical Guidelines (2011) Alcohol-Use Disorders:
Diagnosis,
Assessment
and
Management
of
Harmful
Drinking and Alcohol Dependence. pp. 1–51. Available at:
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg115 (accessed 6 July
2018).
Parliament
(2015)
House
of
Commons:
The
Code
of
Conduct: The Guide to the Rules relating to the conduct
of
members.
Available
at:
www.publications.parlia-
ment.uk/pa/cm201012/cmcode/1885/188502.htm (accessed
23 November 2016).
Walters S (2010) I was too drunk to vote on Budget, confesses
Tories’ Mr Reckless (or should that be Legless?). Mail on
Sunday, 11 July. Available at: www.dailymail.co.uk/news/
article-1293762/I-drunk-vote-Budget-confesses-Tories-
Mark-Reckless.html (accessed 2 July 2018).
Venkataraman and Nutt
3
