 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Optical Coherence Tomography of Retinal Lesions in Infants
With Congenital Zika Syndrome
Camila V. Ventura, MD; Liana O. Ventura, MD, PhD; Vasco Bravo-Filho, MD; Thayze T. Martins, MD;
Audina M. Berrocal, MD; Adriana L. Gois, MD; João Rafael de Oliveira Dias, MD; Leandro Araújo, MD;
Paulo Escarião, MD, PhD; Vanessa van der Linden, MD, MSc; Rubens Belfort Jr, MD, PhD; Mauricio Maia, MD, PhD
IMPORTANCE Zika virus (ZIKV) can cause severe changes in the retina and choroid that may
result in marked visual impairment in infants with congenital Zika syndrome (CZS), the term
created for a variety of anomalies associated with intrauterine ZIKV infection.
OBJECTIVE To evaluate the affected retinal layers in infants with CZS and associated retinal
abnormalities using optical coherence tomography (OCT).
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS This cross-sectional, consecutive case series included 8
infants (age range, 3.0-5.1 months) with CZS. Optical coherence tomographic images were
obtained in the affected eyes of 7 infants with CZS who had undergone previous
ophthalmologic examinations on March 17, 2016, and in 1 infant on January 1, 2016. An IgM
antibody-capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for ZIKV was performed on the
cerebrospinal fluid samples of 7 of the 8 infants (88%), and other congenital infections were
ruled out.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES Observation of retinal and choroidal findings in the OCT
images.
RESULTS Among the 8 infants included in the study (3 male; 5 female; mean [SD] age at
examination, 4.1 [0.7] months), 7 who underwent cerebrospinal fluid analysis for ZIKV had
positive findings for IgM antibodies. Eleven of the 16 eyes (69%) of the 8 infants had retinal
alterations and OCT imaging was performed in 9 (82%) of them. Optical coherence
tomography was also performed in 1 unaffected eye. The main OCT findings in the affected
eyes included discontinuation of the ellipsoid zone and hyperreflectivity underlying the
retinal pigment epithelium in 9 eyes (100%), retinal thinning in 8 eyes (89%), choroidal
thinning in 7 eyes (78%), and colobomatouslike excavation involving the neurosensory retina,
retinal pigment epithelium, and choroid in 4 eyes (44%).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE Zika virus can cause severe damage to the retina, including
the internal and external layers, and the choroid. The colobomatouslike finding seen in the
OCT images relate to the excavated chorioretinal scar observed clinically.
JAMA Ophthalmol. 2016;134(12):1-8. doi:10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2016.4283
Published online November 10, 2016.
Invited Commentary page 1
Supplemental content
Author Affiliations: Department of
Ophthalmology, Altino Ventura
Foundation, Recife, Brazil
(C. V. Ventura, L. O. Ventura, Bravo-
Filho, Martins, Gois, Araújo, Escarião);
Department of Ophthalmology,
Pernambuco Eye Hospital, Recife,
Brazil (C. V. Ventura, L. O. Ventura,
Bravo-Filho, Martins, Gois, Araújo,
Escarião); Department of
Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences,
Paulista School of Medicine, Federal
University of São Paulo, São Paulo,
Brazil (C. V. Ventura, de Oliveira Dias,
Belfort, Maia); Bascom Palmer Eye
Institute, Miami, Florida
(C. V. Ventura, Berrocal, de Oliveira
Dias); Department of Pediatric
Neurology, Barão de Lucena Hospital,
Recife, Brazil (van der Linden).
Corresponding Author: Rubens
Belfort Jr, MD, PhD, Department of
Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences,
Paulista School of Medicine, Federal
University of São Paulo, Rua
Botucatú, 831, São Paulo, SP, Brazil
04023-062 (clinbelf@uol.com.br).
Research
JAMA Ophthalmology | Original Investigation
(Reprinted)
1
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
B
efore April 2015, no cases of Zika virus (ZIKV) infec-
tion were reported in Brazil. Since that time, ZIKV in-
fection has reached epidemic proportions in the coun-
try and affected more than 1 million Brazilians.1,2
Zika virus, a neurotropic flavivirus, was first identified in
1947 among Rhesus monkeys from Africa.3 A few years later,
ZIKVwasisolatedforthefirsttimeinUgandansandNigerians.4
For more than 50 years, the ZIKV was considered an endemic
mosquito-borne disease in Asia and Africa until the Microne-
sian outbreak occurred in 2007, followed by the French Poly-
nesian outbreak in 2013 to 2014.4 In 2014, the first report of
the ZIKV circulating in the Americas was reported on Easter
Island.5
Although intrauterine infections had been described dur-
ing these outbreaks, no cases of microcephaly had been asso-
ciated with ZIKV in the French Polynesian epidemic.6 In Oc-
tober 2015, the Brazilian Ministry of Health6 reported an
unusual increase in cases of microcephaly in northeastern Bra-
zil. By November 2015, the Brazilian Ministry of Health and the
World Health Organization6 reported the association of this
malformation with intrauterine ZIKV infection. Despite mi-
crocephaly being the first clinical feature described in con-
genital ZIKV intrauterine infection, subsequent studies re-
ported a variety of anomalies associated with this disease,
including ocular abnormalities, hearing loss, and limb anoma-
lies, which constitute the clinical features of a syndrome re-
ferred to as the congenital Zika syndrome (CZS).7-11
In 2016, Ventura et al7,8 first reported the ocular findings
associated with intrauterine ZIKV infection that involved the
optic nerve and retina. The retinal findings include mild to se-
vere macular pigmentary changes and chorioretinal atrophy.
Other studies9,10 confirmed the same findings. de Paula Frei-
tas et al9 published a report of similar retinal and optic nerve
changes in infants with presumed CZS from the state of Bahia
in February 2016, and Miranda et al10 described retinal hem-
orrhages and peripheral retinal lesions that had not yet been
reported and are likely related to the viral infection.
In 1991, Huang et al12 first described optical coherence to-
mography (OCT), a noninvasive diagnostic imaging tool that
provides cross-sectional retinal images. Using low-
coherence light (840 nm) associated with an optical reflectiv-
ity system, this technology can visualize the retinal layers and
therefore plays an important role as an ancillary examination
for macular diseases.13 Optical coherence tomography is used
to diagnose and follow up congenital and acquired ocular dis-
eases and evaluate the chronicity and activity of these pro-
cesses. In this case series, we describe the OCT findings of 8
infants with CZS.
Methods
The study inclusion criteria were birth dates from May 1 to De-
cember 31, 2015, in the state of Pernambuco, Brazil; negative
serologic findings for toxoplasmosis, rubella virus, cytomega-
lovirus, herpes simplex virus, syphilis, and human immuno-
deficiency virus; and a previous diagnosis of retinal lesions by
indirect ophthalmoscopy followed by documentation using a
wide-angle digital fundus camera (RetCam Shuttle; Clarity
Medical Systems). After February 2016, serologic testing for
ZIKV became available in Brazil, and with the exception of pa-
tient 8, the cerebrospinal fluid of all other infants was tested
fortheZIKVinfectionusingtheIgMantibody-captureenzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay.14 The institutional review board
of the Altino Ventura Foundation, Recife, Brazil, and the Fed-
eral University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, approved this
prospective cross-sectional study, which followed the tenets
of the Declaration of Helsinki15 and was conducted at the Al-
tino Ventura Foundation. The patients’parents provided writ-
ten informed consent before study enrollment.
Initial Assessment
Thepatients’fundusdescriptionsandimagesusedforthiscase
series are from the patients’initial assessment that occurred
from December 14, 2015, to January 11, 2016, at the Altino Ven-
tura Foundation. The fundus description data were collected
from the patients’medical records. For the present study, in-
creased disc cupping was considered when the cup-disc ratio
was0.5orgreater.Bidigitalpressureandcornealdiameterwere
measured in all infants, none of whom presented with abnor-
mal findings.
Some of the patients included in this study have been de-
scribed previously, and similar fundus images have been pub-
lished in previous studies.7,8,12,16 Patient 1 has been described
in The Lancet7; patients 3 and 5, in the Brazilian Archives of
Ophthalmology8; patient 6, in The Lancet14; and patient 7, in
JAMA Ophthalmology.16 During the patients’initial assess-
ment,ocularultrasonographywasperformedinbotheyes,and
no microphthalmia or macular coloboma was detected in any
of the 8 patients.
OCT Imaging
Optical coherence tomographic imaging of the retinal lesions
was performed in all infants on March 17, 2016, except for pa-
tient 2, in whom OCT was performed on January 1, 2016. The
examinationwasperformedwhiletheinfantswereawakewith
the mothers present. The images were obtained using stan-
dard OCT equipment because portable OCT was not avail-
able. Seven of the patients underwent imaging using Fourier-
domain OCT (FD-OCT) technology with 5-μm axial resolution
Key Points
Question What are the optical coherence tomographic (OCT)
findings in infants with congenital Zika syndrome who present
with chorioretinal scars?
Findings In this case series of 8 infants with congenital Zika
syndrome and associated retinal abnormalities who were born in
Pernambuco, Brazil, OCT imaging performed in 9 of the 16 eyes, of
which 8 were affected, showed substantial neurosensory retinal
thinning with discontinuation of the ellipsoid zone, choroidal
thinning, and hyperreflectivity underlying areas of presumed
atrophic retinal pigment epithelium.
Meaning Zika virus can cause substantial damage to the retina,
including the internal and external layers, and the choroid.
Research Original Investigation
OCT Findings in Infants With Congenital Zika Syndrome
2
JAMA Ophthalmology
December 2016
Volume 134, Number 12
(Reprinted)
jamaophthalmology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
(RTVue-100 OCT; Optovue).17 Patient 2 underwent imaging
usinganOCTdevicethatisbasedonspectral-domainOCTtech-
nology with 3-μm axial resolution (Avanti; Optovue).18 Ow-
ing to the high level of difficulty in performing the examina-
tion, we could not acquire images of both eyes of all 8 infants.
The evaluation of optic nerve findings using OCT was not as-
sessed in this study.
Statistical Analysis
We used the statistical software package SPSS for Windows
(version 16.0; SPSS, Inc) data analysis. Categorical variables
were expressed as relative and absolute frequencies. Continu-
ous variables were expressed as mean (SD) and maximal and
minimal values.
Results
eTables 1 and 2 in the Supplement summarize the patients’
characteristics, fundus examination findings, and OCT find-
ings. Among the 8 infants, the mean (SD) age at examination
was4.1(0.7)months(range,3.0-5.1months).Fiveinfants(62%)
werefemaleand3(38%)weremale.Elevenofthe16eyes(69%)
had retinal alterations and OCT scanning was performed in 9
(82%). Optical coherence tomographic imaging was also per-
formed in the unaffected eye of patient 1.
The macular findings included chorioretinal scar in 10 of
16 eyes (63%) and pigment mottling in 7 of 16 eyes (44%). The
OCT findings in the 9 affected eyes included discontinuation
of the ellipsoid zone and hyperreflectivity underlying the reti-
nal pigment epithelium (RPE) in 9 eyes (100%); retinal thin-
ning in 8 eyes (89%); choroidal thinning in 7 eyes (78%); colo-
bomatouslike excavation of the retina, RPE, and choroid in 4
eyes (44%); possible cleft in 3 eyes (33%); and hyperreflective
dots in the inner retinal layers in 1 eye (11%).
Report of Cases
Patient 1
A female infant (age at examination, 5.0 months) with micro-
cephaly (head circumference at birth, 27 cm) was born to a
woman in her 30s by cesarean delivery at a gestational age of
37 weeks (weight, 2290 g). The mother denied having symp-
toms of ZIKV infection during pregnancy.
Results of the fundus examination of the right eye were
normal and a chorioretinal scar with pigment mottling was ob-
servedinthelefteye(Figure1A).TheFD-OCTimageoftheright
eye was unremarkable, with normal retinal and choroidal lay-
ers (Figure 1B). The FD-OCT image of the left eye revealed neu-
rosensory retinal thinning with discontinuation of the photo-
receptor inner and outer segment junction (ellipsoid zone),
choroidal thinning, and hyperreflectivity underlying the RPE
(Figure 1C).
Patient 2
A male infant (age at examination, 3.9 months) with micro-
cephaly (head circumference at birth, 28 cm) was delivered
vaginally to a woman in her late teens at a gestational age of
37 weeks (weight, 2800 g). The mother reported a rash dur-
ing the first trimester of pregnancy.
The fundus examination of both eyes revealed optic nerve
hypoplasia and a chorioretinal scar with gross pigment mot-
tling in the macular region (Figure 2A and B). The spectral-
domain OCT image in both eyes showed severe neurosensory
retinal thinning with discontinuation of the ellipsoid zone, a
possible cleft, hyperreflectivity underlying the RPE, and cho-
roidalthinning.Acolobomatouslikeexcavationwasseeninthe
affected retina, RPE, and choroid in both eyes (Figure 2C and
D).
Patient 3
Afemaleinfant(correctedageatexamination,3.0months)with
microcephaly (head circumference at birth, 28 cm) was born
Figure 1. Fundus Photographs and Optical Coherence Tomographic
(OCT) Images in Patient 1 With Congenital Zika Syndrome
Left eye
A
Fourier-domain OCT, right eye
B
Fourier-domain OCT, left eye
C
A, Chorioretinal scar and pigment mottling in the left eye. B, No abnormalities in
the right eye. C, Chorioretinal thinning, discontinuation of the ellipsoid zone,
and hyperreflectivity underlying the retinal pigment epithelium in the left eye.
OCT Findings in Infants With Congenital Zika Syndrome
Original Investigation Research
jamaophthalmology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Ophthalmology
December 2016
Volume 134, Number 12
3
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
to a woman in her 40s by cesarean delivery at a gestational age
of 36 weeks (weight, 2765 g). The mother described fever, rash,
and generalized malaise during the second trimester of preg-
nancy.
The fundus examination revealed a unilateral chorioreti-
nal scar in the macular region of the right eye (Figure 3A). The
FD-OCT images in the right eye showed severe neurosensory
retinal and choroidal thinning with discontinuation of the el-
lipsoid zone and hyperreflectivity underlying the RPE. A slight
excavation with a colobomatous aspect was seen in the af-
fected retina, RPE, and choroid (Figure 3B).
Patient 4
A male infant (age at examination, 4.0 months) with micro-
cephaly (head circumference at birth, 27.5 cm) was delivered
vaginallytoawomaninher30satagestationalageof40weeks
(weight, 2685 g). The mother described having an itchy rash
and fever during the second trimester of pregnancy.
Thefundusexaminationrevealedincreasedopticdisccup-
ping and a chorioretinal scar in the macular region in both eyes
and gross pigmentation in the right eye (Figure 3C). The FD-
OCT image of the right eye showed neurosensory retinal thin-
ning with discontinuation of the ellipsoid zone, choroidal thin-
ning, and hyperreflectivity underlying the RPE (Figure 3D).
Optical coherence tomographic imaging could not be per-
formed in the left eye.
Patient 5
A female infant (age at examination, 4.2 months) with micro-
cephaly (head circumference at birth, 30 cm) was born to a
woman in her 40s by cesarean delivery at a gestational age of
39weeks(weight,2900g).Themotherreporteditchinessalone
during the first trimester of pregnancy.
The fundus examination revealed discrete optic disc pal-
lor and gross pigment mottling in both eyes and 2 chorioreti-
nal scars in the macular region in the left eye (Figure 4A). The
FD-OCT image of the left eye showed hyperreflective dots in
theinnerretinallayers,neurosensoryretinalthinningwithdis-
continuation of the ellipsoid zone, and discrete hyperreflec-
tivity underlying the RPE. Choroidal alterations could not be
evaluated(Figure4B).Opticalcoherencetomographicimaging
of the right eye could not be performed owing to technical dif-
ficulties.
Patient 6
A male infant (age at examination, 4.1 months) with no mi-
crocephaly (head circumference at birth, 33 cm) was deliv-
ered vaginally to a woman in her late teens at a gestational age
of 38 weeks (weight, 3500 g). The mother denied symptoms
during pregnancy. At birth, lower and superior limb spasms
were noticed. The infant underwent a neurologic assessment
that detected cerebral calcifications.
Figure 2. Fundus Photographs and Optical Coherence Tomographic (OCT) Images of Patient 2 With Congenital Zika Syndrome
Right eye
A
Left eye
B
Spectral-domain OCT, right eye
C
Spectral-domain OCT, left eye
D
A and B, Optic nerve hypoplasia, chorioretinal scar, and pigment mottling in both eyes. C and D, Severe chorioretinal thinning, discontinuation of the ellipsoid zone,
and excavation of remaining retina in both eyes.
Research Original Investigation
OCT Findings in Infants With Congenital Zika Syndrome
4
JAMA Ophthalmology
December 2016
Volume 134, Number 12
(Reprinted)
jamaophthalmology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
The fundus examination revealed a chorioretinal scar in
the fovea of the left eye (Figure 4C). The FD-OCT image of the
left eye showed discontinuation of the ellipsoid zone, irregu-
lar RPE contour, a possible cleft, and hyperreflectivity under-
lying the RPE (Figure 4D).
Patient 7
A female infant (age at examination, 3.7 months) with micro-
cephaly (head circumference at birth, 29 cm) was born to a
woman in her 30s by cesarean delivery at a gestational age of
39 weeks (weight, 3100 g). The mother reported itchiness,
headache, and retroocular pain during the second trimester
of pregnancy.
The fundus examination revealed a chorioretinal scar in
the macular region of the right eye (Figure 5A). The FD-OCT
imageoftherighteyeshowedsevereneurosensoryretinalthin-
ning, with discontinuation of the ellipsoid zone, hyperreflec-
tivity underlying the RPE, and choroidal thinning. A colobo-
matouslikeexcavationwasseenintheaffectedretina,RPE,and
choroid (Figure 5B).
Patient 8
A female infant (age at examination, 1.1 months) with micro-
cephaly (head circumference at birth, 24 cm) was born to a
woman in her 30s by cesarean delivery at a gestational age of
40 weeks (weight, 2925 g). The mother described rash, itchi-
ness, and arthralgia during the second trimester of preg-
nancy.
The fundus examination revealed a unilateral chorioreti-
nal scar associated with gross pigment mottling in the macu-
lar region of the left eye (Figure 5C). The FD-OCT image of the
left eye showed severe neurosensory retinal thinning with dis-
continuation of the ellipsoid zone, choroidal thinning, and hy-
perreflectivity underlying the RPE (Figure 5D).
Discussion
The present study describes the OCT findings in 8 infants with
retinal changes and presumed congenital ZIKV infection, 7 of
whom had positive test results for ZIKV in the cerebrospinal
fluid. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to
report the OCT findings in macular lesions of newborns with
CZS based on a MEDLINE search on August 28, 2016. These in-
fantswereborninthestateofPernambucoinnortheasternBra-
zil, which is considered the epicenter of the ZIKV epidemic,
with the highest number of infants with microcephaly in
Brazil.19
Figure 3. Fundus Photographs and Optical Coherence Tomographic (OCT) Images of Patients 3 and 4 With Congenital Zika Syndrome
Right eye
A
Fourier-domain OCT, right eye
B
Right eye
C
Fourier-domain OCT, right eye
D
Patient 3
Patient 4
A, Chorioretinal scar in the right eye of patient 3. B, Chorioretinal thinning,
discontinuation of the ellipsoid zone, and excavation of remaining retina in the
right eye of patient 3. C, Chorioretinal scar and pigmentation in the right eye of
patient 4. D, Chorioretinal thinning and discontinuation of the ellipsoid zone in
the right eye of patient 4.
OCT Findings in Infants With Congenital Zika Syndrome
Original Investigation Research
jamaophthalmology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Ophthalmology
December 2016
Volume 134, Number 12
5
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Until recently, microcephaly was considered the main
screening criterion for identifying infants with CZS.7-9 How-
ever, in a recent case report of an infant without micro-
cephaly who presented with other neurologic and ocular
findings,16 the infant had positive test results for the ZIKV in-
fection, confirming CZS. This previous report has changed our
inclusion criteria; thus the infant without microcephaly from
the previous study was included in the present case series.16
Although the ocular findings described by indirect oph-
thalmoscopy and fundus imaging in infants with CZS from sev-
eral studies agree,7-10 none reported the specific retinal lay-
ers affected by the ZIKV. The present study used standard OCT
devices to better understand the effect of ZIKV on the retina,
RPE, and choroid. Despite not acquiring the images with por-
table devices, the images captured and described have enough
quality to perceive in detail the affected retinal layers.
The main OCT findings identified in the present group of
infants with CZS included severe neurosensory retinal thin-
ning with discontinuation of the ellipsoid zone associated with
choroidal thinning and a hyperreflectivity underlying the atro-
phic RPE. Although these OCT findings bring new informa-
tion regarding the severity of the lesions observed clinically
in these patients with CZS, they are not unique to CZS. Dis-
eases that cause aggression to the neurosensory retina, such
as cytomegalovirus retinitis and toxoplasmic retinochoroidi-
tis, can present with similar OCT findings. These findings in-
clude chorioretinal thinning and discontinuation of the ellip-
soid zone.20-22 In addition, the hyperreflectivity seen
underlying the RPE in most of these eyes can be also ob-
served in these other retinal diseases with severe involve-
ment of the RPE, which is simply the signal’
s transmission
through the atrophic tissue.
We speculate that, according to the severity of the ocular
involvement in CZS, the neurosensory retina is solely af-
fected, or in more severe cases, the retina and choroid are af-
fected. The colobomatouslike aspect seen in patients 2, 3, and
7 corresponds to the severe excavated chorioretinal scar ob-
served clinically. Although they simulate macular coloboma,
ocular ultrasonographic findings ruled out this possibility in
these 3 patients. Furthermore, these colobomatouslike le-
sions have also been described in other retinal diseases, such
as scarred congenital toxoplasmosis lesions and congenital
macular coloboma.20,21,23
The possible cleft identified in the OCT images of pa-
tients 2 and 6 are also seen in torpedo maculopathy. How-
ever, in torpedo maculopathy, the inner retinal structure is not
affected, which differs from our cases. Furthermore, the clini-
cal findings of torpedo maculopathy are different from the CZS
lesions. Torpedo lesions are typically unilateral, temporal to
the fovea, and consequently do not affect visual acuity.24,25
Figure 4. Fundus Photographs and Optical Coherence Tomographic (OCT) Images of Patients 5 and 6 With Congenital Zika Syndrome
Left eye
A
Fourier-domain OCT, left eye
B
Left eye
C
Fourier-domain OCT, left eye
D
Patient 5
Patient 6
A, Chorioretinal scars and pigmentation in the left eye of patient 5. B,
Hyperreflective dots in the inner retina and retinal thinning in the left eye of
patient 5. C, Chorioretinal scar in the left eye of patient 6. D, Discontinuation of
the ellipsoid zone and irregular retinal pigment epithelial contour in the left eye
of patient 6.
Research Original Investigation
OCT Findings in Infants With Congenital Zika Syndrome
6
JAMA Ophthalmology
December 2016
Volume 134, Number 12
(Reprinted)
jamaophthalmology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Another interesting OCT finding observed in patient 5 con-
sisted of the hyperreflective dots in the inner retinal layers. We
speculated that they corresponded to the retinal pigment mot-
tling seen in the fundus photograph. However, they could also
be related to a distortion of the signal.
These OCT findings suggest that the physiopathogenesis
of the chorioretinal atrophy is similar to the mechanism by
which ZIKV causes microcephaly in these infants. The im-
mense neurotropism of ZIKV could result in a destructive pro-
cess causing significant necrosis of the retinal tissue. The limi-
tations of the present study included the sample size, lack of
newborn cooperation, inability to document bilateral disease
systematically,lackofapoint-to-pointcorrelationbetweenOCT
and fundus findings, and lack of cerebrospinal fluid testing for
ZIKV in patient 8.
Conclusions
The use of OCT technology in this case series showed severe
involvement of the neurosensory retina, including the inter-
nal and external layers, and the choroid. Although these find-
ings provide important new information about this devastat-
ing disease, they are not unique to CZS, and therefore OCT
cannot be used to differentiate CZS from other retinal dis-
eases. Nevertheless, the OCT findings herein identified con-
firm the primary involvement of the retina in infants with CZS.
They indicate severe visual impairment in newborns; how-
ever, further studies should confirm the accuracy of this state-
ment by correlating the findings with visual function in the fu-
ture.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: September 18, 2016.
Published Online: November 10, 2016.
doi:10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2016.4283
Author Contributions: Dr C. V. Ventura had full
access to all the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis.
Study concept and design: C. V. Ventura, L. O.
Ventura, Berrocal, de Oliveira Dias, Belfort, Maia.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: C. V.
Ventura, L. O. Ventura, Bravo-Filho, Martins, Gois,
de Oliveira Dias, Araujo, Escariao, van der Linden,
Maia.
Drafting of the manuscript: C. V. Ventura, L. O.
Ventura, Martins, Berrocal, de Oliveira Dias, Araujo,
van der Linden, Maia.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: C. V. Ventura, L. O. Ventura,
Bravo-Filho, Berrocal, Gois, de Oliveira Dias,
Escariao, Belfort, Maia.
Statistical analysis: C. V. Ventura.
Obtained funding: L. O. Ventura, Maia.
Administrative, technical, or material support: L. O.
Ventura, Bravo-Filho, Martins, Araujo, van der
Linden, Belfort Jr, Maia.
Study supervision: C. V. Ventura, L. O. Ventura,
Bravo-Filho, Martins, Berrocal, Gois, de Oliveira
Dias, Escariao, Belfort Jr, Maia.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have
completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for
Figure 5. Fundus Photographs and Optical Coherence Tomographic (OCT) Images of Patients 7 and 8 With Congenital Zika Syndrome
Right eye
A
Fourier-domain OCT, right eye
B
Left eye
C
Fourier-domain OCT, left eye
D
Patient 7
Patient 8
A, Chorioretinal scar in the right eye of patient 7. B, Chorioretinal thinning,
discontinuation of the ellipsoid zone, and excavation of the remaining retina in
the right eye of patient 7. C, Chorioretinal scar and pigmentation in the left eye
of patient 8. D, Chorioretinal thinning and discontinuation of the ellipsoid zone
in the left eye of patient 8.
OCT Findings in Infants With Congenital Zika Syndrome
Original Investigation Research
jamaophthalmology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Ophthalmology
December 2016
Volume 134, Number 12
7
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest and
none were reported.
REFERENCES
1. Zanluca C, Melo VC, Mosimann AL, Santos GI,
Santos CN, Luz K. First report of autochthonous
transmission of Zika virus in Brazil. Mem Inst
Oswaldo Cruz. 2015;110(4):569-572.
2. Yakob L, Walker T. Zika virus outbreak in the
Americas: the need for novel mosquito control
methods. Lancet Glob Health. 2016;4(3):e148-e149.
3. Dick GW, Kitchen SF, Haddow AJ. Zika virus, I:
isolations and serological specificity. Trans R Soc
Trop Med Hyg. 1952;46(5):509-520.
4. Petersen LR, Jamieson DJ, Powers AM, Honein
MA. Zika virus. N Engl J Med. 2016;374(16):1552-1563.
5. Tognarelli J, Ulloa S, Villagra E, et al. A report on
the outbreak of Zika virus on Easter Island, South
Pacific, 2014. Arch Virol. 2016;161(3):665-668.
6. World Health Organization (WHO).
Epidemiological alert: neurological syndrome,
congenital malformations, and Zika virus infection.
Implications for public health in the Americas. http:
//www.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com
_docman&task=doc_view&Itemid=270&gid=
32405&lang=en Published December 1, 2015.
Accessed May 26, 2016.
7. Ventura CV, Maia M, Bravo-Filho V, Góis AL,
Belfort R Jr. Zika virus in Brazil and macular atrophy
in a child with microcephaly. Lancet. 2016;387
(10015):228.
8. Ventura CV, Maia M, Ventura BV, et al.
Ophthalmological findings in infants with
microcephaly and presumable intra-uterus Zika
virus infection. Arq Bras Oftalmol. 2016;79(1):1-3.
9. de Paula Freitas B, de Oliveira Dias JR, Prazeres
J, et al. Ocular findings in infants with microcephaly
associated with presumed Zika virus congenital
infection in Salvador, Brazil. JAMA Ophthalmol.
2016;134(5):529-535.
10. Miranda HA II, Costa MC, Frazão MA, Simão N,
Franchischini S, Moshfeghi DM. Expanded
spectrum of congenital ocular findings in
microcephaly with presumed Zika infection.
Ophthalmology. 2016;123(8):1788-1794.
11. Miranda-Filho DdeB, Martelli CM, Ximenes RA,
et al. Initial description of the presumed congenital
Zika syndrome. Am J Public Health. 2016;106(4):
598-600.
12. Huang D, Swanson EA, Lin CP, et al. Optical
coherence tomography. Science. 1991;254(5035):
1178-1181.
13. Puliafito CA, Hee MR, Lin CP, et al. Imaging of
macular diseases with optical coherence
tomography. Ophthalmology. 1995;102(2):217-229.
14. Ventura CV, Maia M, Travassos SB, et al. Risk
factors associated with the ophthalmoscopic
findings identified in infants with presumed Zika
virus congenital infection. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2016;
134(8):912-918.
15. World Medical Association. World Medical
Association Declaration of Helsinki: ethical
principles for medical research involving human
subjects. JAMA. 2013;310(20):2191-2194. doi:10
.1001/jama.2013.281053
16. Ventura CV, Maia M, Dias N, Ventura LO, Belfort
R Jr. Zika: neurological and ocular findings in infant
without microcephaly. Lancet. 2016;387(10037):
2502.
17. Optovue. RTVue-100 optical coherence
tomography brochure. http://www.argonoptics
.com/fileadmin/images/Produkte/geraete/RTVue
_100.pdf. Accessed June 20, 2016.
18. Optovue. Avanti optical coherence tomography
brochure. http://www.optovue.com/products
/avanti/. Accessed June 20, 2016.
19. Brasil Ministério da Saúde. Centro de
Operações de Emergências em Saúde Pública sobre
Microcefalias (COES–Microcefalias). Informe
Epidemiológico No 32 Monitoramento dos casos de
microcefalia no Brasil. http://combateaedes.saude
.gov.br/images/pdf/informe_microcefalia
_epidemiologico_32.pdf. Accessed July 21, 2016.
20. Garg S, Mets MB, Bearelly S, Mets R. Imaging of
congenital toxoplasmosis macular scars with optical
coherence tomography. Retina. 2009;29(5):631-637.
21. Goldenberg D, Goldstein M, Loewenstein A,
Habot-Wilner Z. Vitreal, retinal, and choroidal
findings in active and scarred toxoplasmosis
lesions: a prospective study by spectral-domain
optical coherence tomography. Graefes Arch Clin
Exp Ophthalmol. 2013;251(8):2037-2045.
22. Sun LL, Goodwin T, Park JJ. Optical coherence
tomography changes in macular CMV retinitis. Digit
J Ophthalmol. 2012;18(2):1-4.
23. Oh JY, Yu YS, Hwang JM, Park KH. Optical
coherence tomographic finding in a case of macular
coloboma. Korean J Ophthalmol. 2007;21(3):175-177.
24. Villegas VM, Schwartz SG, Flynn HW Jr, et al.
Distinguishing torpedo maculopathy from similar
lesions of the posterior segment. Ophthalmic Surg
Lasers Imaging Retina. 2014;45(3):222-226.
25. Trevino R, Kiani S, Raveendranathan P. The
expanding clinical spectrum of torpedo
maculopathy. Optom Vis Sci. 2014;91(4)(suppl 1):
S71-S78.
Research Original Investigation
OCT Findings in Infants With Congenital Zika Syndrome
8
JAMA Ophthalmology
December 2016
Volume 134, Number 12
(Reprinted)
jamaophthalmology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
