 sustainability
Article
Attribute Segmentation and Communication Effects on
Healthy and Sustainable Consumer Diet Intentions
Muriel C. D. Verain 1,*, Siet J. Sijtsema 1, Hans Dagevos 2 and Gerrit Antonides 3
1
Wageningen Economic Research, Wageningen University & Research, P.O. Box 35, 6700 AA Wageningen,
The Netherlands; siet.sijtsema@wur.nl
2
Wageningen Economic Research, Wageningen University & Research, P.O. Box 29703, 2502 LS The Hague,
The Netherlands; hans.dagevos@wur.nl
3
Urban Economics, Wageningen University & Research, P.O. Box 8130, 6700 EW Wageningen,
The Netherlands; gerrit.antonides@wur.nl
*
Correspondence: muriel.verain@wur.nl; Tel: +31-(0)70-335-831
Academic Editor: Marc A. Rosen
Received: 29 January 2017; Accepted: 28 April 2017; Published: 4 May 2017
Abstract: A shift towards more sustainable consumer diets is urgently needed. Dietary guidelines
state that changes towards less animal-based and more plant-based diets are beneficial in terms
of sustainability and, in addition, will have a positive effect on public health. Communication on
these guidelines should be most effective when tailored to the motivations of specific consumer
segments. Therefore, the current study (1) segments consumers based on the importance they attach
to sustainability, health, taste and price of food in several food categories; and (2) tests different
ways (with health arguments, sustainability arguments, or both) of communicating the dietary
guideline. Three segments have been identified: pro-self, average, and sustainable conscious
consumers. For pro-self and average consumers, the communication of both health and sustainability
benefits made them think most about sustainability, although communication did not result in
changes in dietary intentions in these segments. For sustainable conscious consumers, intention
to reduce their meat consumption increased when both health and sustainability benefits were
communicated. These research outcomes indicate the importance of segmentation research in the
development of dietary messages. In addition, the findings show the importance of taking product
category differences into account in studying consumer food motivations and intentions.
Keywords:
communication; consumer segmentation; attributes; food; sustainability; health;
experiment; dietary guidelines
1. Introduction
Food consumption patterns are increasingly related to health (e.g., obesity) and sustainability
(e.g., environmental pollution and animal welfare issues) challenges [1–5]. Sustainability of food
consumption includes a reduction of the ecological footprint related to carbon emission, water and
energy use in production and transportation of food, animal welfare and fair trade. A shift towards
more sustainable and healthy diets is urgently needed and therefore synergies between sustainability
and health are important [3,6–8]. Many countries provide national dietary guidelines to inform
their citizens and advise them on their food consumption. Currently, nutritional guidelines are
focused on the healthiness of a diet, but debates on whether these guidelines should consider health
and sustainability aspects of diets simultaneously are emerging. While Lang and colleagues [9]
already pled for the integration of human health and environment (“planetary health”) in the field of
food, even more specifically Hoek and colleagues [10] recommended that health should remain the
Sustainability 2017, 9, 743; doi:10.3390/su9050743
www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
 Sustainability 2017, 9, 743
2 of 19
overarching principle for policies and actions concerned with shifting consumer behaviors, as this
personal benefit appears to have a greater potential to support behavior change.
Recently, the Live Well for LIFE project funded by the EU and WWF formulated the following
policy recommendation: “National governments should develop policies to give more balanced,
integrated dietary recommendations on healthy and sustainable diets” [11]. In 2011, the Health
Council of the Netherlands published a pioneering report in which guidelines for a healthy diet were
evaluated from an ecological perspective [12]. This report concludes that the use of less animal-based
and more plant-based diets would lead to health and ecological gains simultaneously. In the US,
a governmental advisory report with similar conclusions has been published recently [13]. Changes
towards more plant-based and less animal-based diets have been widely acknowledged in the scientific
literature as benefiting both healthiness and sustainability of present-day diets [5,7,12,14–16]. A less
animal-based diet would significantly reduce emissions, is beneficial in terms of animal welfare,
and can improve public health [3,16]. In addition, increased consumption of fruits and vegetables
would promote public health [17–21]. Currently, adherence to nutritional guidelines is low. Current
intake levels of fruits and vegetables are far below recommendations in most European regions as
well as in the US [17,18,21–23], and meat intake is too high in many affluent countries [3,14,24] despite
nutritional campaigns.
Consumers have an important role to play in the desired shift towards more healthy and
sustainable diets [6,25–29]. In order to achieve a change in consumers’ dietary patterns, a whole range
of interventions can be used. Rothschild [30] developed a conceptual framework for interventions in the
public health domain. He poses that motivation, opportunity (a supporting environment) and ability
(knowledge and skills) are prerequisites for behavior change. Education (information), marketing
(environmental incentives) and law are identified as the three main categories of interventions.
The expected effectiveness of these three categories of interventions depend on the level of motivation,
opportunity and ability. For example, when consumers are motivated but lack ability, education
can help to develop the ability to behave. Which of the three aspects is most important to a person
also depends on his or her stage of change towards more healthy and/or sustainable diets [31]. First,
awareness should be created that something needs to be changed, which may result in increased
motivation. Education can help to create awareness. When a person is motivated to change, the person
should be able and have the opportunity to conduct the desired behavior [31].
Information campaigns and educational measures are by far the most used interventions in
Europe that aim to achieve behavior change towards more healthy diets. The effectiveness of such
campaigns on awareness and attitudes seems quite strong; but so far, nutritional campaigns have
had limited success in changing behavior [32–35]. Also, in the domain of sustainable behavior,
information has not proven very successful in achieving behavior change [36]. A possible reason for
the ineffectiveness of food campaigns can be the “one-size-fits-all approach” [37]. As an antidote to this
approach, the essential role of audience segmentation in developing effective communication is widely
acknowledged [37–42]. Consumer populations are heterogeneous and should be segmented into more
homogenous subgroups with regard to key characteristics [43]. Consumers can differ, for example,
in their food choice motives, which are important determinants of food choices [24,44–49] and are
food-category specific [47]. Because consumers differ in the importance they attach to food choice
motives, they may also differ in the arguments and information that appeal to them most. Nutrition
campaigns may benefit from developing tailored messages that fit the motives of the receiver, because
motivation is an important determinant of the way in which a message is cognitively processed and
perceived [50]. Therefore, it might not be advisable to communicate dietary guidelines as either
guidelines for a healthy diet, or guidelines for a healthy and sustainable diet. The most effective
communication in terms of behavior change might depend on the motivations of the audience.
Intuitively, it seems favorable to focus on more than one motive in nutrition interventions,
in order to ensure that arguments appeal to different consumers. In addition, a dietary change
might be perceived as more attractive when multiple goals can be simultaneously satisfied by
 Sustainability 2017, 9, 743
3 of 19
performing a single act. Kareklas, Carlson and Muehling [51] show that promoting organic meat
with both health arguments and environmental arguments is more effective in stimulating organic
purchases as compared to an ad providing only health arguments. On the other hand, there are
several reasons to believe that it might not always be beneficial to combine arguments within the same
communication [52]. Motives can sometimes be conflicting or be perceived as conflicting [6,53,54].
In this context, it is useful to note two important distinctions in food choice motives. First, some motives
relate to present-based benefits (e.g., price), whereas other motives relate to future-based benefits
(e.g., health and sustainability) [55]. Second, some motives are related to individual benefits (e.g., price
or health) whereas other motives are related to social benefits (e.g., sustainability) [6,56]. Consumers
differ in whether they focus more on current or future benefits [57] and whether they attach more
importance to egoistic or altruistic/biospheric values [58,59]. A mismatch between a message and the
audience can undermine the credibility and the persuasiveness of the message [39].
The literature does not provide a decisive answer on whether nutritional guidelines can best be
communicated as healthy, sustainable or both. Our first hypothesis is that the optimal communication
differs across motive-based population subgroups, because we expect a message to be most effective
when it matches the motives of the audience. Second, we hypothesize that the effect of such
an informational intervention on behavioral intentions will differ across motive-based segments,
as providing information is probably not sufficient when motivation is low. In short, the current study
aims to identify and characterize motive-based consumer segments and to explore how the nutritional
guideline should best be communicated to the identified segments in order to increase their intention
to consume according to this guideline.
2. Materials and Methods
An online consumer survey was used to gather cross-sectional data in the Netherlands. A research
agency collected the data in spring 2014. The sample was representative for the Dutch adult population
in terms of age, gender and education. Selection criteria were used to exclude consumers who never
or seldom make dinner choices and/or never or seldom shop for groceries. The survey consisted of
two parts. The second part was filled out approximately one week after the first part. In the first part,
the segmentation variables, the profiling variables and socio-demographic variables were assessed.
In the second part, the respondents were randomly assigned to one of four experimental conditions.
After the experiment, respondents were asked to fill out the manipulation checks and the dependent
measures. In total, 1308 respondents filled out the first survey. Of these 1308 respondents, 829 also
participated in the experiment; 46.1% of whom were male and 53.9% were female. The respondents’
age ranged from 18 to 90 years with a mean of 50.1 years (the total Dutch population in 2014 consisted
of 50.5% females, with a mean age of 41.0 years).
The study consists of three aspects. First, segmentation variables that measure food choice motives
are used to identify motive-based consumer segment. Second, profiling variables are used to gain
insights into the characteristics of these segments that are important to consider in the development
of effective (information) interventions. Third, the experiment will be used to test the hypothesis
that (1) the optimal way of communicating the guideline differs across the identified segments;
and (2) the effectiveness of such an informational intervention on behavioral intentions differs across
the identified segments.
Segmentation variables: The identification of consumer segments was based on the importance
consumers attached to a range of food-category specific motives. Price, taste, healthiness and a range
of sustainability aspects were included. The perceived importance of these aspects was assessed for
each of four product categories, as previous research showed that importance of motives is category
specific [47]. Motives were measured with the following question: “I think it is important that
[food category] is [motive]”. An example item is: “I think it is important that dairy is animal friendly”.
The items were rated on seven-point Likert scales (1 = Totally disagree, 7 = Totally agree) [41]. In total,
55 items were included (see Figure 1). Data reduction was applied by conducting an exploratory
 Sustainability 2017, 9, 743
4 of 19
factor analysis (EFA) with oblique rotation on the 13 or 14 ratings for each of the product categories
separately to estimate the underlying factors. Though a detailed explanation of the procedure is
beyond the scope of this article (for more information, see [47]), eight factors emerged from the analysis:
one pro-self factor including price, taste and health; and one pro-social factor including all sustainability
attributes for each of the four product categories. The total variance explained was 74.7% for dairy,
75.4% for meat, 76.8% for fish and 71.1% for vegetables. The resulting factor scores were mean
centered per respondent, in order to cancel out response tendencies [60]. The correlations between
the pairs of mean-centered factor scores were −0.353 for dairy, −0.362 for meat, −0.135 for fish and
−0.404 for vegetables (all p < 0.01). The reliability scores (Cronbach’s alpha) for the eight factors
ranged from 0.793 to 0.968. Data reduction was checked with a confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) for
each food category, each with two factors. Each of these models yielded comparable factor loadings
and satisfactory fit (a Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) below 0.07 [61] and a Standardized Root
Mean Square Residual (SRMR) below 0.08 indicate satisfactory model fit [62]. Comparative Fit Index
(CFI), Non-Normed Fit Index (NNFI) and Goodness of Fit Index (GFI) of at least 0.90 indicate a
satisfactory model fit [62,63]. Dairy: RMSE = 0.09, NNFI = 0.98, CFI = 0.98, SRMR = 0.03, GFI = 0.93;
Meat: RMSE = 0.09, NNFI = 0.98, CFI = 0.98, SRMR = 0.02, GFI = 0.93; Fish: RMSE = 0.11, NNFI = 0.98,
CFI = 0.98, SRMR = 0.03, GFI = 0.91; Vegetables: RMSE = 0.13, NNFI = 0.96, CFI = 0.97, SRMR = 0.04,
GFI = 0.88), except for RMSE and, for vegetables, GFI.
Sustainability 2017, 9, 743  
4 of 19 
beyond the scope of this article (for more information, see [47]), eight factors emerged from the 
analysis: one pro-self factor including price, taste and health; and one pro-social factor including all 
sustainability attributes for each of the four product categories. The total variance explained was 
74.7% for dairy, 75.4% for meat, 76.8% for fish and 71.1% for vegetables. The resulting factor scores 
were mean centered per respondent, in order to cancel out response tendencies [60]. The correlations 
between the pairs of mean-centered factor scores were −0.353 for dairy, −0.362 for meat, −0.135 for 
fish and −0.404 for vegetables (all p < 0.01). The reliability scores (Cronbach’s alpha) for the eight 
factors ranged from 0.793 to 0.968. Data reduction was checked with a confirmatory factor analysis 
(CFA) for each food category, each with two factors. Each of these models yielded comparable factor 
loadings and satisfactory fit (a Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) below 0.07 [61] and a Standardized 
Root Mean Square Residual (SRMR) below 0.08 indicate satisfactory model fit [62]. Comparative Fit 
Index (CFI), Non-Normed Fit Index (NNFI) and Goodness of Fit Index (GFI) of at least 0.90 indicate 
a satisfactory model fit [62,63]. Dairy: RMSE = 0.09, NNFI = 0.98, CFI = 0.98, SRMR = 0.03, GFI = 0.93; 
Meat: RMSE = 0.09, NNFI = 0.98, CFI = 0.98, SRMR = 0.02, GFI = 0.93; Fish: RMSE = 0.11, NNFI = 0.98, 
CFI = 0.98, SRMR = 0.03, GFI = 0.91; Vegetables: RMSE = 0.13, NNFI = 0.96, CFI = 0.97, SRMR = 0.04, 
GFI = 0.88), except for RMSE and, for vegetables, GFI. 
 
Figure 1. Segmentation variables. 
The mean-centered factor scores on the importance of product-category attributes were used as 
segmentation variables in a two-step cluster analysis, performed in the Statistical Package for Social 
Sciences (SPSS 22). In the first step, a hierarchical agglomerative clustering procedure determined 
the number of clusters [64]. Log-likelihood was used as distance measure [65]. Cluster centroids 
were determined to be used as initial starting points in the second step [64,66]. In the second step, 
K-means clustering was used to group respondents into the final clusters [65]. Merging of clusters 
may depend on the input order of the cases [65] and therefore, analyses were run 10 times with 
randomly ordered cases [44,67]. Based on a combination of the lowest Bayesian Information 
Criterion (BIC) in the 10 runs, the agglomeration schedule and interpretability, the final cluster 
solution was chosen. 
Profiling variables: A range of profiling variables was included to gain more insight into the 
characteristics of the segments. Food intake and behavior regarding the dietary guideline were 
included to evaluate how the identified segments currently perform in terms of sustainable food 
behavior. Life values, time orientation, agreement regarding the dietary guideline, stage in the 
Figure 1. Segmentation variables.
The mean-centered factor scores on the importance of product-category attributes were used as
segmentation variables in a two-step cluster analysis, performed in the Statistical Package for Social
Sciences (SPSS 22). In the first step, a hierarchical agglomerative clustering procedure determined the
number of clusters [64]. Log-likelihood was used as distance measure [65]. Cluster centroids were
determined to be used as initial starting points in the second step [64,66]. In the second step, K-means
clustering was used to group respondents into the final clusters [65]. Merging of clusters may depend
on the input order of the cases [65] and therefore, analyses were run 10 times with randomly ordered
cases [44,67]. Based on a combination of the lowest Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) in the 10 runs,
the agglomeration schedule and interpretability, the final cluster solution was chosen.
 Sustainability 2017, 9, 743
5 of 19
Profiling variables: A range of profiling variables was included to gain more insight into the
characteristics of the segments. Food intake and behavior regarding the dietary guideline were
included to evaluate how the identified segments currently perform in terms of sustainable food
behavior. Life values, time orientation, agreement regarding the dietary guideline, stage in the
transition towards more healthy and towards more sustainable eating, and socio-demographic and
background characteristics were used as profiling variables, because these are important determinants
of food intake and can give insights in how the segments can best be targeted.
Life values have been measured with a short version of Schwartz’s value scale, developed by [59].
The scale included egoistic, altruistic and biospheric values measured with 13 items. Respondents were
asked to rate the importance of the 13 values “as guiding principles in their lives” on a seven-point
scale (1 = “Very unimportant”, 7 = “Very important”). The 13 items were included in a factor analysis
with oblique rotation. Three underlying factors were identified. The first factor included all biospheric
values and explained 37.8% of the item variance. Cronbach’s alpha of the four items was high
(α = 0.90). The second factor included all egoistic values and explained 20.7% of the item variance.
Cronbach’s alpha could be improved by deleting “ambition”. The remaining four items had a
Cronbach’s alpha of 0.78. The third factor included all altruistic values and explained 7.8% of the
item variance. Cronbach’s alpha of the four items was 0.84. The three constructs have been computed
by averaging the items.
Time orientation has been measured with a short version of the Consideration of Future
Consequences scale (CFC) [68]. Four items have been selected (items 1, 2, 10 and 11 of the original scale):
the two items that scored highest on the consideration of future consequences factor and the two items
that scored highest on the consideration of immediate consequences factor in a previous study [69].
The items were measured on a 7-point scale (1 = “Totally disagree”, 7 = “Totally agree”). The four
items were captured by two factors (CFC-future and CFC-immediate), explaining 41.5% and 34.4% of
the variance, respectively. Cronbach’s alpha of the scales were 0.69 and 0.67, respectively. The two
constructs have been computed by averaging the items.
Agreement with and general behavior related to the dietary guideline stating the advice to eat
less animal-based and more plant-based diets has been measured with two items. The items were:
“A less animal-based (e.g., meat and dairy) and more plant-based (e.g., vegetables) diet is healthy and
sustainable” and “While grocery shopping, I always consider the healthiness and the sustainability of
the meal”. The respondents were asked to indicate on a 7-point scale (1 = “Totally not”, 7 = “Totally”)
whether they agreed with the statements.
Stage of change has been measured with four statements about health and four statements
about sustainability. These statements reflected the respondents’ commitment to purchase healthy
or sustainable food.
The stages are based on the transtheoretical model [31] and represent a
pre-contemplation stage, a contemplation stage, a preparation stage and an action and maintenance
stage. The statements were adapted for healthy food and sustainable food from Gwozdz, Netter,
Biartmarz and Reisch [70]. Respondents were asked to think about how important sustainability,
respectively healthiness, are when they buy food. Subsequently they were asked to choose one
of the four health statements and one of the four sustainability statements that best matched their
considerations. The four statements were: “I base my food purchase decisions on price, taste, quality
and/or convenience. I am not concerned with sustainability [health] issues and I don’t think about
them when I purchase food,” “I believe that sustainability [health] is important, but it is too difficult
and time-consuming to base my food purchase decisions on them,” “When it is easy to do, I use
sustainability [health] information on these issues in my purchase decisions,” and “I make an effort
to learn about sustainability [health], and I am willing to pay more or sacrifice on product quality in
order to use sustainability [health] in my food purchases”.
Food intake has been measured with thirteen items. The respondents were asked to indicate
how many days a week (0 to 7) they ate a range of products or meals. The included items were:
(1) organic meat, organic fruits and vegetables, organic dairy, organic eggs, free range meat, products
 Sustainability 2017, 9, 743
6 of 19
with a sustainability logo; (2) small portions of meat, small portions of dairy, small portions, seasonal
vegetables; (3) vegetarian burgers, no meat; and (4) no dairy. Four underlying factors were identified.
The first factor included consumption of sustainable products and explained 32.0% of the item variance.
Cronbach’s alpha of the six items was high (α = 0.85). The second factor included items concerning
the consumption of small portions of food products and seasonable food and explained 13.4% of the
item variance. Cronbach’s alpha of the four items was 0.64. The third factor included consumption
of vegetarian meals and explained 10.4% of the item variance. Cronbach’s alpha of the remaining
two items was 0.52. The last factor consisted of only one item, dairy-free meals, and explained 8.5%
of the item variance. The constructs have been computed by averaging the items, thus indicating
the average frequency of consuming a particular food category. Finally, questions on gender, age,
education, income, and family composition were included in the survey. Differences between the
resulting segments on the profiling variables were investigated through ANOVA and Chi-square tests,
depending on the measurement scale of the variable.
Experimental design: The experiment was a 2 × 2 (health arguments vs. sustainability arguments)
full-factorial between-subjects design in which participants were randomly assigned to one of four
conditions: (1) a health condition received information on health benefits of having a less animal-based
and more plant-based diet; (2) a sustainability condition received information on sustainability
benefits of having a less animal-based and more plant-based diet; (3) a health and sustainability
condition received combined information; and (4) a control condition received neutral information on
eating behavior (without health or sustainability arguments) (see Appendix A). After having read the
information, the participants were asked to note a few words (one to five) that came to their mind when
they thought about healthy eating, sustainable eating, healthy and sustainable eating, and eating in
general, respectively in the four conditions, in order to force them to think of these aspects. In addition,
they were asked to give an example of a healthy, a sustainable, a healthy and sustainable, or general
food choice, respectively in the four conditions, again to force them to think of these aspects.
As a manipulation check, respondents were asked on a 7-point scale (1 = “Very little”,
7 = “Very much”) to indicate to what extent the text they had just read made them think about
healthiness, sustainability, price, taste and convenience of food. A second manipulation check was
conducted by counting the number of times certain words were associated with the information texts in
the four conditions. To assess the impact of the experimental manipulation, one-way between-subjects
ANOVAs were carried out on the first manipulation check. The same analyses were repeated per
identified segment, in order to see whether the manipulation differed in effectiveness across segments.
For the second manipulation check, two researchers recoded the words that were mentioned into
broader categories. Frequencies of categories with more than 20 counts were compared across
conditions using Chi-squared tests.
For the main analyses, a general linear model was used to test the main effect of experimental
manipulation, the main effect of segment, and the interaction effect between manipulation and segment.
The dependent variables included a range of sustainable and unsustainable food choice intentions
related to dinner options. Respondents were asked to indicate, for each of 26 dinner components,
the number of days (0–7) in the following week they intended to choose that component for their dinner.
The options differed in quantities of unsustainable food (meat and dairy) as well as in sustainability of
the production method (e.g., organic and animal friendly) and components were related to one of four
product categories: vegetables, dairy, meat and “other”. Five underlying factors were identified with
a total explained variance of 67.0%. The first factor included consumption intentions of sustainable
products and explained 38.1% of the item variance. One item, consumption of small portions of meat,
has been removed from the scale in order to improve its reliability. The remaining six items had a
Cronbach’s alpha of 0.92. The second factor included items concerning intentions to consume meals
with (regular and large amounts of) meat and explained 12.9% of the item variance. Removing the item
concerning consumption of large amounts of meat improved the reliability of the scale. Cronbach’s
alpha of the remaining three items was 0.84. The third factor included items concerning intentions
 Sustainability 2017, 9, 743
7 of 19
to consume meals with (regular) dairy and explained 6.7% of the item variance. Deletion of the item
concerning the intention to consume small amounts of dairy improved the reliability of the scale
leading to a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.86 for the remaining three items. The fourth factor included items
concerning intentions to consume meals with vegetables and regular products and explained 5.1% of
the item variance. Cronbach’s alpha of the four items was 0.75. The final factor included consumption
intentions of large amounts of meat, large amounts of vegetables and products that could be used as
meat replacers (nuts, fish, meat replacers, legumes) and explained 4.2% of item variance. Cronbach’s
alpha of the eight items was 0.88. The factors were moderately correlated, with values ranging from
0.11 to 0.52. The constructs have been computed by averaging the items.
3. Results
3.1. Segmentation on Food Category Attribute Importance
The first step in the data analysis was the classification of respondents into homogenous consumer
segments. The cluster analysis resulted in three segments with relatively homogenous importance
ratings of the food category specific attributes:
1.
Pro-selves
2.
Average consumers
3.
Conscious consumers
The cluster centroids are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Cluster centroids.
Segmentation Variable
Pro-Self 1
Average
Conscious
Mean (sd)
Mean (sd)
Mean (sd)
Dairy_Sustainable
−0.80 a (0.68) 2
−0.19 b (0.32)
0.31 c (0.32)
Dairy_Healthy/Tasty/Affordable
0.75 a (1.14)
0.22 b (0.43)
−0.31 c (0.46)
Meat_Sustainable
−0.70 a (0.79)
−0.18 b (0.35)
0.27 c (0.37)
Meat_Healthy/Taste/Affordable
0.90 a (1.00)
0.26 b (0.38)
−0.37 c (0.58)
Fish_Sustainable
−0.84 a (0.84)
−0.18 b (0.32)
0.31 c (0.31)
Fish_Healthy/Tasty/Affordable
0.27 a (1.52)
0.24 a (0.38)
−0.20 b (0.42)
Vegetables_Sustainable
−0.63 a (1.026)
−0.31 b (0.40)
0.33 c (0.31)
Vegetables_Healthy/Tasty/Affordable
1.04 a (0.50)
0.14 b (0.42)
−0.34 c (0.51)
1 The pro-self cluster included 116 respondents (14.0%), the average cluster included 253 respondents (30.5%),
and the conscious cluster included 460 respondents (55.5%). 2 Different superscripts indicate significantly different
means in each row following ANOVA post-hoc Tukey test at p < 0.05.
Cluster 1 was the smallest segment, including 14.0% of the respondents. This cluster scored
relatively high on all pro-self factors and relatively low on all sustainability factors. Apparently,
the relative importance of pro-self attributes (price, taste and health) was higher in this cluster
compared to the other clusters. Therefore, this cluster was labeled the pro-self cluster. The pro-self
cluster consisted of 53% males and the mean age was 47 years.
Cluster 2 represented 30.5% of the respondents. Respondents in this cluster attached about
average importance to pro-self factors and sustainability factors for all product categories. Therefore,
this cluster was labelled “average consumers”. The average cluster consisted of 50% males, and the
mean age was 50 years. This segment had the highest number of respondents in the youngest age
group (18–29 years).
Cluster 3 was the largest cluster, representing 55.5% (N = 460) of the sample. This cluster
attached relatively high importance to the sustainability attributes compared to pro-self attributes.
Therefore, this cluster was labelled “sustainable conscious consumers” (or “conscious consumers”
 Sustainability 2017, 9, 743
8 of 19
in short). Cluster 3 consisted of 58% females and had the highest mean age of 53 years, and the highest
percentage of people over 65 years of age.
The segments did not show any significant differences in education, income and household
composition. In addition, the segments did not differ in the number of times per week the respondents
cooked a hot meal, went grocery shopping, or decided what would be served for dinner.
3.1.1. Life Values and Time Orientation
Both egoistic motives (F(2826) = 4.39, p < 0.05) and biospheric motives (F(2826) = 34.60, p < 0.001)
differed significantly between segments. Pro-selves had a significant lower mean score (M = 3.11) on
egoistic motives than average consumers (M = 3.42) and conscious consumers (M = 3.45). Altruistic
values showed no significant differences. Biospheric values were lowest for pro-selves (M = 4.60),
followed by average consumers (M = 5.21) and conscious consumers had the highest mean score
on biospheric values (M = 5.58). Peace, equality and justice were the most important values for
pro-selves as well as for average consumers. Conscious consumers also valued peace and equality
most, but protection of nature scored on the third place for this segment.
Consideration of future consequences differed significantly between the segments (F(2826) = 21.86,
p < 0.001) with conscious consumers (M = 4.43) considering future consequences more than the
pro-selves (M = 3.71) and average consumers (M = 3.98). Consideration of immediate consequences
did not differ significantly across segments (M = 3.78 for pro-selves, M = 3.72 for average consumers,
and M = 3.56 for conscious consumers).
3.1.2. Agreement with the Dietary Guideline and Related Behavior
Agreement with the dietary guideline (F(2826) = 37.29, p < 0.001) and the consideration of
healthiness and sustainability in food purchasing (F(2826) = 80.57, p < 0.001) both differed significantly
across segments. Pro-selves (M = 4.08) and average consumers (M = 4.38) agreed to a lesser degree
that eating less animal-based and more plant-based food provides health and sustainability benefits
than conscious consumers (M = 5.15). Pro-selves also considered health and sustainability least while
grocery shopping (M = 3.09), followed by average consumers (M = 3.86), and conscious consumers
considered health and sustainability most (M = 4.77).
3.1.3. Transition Stage
A large majority (69.8%) of pro-selves were beginning to make the transition towards sustainable
food choices and towards health (42.2%). About half of the average consumers were beginning to make
the transition towards sustainable consumption, but they were equally divided over the transition
stages towards healthy food consumption. Conscious consumers were about equally divided over the
transition stages towards sustainable consumption, but more than a third (36.5%) were in the most
progressed stage towards healthy food consumption, indicating that health was important in their
food purchases.
3.1.4. Food Intake
Intake of sustainable food products (F(2826) = 86.15, p < 0.001), small portions (F(2826) = 7.19,
p < 0.01), and vegetarian meals (F(2826) = 12.30, p < 0.001) all differed significantly between the
segments.
Pro-selves consumed sustainable products the least frequently (M = 0.51), followed
by average consumers (M = 1.04), and conscious consumers consumed sustainable products the
most frequently (M = 1.98). Regarding the intake of small portions, pro-selves scored significantly
lower (M = 2.84) as compared to average consumers (M = 3.19) and conscious consumers (M = 3.41).
Vegetarian intake was significantly more frequent for conscious consumers (M = 1.24) than for
pro-selves (M = 0.74) and average consumers (M = 0.81).
 Sustainability 2017, 9, 743
9 of 19
3.2. Effect of Communication on Thoughts and Meal Intentions
Overall, the manipulation checks showed that respondents in both the sustainability condition
and the combined condition had started to think more about sustainability than those in the health
and control conditions (F(3825) = 12.37, p < 0.001). In addition, respondents in the control condition
thought more about taste than those in the other conditions (F(3825) = 12.598, p < 0.001) (see Table 2).
No differences were found across conditions in the extent to which the provided information made the
respondents think of healthiness, convenience and price.
Concerning differences between segments in the amount of thoughts after the manipulations,
several significant differences were found (see Table 2).
Respondents in the pro-self segment
who received health and sustainability arguments indicated that the information made them think
more about sustainability, compared to pro-selves in the control group (F(3112) = 3.31, p < 0.05).
In addition, taste showed a significant result (F(3112) = 3.17, p < 0.05), but no significance between
the four conditions have been found in a post-hoc test. For average consumers, differences across
conditions were found for sustainability thoughts (F(3249) = 3.02, p < 0.05) and taste thoughts
(F(3249) = 5.43, p < 0.01). Respondents in the health and sustainability condition thought more about
sustainability than respondents in the healthy condition. In addition, respondents in the control
condition thought more about taste compared to those in the healthy and sustainable, and sustainable
conditions. For conscious consumers, thoughts about sustainability (F(3456) = 4.46, p < 0.01) and
taste (F(3456) = 6.17, p < 0.001) also differed across conditions, but the pattern of differences between
conditions differed slightly from what had been found for the average consumers (see Table 2). Those in
the sustainable condition thought more about sustainability than those in the control and healthy
conditions. In addition, those in the control condition thought more about taste compared to the
other conditions.
Table 2. Manipulation check. 1
Communication Type
N
Attributes
Health
Sustainability
Price
Taste
Convenience
Total sample
Control
209
4.90 a,2
3.98 a
4.68 a
5.74 a
4.64 a
Healthy
205
5.02 a
4.04 a
4.37 a
5.16 b
4.49 a
Sustainable
210
4.91 a
4.65 b
4.70 a
5.02 b
4.32 a
Healthy & sustainable
205
5.00 a
4.71 b
4.68 a
5.01 b
4.46 a
Pro-self consumers
Control
35
4.09 a
2.51 a
4.26 a
5.60 a
4.20 a
Healthy
33
5.03 a
2.97 a,b
4.64 a
5.24 a
4.61 a
Sustainable
29
4.07 a
3.55 a,b
4.66 a
4.45 a
3.76 a
Healthy & sustainable
19
4.26 a
3.79 b
3.79 a
4.37 a
3.74 a
Average consumers
Control
73
4.90 a
3.81 a,b
4.66 a
5.71 a
4.63 a
Healthy
63
4.92 a
3.71 a
4.19 a
5.10 a,b
4.19 a
Sustainable
64
4.67 a
4.23 a,b
4.52 a
4.95 b
4.05 a
Healthy & sustainable
53
5.04 a
4.40 b
4.62 a
4.85 b
4.43 a
Conscious consumers
Control
101
5.18 a
4.61 a
4.85 a
5.80 a
4.79 a
Healthy
109
5.08 a
4.56 a
4.39 a
5.17 b
4.63 a
Sustainable
117
5.26 a
5.15 b
4.80 a
5.20 b
4.61 a
Healthy & sustainable
133
5.09 a
4.97 a,b
4.83 a
5.17 b
4.57 a
1 “To what extent did the text above make you think of the following aspects of food?” (1 = very little, 7 = very much).
2 Different superscripts in each column (per cluster) indicate significantly different means following ANOVA
post-hoc Tukey test at p < 0.05.
 Sustainability 2017, 9, 743
10 of 19
The results of the open-ended question in which respondents were asked to mention a few
words that came up after they read the manipulation confirmed the manipulations (see Appendix B).
Those in the control condition mentioned taste most often. In addition, product groups such as meat,
bread, potatoes, pasta and rice were often mentioned, as were general food aspects such as hunger,
grocery shopping and cooking. Respondents in the sustainable, and the healthy and sustainable
condition, most often thought about all kinds of sustainability aspects such as environmentally friendly,
Fair Trade, animal friendly, regional, ecological, seasonal and vegetarian, but also expensiveness was
mentioned frequently in these conditions. Respondents in the health condition mentioned fruits and
vegetables most often, but also respondents in the health and sustainable condition mentioned fruits
and vegetables frequently. In addition, calories, dairy, vitamins and minerals, fibers and variety of
food were often mentioned in the health condition. Calories were also mentioned frequently in the
combined condition. Finally, respondents in the health, sustainable and combined conditions thought
of natural production and pureness more often than those in the control condition.
A multivariate ANOVA shows that the main effect of experimental manipulation condition was
not significant for any of the intentions. The main effect of segment was significant for intentions
to consume sustainable products (F(2817) = 72.27, p < 0.001), intentions to consume regular meat
(F(2817) = 14.62, p < 0.001) and intentions to consume vegetarian meals (F(2817) = 21.08, p < 0.001).
Pro-selves intended to eat less sustainable products compared to average consumers, and conscious
consumers intend to eat more. Conscious consumers also intended to eat more products that can replace
meat in the meal than the other two segments. In addition, conscious consumers intended to eat meat
less regularly (see Table 3). In addition, there was a significant interaction between the manipulation
condition and segment for regular meat intentions (F(6817) = 2.18, p = 0.043). A subsequent one-way
between-subjects ANOVA with post-hoc Tukey test per segment shows that for sustainable conscious
consumers, intentions to consume regular types and portions of meat were significantly lower in the
combined condition (M = 4.01) than in the control condition (M = 4.89) (F(3456) = 3.89, p < 0.01).
Table 3. Consumption intention (in number of days of the following week).
Cluster
Sustainable
Products
Regular
Meat
Regular
Dairy
Vegetables
and Regular
Products
Meat Replacers,
and Large Amounts of
Vegetables and Meat
Pro-self
consumers
0.68 a, 1 (1.08)
4.36 a (1.83)
2.95 a (2.42)
4.45 a (1.67)
1.43 a (1.40)
Average
consumers
1.31 b (1.58)
3.96 a (1.75)
2.99 a (2.16)
4.39 a (1.51)
1.55 a (1.40)
Conscious
consumers
2.56 c (1.93)
3.38 b (1.99)
3.15 a (2.21)
4.25 a (1.58)
2.21 b (1.64)
1 Different superscripts within one column indicate significantly different intentions following ANOVA post-hoc
Tukey test at p < 0.05.
No significant differences were found in attitudes towards the food consumption guideline
(to eat less animal-based and more plant-based diets) between conditions within the clusters. The only
significant difference was that, overall, those in the combined condition scored higher than those in
the healthy condition on the question whether the information that they had read made them think
about the amount of animal-based and plant-based products that they ate.
4. Discussion
This study revealed the potential of targeting dietary messages to motive-based consumer
segments. Segmentation may allow nutritional campaigns to reach specific audiences with the most
effective message, tailored to their motivations. This study shows the importance of consumer
segmentation, as well as the focus on the product-category level, in the development of effective
dietary communication. Implications of the findings will be considered in more detail below.
 Sustainability 2017, 9, 743
11 of 19
This study has proposed to segment consumers based on food category specific motives.
Three consumer segments have been identified: “pro-selves”, “average consumers” and “sustainable
conscious consumers”. For the identification of the segments, this study used a domain-specific
segmentation base. The identification of homogeneous subgroups was based on people’s
reasons and motivations behind their food choices instead of more general descriptive variables
(e.g., socio-demographics) that are commonly used as segmentation base [71]. Food-related motivations
are more closely related to behavior and are therefore preferred to more abstract variables in identifying
segments [72]. The current study adds to the literature by considering food-category differences in
domain-specific motivations (see also [47]) as well as the relation with effective dietary communication.
This study replicated and extended an earlier motive-based segmentation study [47].
The replication of the segmentation procedure almost three years after the initial study showed
similar results, indicating the stability of the segments. Segment sizes slightly changed with an increase
of just over ten percent of the sustainable conscious segment, mainly at the expense of the size of
the average consumer segment. This finding looks promising, as it shows that the proportion of
the population for whom sustainability attributes are relatively important has increased. The factor
analysis also replicated the underlying factor structure of a pro-self factor (capturing taste, price and
healthiness) and a sustainability factor (capturing a range of sustainability aspects such as animal
welfare and environmental welfare) for each of the food categories (dairy, meat, fish and vegetables).
This replication again underpins the significance of considering food category differences in attribute
importance. In addition, this replication confirms that sustainability can be used as a container
construct, because several sustainability aspects such as environmental aspects and animal welfare
aspects loaded on one dimension.
The main added value of this study as compared to the previous study is twofold. First of all,
the current study extends previous findings by gaining deeper insights into the segment profiles.
The segments differed in food consumption, personal characteristics and food-related lifestyle aspects;
elements which should be taken into consideration in the development of nutritional campaigns.
Second, the current study provides insights into communication strategies towards the segments.
Implications for the development of dietary communication will be discussed next.
The main aim of this study was to show how nutritional messages on healthy and sustainable
diets should be tailored to different segments. The domain-specific lifestyle and personal characteristics
of the three segments identified here imply some strategies for communicating dietary guidelines to
each of the groups. The results show, however, that the same option—the strategy in which health
and sustainability messages were combined—can best be used for all three segments. In other words,
against our expectations, there was no strategy that showed to be significantly more effective than
the health and sustainability condition in any of the segments. This is an unexpected result because
we assumed that segments needed different communication strategies, adapted to their motivations.
Apart from being unexpected, it is an interesting result. It shows that even those consumers who are
less motivated to make healthy and sustainable food choices may benefit from information on healthy
and sustainable diets. Although the information may not result in changing meal intentions, it makes
them think more of sustainability and less of taste. This finding is in line with the literature, stating
that the effectiveness of information campaigns on awareness is quite strong, but does not often result
in behavior change [32–34,36]. In addition, based on our results, no negative effects are expected in
any of the segments from communicating health and sustainability benefits of less animal-based and
more plant-based diets.
Although we found that the most effective communication strategy is the same for all
segments, results do indicate the relevance of motive-based consumer segmentation, as the effect
of the communication on behavioral intentions differs across segments. A positive effect of the
communication on sustainable dietary intentions has been found for sustainable conscious consumers
only. The other two segments may need other issues addressed in their strategies to stimulate them to
shift their diets towards more sustainable consumption levels or other pathways—next to providing
 Sustainability 2017, 9, 743
12 of 19
information—are needed in order for behavior change to occur in these segments. An option might
be to consider the addition of pro-self motives in the formulation of and communication on dietary
guidelines. In accordance with a flood of food studies, this study shows the importance of taste,
price and convenience to food consumers. The lack of consideration of these attributes may be a reason
why communication of dietary guidelines shows limited effectiveness in the real world. Synergies
between pro-self short-term motives (e.g., price and taste), and healthy and sustainable choices should
be communicated. An example could be the stimulation of seasonal fruit and vegetable consumption
by emphasizing their low price and good taste, next to their possible health and sustainability gains.
However, the provision of information might also be insufficient. Literature shows that the
effectiveness of information is limited, especially in terms of behavioral intentions, which is in line
with our results. This research has focused on educational interventions adapted to the motivations of
consumers. Results show that communicating the guideline only results in improved intentions for
the segment that is already motivated. Agreement with the guideline does not differ across conditions
within segments, indicating that communicating the guideline has no effect on agreement with it.
Therefore, it is likely that for pro-self and average consumers, dietary communications that can increase
knowledge or awareness will not result in behavior change. General agreement exists that knowledge
is necessary but insufficient to change (health) behaviors [73]. Therefore, other pathways must be
considered, such as marketing and legal interventions to help create the necessary motivation, ability
and opportunity for behavior change [30]. Nudges or labelling could help to make the healthy and
sustainable choice the easy choice and taxes, subsidies or prohibitions of certain products can create
a supporting environment. A combination of different types of interventions is likely to be needed
to achieve a sufficient level of motivation and ability and the right opportunity. This implies that
several actors are needed to achieve a dietary shift. Actors communicating about dietary guidelines,
such as governmental organizations, dieticians, retail and food industries should work together to
communicate about nutritional guidelines in an effective and unambiguous way, combining health
and sustainability arguments. In addition, supermarkets could use nudging and labelling strategies,
governments could provide regulations and food industries could get involved in regulation and
labeling, for example.
Our insights into personal characteristics of the segments can be used in developing effective
strategies for each of the segments. It may be beneficial, for example, to make pro-self and average
consumers more future oriented. This study has shown that pro-selves differ from sustainable conscious
consumers on this aspect. In addition, messages can be adapted to the transition phase in which a
consumer is positioned. For instance, in the pre-contemplation phase, it is important to raise consumers’
awareness of health and sustainability problems. In the contemplation stage, one’s self image is crucial
and can be influenced by providing role models, for example. In the preparation stage, it is important
to make consumers believe that they can change, for instance by providing a range of practical options.
Consumers in the action and maintenance stage can be helped by prompting healthy and sustainable
choices [31]. The finding that the segments differ in their transition stages suggests that different types
of messages best fit these segments. Prompting health and sustainable choices, as has been done in
this study by the provided information, best fits consumers in the maintenance stage. It is therefore
not surprising that the effect on intentions was only found for the sustainable conscious consumers,
the segment with the largest number of consumers in the maintenance stage.
The results underpin the importance to take product-category differences into account. First of
all, the communication of the dietary guideline seems to have an effect on intentions, if only for the
product-category of meat. The specific character of meat is also shown in a study about vegetarian
diets [74], which showed that although these diets are generally perceived as positive, the consumption
of such a diet is still hampered by health concerns, unwillingness to make dietary changes or enjoyment
of eating meat.
Second, the factor analysis on intentions shows that consumption of regular portions and regular
variants of meat, dairy and vegetables load on different underlying factors. This implies that the
 Sustainability 2017, 9, 743
13 of 19
guideline to consume less animal-based products might be too general. Motivational differences exist
concerning meat and dairy, and it might be better not to lump these product categories together in the
same message.
Furthermore, the results show that the effect of communicating the guideline is only found for
the curtailment of meat, and not for the purchase of sustainably produced meat products (e.g., organic
or animal friendly variants) [49]. This finding is not surprising, as the guideline is focused on
curtailment behavior, and not on stimulating the purchase of sustainably produced products, but it
shows that the effect does not lead to spillovers to other types of sustainable behavior. This implies that
communication aimed at stimulating sustainably produced products may have additional beneficial
effects on stimulating sustainable diets.
In short, we can conclude that it is not so much the nature of the message (healthiness and/or
sustainability argument) that is key in differentiating between segments, but the relation between
message, segment and product category. Those involved in communicating dietary guidelines could
choose to use a mix of pro-self and pro-social arguments for all consumer segments, as including both
types of arguments might appeal to a larger audience. The current study did not find any negative
effects on either thoughts or meal intentions of a frame that combines health and sustainability in any
of the segments. Therefore, we propose to place dietary guidelines in a context of both healthiness and
sustainability, and to combine both health and sustainability arguments. In other words, sustainability
should become part of the criteria on which dietary guidelines are formulated and communicated,
like Lang and colleagues [9] already pled for in 2009. This study underpins the ongoing debates on the
shift in focus of nutritional guidelines to include sustainability considerations.
Overall, the results imply that in the development of dietary messages:
•
Product-category differences should be taken into account.
•
Differences between motive-based segments should be taken into account.
•
The type of sustainability that is targeted—curtailment versus sustainable products—should be
taken into account.
•
Communication strategies seem insufficient to shift diets, especially among pro-self and average
consumers, and therefore additional strategies should be considered.
Although this research has some important implications, it also faces some limitations and raises
some important issues for future research. First, the health manipulation did not result in more health
thoughts. A possible explanation is that, at the baseline level (regardless of any communication),
health is more salient in the consumer’s mind than sustainability. Therefore, it is much harder
(and maybe unnecessary) to increase health thoughts through communication. We do not perceive it as
a problem that the health manipulation check did not show significant differences between conditions,
because the open-ended question on association words show that the manipulation has been read and
understood, because respondents mentioned health-related words (those in the health manipulation
mention ‘health’ least often. This is a logical result of the way we framed the question, as we asked
them to mention words that came to their mind when thinking of healthy food).
Future research should include a broader range of communication conditions to check the effect
of combining short-term pro-self motives (e.g., taste, price and convenience) with long-term pro-social
motives (sustainability) and/or long-term pro-self motives (health). All segments, specifically the
pro-self segment, could be attracted with messages including those pro-self short-term motives.
Such additional communication strategies may result in larger differences in effectiveness between
segments. Furthermore, additional attribute combinations may give insights into whether a
combination of two attributes is more effective than focusing on a single attribute. The current study is
not conclusive on whether the health and sustainability condition shows the best results, because of the
synergy of the two arguments or because of the fact that two arguments are included in this condition as
compared to one argument in the other conditions. We did, however, keep the information comparable
in length by shortening the length of both arguments in the combined condition, and therefore it is
 Sustainability 2017, 9, 743
14 of 19
most likely that the effect occurs because of synergy. Another argument to support this reasoning is
that, from previous research [47], we know that sustainable conscious consumers perceive the most
synergy and pro-selves perceive the least synergy between health and sustainability of food products.
If the effect of the health and sustainability condition was due to the number of arguments, than the
largest effect would be expected to occur for pro-selves, whereas if it were the synergy perception,
the largest effect would be expected to occur for conscious consumers (which is the case). A final
interesting direction for future research can be found in the spillover literature [75]. Based on the
current study it can be concluded that the best communication strategy is to include a combination of
health and sustainability arguments. It seems intuitive to persuade people that sustainable behavior is
in their own interest, for example by stressing the health or price benefits that come along with certain
sustainable behaviors. Previous research showed, however, that making self-interest motivations
salient may counteract prosocial motivations and therefore it may prevent positive spillover from one
prosocial behavior to other prosocial behaviors [75,76]. Future research should provide more insights
into positive or negative spillover effects resulting from communication strategies.
5. Conclusions
This study puts forth a preliminary segmentation based on food-category specific food motivations
that may help develop effective dietary communication strategies motivating consumers towards more
healthy and sustainable diets. We can conclude that communicating both health and sustainability
benefits of eating less animal-based and more plant-based products is advisable for all motive-based
consumer segments. Effects on behavioral intention differ across motive-based segments and additional
ways of stimulating sustainable food consumption beyond informing are needed, especially for pro-self
and average consumers. The effectiveness of the communication in terms of sustainable food intentions
not only depends on the segment, but also on the product category. Future research is needed to study
the generalizability of the findings to other guidelines, in other food categories, with other product
attributes and considering the entire diet, but this study leads to useful insights for those who are
involved in communicating healthy and sustainable dietary guidelines. Thereby this study contributes
to a more healthy and sustainable food consumption pattern.
Acknowledgments: This research was part of the doctoral thesis of the first author. The research work has
received financial support from both Wageningen University and Wageningen Economic Research, which is
greatly acknowledged.
Author Contributions: All authors conceived and designed the experiment together; Muriel C. D. Verain analysed
the data and wrote the paper, which had then been checked and revised by all authors.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The founding sponsors had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, and in the
decision to publish the results.
Appendix A
The following manipulations have been used in the experiment (original Dutch text followed by
the English translation).
Control condition:
Deze vragenlijst gaat over eten. Hiermee bedoelen we eetgedrag dat bijdraagt aan uw totale
voedselinname gedurende de hele dag. U kunt hierbij bijvoorbeeld denken aan wat voor soort
producten u eet en hoeveel u ervan eet. Het eten van drie hoofdmaaltijden en (eventueel) een aantal
tussendoortjes bepaalt uw voedselinname. Het gaat om hoe u uw maaltijden samenstelt.
English translation: This questionnaire focusses on food. With this we mean dietary behavior that
contributes to your total food intake during the entire day. You could think of the type of products you
eat and the amount you eat of it. The intake of three main meals and (potentially) a number of snacks
determines your food intake. It entails the way you compose your meals.
 Sustainability 2017, 9, 743
15 of 19
Health condition:
Deze vragenlijst gaat over gezond eten. Hiermee bedoelen we eetgedrag dat bijdraagt aan een
goede gezondheid met een goede weerstand, weinig ziekte en een fit en energiek gevoel. U kunt
hierbij bijvoorbeeld denken aan de verhouding dierlijke en plantaardige producten die u eet. Het eten
van weinig dierlijke producten (zoals vlees en zuivel) en veel plantaardige producten (zoals groente) is
gezond. Het gaat er om hoe gezond de maaltijden zijn die u samenstelt.
English translation: This questionnaire focusses on healthy eating. With this we mean dietary
behavior that contributes to a good health with a good resistance, little illness and a fit and energetic
feeling. You could think of the proportion of animal-based and plant-based products that you eat.
The intake of few animal-based products (such as meat and dairy) and many plant-based products
(such as vegetables) is healthy. It entails the healthiness of the meals you compose.
Sustainability condition:
Deze vragenlijst gaat over duurzaam eten. Hiermee bedoelen we eetgedrag dat bijdraagt aan een
duurzame wereld met respect voor het milieu, de dieren en de mensen om ons heen. U kunt hierbij
bijvoorbeeld denken aan de verhouding dierlijke en plantaardige producten die u eet. Het eten van
weinig dierlijke producten (zoals vlees en zuivel) en veel plantaardige producten (zoals groente) is
duurzaam. Het gaat er om hoe duurzaam de maaltijden zijn die u samenstelt.
English translation: This questionnaire focusses on sustainable eating. With this we mean dietary
behavior that constitutes to a sustainable world, with respect for the environment, the animals and the
people surrounding us. You could think of the proportion of animal-based and plant-based products
that you eat. The intake of few animal-based products (such as meat and dairy) and many plant-based
products (such as vegetables) is sustainable. It entails the sustainability of the meals you compose.
Combined condition:
Deze vragenlijst gaat over gezond en tegelijk duurzaam eten. Hiermee bedoelen we eetgedrag dat
bijdraagt aan een goede gezondheid en een duurzame wereld met respect voor het milieu, de dieren
en de mensen om ons heen. U kunt hierbij bijvoorbeeld denken aan de verhouding dierlijke en
plantaardige producten die u eet. Het eten van weinig dierlijke producten (zoals vlees en zuivel) en
veel plantaardige producten (zoals groente) is gezond én duurzaam. Het gaat er om hoe gezond en
duurzaam de maaltijden zijn die u samenstelt.
English translation: This questionnaire focusses on healthy and simultaneously sustainable eating.
With this we mean dietary behavior that contributes to a good health and a sustainable world,
with respect for the environment, the animals and the people surrounding us. You could think of the
proportion of animal-based and plant-based products that you eat. The intake of few animal-based
products (such as meat and dairy) and many plant-based products (such as vegetables) is healthy
AND sustainable. It entails the healthiness and sustainability of the meals you compose.
Appendix B
Table A1. Number of times words in certain categories were mentioned in the four conditions.
Control
Health
Sustainable
Health & Sustainable
F-Value
Tasty
140 a
13 b
10 b
13 b
287.961 ***
Fruit and vegetables
70 a
263 b
30 c
86 a
327.226 ***
Healthy
47 a
5 b
40 a,c
21 c
38.152 ***
Meat
43 a
21 b
7 c
4 c
50.929 ***
Sociable
37 a
0 b
1 b
0 b
105.974 ***
Bread
34 a
11 b
1 c
6 b,c
49.080 ***
 Sustainability 2017, 9, 743
16 of 19
Table A1. Cont.
Control
Health
Sustainable
Health & Sustainable
F-Value
Cooking
28 a
0 b
0 b
0 b
83.627 ***
Potatoes
27 a
3 b
5 b
2 b
45.647 ***
Good
25 a
3 b
6 b
7 b
28.938 ***
Calories
24 a
86 b
4 c
27 a
112.505 ***
Pasta
18 a
1 b
1 b
0 b
44.874 ***
Hungry
15 a
0 b
0 b
1 b
40.187 ***
Fish
13 a
18 a
9 a
9 a
4.686
Grocery shopping
12 a
0 b
0 b
0 b
35.701 ***
Dairy
11 a,b,c
25 c
2 b
13 a,c
21.948 ***
Rice
10 a
1 b
0 b
0 b
25.494 ***
Nutritious
8 a
2 a
2 a
1 a
9.327 *
Variety
6 a,b
16 b
0 a
1 a
28.553 ***
Vitamins & minerals
5 a,b
21 c
1 b
10 a,c
25.140 ***
Fresh
4 a
20 b
1 a
23 b
32.042 ***
Expensive
3 a
8 a
29 b
26 b
30.672 ***
Organic
2 a
29 b
73 c
81 c
94.831 ***
Vegetarian
2 a
1 a
6 a,b
13 b
16.517 **
Natural
1 a
5 a
2 a
4 a
3.473
Water
1 a,b
8 b
0 a
3 a,b
12.968 **
Animal friendly
1 a
1 a
21 b
14 b
31.975 ***
Nutrition guideline
1 a,b
9 b
0 a
1 a,b
19.558 ***
Wasting
1 a,b
0 b
9 a
1 a,b
18.847 ***
Regional
1 a
0 a
14 b
15 b
26.444 ***
Fiber
1 a
20 b
0 a
3 a
45.343 ***
No additives
1 a
7 a
7 a
6 a
4.792
Environmentally friendly
0 a
0 a
27 b
19 b
48.839 ***
Fair Trade
0 a
0 a
23 b
21 b
44.464 ***
Natural production
0 a
7 b
13 b
20 b
22.287 ***
Ecological
0 a
2 a,b
11 b
11 b
17.063 **
Seasonal
0 a
3 a,b
11 b
9 b
13.668 **
Pure
0 a
8 b
4 a,b
8 b
9.083 *
Responsible
0 a
0 a,b
7 b
6 a,b
13.119 *
Don’t know
0 a
3 a
30 b
23 b
46.928 ***
1 Control includes 1045 words, health includes 1025 words, sustainable includes 1050 words and health & sustainable
includes 1025 words. 2 Different superscripts within one row indicate significant differences following ANOVA
post-hoc Tukey test at p < 0.05. 3 * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.
References
1.
Caballero, B. The global epidemic of obesity: An overview. Epidemiol. Rev. 2007, 29, 1–5. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.
Garnett, T. Where are the best opportunities for reducing greenhouse gas emissions in the food system
(including the food chain)? Food Policy 2011, 36, S23–S32. [CrossRef]
3.
McMichael, A.J.; Powles, J.W.; Butler, C.D.; Uauy, R. Food, livestock production, energy, climate change,
and health. Lancet 2007, 370, 1253–1263. [CrossRef]
4.
Ng, M.; Fleming, T.; Robinson, M.; Thomson, B.; Graetz, N.; Margono, C.; Mullany, E.C.; Biryukov, S.;
Abbafati, C.; Abera, S.F.; et al. Global, regional, and national prevalence of overweight and obesity in
children and adults during 1980–2013: A systematic analysis for the global burden of disease study 2013.
Lancet 2014, 384, 766–781. [CrossRef]
5.
Reisch, L.; Eberie, U.; Lorek, S. Sustainable food consumption: An overview of contemporary issues and
policies. Sustain. Sci. Pract. Police 2013, 9, 7–25.
6.
Aschemann-Witzel, J. Consumer perception and trends about health and sustainability: Trade-offs and
synergies of two pivotal issues. Curr. Opin. Food Sci. 2015, 3, 6–10. [CrossRef]
 Sustainability 2017, 9, 743
17 of 19
7.
Carlsson-Kanyama, A.; González, A.D. Potential contributions of food consumption patterns to climate
change. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2009, 89, S1704–S1709. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.
De Boer, J.; Schösler, H.; Boersema, J.J. Motivational differences in food orientation and the choice of snacks
made from lentils, locusts, seaweed or “hybrid” meat. Food Qual. Preference 2013, 28, 32–35. [CrossRef]
9.
Lang, T.;
Barling, D.;
Caraher, M. Food Policy:
Integrating Health,
Environment and Society;
Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2009.
10.
Hoek, A.C.; Pearson, D.; James, S.W.; Lawrence, M.A.; Friel, S. Shrinking the food-print: A qualitative study
into consumer perceptions, experiences and attitudes towards healthy and environmentally friendly food
behaviours. Appetite 2017, 108, 117–131. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.
Alarcon, B.; Gerritsen, E. On Our Plate Today: Healthy, Sustainable Food Choices. LiveWell for LIFE, 2014.
Available online: http://www.wwf.eu/what_we_do/eu_forests/publications_forest.cfm?uNewsID=238793
(accessed on 5 January 2017).
12.
Health Council of The Netherlands. Guidelines for a Healthy Diet: The Ecological Perspective; Health Council of
The Netherlands: The Hague, The Netherlands, 2011.
13.
Department of Health and Human Services; Department of Agriculture. Scientific Report of the 2015 Dietary
Guidelines Advisory Committee; HHS: Washington, DC, USA; USDA: Washington, DC, USA, 2015.
14.
Raphaely, T.; Marinova, D. (Eds.) Impact of Meat Consumption on Health and Environmental Sustainability;
IGI Global: Hershey, PA, USA, 2016.
15.
Van Dooren, C.; Marinussen, M.; Blonk, H.; Aiking, H.; Vellinga, P. Exploring dietary guidelines based
on ecological and nutritional values: A comparison of six dietary patterns. Food Policy 2014, 44, 36–46.
[CrossRef]
16.
Westhoek, H.; Lesschen, J.P.; Rood, T.; Wagner, S.; De Marco, A.; Murphy-Bokern, D.; Leip, A.;
van Grinsven, H.; Sutton, M.A.; Oenema, O. Food choices, health and environment: Effects of cutting
Europe’s meat and dairy intake. Glob. Environ. Chang. 2014, 26, 196–205. [CrossRef]
17.
Naska, A.; Vasdekis, V.G.S.; Trichopoulou, A.; Friel, S.; Leonhäuser, I.U.; Moreiras, O.; Nelson, M.;
Remaut, A.M.; Schmitt, A.; Sekula, W.; et al. Fruit and vegetable availability among ten European countries:
How does it compare with the ‘five-a-day’ recommendation? Br. J. Nutr. 2000, 84, 549–556. [PubMed]
18.
Pomerleau, J.; Lock, K.; McKee, M.; Altmann, D.R. The challenge of measuring global fruit and vegetable
intake. J. Nutr. 2004, 134, 1175–1180. [PubMed]
19.
Trichopoulou, A.; Naska, A.; Antoniou, A.; Friel, S.; Trygg, K.; Turrini, A. Vegetable and fruit: The evidence in
their favour and the public health perspective. Int. J. Vitam. Nutr. Res. 2003, 73, 63–69. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.
Van’t Veer, P.; Jansen, M.C.; Klerk, M.; Kok, F.J. Fruits and vegetables in the prevention of cancer and
cardiovascular disease. Public Health Nutr. 2000, 3, 103–107. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21.
Van Rossum, C.T.M.; Fransen, H.P.; Verkaik-Kloosterman, J.; Buurma-Rethans, E.J.M.; Ocké, M.C.
Dutch National Food Consumption Survey 2007–2010; National Institute for Public Health and the Environment:
Bilthoven, The Netherlands, 2011.
22.
Haack, S.A.; Byker, C.J. Recent population adherence to and knowledge of United States federal nutrition
guides, 1992–2013: A systematic review. Nutr. Rev. 2014, 72, 613–626. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Joffe, M.; Robertson, A. The potential contribution of increased vegetable and fruit consumption to health
gain in the European Union. Public Health Nutr. 2001, 4, 893–901. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Henchion, M.; McCarthy, M.; Resconi, V.C.; Troy, D. Meat consumption: Trends and quality matters. Meat Sci.
2014, 98, 561–568. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.
Dagevos, H. Exploring flexitarianism: Meat reduction in a meat-centred food culture. In Impact of Meat
Consumption on Health and Environmental Sustainability; Raphaely, T., Marinova, D., Eds.; IGI Global: Hershey,
PA, USA, 2016; pp. 233–243.
26.
Dagevos, H.; Voordouw, J. Sustainability and meat consumption: Is reduction realistic? Sustain. Sci.
Pract. Policy 2013, 9, 60–69.
27.
Grunert, K.G. Sustainability in the food sector: A consumer behaviour perspective. Int. J. Food Syst. Dyn.
2011, 2, 207–218.
28.
Heller, M.C.; Keoleian, G.A.; Willett, W.C. Toward a life cycle-based, diet-level framework for food
environmental impact and nutritional quality assessment: A critical review. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2013, 47,
12632–12647. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Sustainability 2017, 9, 743
18 of 19
29.
Spaargaren, G.; Oosterveer, P. Citizen-Consumers as Agents of Change in Globalizing Modernity: The Case
of Sustainable Consumption. Sustainability 2010, 2, 1887–1908. [CrossRef]
30.
Rothschild, M.L. Carrots, sticks, and promises: A conceptual framework for the management of public
health and social issue behaviors. J. Mark. 1999, 63, 24–37. [CrossRef]
31.
Prochaska, J.O.; Velicer, W.F. The transtheoretical model of health behavior change. Am. J. Health Promot.
1997, 12, 38–48. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.
Boles, M.; Adams, A.; Gredler, A.; Manhas, S. Ability of a mass media campaign to influence knowledge,
attitudes, and behaviors about sugary drinks and obesity. Prev. Med. 2014, 67, S40–S45. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.
Brambila-Macias, J.; Shankar, B.; Capacci, S.; Mazzocchi, M.; Perez-Cueto, F.J.A.; Verbeke, W.; Trail, W.B.
Policy interventions to promote healthy eating: A review of what works, what does not, and what is
promising. Food Nutr. Bull. 2011, 32, 365–375. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.
Capacci, S.; Mazzocchi, M.; Shankar, B.; Macias, J.B.; Verbeke, W.; Perez-Cueto, F.J.A.; Koziol-Kozakowska, A.;
Piorecka, B.; Niedzwiedzka, B.; D’Addesa, D.; et al.
Policies to promote healthy eating in Europe:
A structured review of policies and their effectiveness. Nutr. Rev. 2012, 70, 188–200. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.
Geeroms, N.; Verbeke, W.; Kenhove, P.V. Health advertising to promote fruit and vegetable intake:
Application of health-related motive segmentation. Food Qual. Preference 2008, 19, 481–497. [CrossRef]
36.
Ölander, F.; Thøgersen, J. Informing versus nudging in environmental policy. J. Consum. Policy 2014, 37,
341–356. [CrossRef]
37.
Kazbare, L.; van Trijp, H.C.M.; Eskildsen, J.K. A-priori and post-hoc segmentation in the design of healthy
eating campaigns. J. Mark. Commun. 2010, 16, 21–45. [CrossRef]
38.
Hine, D.W.; Reser, J.P.; Morrison, M.; Phillips, W.J.; Nunn, P.; Cooksey, R. Audience segmentation and
climate change communication: Conceptual and methodological considerations. WIREs Clim. Chang. 2014, 5,
441–459. [CrossRef]
39.
Moser, S.C. Communicating climate change:
History, challenges, process and future directions.
WIREs Clim. Chang. 2010, 1, 31–53. [CrossRef]
40.
Noar, S.M.; Benac, C.N.; Harris, M.S. Does tailoring matter? Meta-analytic review of tailored print health
behavior change interventions. Psychol. Bull. 2007, 133, 673–693. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41.
Slater, M.D. Theory and method in health audience segmentation. J. Health Commun. 1996, 1, 267–283.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
42.
Wilson, B.J. Designing media messages about health and nutrition: What strategies are most effective?
J. Nutr. Educ. Behav. 2007, 39, S13–S19. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43.
Wedel, M.; Kamakura, W. Market Segmentation:
Conceptual and Methodological Foundations, 2nd ed.;
Kluwer Academic Publishers: Boston, MA, USA, 2000.
44.
Onwezen, M.C.; Reinders, M.J.; van der Lans, I.A.; Sijtsema, S.J.; Jasiulewicz, A.; Dolors Guardia, M.;
Guerrero, L. A cross-national consumer segmentation based on food benefits: The link with consumption
situations and food perceptions. Food Qual. Preference 2012, 24, 276–286. [CrossRef]
45.
Realini, C.E.; Kallas, Z.; Pérez-Juan, M.; Gómez, I.; Olleta, J.L.; Beriain, M.J.; Albertí, P.; Sañudo, C. Relative
importance of cues underlying spanish consumers’ beef choice and segmentation, and consumer liking of
beef enriched with n-3 and cla fatty acids. Food Qual. Preference 2014, 33, 74–85. [CrossRef]
46.
Steptoe, A.; Pollard, T.M.; Wardle, J. Development of a measure of the motives underlying the selection of
food: The food choice questionnaire. Appetite 1995, 25, 267–284. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47.
Verain, M.C.D.; Sijtsema, S.J.; Antonides, G. Consumer segmentation based on food-category attribute
importance: The relation with healthiness and sustainability perceptions. Food Qual. Preference 2016, 48,
99–106. [CrossRef]
48.
Pollard, T.M.; Steptoe, A.; Wardle, J. Motives underlying healthy eating: Using the food choice questionnaire
to explain variation in dietary intake. J. Biosoc. Sci. 1998, 30, 165–179. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49.
Verain, M.C.D.; Dagevos, H.; Antonides, G. Sustainable food consumption. Product choice or curtailment?
Appetite 2015, 91, 375–384. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50.
Petty, R.E.; Cacioppo, J.T. The effects of involvement on responses to argument quantity and quality: Central
and peripheral routes to persuasion. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 1984, 46, 69–81. [CrossRef]
51.
Kareklas, I.; Carlson, J.; Muehling, D.D. ‘I eat organic for my benefit and yours’: Egoistic and altruistic
considerations for purchasing organic food and their implications for advertising strategists. J. Advert. 2014,
43, 18–32. [CrossRef]
 Sustainability 2017, 9, 743
19 of 19
52.
Feiler, D.C.; Tost, L.P.; Grant, A.M. Mixed reasons, missed givings: The costs of blending egoistic and
altruistic reasons in donation requests. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 2012, 48, 1322–1328. [CrossRef]
53.
Raghunathan, R.; Naylor, R.W.; Hoyer, W.D. The unhealthy = tasty intuition and its effects on taste inferences,
enjoyment, and choice of food products. J. Mark. 2006, 70, 170–184. [CrossRef]
54.
Newman, G.E.; Gorlin, M.; Dhar, R. When going green backfires: How firm intentions shape the evaluation
of socially beneficial product enhancements. J. Consum. Res. 2014, 41, 823–839. [CrossRef]
55.
Gad Mohsen, M.; Dacko, S. An extension of the benefit segmentation base for the consumption of organic
foods: A time perspective. J. Mark. Manag. 2013, 29, 1701–1728. [CrossRef]
56.
Chryssohoidis, G.M.; Krystallis, A. Organic consumers’ personal values research: Testing and validating the
list of values (lov) scale and implementing a value-based segmentation task. Food Qual. Preference 2005, 16,
585–599. [CrossRef]
57.
Van Lange, P.A.M.; Joireman, J.; Parks, C.D.; van Dijk, E. The psychology of social dilemmas: A review.
Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 2013, 120, 125–141. [CrossRef]
58.
Messick, D.M.; McClintock, C.G. Motivational bases of choice in experimental games. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol.
1968, 4, 1–25. [CrossRef]
59.
De Groot, J.I.M.; Steg, L. Value orientations to explain beliefs related to environmental significant behavior:
How to measure egoistic, altruistic, and biospheric value orientations. Environ. Behav. 2008, 40, 330–354. [CrossRef]
60.
Fischer, R.; Milfont, T.L. Standardization in psychological research. Int. J. Psychol. Res. 2010, 3, 88–96.
61.
Steiger, J.H. Understanding the limitations of global fit assessment in structural equation modelling.
Personal. Individ. Differ. 2007, 42, 893–899. [CrossRef]
62.
Hu, L.; Bentler, P.M. Cut-off criteria for fit indexes in covariance matrix analysis: Conventional criteria versus
new alternatives. Struct. Equ. Model. 1999, 6, 1–55. [CrossRef]
63.
Baumgartner, H.; Homburg, C. Applications of structural equation modeling in marketing and consumer
research: A review. Int. J. Res. Mark. 1996, 13, 139–161. [CrossRef]
64.
Ketchen, D.J., Jr.; Shook, C.L. The application of cluster analysis in strategic management research:
An analysis and critique. Strateg. Manag. J. 1996, 17, 441–458. [CrossRef]
65.
SPSS Inc. SPSS User Manual; IBM: Armonk, NY, USA, 2010.
66.
Hair, J.F.; Black, W.C.; Babin, B.J.; Anderson, R.E.; Tatham, R.L. Multivariate Data Analysis; Pearson Prentice
Hall: Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 2006.
67.
Wedel, M.; Desarbo, W.S. Market segment derivation and profiling via a finite mixture model framework.
Mark. Lett. 2002, 13, 17–25. [CrossRef]
68.
Joireman, J.; Shaffer, M.J.; Balliet, D.; Strathman, A. Promotion orientation explains why future-oriented
people exercise and eat healthy: Evidence from the two-factor consideration of future consequences-14 scale.
Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 2012, 38, 1272–1287. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
69.
Antonides, G.; Nyhus, E.K. Time preference and household financial capability. (in preparation)
70.
Gwozdz, W.; Netter, S.; Biartmarz, T.; Reisch, L.A. Survey Results on Fashion Consumption and Sustainability
among Young Swedes; Mistra Future Fashion: Borås, Sweden, 2013.
71.
Verain, M.C.D.; Bartels, J.; Dagevos, H.; Sijtsema, S.J.; Onwezen, M.C.; Antonides, G. Segments of sustainable
food consumers: A literature review. Int. J. Consum. Stud. 2012, 36, 123–132. [CrossRef]
72.
Van Raaij, W.F.; Verhallen, T.M.M. Domain-specific market segmentation. Eur. J. Mark. 1994, 28, 49–66. [CrossRef]
73.
Bersma, L.; Ferris, E. The impact of health-promoting media-literacy education on nutrition and diet behavior.
In Handbook of Behavior, Food and Nutrition; Preedy, V.R., Watson, R.R., Martin, C.R., Eds.; Springer: New York,
NY, USA, 2011.
74.
Corrin, T.; Papadopoulos, A. Understanding the attitudes and perceptions of vegetarian and plant-based
diets to shape future health promotion programs. Appetite 2017, 109, 40–47. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75.
Thøgersen, J.; Crompton, T. Simple and painless? The limitations of spillover in environmental campaigning.
J. Consum. Policy 2009, 32, 141–163. [CrossRef]
76.
Evans, L.; Maio, G.R.; Corner, A.; Hodgetts, C.J.; Ahmed, S.; Hahn, U. Self-interest and pro-environmental
behaviour. Nat. Clim. Chang. 2013, 3, 122–125. [CrossRef]
© 2017 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
