 457
ISSN 1758-2024
Neurodegener. Dis. Manag. (2016) 6(6), 457–466
part of
10.2217/nmt-2016-0034 © 2016 Future Medicine Ltd
CLINICAL TRIAL PROTOCOL
Cognitive remediation to enhance 
mobility in older adults: the CREM study
Joe Verghese*,1,2, Emmeline Ayers1, Jeannette R Mahoney1, Anne Ambrose3, 
Cuiling Wang4 & Roee Holtzer1,5
1Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA 
2Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA 
3Burke Rehabilitation Hospital, White Plains, NY, USA 
4Department of Epidemiology & Population Health, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA 
5Ferkauf Graduate School of Psychology of Yeshiva University, Bronx, NY, USA 
*Author for correspondence: Tel.: +1 718 430 3808; Fax: +1 718 430 3829; joe.verghese@einstein.yu.edu 
Mobility disabilities represent the most prevalent disability among seniors. Emerging 
evidence indicates that executive functions play an important role in maintaining mobility. 
However, the use of cognitive remediation programs to enhance mobility has not been 
investigated in a full-scale randomized control trial. The CREM study is a single-blind 
randomized control trial to examine the effect of computerized cognitive remediation versus 
computer-based health education training on mobility in 420 seniors. The primary outcome 
is change in gait speed during normal walking and walking-while-talking conditions from 
baseline to postintervention. Secondary outcomes are change in mobility, mobility-related 
cognitive processes and neuroplasticity. Results of this study will fill an important gap in the 
efficacy and feasibility of cognitive remediation to improve mobility in seniors.
First draft submitted: 1 August 2016; Accepted for publication: 28 September 2016; Published 
online: 4 November 2016
Mobility disability, defined as severe difficulty or inability to walk a quarter of a mile or climb stairs, is 
associated with loss of independence and is an independent predictor of mortality in older adults [1,2]. 
While exercise is recommended to prevent mobility disability and improve gait speed [3], <10% of 
US seniors exercise at recommended levels [4] and 25% are inactive [1], necessitating exploration of 
new approaches to improve mobility.
Intact gait control requires efficient integration of many neural systems, namely motor, sensory 
and cognitive, including multiple cognitive subsystems (i.e., memory, attention and executive func-
tions [EFs]). EFs are a set of higher cognitive processes that modulate behavior, facilitate allocation 
Practice points
 
●
 
Given the major medical and socioeconomic consequences of disability in seniors and the low compliance with 
recommended treatments such as physical exercise, investigation of alternate strategies to improve mobility is a vital 
need.
 
●
 
We present a randomized clinical trial to test the efficacy of a computerized cognitive remediation program on 
improving mobility in sedentary seniors, a group at an especially high risk for disability.
 
●
 
The primary outcome is postintervention change in gait speed measured during normal-pace walking (simple 
locomotion) and walking-while-talking (complex locomotion) conditions.
 
●
 
This novel approach to improving mobility has the potential to shift treatment paradigms in the field of disability by 
introducing cognitive approaches to mobility that can be applied to prevention and rehabilitation in diverse settings.
KEYWORDS  
• clinical trial protocol 
• cognitive remediation 
• executive function • gait 
velocity
 Neurodegener. Dis. Manag. (2016) 6(6)
458
CliniCal TRial PROTOCOl Verghese, Ayers, Mahoney, Ambrose, Wang & Holtzer
future science group
of attention during simultaneous tasks (divided 
attention) and afford adaptation to changing 
situations [5]. Impairments in EFs, particularly 
on measures of attention are associated with 
poor motor function [6]. Several pilot studies 
have shown that motor training with cognitive 
components improves mobility and balance in 
cognitively normal as well as impaired seniors [7–
16]. Cognitive training of EF and attention has 
also been shown to improve both cognition and 
functional status in seniors [17]. In the ACTIVE 
study, attention and EF training resulted in 
improved activities of daily living and driving 
skills [17].
The term ‘cognitive training’ typically 
involves guided practice on a set of standard 
tasks designed to improve particular cognitive 
functions, such as memory, attention or prob-
lem solving [18]. The focus of training is on near 
transfer resulting in improved performance 
on the specific domain trained, and not on far 
transfer of effects to other behaviors or skills 
not directly trained, such as improving loco-
motion. The focus of cognitive remediation, as 
described in this clinical trial protocol, is to indi-
cate cognitive exercises with an aim at improving 
attention and EFs where the expected result is a 
positive impact (far transfer) on mobility deficits 
affecting everyday life.
Results from our pilot study demonstrated for 
the first time that frail seniors who completed 
a computerized cognitive remediation program 
targeting EFs improved walking during simple 
(normal-pace walking [NPW]) and complex 
locomotion (walking-while-talking [WWT]) 
conditions compared with baseline (i.e., far 
transfer effects), as well as compared with frail 
seniors in a usual care group [19]. Our pilot 
results were independently replicated in several 
small pilot studies in frail seniors [20], Parkinson’s 
disease patients [21] and community-dwelling 
black older adults [22]. However, these studies 
were limited by small samples and focus on spe-
cific minority and disease groups [8–14,20,23]. To 
address this knowledge gap we are conducting 
a single-blind randomized control trial (RCT) 
over 5 years to test the effect of a commercially 
available internet-based cognitive training pro-
gram (CogniFit Ltd; Israel), which offers pro-
grams specifically tailored for adults 55+ years as 
well as targeted training in EFs. Once complete, 
the RCT described in this protocol will provide 
a rigorous test of the efficacy of an innovative 
cognitive remediation approach to improving 
mobility in vulnerable frail seniors as well as 
provide insights into the underlying biological 
mechanisms. Herein, we describe the protocol 
of our proposed clinical trial.
Hypothesis
Our hypothesis is that mobility and EFs are 
linked via frontal cortices, basal ganglia and 
their connections; and that neuroplasticity will 
occur in these areas in response to computerized 
cognitive remediation. The primary goal of the 
study is to compare the effect of an 8-week indi-
vidualized computerized cognitive remediation 
program (experimental condition) versus inter-
active computerized health education program 
(control condition) on simple and complex loco-
motion measured by gait speed during NPW 
and WWT conditions in 420 seniors. As sec-
ondary outcomes, we will examine effects of the 
computerized cognitive remediation program on 
an expanded mobility battery and other quan-
titative gait variables during NPW and WWT 
conditions since mobility limitations other than 
gait speed [24] have been shown to increase risk 
of disability and falls [25]. Additional secondary 
outcomes include neuroplasticity measured by 
functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS), 
an innovative technology that enables cortical 
imaging during walking [26], and other mobility 
related cognitive processes such as speed of pro-
cessing, attention and divided attention. We will 
also explore durability of cognitive remediation 
effects on these measures at 6 and 12 months 
postintervention.
Methods
●
● Study design
We are recruiting 420 sedentary seniors to par-
ticipate in a single-blind RCT. Participants are 
randomly assigned to either an 8-week com-
puterized cognitive remediation program or an 
interactive computerized health education pro-
gram (210 per group). A computer familiariza-
tion session is administered to all participants 
prior to starting the RCT, regardless of group 
assignment.
●
● Screening, recruitment & randomization
Samples of individuals 70 years and over from 
Bronx and Westchester counties are being 
recruited using public records such as voter regis-
tration lists and through advertisements at local 
clinics and community organizations. Screening 
is conducted in two phases (telephone and clinic 
 459
The CREM study CliniCal TRial PROTOCOl
future science group
www.futuremedicine.com
visit). A letter explaining our study is sent fol-
lowed by a structured telephone interview a few 
days later. Those expressing interest are screened 
with the Memory Impairment Screen [27] and 
AD8, a brief informant questionnaire [28], to 
exclude dementia. The Memory Impairment 
Screen is a brief four-item test which can be 
administered over the telephone and uses the 
same principles as the Free and Cued Selective 
Reminding Test [29]. It has a sensitivity of 85% 
and specificity of 86% for diagnosing demen-
tia [27]. Potential recruits who meet eligibility 
criteria on the telephone are invited for in-person 
screening. Participants are randomized into con-
trol or experimental groups after completion of 
all baseline assessment measures and signing 
informed consent.
For the purpose of this study we chose to 
focus first on the efficacy of secondary preven-
tion using a computerized cognitive remediation 
program in seniors at high-risk for disability. 
Eligible persons are 70 years and older; ambula-
tory with or without an assistive device; at high 
risk for disability defined using a short physical 
performance battery (SPPB) cut score of ≤9 [30] 
corresponding to frail range; and have a gait 
speed of ≤100 cm/s [31]. Box 1 includes a full list 
of inclusion and exclusion criteria. Thus, final 
eligibility is determined based on performance 
on mobility tasks and questionnaires during the 
in-house screening visit. All study procedures 
have been approved by the Albert Einstein 
College of Medicine Institutional Review 
Board as well as the National Institute on Aging 
appointed Data and Safety Monitoring Board 
of this study. Prior to the onset of this RCT, all 
study staff and key personnel took the courses 
from the Collaborative Institutional Training 
Initiative.
●
● Study measures
A complete list of all evaluation tools con-
ducted at baseline and follow-up visits is delin-
eated in Table 1, and the primary outcomes are 
described below. These measures also serve to 
define the baseline characteristics of the groups, 
assess confounding and as covariates in analy-
ses. To reduce bias, we have employed a num-
ber of methods in addition to randomization 
including concealing treatment allocation until 
the participants are enrolled into the trial [32]. 
Intervention and control programs are con-
ducted at nonoverlapping times. Participants 
and study staff from different groups are kept 
separate and instructed not to disclose group 
assignments or details of interventions.
●
● Primary outcomes
Normal pace walking
Gait speed was recommended by the US FDA 
as one of the two functional tests to be used 
as outcomes in pharmacological trials because 
of its good validity, reliability, sensitivity to 
change and predictive validity for multiple 
adverse outcomes [33]. Research assistants con-
duct gait evaluations using a computerized 
mat (180 × 35.5 × 0.25 inches) with embedded 
pressure sensors (GAITRite; CIR Systems, PA, 
USA). Participants are asked to walk on the mat 
at their ‘normal walking speed’ in a quiet and 
well-lit room. Our primary outcome is gait speed 
(cm/s). However, multiple gait parameters are 
obtained and available for analyses [34]. We have 
reported excellent test–retest reliability of gait 
speed on GAITRite (κ >0.9) [35].
Walking-while-talking
The WWT paradigm has been widely stud-
ied as a real world test of divided attention to 
examine cognitive-motor interactions. The 
WWT test is a novel, reliable and ecologi-
cally valid mobility measure developed by our 
group [36–38]. Our studies have established 
the incremental validity of WWT over NPW 
speed for predicting adverse outcomes such as 
falls, frailty and disability [36,37]. Participants 
are instructed to walk on the mat, as described 
above, while performing a cognitive interfer-
ence task, which is reciting alternate letters of 
the alphabet starting with the letter ‘A’. They 
are instructed to pay equal attention to walk-
ing and talking to minimize task prioritiza-
tion effects [36,38]. The number of errors and 
correctly recited alternate letters are recorded. 
There was good inter-rater reliability in our 
previous studies (r = 0.602) [36].
●
● Other study outcomes
Secondary outcomes include the SPPB, mobility-
related cognitive processes assessed by a battery 
of validated tests, quantitative gait variables 
other than speed and neuroplasticity measured 
by fNIRS. Details regarding fNIRS are provided 
in our recent publications [39,40]. In brief, fNIRS 
measures change in cortical hemodynamic 
response by monitoring changes in light intensity 
within near-infrared range [39]. fNIRS can detect 
brain activation changes during walking in the 
 Neurodegener. Dis. Manag. (2016) 6(6)
460
CliniCal TRial PROTOCOl Verghese, Ayers, Mahoney, Ambrose, Wang & Holtzer
future science group
prefrontal cortical regions and handle motion 
artifacts [41,42]; overcoming limitations of con-
ventional imaging [43]. Oxygenated hemoglobin 
(HbO2) and deoxygenated hemoglobin have 
characteristic optical properties in visible and 
near-infrared light range allowing the change in 
concentration of these molecules during neuro-
vascular coupling to be measured using optical 
methods. fNIRS measure changes in the ratio of 
HbO2 to blood volume in order to assess brain 
activity through intact skulls in adults [44]. The 
objective is to identify patterns of activations and 
alterations following the cognitive remediation 
program to provide insights into neuroplasti-
city. Initially, the fNIRS device used in our set-
ting was successfully implemented in a walking 
experiment demonstrating a differential pattern 
of increased HbO2 levels in the prefrontal cortex 
(PFC) in WWT compared with NPW in young 
and old participants [26]. In subsequent fNIRS 
studies, we have demonstrated that internal con-
sistency of HbO2 measurements, determined by 
split-half intraclass correlations, was excellent 
for NPW (0.830) and WWT (0.849) [39]. 
Furthermore, we have replicated the original 
finding demonstrating increased activation levels 
in the PFC in WWT compared with NPW in 
a large cohort of older adults [39], elucidated the 
role of the PFC in cognitive control of attention-
demanding locomotion in groups stratified by 
the presence of peripheral and central gait abnor-
malities [45] and reported on the effect of mild 
Parkinsonian symptoms on the involvement of 
the PFC in balance [46].
The durability of the cognitive remedia-
tion program effects on gait speed during 
NPW and WWT conditions measured at 6 
and 12 months postintervention will also be 
recorded. Additional secondary and tertiary 
outcomes are presented in Table 1.
●
● Study interventions
Computerized cognitive remediation program
CogniFit, a commercially available internet-
based cognitive training software, provides 
specialized training across multiple domains 
Box 1. Eligibility criteria.
Inclusion criteria
 
●  
Adults aged 70 years and older, residing in the community
 
●  
Plan to be in area for next year
 
●  
Able to speak English at a level sufficient to undergo our cognitive assessment battery
 
●  
Ambulatory. Participants are classified as ‘nonambulatory’ if they are unable to leave the confines of 
their home and attend a clinic visit
 
●  
Gait speed during normal-pace walking ≤100 cm/s
 
●  
Short physical performance battery score less than or equal to nine
Exclusion criteria
 
●  
Presence of dementia identified by any one of the following: Memory Impairment Screen of less 
than 5, Alzheimer’s disease-8 greater than or equal to 2 or dementia diagnosed by baseline cognitive 
assessment
 
●  
Serious chronic or acute illness such as cancer (late stage, metastatic or on active treatment), chronic 
pulmonary disease on ventilator or continuous oxygen therapy or active liver disease
 
●  
Mobility limitations solely due to musculoskeletal limitation or pain (e.g., severe osteoarthritis), which 
prevent subjects from completing mobility tests. Presence of arthritis will not be used to exclude 
subjects if they can complete the mobility tasks
 
●  
Any medical condition or chronic medication use (e.g., neuroleptics) that will compromise safety or 
affect cognitive functioning or terminal illness with life expectancy <12 months
 
●  
Presence of progressive, degenerative neurologic disease (e.g., Parkinson’s disease or amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis)
 
●  
Hospitalized in the past 6 months for severe illness or surgery that specifically affects mobility 
(e.g., hip or knee replacement) and that prevents subjects from completing mobility tests or plans for 
surgery affecting mobility in the next 6 months
 
●  
Severe auditory or visual loss
 
●  
Active psychoses or psychiatric symptoms (such as agitation) noted during the clinic visit that will 
prevent completion of study protocols
 
●  
Living in nursing home
 
●  
Participation in other intervention trial or observational studies
 461
The CREM study CliniCal TRial PROTOCOl
future science group
www.futuremedicine.com
Table 1. Outcome assessment schedule.
Assessments
Preintervention
Postintervention
Baseline 
Week 9 6 months 12 months
Primary outcomes
NPW gait speed (cm/s)†
x
x
x
x
WWT gait speed (cm/s)†
x
x
x
x
Secondary outcomes
Short physical performance battery (range: 0–12)†
x
x
x
x
Quantitative gait performance other than speed‡
x
x
x
x
Stair climbing§
x
x
x
x
Disability scale§
x
x
x
x
Functional near-infrared spectroscopy‡
x
x
–
–
Trail-Making Task Forms A and B§
x
x
x
x
Control Oral Word Association Test†
x
x
x
x
WAIS¶ Digit Symbol Substitution Test†
x
x
x
x
Flanker task‡
x
x
x
x
Tertiary outcomes
Geriatric Depression Scale (30 item)§
x
x
x
x
Falls self-efficacy§
x
x
x
x
12-Item Short Form Health Survey†
x
x
x
x
Fall history (number of falls)§
x
x
x
x
Additional neuropsychological measures#‡
x
x
x
x
Other study measures
Demographic information
x
–
–
–
Memory Impairment Screen†
x
–
–
–
Ascertain dementia 8-item informant questionnaire§
x
x
x
x
Blessed Orientation-Memory-Concentration Test§
x
x
x
x
Medical history and medication inventory
x
–
–
–
Physical examination††
x
x
x
x
Unipedal stance†
x
x
x
x
Knee extensor†
x
x
x
x
Grip strength†
x
x
x
x
CogniFit assessment†
x
x
x
x
Transtheoretical model
x
–
–
–
Beck Anxiety Inventory§
x
x
x
x
Brief Fatigue Inventory§
x
x
x
x
Big 5
x
–
–
–
Medical Outcomes Study Social Support Survey†
x
–
–
–
Alcohol/Smoking Consumption Inventory
x
–
–
–
Medical Outcomes Study Pain Measures§
x
x
x
x
Activity Balance Confidence Scale†
x
x
x
x
Instrumental activities of daily living§
x
x
x
x
Duke Activity Status Index†
x
–
–
–
General mobility questionnaire
x
x
x
x
Marlowe–Crown Scale
x
–
–
–
†Higher scores indicate better performance. 
‡Depends on condition and/or variable. 
§Lower scores indicate better performance. 
¶Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale. 
#Repeatable battery for assessment of neuropsychological status figure copy and delay figure copy measures; Wide Range 
Achievement Test & Wechsler Test of Adult Reading; Hopkins Verbal Learning Test; Boston Naming Tests (15-item). 
††Physical examination includes height, weight, blood pressure, auditory and visual measurement. 
NPW: Normal pace walking; WWT: Walking-while-talking.
 Neurodegener. Dis. Manag. (2016) 6(6)
462
CliniCal TRial PROTOCOl Verghese, Ayers, Mahoney, Ambrose, Wang & Holtzer
future science group
including naming, memory, attention, percep-
tion and coordination, to a name a few. While 
Cognifit offers a wide array of specialized train-
ing, for the purposes of our study, we employed 
two specific training programs tailored for 
adults of age 55+ years as well as a targeted 
training in EFs. As described previously [19,47], 
each participants’ individualized training plan 
is dependent on their performance on a baseline 
evaluation, which assesses cognitive processes 
including, but not limited to psychomotor skills, 
dual tasking, sustained attention, naming and 
working memory [47]. Based on the distribu-
tion of cognitive-test scores from the baseline 
CogniFit assessment, participants’ cognitive 
abilities are divided into three categories: abili-
ties on which the participant performed well, 
abilities performed in the medium range of the 
norm and abilities on which the participant 
performed low. The participant begins train-
ing on the tasks that reflect its weakest scoring 
ability in each category. The system is designed 
to calibrate the difficulty level of each task in 
order to moderate how challenging each sub-
sequent task becomes. Then the system begins 
rotating the training tasks from a pool of tasks 
defined by the type of training in a way that 
maximizes the exposure to tasks that train the 
participants’ weakest areas first. If a category of 
abilities has no new tasks, new tasks are taken 
from another category with the next lowest per-
formance. This form of practice allocation con-
tinues throughout the program, so that a new 
task is introduced every session. It is a complex 
and sophisticated system, which ensures that the 
participant is always working within its comfort 
zone while simultaneously practicing its weakest 
abilities. Each training session includes two cog-
nitive training tasks and one cognitive training 
assessment task, which is used to choose the 
training tasks for the next session.
After a participant has completed three 
training sessions, a fourth session, which spe-
cifically targets EFs, is assigned irrespective 
of the baseline cognitive evaluation to ensure 
adequate training on EFs and related cognitive 
functions. Tasks in this session are designed to 
test areas of EF, which include but are not lim-
ited to divided attention, inhibition, updating, 
planning and shifting. One example of a task 
for areas of divided attention, response time 
and visual perception is the ‘Traffic Manager’ 
game. In this task, participants are shown an 
aerial view of several intersections with vehicles 
moving around the screen. They are instructed 
to control the traffic at different intersections 
by switching traffic lights from red to green by 
clicking on them with the mouse to avoid col-
lisions and traffic jams. A second task called 
‘Cube Foundry’, is a hand–eye coordination 
task that involves planning and spatial percep-
tion. This task instructs participants to assem-
ble blocks of various shapes to create continu-
ous layers in a 3D environment by moving and 
rotating the blocks.
Frequency & duration
Participants attend 24 training days over a 
period of 8 weeks for a total of 20 training hours. 
Each training day consists of three cognitive 
remediation sessions for adults 55+ years and 
one specialized concentration training session. 
Each training session is comprised of three tasks 
and requires about 12 min to complete; thus, 
total training time is on average 50 min per day. 
Over the 24 days, each participant will complete 
approximately 72 cognitive training sessions and 
24 targeted EF training sessions. Noteworthy, by 
Assessments
Preintervention
Postintervention
Baseline 
Week 9 6 months 12 months
Other study measures (cont.)
Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale§
x
–
–
–
CHAMPS†
x
x
x
x
Physical activity monitoring – accelerometer‡
x
–
–
–
†Higher scores indicate better performance. 
‡Depends on condition and/or variable. 
§Lower scores indicate better performance. 
¶Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale. 
#Repeatable battery for assessment of neuropsychological status figure copy and delay figure copy measures; Wide Range 
Achievement Test & Wechsler Test of Adult Reading; Hopkins Verbal Learning Test; Boston Naming Tests (15-item). 
††Physical examination includes height, weight, blood pressure, auditory and visual measurement. 
NPW: Normal pace walking; WWT: Walking-while-talking.
Table 1. Outcome assessment schedule (cont.).
 463
The CREM study CliniCal TRial PROTOCOl
future science group
www.futuremedicine.com
the end of the 8 weeks all participants enrolled in 
the cognitive remediation program will complete 
the same number and types of scheduled and 
additional EF training sessions and tasks.
Interactive computerized health education 
program
The control program was guided by four princi-
ples: optimize participant recruitment and reten-
tion; minimal effect on outcomes as there is no 
evidence that health education alone improves 
mobility; control for computer exposure; 
and older adults are less inclined to continue 
participation if they perceive a lack of benefit.
Participants complete one 150-min session 
per week for a total of 8 weeks. Each session 
is divided into two sections: an interactive 
computer-based health education program; 
and low-intensity computer-based games that 
contrary to the experimental group, do not 
increase in intensity or complexity in order to 
match computer exposure time and intensity of 
interactions in the experimental group. Health 
education topics come from a large library of 
interactive multimedia tutorials from the Patient 
Education Institute [48], and include topics such 
as ‘Sleep Apnea in Elderly Adults’ and ‘Adult 
Self Care for Colds and Flu’. Participants rand-
omized to the health education program com-
plete the same baseline CogniFit assessment as 
the experimental group; however, their perfor-
mance does not influence the complexity or 
intensity of the future low-intensity computer 
games, also developed by CogniFit, to avoid 
confounding of potential cognitive benefits of 
these programs. Sessions are completed on the 
same computer workstations as the experimental 
group on nonoverlapping days; one participant 
per computer.
Frequency & duration
The health education group attends a total of 
eight sessions in 8 weeks. Each session lasts 
150 min, for a total of 20 h over the 8 weeks, 
identical in duration to the experimental group. 
The individualized computer-based interactive 
health education and low-intensity computer 
game classes are balanced with the intervention 
group in computer exposure time and amount, 
and quality of social contacts.
●
● Statistical plan
Baseline distribution of covariates will be com-
pared with assess adequacy of randomization 
of participants using appropriate graphical 
procedures and summary statistics.
We will employ linear mixed effects model to 
compare the changes in gait speed immediately 
postintervention (week 9) as well as at 6 and 
12 months postintervention in experimental 
versus controls. The variance will be allowed 
to differ between experimental and control 
groups. The primary test of the effectiveness of 
the intervention will be change in mean pre- 
and postintervention gait speed during NPW 
and WWT conditions between the two groups. 
For WWT, we will also consider the change in 
WWT speed from normal walking (dual task 
cost). We will define improvers on NPW and 
WWT by using a cut score of 4 cm/s on these 
measures as described in our pilot study [19], 
and compare proportion of improvers versus 
nonimprovers in the two groups using linear 
mixed effects models [49].
The primary hypothesis examines change in 
gait speed during NPW and WWT conditions. 
Improvement in speed has been reported to be 
approximately 10 cm/s after 8–12 weeks physical 
exercise interventions [15]. In contrast, gait speed 
in the nonintervention controls shows minimal 
improvement [15], unchanged [3] or declined [50]. 
Based on these effects and results from our pilot 
study [19], we conservatively estimate a 5 cm/s 
improvement in the experimental group postin-
tervention, which is approximately 50% of the 
mobility effect in physical exercise trials and less 
than that achieved in our pilot study (8 cm/s). 
This magnitude of change also corresponds 
to that recommended as small, but clinically 
meaningful change in gait in aging studies [51].
The sample size (n = 420) provides >80% 
power to detect clinically meaningful differences 
at significance level of 0.05. The Bonferroni cor-
rection for multiple testing was used in sample 
size calculations. Based on conservatively esti-
mated standard deviations of 12 and 20 cm/s for 
NPW and WWT, respectively, to detect clini-
cally meaningful differences of 5 cm/s for NPW 
and 10 cm/s for WWT with 80% power, at least 
169 subjects per group are needed. To take into 
account the projected 20% dropout rate at end 
of intervention, 210 subjects will be enrolled 
per group. Assuming cumulative dropout rates 
of 25% at 6 months, with 210 participants per 
group, we will have 92 and 99% power for 
detecting differences of 5 and 10 cm/s in NPW 
and WWT, respectively. At 1 year of follow-up, 
assuming 30% cumulative dropout, we will have 
 Neurodegener. Dis. Manag. (2016) 6(6)
464
CliniCal TRial PROTOCOl Verghese, Ayers, Mahoney, Ambrose, Wang & Holtzer
future science group
90 and 98% power for detecting differences of 5 
and 10 cm/s in NPW and WWT, respectively.
We will use intention to treat analysis, which 
includes all randomized participants in the 
groups assigned, regardless of adherence with 
entry criteria, whether the intervention was 
received, and subsequent withdrawal or devia-
tion from the protocol [52]. Intention to treat 
analysis is pragmatic because it admits non-
compliance and protocol deviations, and gives 
an unbiased estimate of the intervention effect. 
The linear mixed effects model is good at han-
dling missing data due to dropout assuming a 
missing at random mechanism [49,53]. Mediation 
analysis (product of coefficients method) will be 
conducted to examine whether depression, psy-
chosocial measures (mood, self-esteem and self-
efficacy) as well as changes in proximal cognitive 
outcomes (attention and EF) mediate the effect 
of cognitive remediation on gait speed in NPW 
and WWT conditions. In addition, we will assess 
dose-response effects by tracking attendance and 
session duration for each participant.
All secondary outcomes including quantita-
tive gait variables and gait domains, as well as 
SPPB scores and cognitive processes, will be 
analyzed using linear mixed effects models as 
described above [49]. In addition to PFC oxy-
genation levels on fNIRS, alternative measures 
such as areas activated, bilateral versus unilateral 
activation, and any reduction in activation will 
be considered simultaneously using linear mixed 
effects model. As discussed earlier, internal con-
sistency of fNIRS measurements for both NPW 
and WWT is excellent [39].
A prespecified set of baseline covariates was 
selected to determine their influence on the 
treatment and include age, gender, education, 
chronic illnesses, cognitive test performance, 
pain, arthritis and cardiac fitness measured 
using the Duke Activity Status Index [54]. This 
method is preferred to adjusting for covariates 
that are imbalanced between treatment groups 
using significance testing, because it is possi-
ble for a covariate to have a strong confound-
ing effect even if the difference in the average 
value of that variable between the parallel arms 
is not significant. We will conduct assessments 
on many of these covariates postintervention 
and monitor any change over the intervention 
period and analytically account for their effects 
by including these measures (baseline levels as 
well as change) in linear mixed effect models to 
control for possible confounding.
●
● Data management & quality control
The information collected from each participant 
at their screening and baseline visits, as well as 
at their postintervention visits at 9 weeks, 6 and 
12 months is entered by trained research assis-
tants and maintained in a Database Manager 
System programmed using Microsoft Access 
2010 relational database software. The system 
is designed with automated checks for ranges 
of values and logical validity of data entered 
and imports data directly from the computer-
ized assessment files. Imported data files are 
checked for data integrity and flagged in the 
event of inconsistent or missing data. Weekly 
progress reports are generated to track the num-
ber of participants that have been screened and 
enrolled as well as how many have dropped and 
the reasons for dropping. Analyses and data 
monitoring reports are performed and devel-
oped by the designated study statistician for the 
Data and Safety Monitoring Board meetings on 
a biannual basis.
Discussion
To our knowledge, this is the first full scale 
RCT proposed to test the efficacy of EF-targeted 
cognitive remediation on mobility, specifically 
gait speed during simple and complex locomo-
tion. Our cognitive remediation approach is 
corroborated by independent pilot studies in 
small samples of older adults and Parkinson’s 
disease patients [20–22]. The computerized cog-
nitive remediation approach is also supported 
by studies that have shown that cognitive-
motor training as well as dual-task training 
improves mobility and balance [10,15–16]. If suc-
cessful, this approach will help shift paradigms 
in the disability field by introducing cognitive 
approaches to mobility that can be applied to 
prevention and rehabilitation. Even if negative, 
important insights will be gained on the effect 
of computerized cognitive remediation on a 
wide array of secondary mobility and cogni-
tive measures, test feasibility of a computerized 
cognitive remediation program, as well as offer 
the potential to conduct future biological and 
genetic investigations of neuroplasticity.
Other investigators have shown that train-
ing older adults on similar WWT tasks trans-
lates into clinically relevant outcomes such as 
reduced falls, better balance or improved func-
tion [7,14]. Hence, establishing the effects of cog-
nitive remediation on our co-primary outcome 
of WWT speed alone could be of high clinical 
 465
The CREM study CliniCal TRial PROTOCOl
future science group
www.futuremedicine.com
impact and relevance, irrespective of its effect 
on NPW speed.
Mobility disability is the most prevalent type 
of disability in older Americans [55]. The com-
puterized cognitive remediation approach may 
be an effective, accessible and low-risk method 
to improve mobility-related cognitive functions 
in vulnerable seniors. Demonstrating mobility 
gains with computerized cognitive remedia-
tion will open new or supplemental treatment 
options for the majority of US seniors who do 
not engage in physical exercise due to physical, 
motivational or socioeconomic reasons. This 
‘proof of concept’ RCT will provide scientific 
and biological support for a future multicenter 
RCT to examine the combined effect of com-
puterized cognitive remediation and physical 
exercise on mobility, as well as the long-term 
impact of computerized cognitive remediation 
programs on falls and cognition in healthy, 
frail and Mild Cognitive Impairment patient 
populations.
Disclosure
The CREM study has been registered on www.clinicaltrials.
gov – identifier: NCT02567227.
Financial & competing interests disclosure
This work is supported by a grant from the NIH 
(R01AG050448-01). The authors have no other relevant 
affiliations or financial involvement with any organization 
or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict 
with the subject matter or materials discussed in the 
manuscript apart from those disclosed.
No writing assistance was utilized in the production of 
this manuscript.
References
1 
Newman AB, Simonsick EM, Naydeck BL 
et al. Association of long-distance corridor 
walk performance with mortality, 
cardiovascular disease, mobility limitation, and 
disability. JAMA 295(17), 2018–2026 (2006).
2 
Hirvensalo M, Rantanen T, Heikkinen E. 
Mobility difficulties and physical activity as 
predictors of mortality and loss of 
independence in the community-living older 
population. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 48(5), 
493–498 (2000).
3 
Judge JO, Underwood M, Gennosa T. 
Exercise to improve gait velocity in older 
persons. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 74(4), 
400–406 (1993).
4 
Haskell WL, Lee IM, Pate RR et al. Physical 
activity and public health: updated 
recommendation for adults from the 
American College of Sports Medicine and the 
American Heart Association. Med. Sci. Sports 
Exerc. 39(8), 1423–1434 (2007).
5 
Posner MI, Petersen SE. The attention system 
of the human brain. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 13, 
25–42 (1990).
6 
Inzitari M, Baldereschi M, Di Carlo A et al. 
Impaired attention predicts motor 
performance decline in older community-
dwellers with normal baseline mobility: 
results from the Italian Longitudinal Study 
on Aging (ILSA). J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. 
Med. Sci. 62(8), 837–843 (2007).
7 
Silsupadol P, Lugade V, Shumway-Cook A 
et al. Training-related changes in dual-task 
walking performance of elderly persons with 
balance impairment: a double-blind, 
randomized controlled trial. Gait Posture 
29(4), 634–639 (2009).
8 
Coelho FG, Andrade LP, Pedroso RV et al. 
Multimodal exercise intervention improves 
frontal cognitive functions and gait in 
Alzheimer’s disease: a controlled trial. Geriatr. 
Gerontol. Int. 13(1), 198–203 (2013).
9 
De Bruin ED, Van Het Reve E, Murer K. A 
randomized controlled pilot study assessing 
the feasibility of combined motor-cognitive 
training and its effect on gait characteristics 
in the elderly. Clin. Rehabil. 27(3), 215–225 
(2013).
10 
Li KZ, Roudaia E, Lussier M, Bherer L, 
Leroux A, Mckinley PA. Benefits of cognitive 
dual-task training on balance performance in 
healthy older adults. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. 
Med. Sci. 65(12), 1344–1352 (2010).
11 
Pichierri G, Coppe A, Lorenzetti S, Murer K, 
De Bruin ED. The effect of a cognitive-motor 
intervention on voluntary step execution 
under single and dual task conditions in older 
adults: a randomized controlled pilot study. 
Clin. Interv. Aging 7, 175–184 (2012).
12 
Pichierri G, Wolf P, Murer K, De Bruin ED. 
Cognitive and cognitive-motor interventions 
affecting physical functioning: a systematic 
review. BMC Geriatr. 11, 29 (2011).
13 
Plummer-D’amato P, Cohen Z, Daee NA, 
Lawson SE, Lizotte MR, Padilla A. Effects of 
once weekly dual-task training in older adults: 
a pilot randomized controlled trial. Geriatr. 
Gerontol. Int. 12(4), 622–629 (2012).
14 
Schwenk M, Zieschang T, Oster P, Hauer K. 
Dual-task performances can be improved in 
patients with dementia: a randomized 
controlled trial. Neurology 74(24), 1961–1968 
(2010).
15 
Brauer SG, Morris ME. Can people with 
Parkinson’s disease improve dual tasking 
when walking? Gait Posture 31(2), 229–233 
(2010).
16 
Lajoie Y. Effect of computerized feedback 
postural training on posture and attentional 
demands in older adults. Aging Clin. Exp. Res. 
16(5), 363–368 (2004).
17 
Willis SL, Tennstedt SL, Marsiske M et al. 
Long-term effects of cognitive training on 
everyday functional outcomes in older adults. 
JAMA 296(23), 2805–2814 (2006).
18 
Clare L, Woods RT, Moniz Cook ED, Orrell 
M, Spector A. Cognitive rehabilitation and 
cognitive training for early-stage Alzheimer’s 
disease and vascular dementia. Cochrane 
Database Syst. Rev. (4), CD003260 (2003).
19 
Verghese J, Mahoney J, Ambrose AF, Wang 
C, Holtzer R. Effect of cognitive remediation 
on gait in sedentary seniors. J. Gerontol. A 
Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 65(12), 1338–1343 
(2010).
20 
Smith-Ray RL, Hughes SL, Prohaska TR, 
Little DM, Jurivich DA, Hedeker D. Impact 
of cognitive training on balance and gait in 
older adults. J. Gerontol. B Psychol. Sci. Soc. 
Sci. 70(3), 357–366 (2015).
21 
Milman U, Atias H, Weiss A, Mirelman A, 
Hausdorff JM. Can cognitive remediation 
improve mobility in patients with Parkinson’s 
disease? Findings from a 12 week pilot study. 
J. Parkinsons Dis. 4(1), 37–44 (2014).
22 
Smith-Ray RL, Makowski-Woidan B, Hughes 
SL. A randomized trial to measure the impact 
 Neurodegener. Dis. Manag. (2016) 6(6)
466
CliniCal TRial PROTOCOl Verghese, Ayers, Mahoney, Ambrose, Wang & Holtzer
future science group
of a community-based cognitive training 
intervention on balance and gait in 
cognitively intact Black older adults. Health 
Educ. Behav. 41(Suppl. 1), S62–S69 (2014).
23 
Yogev-Seligmann G, Giladi N, Brozgol M, 
Hausdorff JM. A training program to improve 
gait while dual tasking in patients with 
Parkinson’s disease: a pilot study. Arch. Phys. 
Med. Rehabil. 93(1), 176–181 (2012).
24 
Brach JS, Perera S, Studenski S, Katz M, Hall 
C, Verghese J. Meaningful change in 
measures of gait variability in older adults. 
Gait Posture 31(2), 175–179 (2010).
25 
Verghese J, Holtzer R, Lipton RB, Wang C. 
Quantitative gait markers and incident fall 
risk in older adults. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. 
Med. Sci. 64(8), 896–901 (2009).
26 
Holtzer R, Mahoney JR, Izzetoglu M, 
Izzetoglu K, Onaral B, Verghese J. fNIRS 
study of walking and walking while talking in 
young and old individuals. J. Gerontol. A Biol. 
Sci. Med. Sci. 66(8), 879–887 (2011).
27 
Lipton RB, Katz MJ, Kuslansky G et al. 
Screening for dementia by telephone using the 
memory impairment screen. J. Am. Geriatr. 
Soc. 51(10), 1382–1390 (2003).
28 
Galvin JE, Roe CM, Powlishta KK et al. The 
AD8: a brief informant interview to detect 
dementia. Neurology 65(4), 559–564 (2005).
29 
Lemos R, Maroco J, Simoes MR, Santana I. 
Construct and diagnostic validities of the Free 
and Cued Selective Reminding Test in the 
Alzheimer’s disease spectrum. J. Clin. Exp. 
Neuropsychol. 38(8), 913–924 (2016).
30 
Espeland MA, Gill TM, Guralnik J et al. 
Designing clinical trials of interventions for 
mobility disability: results from the lifestyle 
interventions and independence for elders 
pilot (LIFE-P) trial. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. 
Med. Sci. 62(11), 1237–1243 (2007).
31 
Abellan Van Kan G, Rolland Y, Andrieu S 
et al. Gait speed at usual pace as a predictor of 
adverse outcomes in community-dwelling 
older people an International Academy on 
Nutrition and Aging (IANA) Task Force. 
J. Nutr. Health Aging 13(10), 881–889 
(2009).
32 
Day SJ, Altman DG. Statistics notes: blinding 
in clinical trials and other studies. BMJ 
321(7259), 504 (2000).
33 
Working Group on Functional Outcome 
Measures for Clinical Trials, Bhasin S, 
Espeland MA et al. Indications, labeling, and 
outcomes assessment for drugs aimed at 
improving functional status in older persons: 
a conversation between aging researchers and 
FDA regulators. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. 
Sci. 64(4), 487–491 (2009).
34 
Verghese J, Wang C, Lipton RB, Holtzer R, 
Xue X. Quantitative gait dysfunction and risk 
of cognitive decline and dementia. J Neurol. 
Neurosurg. Psychiatry 78(9), 929–935 (2007).
35 
Verghese J, Katz MJ, Derby CA, Kuslansky 
G, Hall CB, Lipton RB. Reliability and 
validity of a telephone-based mobility 
assessment questionnaire. Age Ageing 33(6), 
628–632 (2004).
36 
Verghese J, Buschke H, Viola L et al. Validity 
of divided attention tasks in predicting falls in 
older individuals: a preliminary study. J. Am. 
Geriatr. Soc. 50(9), 1572–1576 (2002).
37 
Verghese J, Holtzer R, Lipton RB, Wang C. 
Mobility stress test approach to predicting 
frailty, disability, and mortality in high-
functioning older adults. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 
60(10), 1901–1905 (2012).
38 
Verghese J, Kuslansky G, Holtzer R et al. 
Walking while talking: effect of task 
prioritization in the elderly. Arch. Phys. Med. 
Rehabil. 88(1), 50–53 (2007).
39 
Holtzer R, Mahoney JR, Izzetoglu M, Wang 
C, England S, Verghese J. Online fronto-
cortical control of simple and attention-
demanding locomotion in humans. 
Neuroimage 112, 152–159 (2015).
40 
Holtzer R, Yuan J, Verghese J, Mahoney JR, 
Izzetoglu M, Wang C. Interactions of subjective 
and objective measures of fatigue defined in the 
context of brain control of locomotion. 
J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. doi:10.1093/
gerona/glw167 (2016) (Epub ahead of print).
41 
Ayaz H, Izzetoglu M, Shewokis PA, Onaral B. 
Sliding-window motion artifact rejection for 
functional near-infrared spectroscopy. Conf. 
Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. 2010, 
6567–6570 (2010).
42 
Izzetoglu M, Chitrapu P, Bunce S, Onaral B. 
Motion artifact cancellation in NIR 
spectroscopy using discrete Kalman filtering. 
Biomed. Eng. Online 9, 16 (2010).
43 
Mihara M, Miyai I, Hatakenaka M, Kubota 
K, Sakoda S. Role of the prefrontal cortex in 
human balance control. NeuroImage 43(2), 
329–336 (2008).
44 
Villringer A, Chance B. Non-invasive optical 
spectroscopy and imaging of human brain 
function. Trends Neurosci. 20(10), 435–442 
(1997).
45 
Holtzer R, Verghese J, Allali G, Izzetoglu M, 
Wang C, Mahoney JR. Neurological gait 
abnormalities moderate the functional brain 
signature of the posture first hypothesis. Brain 
Topogr. 29(2), 334–343 (2016).
46 
Mahoney JR, Holtzer R, Izzetoglu M, Zemon 
V, Verghese J, Allali G. The role of prefrontal 
cortex during postural control in 
Parkinsonian syndromes a functional 
near-infrared spectroscopy study. Brain Res. 
1633, 126–138 (2016).
47 
Haimov I, Hanuka E, Horowitz Y. Chronic 
insomnia and cognitive functioning among 
older adults. Behav. Sleep Med. 6(1), 32–54 
(2008).
48 
Patient Education.  
www.patient-education.com 
49 
Laird NM, Ware JH. Random-effects models 
for longitudinal data. Biometrics 38(4), 
963–974 (1982).
50 
Timonen L, Rantanen T, Ryynanen OP, 
Taimela S, Timonen TE, Sulkava R. A 
randomized controlled trial of rehabilitation 
after hospitalization in frail older women: 
effects on strength, balance and mobility. Scand. 
J. Med. Sci. Sports 12(3), 186–192 (2002).
51 
Kwon S, Perera S, Pahor M et al. What is a 
meaningful change in physical performance? 
Findings from a clinical trial in older adults 
(the LIFE-P study). J. Nutr. Health Aging 
13(6), 538–544 (2009).
52 
Gupta SK. Intention-to-treat concept: a 
review. Perspect. Clin. Res. 2(3), 109–112 
(2011).
53 
Fielding S, Fayers P, Ramsay CR. Analysing 
randomised controlled trials with missing 
data: choice of approach affects conclusions. 
Contemp. Clin. Trials 33(3), 461–469 
(2012).
54 
Hlatky MA, Boineau RE, Higginbotham MB 
et al. A brief self-administered questionnaire 
to determine functional capacity (the Duke 
Activity Status Index). Am. J. Cardiol. 64(10), 
651–654 (1989).
55 
He W, LJ Larsen. Older Americans with a 
disability: 2008–2012. American Community 
Survey Reports (2014).  
www.census.gov/content/dam/Census
