 136 
www.anesthesia-analgesia.org 
January 2017 • Volume 124 • Number 1
S
ince their invention several decades ago,1,2 pulse oxim-
eters have successfully used the principle of photople-
thysmography (PPG). In PPG, the intensity of light that 
travels through tissue is modulated by the absorption of 
pulsatile blood volume.3 In pulse oximetry, the relative PPG 
amplitudes at 2 or more wavelengths provide a noninvasive 
estimate, termed Spo2, of the arterial oxygen saturation Sao2. 
Many technical improvements over the past decades have 
led to Spo2 as one of the common vital signs to be monitored 
clinically, but it has always remained a contact measurement.
However, development of inexpensive and sensitive 
digital imaging sensors has enabled several investigators4–8 
to change the conventional geometry and measure PPG in a 
fully contactless manner, with both light source and detec-
tor away from the skin. The potential advantages of contact-
less PPG include avoiding skin damage in fragile patients 
and a freedom to select a more physiologically central loca-
tion with a possibly faster response.9,10
In the past decade, a rapidly increasing number of arti-
cles11 has been published on contactless PPG addressing 
pulse or respiration rate, while only a few4,5,12–16 explore 
Spo2. Humphreys et al5 sought to emulate the conventional 
source-detector geometry by illuminating the skin at one 
location and measuring PPG (with a camera) right next to it. 
Wieringa et al4 used wide-field illumination but focused on 
imaging vasculature. However, none of these has convinc-
ingly demonstrated that camera-based Spo2 is fundamen-
tally calibratable. In this article, we address the question 
“Can a single calibration curve provide Spo2 estimates for a 
population of individuals with acceptable accuracy?”
This is not a trivial question because there is a fundamental 
difference between the conventional contact source–detector 
(Figure 1A), and the contactless, wide-field illumination-detec-
tion geometries (Figure 1B). Although the former geometry col-
lects light that has travelled through relatively deep vasculature 
(both in transmissive and reflective, or “surface” mode),17 the 
latter predominantly collects light that has travelled through 
much shallower tissue depths15,18 over much smaller distances.
Currently, it is not known whether the PPG signal mea-
sured in the camera geometry stems mostly from the deeper 
arterioles or also (partly) from the shallow capillaries. In 
fact, there is some controversy on whether the PPG signal 
stems directly from blood volume changes at all.19–21 We can 
only hypothesize on PPG origins and the consequences for 
Spo2 calibratability. Due to their shallow location, superfi-
cial capillaries may contribute to PPG amplitude or even be 
the predominant source (Figure 1B), even if they are only 
slightly pulsatile compared with arterioles. If their oxygen 
saturation is not representative of arterial blood, calibrat-
ability becomes questionable. Another potential risk is 
shunt light, light that has travelled through the bloodless 
epidermis only, or specularly reflected light. The shallow 
skin layers involved in camera-based PPG are essentially 
Copyright © 2016 International Anesthesia Research Society. This is an 
open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Non Commercial-No Derivatives License 4.0 (CCBY-NC-ND), 
where it is permissible to download and share the work provided it is prop-
erly cited. The work cannot be changed in any way or used commercially.
DOI: 10.1213/ANE.0000000000001381
BACKGROUND: Contactless, camera-based photoplethysmography (PPG) interrogates shal-
lower skin layers than conventional contact probes, either transmissive or reflective. This raises 
questions on the calibratability of camera-based pulse oximetry.
METHODS: We made video recordings of the foreheads of 41 healthy adults at 660 and 840 
nm, and remote PPG signals were extracted. Subjects were in normoxic, hypoxic, and low tem-
perature conditions. Ratio-of-ratios were compared to reference Spo2 from 4 contact probes.
RESULTS: A calibration curve based on artifact-free data was determined for a population of 26 
individuals. For an Spo2 range of approximately 83% to 100% and discarding short-term errors, 
a root mean square error of 1.15% was found with an upper 99% one-sided confidence limit of 
1.65%. Under normoxic conditions, a decrease in ambient temperature from 23 to 7°C resulted 
in a calibration error of 0.1% (±1.3%, 99% confidence interval) based on measurements for 
 
3 subjects. PPG signal strengths varied strongly among individuals from about 0.9 × 10−3 to 
4.6 × 10−3 for the infrared wavelength.
CONCLUSIONS: For healthy adults, the results present strong evidence that camera-based con-
tactless pulse oximetry is fundamentally feasible because long-term (eg, 10 minutes) error 
stemming from variation among individuals expressed as A*rms is significantly lower (<1.65%) 
than that required by the International Organization for Standardization standard (<4%) with the 
notion that short-term errors should be added. A first illustration of such errors has been pro-
vided with A**rms = 2.54% for 40 individuals, including 6 with dark skin. Low signal strength and 
subject motion present critical challenges that will have to be addressed to make camera-based 
pulse oximetry practically feasible.  (Anesth Analg 2017;124:136–45)
From the *Standardization Research, †Patient Care and Measurements, and 
‡Data Science, Philips Research, Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
Acceptance for publication March 24, 2016.
Funding: None.
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Supplemental digital content is available for this article. Direct URL citations 
appear in the printed text and are provided in the HTML and PDF versions of 
this article on the journal’s website (www.anesthesia-analgesia.org).
Reprints will not be available from the authors.
Address correspondence to Wim Verkruysse, PhD, Standardization 
 
Research, Philips Research, HTC 36 p 0.88, Eindhoven, The Netherlands. 
 
Address e-mail to wim.verkruijsse@philips.com.
Calibration of Contactless Pulse Oximetry
Wim Verkruysse, PhD,* Marek Bartula, MSc,† Erik Bresch, PhD,‡ Mukul Rocque, MSc,†  
Mohammed Meftah, BSc,† and Ihor Kirenko, PhD†
 January 2017 • Volume 124 • Number 1 
www.anesthesia-analgesia.org  137
  
“uncharted territory” in terms of pulse oximetry. To address 
this fundamental question of calibratability, we have taken 
an experimental approach. However, we did not address 
technical challenges and used only artifact-free data.
We have found that some individuals can induce significant 
changes in Spo2 by holding their breath. Trending of contactless 
Spo2 can thus be demonstrated without the aid of hypoxic envi-
ronments (Figure 2). However, to calibrate and study accuracy 
on a broader population, stable desaturation levels are needed 
to exclude discrepancies related to the temporal filtering in 
contact references and synchronization between reference and 
camera traces. Guazzi et al16 were the first to report contactless 
Spo2 in a more controlled manner in a hypoxic chamber but 
their analysis aimed at trending and resulted in different cali-
bration constants for each of the 5 individuals studied.
In the present study, we use a dedicated hypoxic cham-
ber with the goal of investigating whether a single calibra-
tion curve can describe a population of individuals with 
acceptable accuracy. We realize that calibratibility may 
depend on many variables such as physiological status, age, 
and skin condition. We only included healthy adults as sub-
jects under normoxic and hypoxic conditions. Additionally, 
we explored the impact of simulated centralization on the 
calibratibility of contactless pulse oximetry. To this goal, 
we exposed subjects to low temperatures in a climate room 
study under normoxic conditions.
METHODS
IRB/Consent
All experiments were approved by the Philips IRB (Internal 
Committee on Biomedical Experiments) before experimen-
tation. Written informed consent was obtained from all sub-
jects. Three different experimental protocols (studies N, H, 
and C) were submitted to and approved by the Philips IRB. 
The methods used for the 3 experiments are described in 
separate sections below. IRB contact: PHM Keizer, Senior 
Ethical & Biomedical Officer, High Tech Campus 34, 5656 
AE Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
Clinical Trial Registration
The study was not registered before patient enrollment because 
it was not a clinical trial; it was a basic research study on healthy 
volunteers. It did not include treatment or control groups.
A
B
Figure 1. In conventional contact probes (A), albeit transmissive or reflective, the skin interrogation depth is significantly deeper than in 
a wide-field illumination camera geometry (B) which has consequences for the signal strength and potentially also for calibration of Spo2. 
Proportions not to scale.
Figure 2. Normalized raw PPG signals at a normoxic (A) and hypoxic 
(B) segments. Breath-holds are shown along with Spo2 traces from 
finger probe and camera in (C). Time segments in (A) and (B) are 
indicated in (C) by “n” and “h.” The camera Spo2 trace is delayed by 
21 seconds for a good visual match. Tentative calibration constants 
were used.
 138   www.anesthesia-analgesia.org 
aNesthesia & aNalgesia
Calibration of Contactless Pulse Oximetry
The Basic Set-up (Study N)
During data collection, the subjects were seated, and head 
motion was minimized using a head support mounted on the 
chair. Two tripod-mounted monochrome Stingray F046-B 
FireWire cameras (Allied Vision Technologies, Stadtroda, 
Germany) with Computar 50 mm 1:1.3 lenses (CBC, 
Commack, NY) were each equipped with spectral bandpass 
filters with red and infrared (IR) center wavelengths of 675 
and 842 nm, respectively (Semrock FF02-675/67-24-D and 
FF01-842/56-24D; IDEX Corp., Lake Forrest, IL). The cam-
eras recorded movies of the subject’s face from a distance of 
about 1.6 meters at 15 frames per second.
Illumination was provided by 2 armatures (Falcon Eyes, Hong 
Kong, China), each equipped with 9 incandescent lamps (Philips 
40 W) at a distance of about 1 m from the subjects. Current lim-
ited DC power supplies set to 150 V
, 1.25 A (SM3004-D, Delta 
Electronica, Zierikzee, The Netherlands) powered the lamps.
For Spo2 reference, rather than blood gas analysis, we 
used 4 conventional Spo2 probes coupled to Philips MP2 
patient monitors: a Philips finger sensor, a Philips ear 
sensor (M1191B and M1194A, Philips Medizin-Systeme, 
Böblingen, Germany), a Masimo finger sensor (LNCS DC-I, 
Masimo Corporation, Irvine), and a Nellcor finger sen-
sor (DS-100A Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland). A sample-wise 
 
(1 Hz) median of all 4 probes was defined as the reference 
signal Spo2,ref(t). Twenty-five individuals participated in 
study N (Supplemental Digital Content, Supplemental 
Table 1, http://links.lww.com/AA/B428).
The Hypoxic Tent (Study H)
For the second study, the setup described above was used 
in a normobaric hypoxic tent (At Home Cubicle, Hypoxico 
Inc, New York, NY). Oxygen concentration and tempera-
ture inside the tent were continuously monitored (Model 
AD300, Teledyne Analytical Instruments, City of Industry, 
CA and Model 54II B, Fluke Corp, Everett, WA, respectively). 
After about 4 hours of pumping with the hypoxic genera-
tor (Everest Summit 2 Hypoxic Generator, Hypoxico Inc), 
the oxygen concentration stabilized at approximately 15% at 
which point the subject entered the tent, carefully and quickly 
to minimize air exchange. An electric fan (Cool Air System 40, 
Philips) homogenized the air inside the tent while the outlet of 
the oxygen pump was relatively close (eg, 20 cm) to the mouth 
of the subject and the probe of the oxygen meter at about 1 
m away, probing homogenized air. During data collection, 
oxygen concentration was measured to be 15.0% ± 0.5% 
(average and standard deviation over all recordings) and air 
temperature typically increased to approximately 25°C. While 
results varied strongly among subjects, an Spo2 reduction of 
about 7% on average was induced by the hypoxic conditions: 
median Spo2 values were 98.2% and 90.6% for studies N and 
H, respectively (Supplemental Digital Content, Supplemental 
Table 
1, 
http://links.lww.com/AA/B428). 
Twenty-one 
individuals participated in study H (Supplemental Digital 
Content, Supplemental Table 2, http://links.lww.com/AA/
B428), three were also in study N.
The Climate Chamber (Study C)
In the third study, the subject was seated comfortably in a 
chair in a climate-controlled room (Environmental Stress 
Chamber GMAPX-15CW, Hielkema Testequipment, Uden, 
NL), with an initial temperature of approximately 22°C. The 
chamber temperature was then gradually reduced to about 
5°C. This process took approximately 30 minutes. The room 
temperature was continuously monitored using the tem-
perature probe of a patient monitor (MP5, Philips Medizin-
Systeme). Video recordings of the subject’s head were made 
before the cooling phase at about 22°C, in the middle of the 
cooling phase at about 11°C, and at the end at about 5°C. 
The climate chamber’s cooling fan was turned off during 
the recordings to avoid any air turbulence moving the cam-
eras or illumination. Due to limited space in the climate 
room, only 1 illumination armature was used instead of 2 in 
studies N and H. Other than this difference, the temperature 
was the only variable that changed.
To obtain feedback on cold-induced skin physiological 
changes, skin reflectance spectra (380–740 nm) were mea-
sured on the forehead with a spectrophotometer (CM-2600d, 
Konica-Minolta, Osaka, Japan). Immediately after each 
video recording at each temperature regime, 5 measure-
ments were made and used as input for a median spectrum. 
Five individuals participated in study C (Supplemental 
Digital Content, Supplemental Table 2, http://links.lww.
com/AA/B428). Three of these individuals also partici-
pated in studies N and/or H.
Signal Processing for All Experiments
The camera and reference probe signals were acquired and 
processed by LabVIEW (National Instruments, Austin, 
TX). The raw PPG signals R(t) and IR(t) (Appendix) are the 
spatially averaged pixel intensity in a manually selected 
region of interest on the forehead. Next, using a window 
size of 10 seconds and step size of 1 second, R(t) and IR(t) 
were normalized (by the respective temporal mean values 
over the window) and temporally filtered (second-order 
Butterworth bandpass with the cutoff frequencies 0.5 and 
1.5 Hz), giving signals Rn(t) and IRn(t). For each channel, 
the difference between median values of peaks and valleys 
was defined as the pulsatility amplitude, now at a temporal 
resolution of the window step size. The ratio-of-ratio signal 
RR(t) was finally computed as the sample-wise quotient of 
red and IR pulsatility amplitudes, which is subsequently 
linearly transformed into an Spo2 trace with calibration con-
stants C1 and C2:
 
Sp
t  
 C
 C
RR t
o2 cam
1
2
,
*
.
( ) =
( )
−
 
(1)
Camera Spo2 traces were typically about 20 seconds 
faster than the Spo2,ref., due to a limited signal processing of 
the camera signals compared with the reference Spo2 probes 
and likely also a physiological delay at the periphery with 
respect to the forehead. Most traces have insufficient fea-
tures to individually determine a delay. To avoid fitting 
the camera data to the reference probe, we tried to deter-
mine an average delay for the whole data set. We identified 
 
12 traces with distinct temporal features in the Spo2 traces. 
For each of these traces, we determined the optimal delay 
τ for temporal alignment of the reference and camera Spo2 
traces, using Equation 2:
 
τ
τ
τ
 
argmin
Sp
t
 
 Sp
t
o
o
2 ref
2 cam
=
’
,
,
’
–
−
(
)
( )  
(2)
 January 2017 • Volume 124 • Number 1 
www.anesthesia-analgesia.org  139
  
Four of the 12 traces are shown in Figure 3, A–D. For the 
12 traces, an average delay of 21.1 seconds was found. An 
SD of 2.1 seconds partly represents physiological variation 
but also expresses accuracy of determination of τ.
Next, we computed the temporal median RR of the sig-
nal RR(t). This procedure was justified since we considered 
individuals in steady-state conditions and we were primarily 
interested in long-term calibratability of camera-based Spo2 
measurements. Further advantages are that each individual 
entered the calibration process with the same weight and that 
recording length did not introduce a bias. It also further mini-
mized synchronization issues between reference and camera-
based traces and among the reference probes themselves. 
Similarly, for each recording, 1 median Spo2,ref value was 
computed for each Spo2,ref(t) trace. With this approach, each 
recording in studies N and H provided 1 data point (median 
RR, median Spo2,ref) to populate a calibration data set.
Despite head fixation, some recordings were frequently 
disrupted due to motion. In other recordings, the signal 
amplitude of the red PPG signal was so small that noise 
from illumination or camera disrupted proper measurement 
of the pulsatility. Because we sought a fundamental assess-
ment of calibratability, we excluded such recordings from 
the data set in an objective manner. To this goal, a signal 
quality Q(t), essentially a signal-to-noise ratio, was derived 
from the raw red PPG signal to allow the deselection of data 
of low signal quality (see Results, Figure 4B). Hereby, Rn(t), 
the weakest signal, was processed in 20-s sliding windows, 
in steps of 1 second. Within each window, the Fourier trans-
form of R(t) was computed. The magnitude of the Fourier 
spectrum at the heart rate was used as a measure of signal 
strength, whereas the average magnitude at frequencies of 
heart rate ±0.3 Hz was used as a measure for noise strength. 
The Q-value for the window was finally computed as 
log10(signal amplitude/noise amplitude). Example signals 
of strong, weak, and motion-distorted signals are shown in 
Figure 4, A–C, respectively.
Analogous to the temporal medians for Spo2,ref, and RR, 
we also defined a single Q value for each recording, as the 
temporal median of Q(t). As shown in the Results section, 
a threshold value Qthr was determined as an objective mea-
sure to only use reliable data in the calibration procedure.
Statistical Approach and Analysis
Before our measurements, we faced many unknowns such 
as variations in PPG signal strength among individuals, 
subject motion, and the extent to which hypoxia could be 
induced in the normobaric hypoxic tent. Rather than con-
ducting a pilot study to investigate each of these unknowns, 
we recruited relatively large numbers of subjects for stud-
ies N and H (25 each), in the anticipation that this would 
provide a sufficiently large and clean data set to determine 
a stable linear regression between RR and Spo2,ref. Thus, we 
enrolled many subjects in the study and determined a pos-
teriori if we succeeded in establishing a stable linear regres-
sion. This process is described in the Results section.
All measurements for studies N and H were performed 
consecutively without intermediate analysis to adjust the 
study design. Inclusion and exclusion criteria for studies N, 
H, and C are in Supplemental Digital Content, Supplemental 
Table 3 (http://links.lww.com/AA/B428). For study N, all 
25 recruited individuals were included while for study H, 
21 individuals were included after checking for inclusion 
and exclusion criteria. For study C, we were somewhat lim-
ited in inclusion because the climate room had limited avail-
ability. The purpose of study C was exploratory.
For studies N and H, an objective measure was used 
to discard recordings with unreliable RR. As shown in the 
Results section, indeed the 17 cleanest data points resulted 
in a regression line that was essentially the same as the 
regression for the 31 cleanest data points by which we 
mean that any error due to variation in regression was irrel-
evant (much smaller) compared with inaccuracies caused 
by variations among subjects. The determination of C1 and 
C2 was eventually based on the 31 cleanest data points. 
Next, with these calibration constants we proceeded to 
answer the overall study goal (Can a single calibration 
curve provide Spo2 estimates for a population of individu-
als with acceptable accuracy?). For this, we adopted Arms, 
Figure 3. Example Spo2 traces for study H. Values for (tentative) 
calibration constants C1 and C2 were the same as those use for 
the breath hold experiment (Figure 2). For a good temporal match 
with the Spo2 ref, delays τ were determined as 20, 22, 24, and 24 
seconds in (A–D), respectively.
 140   www.anesthesia-analgesia.org 
aNesthesia & aNalgesia
Calibration of Contactless Pulse Oximetry
a metric used for pulse oximeters to describe accuracy 
(ISO 80601-2-61, 2011, section 201.12.1.101.2.2). An * super-
script is used to indicate at least 1 major difference with 
the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
standard, which is that in our formulation (Equation 3) we 
used median values of the traces, thus discarding short-
term errors.
 
A
Sp
Sp
*
rms
2,ref
2,cam
o
o
=
−
(
)
∑
2
n
 
(3)
Because, in our calibration approach, this expression was 
mathematically similar to that of a standard deviation, we 
used the χ2 approach to calculate an error estimate for A*
rms.
A mean difference or “bias” was according to Equation 4, 
also following the ISO standard.
 
MD
Sp
Sp
o
o
2,ref
2,cam
=
−
(
)
∑
n
 
(4)
In study C, the protocol was repeated once for each of 
the 5 individuals. To assess statistical significance among 
parameters (eg, DC reflectance, PPG signal strength or 
Spo2,cam–Spo2,ref), caused by exposure to different tempera-
tures, we averaged the values from the 2 sessions and then 
treated these averages as 5 independent samples (from 5 
individuals).
Throughout this study, we reported 99% confidence 
intervals (CIs) because no prior data were used to choose 
our sample sizes. When Student t tests were used, we 
reported the P values.
RESULTS
Filtering the Data Set and Determination of Qthr 
and Calibration Constants C1, C2
A total of 46 data points from 39 individuals for studies N 
and H are shown in Figure 5A and listed in Supplemental 
Table 1 (Supplemental Digital Content, http://links.lww.
com/AA/B428). As expected, similar to calibration curves 
for conventional pulse oximetry, a negative correlation 
between median RR and median Spo2,ref is seen. Some out-
lier data points are from signals similar to those in Figure 
4B or C, that are obviously corrupted. As expected, simi-
lar to calibration curves for conventional pulse oximetry, 
a negative correlation between median RR and median 
Spo2,ref. is seen. Some outlier data points are from signals 
Figure 4. Normalized PPG signal seg-
ments with Q values of 2.2, 1.0, and 0.6 
in (A), (B), and (C), respectively. The PPG 
signals may be described as “strong,” 
“weak,” 
and 
“motion 
corrupted,” 
respectively.
Figure 5. All candidate data points for calibration are shown in (A) 
with Q values indicated and regression lines for different values for 
Qthr. Using data with Q > 0.5 shows a regression line (dashed) that 
is biased by outlier points. Too strict filtering with Qthr = 2.3 gives a 
regression line (dashed) determined by too few data points and low 
value for R2. Regression has high values for R2 and, more impor-
tantly, is stable for 1.4 < Qthr < 1.9, (A and B). Fourteen regression 
lines (solid) are shown for this range of Qthr.
 January 2017 • Volume 124 • Number 1 
www.anesthesia-analgesia.org  141
  
similar to those in Figure 4B or C that are obviously cor-
rupted. As mentioned, we wished to discard such data in 
an objective manner. We defined an objective quality met-
ric Q and indeed, the signals in Figure 4B and C, had low 
Q values. However, the question remains which threshold 
value Qthr to use for this metric to discard data for which 
the signal corruption is less obvious. In the following 
paragraph, we describe the process of determining Qthr in 
an objective manner.
In Figure 5B, we used Qthr as a parameter to discard data 
with Q is less than Qthr and plot the coefficient of deter-
mination (R2) for regression on the remaining data. Three 
domains can be identified: insufficient filtering, appro-
priate filtering, and too aggressive filtering. At Qthr <1.4, 
recordings with corrupted data had a large impact on 
the regression; only moderate R2 values were found. For 
1.4 < Qthr <1.9, R2 was high but more importantly, regres-
sion lines were very similar to each other (Figure 5A). For 
Qthr >1.9, both the R2 values and regression slopes were 
unstable. Here, the filtering was too aggressive and inter-
individual variations combined with poor statistics (too 
few data points) dominated the regression slope. We chose 
Qthr = 1.4 as the filtering value to obtain a clean set of data 
for the calibration although any value between 1.4 and 1.9 
gave essentially equal calibration results. In other words, 
the 17 cleanest recordings gave the same regression as the 
31 cleanest recordings and those in between (14 regression 
lines shown in Figure 5A), indicating that the data set was 
sufficiently large to determine a population calibration.
The regression line for Qthr = 1.4 defined the calibration 
curve with constants C1 =118.0 and C2 =45.9 (Figure 6). With 
calibration defined, the next step was to analyze the A*
rms as 
this determined an estimate of the system accuracy. After 
linear regression on 31 data points, the point estimate of the 
A*
rms was 1.15%. We applied a 1-sided, 99% CI based on the 
χ2 distribution with 29 degrees of freedom for the root mean 
square error after a linear regression of our data. This gave 
an upper limit of 1.65% for A*
rms.
Perturbation of Physiological Conditions and 
Validation of Calibration Under Normoxic 
Conditions
One source of feedback on the effect of cooling was obtained 
with reflectance spectra on the forehead. Typically, the 
reflectance spectra at low temperatures were slightly higher 
than that at room temperature for wavelengths between 450 
and 600 nm that was likely due to a lower blood volume 
caused by vasoconstriction. Figure 7A shows reflectance 
spectra for room and cold temperatures for one individual, 
as well as the average difference for 5 individuals. The dif-
ference just reached statistical significance (at 99% CI) for 
a few yellow and green wavelengths. An increased reflec-
tance in this wavelength region only was consistent with 
a reduced blood volume at skin depths of about 0.1 to 
0.3 mm (Figure 7B).22 These skin layers were dominant in 
camera-based PPG measurements (Figure 1B). While barely 
significant, we considered this a first sign of successful per-
turbation relevant for investigating calibration of camera-
based pulse oximetry.
A stronger manifestation of physiological perturba-
tion was the dependency of PPG signal strength on tem-
perature, for both contact and contactless PPG (Figure 7C). 
Pulsatile strengths varied considerably at any tempera-
ture, which was due to a natural variation among indi-
viduals (Supplemental Digital Content, Supplemental 
Table 3, http://links.lww.com/AA/B428) and the fact 
that temperature control was not perfect. A strong wind 
from the cooling ventilators caused us to only record when 
they were off. Thus, actual temperatures increased quite 
rapidly during recordings and indicated temperatures per 
data point were only averages. Nevertheless, the impact of 
ambient temperature on pulsatility in the finger was sig-
nificant. A paired, 1-sided t test analysis of the changes of 
pulsatile strengths with temperature shows that pulsatility 
at room temperature was larger than that at medium tem-
peratures (P = 0.0096) and similarly for medium and cold 
temperatures (P = 0.006) for the finger probe. For the fore-
head, this was similar for room and medium temperature 
(P = 0.002). For medium and cold temperatures, the differ-
ence did not reach a significant level (P = 0.034); here, only 
3 data were available with Q is greater than Qthr. Overall, 
the amplitude reduction at the finger was stronger than on 
the forehead by approximate factors of 30 and 4, respec-
tively, for the temperature range of 23 to 7°C. More inter-
estingly, however, we observed that the regression lines 
for red and IR were more or less parallel, which illustrates 
that the RR, critical for Spo2 calibratability, did not appear 
to be negatively affected. Please note that the wavelengths 
used in contact probes were different than those used for 
the camera, which explains the different red/IR ratios. To 
investigate calibration robustness with temperature, we 
did not further analyze the red and IR regression lines 
because this would have implied that we assumed the 
Spo2 did not change with temperature. In fact, on aver-
age, Spo2,ref increased slightly by 0.21% (±0.08%, 99% CI) 
per degree Celsius cooling. Instead, we computed Spo2,cam 
Figure 6. The calibration curve (regression line) based on filtered 
data (Q >1.4) along with its corresponding 99% confidence interval. 
Discarded data (Q <1.4) not used in calibration are also shown.
 142   www.anesthesia-analgesia.org 
aNesthesia & aNalgesia
Calibration of Contactless Pulse Oximetry
values from the RR and the earlier established calibration 
constants. The results are shown in Figure 8 combined 
with the main results of studies N and H to allow an 
easy visual comparison. The data used for calibration are 
shown along with the computed upper limit for A*
rms (99% 
CI), indicated as dashed lines. The ISO requirement of Arms 
<4% is also indicated for reference.
It is encouraging that with a different experimental 
setting, the Spo2,cam values from study C were estimated 
quite well with the calibration derived from studies N and 
H. Even though study C explored the impact of ambient 
temperature on calibratibility rather than validation of 
the calibration, the data for 2 individuals (40 and 41) that 
were not in the calibration studies at room temperature 
can be considered a first validation of the calibration at 
normoxic conditions. While the mean difference values for 
room, medium, and cold temperature were small (−0.7%, 
−0.5%, and −0.7%), the 99% CI intervals were relatively 
large (±0.7%, ±2.1%, and ±2.4%, respectively), expressing 
the poor statistics in study C. An indication of whether 
calibration is robust for cold perturbation is to analyze the 
pairwise changes in Spo2 discrepancies (Spo2,cam – Spo2,ref) 
per individual for a change in temperature because such 
an analysis discards any potential systematic errors 
resulting from the different experimental setting. With Q 
is greater than Qthr, we had 5 Spo2,cam – Spo2,ref values at 
room and medium temperature but only 3 at cold temper-
ature, which gave 5 pairs for room-medium and 3 pairs 
for medium-cold. An additional comparison was made by 
comparing the values for room and cold temperature. The 
average changes in discrepancies for these 3 temperature 
steps were small: 0.3%, 0.5%, and −0.1% for room-medium, 
medium-cold, and room-cold, respectively. However, the 
99% CI were relatively large: ±2.0%, ±0.7%, and ±1.3%, 
respectively.
Figure 7. Reflectance spectra for one individual (A, left axis) and 
the average difference for five individuals (B, right axis) shown 
along with the 99% confidence interval. Typically, reflectance 
for green and yellow light increases slightly at low temperature 
although the difference reaches significance at a few wavelengths 
only. Such a difference is consistent with reduced blood volume 
in superficial skin (B). B, The relative penetration depths of the 
various wavelengths indicated. The PPG signal strength strongly 
reduces with temperature (C) for both finger contact probe and 
camera.
Figure 8. Calibration data from studies N and H, shown along with 
data from study C (normoxic conditions), all computed with one set 
of calibration constants. The labels “Low,” “Medium,” and “Room” 
refer to temperatures of approximately 7, 14, and 22°C, respectively.
 January 2017 • Volume 124 • Number 1 
www.anesthesia-analgesia.org  143
  
DISCUSSION
The presented data provide strong evidence that a single 
calibration curve for a population of healthy adult indi-
viduals can be used to estimate Spo2 contactlessly with 
an acceptable accuracy of A*
rms <1.65% (upper 99%, one-
sided confidence limit). While noting that we discarded 
short-term errors, we consider this accuracy acceptable 
in view of typical Arms values of 2% or 3% for commer-
cial pulse oximeters and the maximum of 4% as specified 
by the ISO standard (80601-2-61, 2011). In our view, this 
finding was not trivial because the contactless nature 
of camera-based pulse oximetry implies interrogation 
of much shallower skin layers than conventional pulse 
oximetry.
The calibration was performed on the basis of data 
for 26 individuals from a data pool of 39. Using an objec-
tive measure, the data for 15 individuals were discarded 
because subject motion and/or low pulsatile strengths 
caused the signals to be unreliable for accurate assess-
ment of pulsatile strength. Overall pulsatile strength 
varied significantly among individuals: the lowest and 
highest median IR pulsatile strengths in the data with 
Q > 1.4 were 0.9 × 10−3 and 4.6 × 10−3, respectively. The 
discarded data tended to have lower average pulsatility 
than the nondiscarded data (IR pulsatility: 0.9 × 10−3 and 
1.2 × 10−3, respectively). Even though we found that 14 
regression lines were stable for 1.4 < Q < 1.9, we wanted 
to verify that the corresponding measured pulsatile 
strengths were clean, that is, the signal was due to true 
PPG and not due to motion or noise (camera or lamp). 
In our approach of assessing pulsatile strength, noise 
artificially increased pulsatile strength in both channels 
(red and IR) to the same extent, pushing the RR value 
closer toward one. If this were the case, the discrepancy 
 
( Spo2,cam − Spo2,ref) would then tend to become negative 
for traces with relatively low pulsatile strength. Analysis 
of our data (Supplemental Digital Content, Supplemental 
Table 1, http://links.lww.com/AA/B428) showed that 
(Spo2,cam − Spo2,ref) in fact slightly trended in the oppo-
site direction (not significant) illustrating that the mea-
sured pulsatilities were caused by true PPG (skin color 
changes) and did not have a significant noise compo-
nent. Apparently, the approach of discarding unreliable 
data based on Q provided satisfactory filtering of the 
data. Moreover, in study C, where PPG amplitudes were 
reduced significantly, we measured traces with Q >1.4 at a 
pulsatile strength as low as 0.7 × 10−3.
PPG pulse amplitude on the forehead decreased to 
a much smaller extent than at the finger. This was quali-
tatively consistent with observations of Bebout and 
Mannheimer9 who also compared pulsatile strengths on the 
forehead with the finger. It should be noted, however, that 
the contact forehead sensor interrogated deeper skin layers 
than the camera (Figure 1 and comments by Mannheimer17 
on referring to such probes as “surface” versus “reflective” 
probes). Other differences in the present study were that the 
temperature reduction was slightly larger and acclimatiza-
tion was shorter.
Unfortunately, the discarded group included 5 of 
 
7 people with dark skin, leaving only 2 remaining sub-
jects in the calibration set (subjects 7 and 29, Supplemental 
Digital Content, Supplemental Table 3, http://links.lww.
com/AA/B428). Although not enough data were available 
for statistical proof, the 2 data points had relatively small 
Figure 9. Differences between Spo2,cam and Spo2,ref for 10 second segments with Q >1.4 from all recordings of studies N, H, and C. The 
calibration constants are validated for a population of 26 individuals that were in the calibration (“+” symbols), and 16 new individuals (“−“ 
symbols) that were not in the calibration set. Six individuals with fotoype IV or higher are now represented in total and are indicated by “*” in 
the legend and emphasized by larger symbols in the chart. The A**
rms is 2.54% where the asterisks serve to indicate that the individuals are 
not equally weighed for the calculation.
 144   www.anesthesia-analgesia.org 
aNesthesia & aNalgesia
Calibration of Contactless Pulse Oximetry
errors (0.5% and 1.5%), suggesting that there was not nec-
essarily relevant bias due to melanin concentration. While 
melanin reduces the signal to noise ratio, we did not see 
evidence, experimental nor theoretical, of a potential cali-
bration problem in contactless pulse oximetry caused by 
melanin.
In this study, we focused on fundamental calibratabil-
ity based on median values of traces, discarding short-
term errors. However, to obtain an impression of general 
accuracy, we considered all recordings of all individuals 
and considered segments of 10 seconds. In Figure 9, each 
point represents the average value for a 10-second seg-
ment. We filtered with Q >1.4, per segment, resulting in 
2500 segments (59% of all segments). Please note that the 
data in Figure 9 now include 6 individuals with skin foto-
type IV or higher (indicated by asterisks in the legend). 
For data that were in the calibration set, “+” symbols are 
used, while for the additional data we use “−.” Data for 
dark-skinned individuals are emphasized by using larger 
symbols. Some data points feature a relatively large error. 
It should be noted that the Qthr of 1.4 was derived for traces 
and is likely not strict enough for the 10-second shorter 
segments. Also, the data that were not used in the calibra-
tion stem from traces with lower Q values; thus, it is not 
surprising that these data feature larger errors than the 
segments stemming from the traces with higher Q values. 
We include this figure to give the reader an impression of 
data that were discarded in the calibration. Also, it serves 
to remind that the calibration error A*
rms is an underes-
timate because it discards short-term errors. While not-
ing that some individuals contribute much more than 
others, the overall A**
rms for Figure 9 is 2.54%. Short-term 
errors can be mitigated with various methods (eg, filter-
ing and error concealment) and of course algorithms that 
address motion, unlike the approach used in this study. 
Many factors therefore will change (reduce) the eventual 
Arms. The value of 2.54% is therefore merely illustrative 
which is why we did not compute a confidence interval. 
Nevertheless, we believe that the finding of an A**
rms of 
2.54%, together with the A*
rms <1.65% (upper 99% 1-sided 
confidence limit) for long-term calibratibility, provides 
strong evidence for the fundamental feasibility of contact-
less pulse oximetry.
CONCLUSIONS
Calibration of contactless, camera-based pulse oximetry 
was performed by robust linear regression on 31 data 
points measured on a population of 26 healthy individuals 
under normoxic and hypoxic conditions (Spo2 83% – 100%). 
Discarding short-term errors, an accuracy of A*
rms <1.65% 
(99% one-sided, upper confidence limit) was found which 
compared well with Arms values for conventional pulse 
oximeters (typical values are 2% – 3%) and the maximum 
(4%) allowed by ISO 80601-2-61, 2011.
By exposing subjects to temperature changes from 
room temperature down to cold (about 5°C), discrepancies 
between Spo2,ref and Spo2,cam were 0.3%, 0.5%, and −0.1% 
for room-medium, medium-cold, and room-cold, respec-
tively. With 99% CI intervals of ±2.0%, ±0.7%, and ±1.3%, 
respectively, these accuracies do not necessarily violate the 
ISO standard. Although further research on more than just 
5 individuals is needed to narrow the intervals, these results 
are encouraging.
Challenges such as subject motion and low pulsatile 
strength have to be addressed to make this new measure-
ment practical and successful. E
APPENDIX
R(t), IR(t)
Raw PPG signals: time series of the 
spatial averaged of intensity of 
camera pixels in the region of interest 
for red and infrared, respectively
At framerate 
15 Hz
Rn(t), IRn(t)
Normalized and filtered PPG signals
At framerate 
15 Hz
RR(t)
Quotient of red and IR pulsatility 
amplitudes
At 1Hz
RR
Temporal median value of RR(t) over 
length of recording
Scalar
 Spo2,ref(t)
Sample-wise (1Hz) median of all four 
contact Spo2 probes
At 1Hz
 Spo2,ref
Temporal median value of Spo2,ref(t)  
over length of recording
Scalar
 Spo2,cam
Camera based Spo2 (C1 + C2 * RR)
Scalar
Q(t)
Signal-to-noise ratio of the raw red PPG 
signal
At 1Hz
Q
Temporal median value of Q(t) over 
length of recording
Scalar
Qthr
Threshold value to exclude noisy data
Scalar
C1, C2
Calibration constants
Scalar
τ
Temporal delay of Spo2,ref(t) with respect 
to the camera determined Spo2 (t)
Scalar
A*
rms
Root mean square difference between 
Spo2,cam and Spo2,ref Asterisk indicates 
that temporal medians of traces are 
used
Scalar
Arms
Root mean square difference between 
Spo2,cam and Spo2,ref for short time 
segments
Scalar
A**
rms
Root mean square difference between 
Spo2,cam and Spo2,ref for short time 
segments. Asterisks indicate that 
individuals are unequally balanced.
Scalar
MD
Mean difference between Spo2,cam  
and Spo2,ref
Scalar
DISCLOSURES
Name: Wim Verkruysse, PhD.
Contribution: This author was involved in study design, con-
duct of the study, and manuscript preparation.
Name: Marek Bartula, MSc.
Contribution: This author was involved in study design and 
manuscript preparation.
Name: Erik Bresch, PhD.
Contribution: This author was involved in conduct of the 
study, data analysis, and manuscript preparation.
Name: Mukul Rocque, MSc.
Contribution: This author was involved in conduct of the 
study, data analysis, and manuscript preparation.
Name: Mohammed Meftah, BSc.
Contribution: This author was involved in study design, con-
duct of the study, and manuscript preparation.
Name: Ihor Kirenko, PhD.
Contribution: This author was involved in conduct of the 
study and critical reading.
This manuscript was handled by: Maxime Cannesson, MD, PhD.
 January 2017 • Volume 124 • Number 1 
www.anesthesia-analgesia.org  145
  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We greatly appreciate the invaluable suggestions from 
Siegfried Kaestle, Andreas Schlack, Alexander Dubielczyk, 
and Rolf Neumann from Philips Medizin-Systeme, Böblingen, 
Germany. Furthermore, we also thank our software expert 
Patriek Bruins from Philips Innovation Services, Eindhoven, 
The Netherlands.
REFERENCES
 1. Aoyagi T, Kishi M, Yamaguchi K, Watanabe S. Improvement of 
the earpiece oximeter. In: Abstracts of the 13th annual meeting 
of the Japanese Society for Medical Electronics and Biological 
Engineering. Osaka; 1974:90–91
 2. Severinghaus JW. Takuo Aoyagi: discovery of pulse oximetry. 
Anesth Analg 2007;105:S1–4
 3. Hertzman A, Spielman C. Observations on the finger vol-
ume pulse recorded photoelectrically. American Journal of 
Physiology 1937;119:334–335
 4. Wieringa FP, Mastik F, van der Steen AF. Contactless mul-
tiple wavelength photoplethysmographic imaging: a first 
step toward “SpO2 camera” technology. Ann Biomed Eng 
2005;33:1034–41
 5. Humphreys K, Ward T, Markham C. Noncontact simulta-
neous dual wavelength photoplethysmography: a further 
step toward noncontact pulse oximetry. Rev Sci Instrum 
2007;78:044304–6
 6. Huelsbusch M, Blazek V. Contactless mapping of rhythmical 
phenomena in tissue perfusion using PPGI. In: Clough AV, 
Chen CT. SPIE Proceedings of the Medical Imaging. San Diego, 
CA: Physiology and Function from Multidimensional Images, 
2002:110–117
 7. Takano C, Ohta Y. Heart rate measurement based on a time-
lapse image. Med Eng Phys 2007;29:853–7
 8. Verkruysse W, Svaasand LO, Nelson JS. Remote plethys-
mographic imaging using ambient light. Opt Express 
2008;16:21434–45
 9. Bebout DE, Mannheimer PD. Effects of cold-induced periph-
eral vasoconstriction on pulse amplitude at various pulse oxim-
eter sensor sites. Anesthesiology 2002;96:A558
 
10. Cooke J, Scharf J. Improving pulse oximeter performance. 
Anesthesiology 2002; 96:A593
 
11. Sun Y, Thakor N. Photoplethysmography Revisited: From 
Contact to Noncontact, From Point to Imaging. IEEE Trans 
Biomed Eng 2016;63:463–77
 
12. Kong L, Zhao Y, Dong L, Jian Y, Jin X, Li B, Feng Y, Liu M, Liu 
X, Wu H. Non-contact detection of oxygen saturation based on 
visible light imaging device using ambient light. Opt Express 
2013;21:17464–71
 
13. Bal U. Non-contact estimation of heart rate and oxygen satura-
tion using ambient light. Biomed Opt Express 2015;6:86–97
 
14. Shao D, Liu C, Tsow F, Yang Y, Du Z, Iriya R, Yu H, Tao N. 
Noncontact Monitoring of Blood Oxygen Saturation Using 
Camera and Dual-Wavelength Imaging System. IEEE Trans 
Biomed Eng 2015; Epub ahead of print
 
15. Corral F, Paez G, Strojnik M. A photoplethysmographic imag-
ing system with supplementary capabilities. Optica Applicata 
2014;44:191–204
 
16. Guazzi AR, Villarroel M, Jorge J, Daly J, Frise MC, Robbins PA, 
Tarassenko L. Non-contact measurement of oxygen saturation 
with an RGB camera. Biomed Opt Express 2015;6:3320–38
 
17. Mannheimer PD. The light-tissue interaction of pulse oximetry. 
Anesth Analg 2007;105:S10–7
 
18. Farrell TJ, Patterson MS, Wilson B. A diffusion theory model of 
spatially resolved, steady-state diffuse reflectance for the non-
invasive determination of tissue optical properties in vivo. Med 
Phys 1992;19:879–88
 
19. Fine I. The optical origin of the PPG signal. In: Genina EA, Derbov 
VL, Meglinski I, Tuchin VV. SPIE Proceedings of the Saratov 
Fall Meeting. Saratov: Optical Technologies in Biophysics and 
Medicine XV; and Laser Physics and Photonics XV, 2013:903103–1
 
20. Shvartsman LD, Fine I. Optical transmission of blood: 
effect of erythrocyte aggregation. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 
2003;50:1026–33
 
21. Kamshilin AA, Nippolainen E, Sidorov IS, Vasilev PV, Erofeev 
NP, Podolian NP, Romashko RV. A new look at the essence of 
the imaging photoplethysmography. Sci Rep 2015;5:10494
 
22. Verkruysse W, Lucassen GW, van Gemert MJ. Simulation of 
color of port wine stain skin and its dependence on skin vari-
ables. Lasers Surg Med 1999;25:131–9
