 Spironolactone blocks Epstein–Barr virus production by
inhibiting EBV SM protein function
Dinesh Vermaa, Jacob Thompsona, and Sankar Swaminathana,1
aDivision of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84132
Edited by Elliott Kieff, Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, and approved February 17, 2016 (received for review
December 1, 2015)
Clinically available drugs active against Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)
and other human herpesviruses are limited to those targeting viral
DNA replication. To identify compounds directed against other
steps in the viral life cycle, we searched for drugs active against
the EBV SM protein, which is essential for infectious virus produc-
tion. SM has a highly gene-specific mode of action and preferen-
tially enhances expression of several late lytic cycle EBV genes.
Here we demonstrate that spironolactone, a mineralocorticoid re-
ceptor antagonist approved for clinical use, inhibits SM function
and infectious EBV production. Expression of EBV viral capsid an-
tigen is highly SM dependent, and spironolactone inhibits viral
capsid antigen synthesis and capsid formation, blocking EBV virion
production at a step subsequent to viral DNA replication. In addi-
tion, spironolactone inhibits expression of other SM-dependent
genes necessary for infectious virion formation. We further dem-
onstrate that molecules structurally related to spironolactone with
similar antimineralocorticoid blocking activity do not inhibit EBV
production. These findings pave the way for development of anti-
herpesvirus drugs with new mechanisms of action directed against
SM and homologous essential proteins in other herpesviruses.
Epstein–Barr virus | spironolactone | posttranscriptional regulation |
herpesvirus | antiviral
E
pstein–Barr virus (EBV) is a human lymphotropic herpesvi-
rus associated with several types of lymphoid and epithelial
malignancies and lymphoproliferative syndromes (for a review,
see ref. 1). EBV infects the majority of humans worldwide and
establishes a persistent, lifelong latent infection in memory B
cells. Occasional reactivation from latency occurs, and EBV
enters a lytic phase of replication, during which a tightly regu-
lated series of lytic genes is expressed, culminating in lysis of the
host cell and release of infectious viral progeny. All herpesvi-
ruses share these abilities to establish asymptomatic latent in-
fection and reactivate intermittently.
All herpesviruses also express a regulatory protein early in lytic
replication that is essential for efficient gene expression and in-
fectious virion production. The EBV member of this family, which
includes herpes simplex virus ICP27, cytomegalovirus (CMV)
UL69, and Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV)
ORF57, is known as SM (2). SM acts posttranscriptionally to
enhance accumulation of many lytic EBV transcripts. SM activity
is highly gene-specific and preferentially enhances expression of
several late lytic transcripts, including those encoding the major
viral capsid antigen (VCA) and gp350, which is required for in-
fection of B lymphocytes (3–5). SM and its homologs in other
herpesviruses may also enhance transcription and translation of
specific viral genes (6).
Currently, all available antiherpesvirus drugs target viral DNA
polymerases and are usually highly effective, but toxicity and
development of resistance limits their use (7). To discover potential
novel therapeutic compounds, we applied a cell-based screening
assay to identify compounds that would specifically target SM
function (8). Using this assay, spironolactone (SPR), a drug in
clinical use for over 50 y, was identified as inhibiting SM function
and EBV virion production. SPR is an aldosterone antagonist
that binds to the mineralocorticoid receptor, but comparison
with derivatives of SPR demonstrated that mineralocorticoid
receptor blocking activity was not the basis of its antiviral activity.
Rather, the profile of SPR’s effects on EBV gene expression
paralleled that of genetically inactivating SM. SM and its coun-
terparts in other herpesviruses have no cellular homologs and act
at a stage of herpesvirus replication distinct from DNA replication
(9). Thus, compounds based on SPR have the potential to yield
antiviral drugs with a new mechanism of action and limited toxicity.
Results
SPR Inhibits EBV SM Function. We previously described a screening
assay to identify compounds that can inhibit the function of EBV
SM protein, which is essential for lytic EBV replication (3, 8).
The assay is based on the finding that mRNAs dependent on
EBV SM protein for efficient expression confer SM dependence
on heterologous genes to which they are fused. The assay uses a
reporter cell line stably expressing the SM-responsive KSHV
ORF59 gene fused in frame to GFP and in which the fusion
product is not efficiently expressed. These also contain a doxy-
cycline-inducible SM gene, and when SM protein is produced,
the ORF59-GFP fusion mRNA is expressed and the cells exhibit
strong green fluorescence (8). We screened a library of com-
pounds of known activity and structure (10) for their ability to
inhibit SM function in this assay and identified SPR as a po-
tential inhibitor of SM function. Treatment of the reporter cells
with 10 μM SPR led to inhibition of fluorescence accompanied
by almost complete absence of ORF59-GFP RNA and protein
accumulation (Fig. 1 A–C). We next asked whether SPR could be
affecting SM localization by performing immunofluorescence
microscopy for SM in the presence or absence of SPR. As seen in
Fig. 1D, SPR did not affect nuclear localization of SM. The
specificity of SPR activity was tested by determining the effect of
SPR on an analogous construct expressing a CMV UL44-GFP
fusion construct that is not SM-dependent or -responsive. SPR
Significance
Epstein–Barr virus is a human herpesvirus associated with sev-
eral types of malignancy. We show that spironolactone, a drug
used to block mineralocorticoid activity, also has anti-EBV ac-
tivity and that it acts by inhibiting the function of an essential
EBV protein SM, which preferentially increases expression of
specific EBV genes. We also show that the mineralocorticoid
blocking activity is not the basis for spironolactone’s antiviral
activity. Because the SM protein acts at steps of the viral life
cycle distinct from those targeted by currently available thera-
pies, this study paves the way for development of novel anti-
EBV drugs to address emerging problems of drug resistance
and toxicity.
Author contributions: D.V. and S.S. designed research; D.V., J.T., and S.S. performed re-
search; D.V., J.T., and S.S. analyzed data; and D.V. and S.S. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: sankar.swaminathan@hsc.utah.
edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1523686113/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1523686113
PNAS
|
March 29, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 13
|
3609–3614
MEDICAL SCIENCES
 did not affect UL44-GFP expression, indicating that its effect is
SM-specific (Fig. 1E).
Antiviral Activity of SPR Is Not Due to Mineralocorticoid Receptor
Blocking Activity. SPR acts to block aldosterone activity by bind-
ing to the mineralocorticoid receptor and acting as a receptor
antagonist (11). To ask whether SM inhibition by SPR was re-
lated to its mineralocorticoid blocking activity, we compared its
effect on SM with that of eplerenone (EPR), a chemically similar
congener also used clinically as an aldosterone antagonist (12).
As shown in Fig. 2, SPR displayed a dose-dependent SM in-
hibitory effect in the SM functional assay, whereas EPR had no
effect. These results therefore indicate that mineralocorticoid
receptor blockade is not sufficient for SM inhibition and that it is
not likely to be related to the effect of SPR on SM activity.
SPR Exhibits Potent Structure-Dependent Antiviral Activity Against
EBV. To determine whether SPR inhibition of SM activity trans-
lated into antiviral activity, we measured its effect on infectious
EBV production. An epithelial gastric carcinoma cell line (AGS)
infected with a GFP-expressing EBV (13) was used to test the
effect of SPR and SPR-related compounds on EBV production.
AGS cells were induced to permit lytic EBV replication and
treated with either vehicle (DMSO) or SPR. Release of infectious
EBV was then measured by incubating the supernatant from the
induced AGS cells with uninfected 293 cells. EBV-infected cells
express GFP, allowing them to be accurately counted by flow
cytometry as previously described (5, 14). SPR led to a dose-related
reduction in infectious EBV titer in the supernatant (Fig. 3A). The
IC50 of SPR (2.1 μM) was similar to that of acyclovir (3.4 μM)
in this assay (Fig. S1). The antiviral effect of EPR and two me-
tabolites of SPR that also have mineralocorticoid antagonist ac-
tivity (11), canrenone (CAN) and 7α-thiomethyl SPR (TMS), was
compared with that of SPR. Interestingly, CAN displayed antivi-
ral activity, albeit less than that of SPR, whereas TMS and
EPR did not (Fig. 3B). Comparison of their structures reveals that
these molecules differ only at the modifications to the number 7
carbon of the parent molecule (Fig. 3C). The residues at this
position therefore appear to be critical for anti-SM– and EBV-
directed antiviral activity but not for mineralocorticoid activity. All
four compounds were also tested in the SM reporter assay, and
SPR was highly active, with CAN displaying slight activity and
EPR and TMS having no detectable activity (Fig. S2). To confirm
the aldosterone blocking activity of the four compounds, a cell-
based reporter assay for aldosterone function was performed and
verified that all four compounds, although varying in potency, had
maximal activity at concentrations of 10 μM and above (Fig. S3).
SPR Inhibits Virus Production at a Stage Subsequent to EBV DNA
Replication but Before Virus Release. To investigate the mecha-
nism of SPR’s antiviral action, we measured the effect of SPR on
EBV DNA replication and early (E) and immediate-early (IE)
gene expression, which occur before DNA replication (1). EBV-
infected AGS cells were induced to replicate and were treated
with SPR or vehicle. DNA replication was measured by qPCR of
DNA harvested from induced cells, and EBV protein expression
was assessed by Western blotting of cell lysates (Fig. 4 A and C).
Despite SPR having the expected inhibitory effect on infectious
EBV production, SPR did not affect the increase in intracellular
EBV copy number that occurs with lytic replication (Fig. 4 A and
B). SPR also had no effect on IE or E gene expression, including
SM expression (Fig. 4C). Many E genes are required for EBV
lytic DNA replication, whereas EBV late gene expression is highly
dependent on EBV DNA replication (1). Preservation of IE and E
gene expression and DNA replication in the presence of SPR
therefore indicated that SPR was inhibiting the expression of one
or more late genes required for infectious EBV production. To
determine whether defective, noninfectious EBV particles were
being released after SPR treatment, we measured the effect of
SPR on release of extracellular EBV DNA by qPCR. As shown in
Fig. 4D, SPR, but not EPR, prevented release of EBV DNA into
the supernatant. To determine whether SPR had similar effects in
EBV-infected B lymphocytes, we measured E and IE lytic protein
expression in EBV-positive P3HR1-ZHT lymphoma cells treated
with SPR (Fig. S4). SPR did not affect E or IE gene expression in
lymphoma cells. However, as in epithelial cells, SPR inhibited
release of extracellular EBV DNA into the supernatant (Fig.
S4A). These data therefore indicate that because EBV DNA is
replicated normally in the presence of SPR, subsequent stages of
viral packaging, assembly, or egress may be inhibited by SPR.
SPR Prevents EBV Capsid Formation. Because SPR prevented in-
fectious virus production despite having no effect on DNA repli-
cation, we examined the effect of SPR on virion assembly and
Fig. 1.
Identification of SPR as a drug that inhibits EBV SM function. (A) HEK293
cells were stably transfected with a KSHV ORF59-GFP reporter plasmid and
transduced with a lentivirus expressing inducible EBV SM protein. Fluores-
cence microscopy was performed on reporter cells in the presence or absence
of SPR. Cells expressed GFP protein only when SM was expressed (+SM) but
were GFP-negative when treated with 10 μM SPR (S). (B) SPR inhibits SM-
dependent ORF59-GFP RNA accumulation. The expression of ORF59-GFP
fusion RNA was measured by qRT-PCR 24 h after 10 μM SPR treatment. (C) SPR
inhibits ORF59-GFP protein accumulation. Immunoblotting with anti-GFP or
actin antibody was performed on lysates from cells treated as shown. (D) The
reporter cell line was induced to express SM and treated with either vehicle
(–S) or treated with SPR (+S). Cells were fixed 30 h after induction and
stained with either DAPI (blue) or anti-SM antibodies (red). (E) 293 cells were
transfected with CMV UL44-GFP and empty vector (–) or SM (+) and treated
with either vehicle or 10 μM SPR as shown.
Fig. 2.
Inhibitory effect of SPR on SM activation of gene expression is in-
dependent of mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist activity. The ORF59-GFP
reporter cell line was either mock-treated (–) or treated with dox (+) to in-
duce SM expression, which is required for GFP expression. The induced cells
were also treated with either DMSO vehicle (0) or various concentrations of
SPR (S) or the mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist EPR (E), and cells were
examined for GFP expression by fluorescence microscopy 24 h after treat-
ment. Drug concentrations are shown below the panel.
3610
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1523686113
Verma et al.
 egress. Electron microscopy was performed on EBV-infected
AGS cells after induction of EBV replication and SPR treatment
to examine the potential effect of SPR on virion formation. As
shown in Fig. 5, SPR completely abolished EBV capsid forma-
tion. Whereas intranuclear EBV capsids at various stages of
formation were readily detectable in EBV-infected AGS cells
(32% of induced cells), no capsids were found in SPR-treated
cells (0%). Viral DNA replication was again unaffected by drug
treatment (Fig. S5). These data therefore suggested that SPR
inhibits expression of one or more proteins required for EBV
capsid formation but did not rule out additional effects on other
late genes.
SPR Inhibits Expression of an Essential SM-Dependent Late Lytic
Capsid Gene. We have recently shown that SM preferentially
enhances expression of several late lytic genes but is not required
for efficient expression of IE or E genes (9). To investigate the
effect of SPR on EBV late gene expression, we compared the
effect of SPR on EBV protein expression from several EBV
genes of different temporal classes, by immunofluorescence mi-
croscopy. As expected, SPR had no effect on expression of IE
gene Z or E genes EA or SM (Fig. 6). However, SPR did strongly
inhibit expression of VCA, which is highly dependent on SM for
efficient expression (4, 9). Although the percentage of BMRF1
(EA-D)-, ZTA-, and SM-expressing cells was unaffected or ac-
tually increased slightly with SPR treatment, the percentage of
VCA-positive cells decreased by 73% (P < 0.0001; Fig. 6B). To
confirm these results and examine SPR effects on additional SM-
dependent genes, qPCR for several EBV lytic genes was per-
formed using RNA from SPR-treated AGS cells. As shown in
Fig. S6A, the effect of SPR on late lytic genes was gene-specific,
inhibiting expression of SM-dependent mRNAs, such as BDLF1,
BLLF1 (gp350), and BcLF1 (VCA), but having little effect on
BFRF3 or BALF4, which are not SM-dependent (9). The effect
of SPR on these genes in EBV-infected lymphoma cells was
similar to that observed in AGS epithelial cells (Fig. S6B). We
also compared the effect of SPR on SM-responsive and SM-
unresponsive transcripts in cotransfection assays (Fig. S7) and
demonstrated that SPR inhibits only SM-responsive gene expression.
Concordance Between the Effects of SPR Treatment and SM Deletion
on the EBV Transcriptome. We have comprehensively character-
ized the specificity of SM effects on the EBV transcriptome by
comparing the transcriptome of SMKO EBV-infected cells with
that of cells infected with wt EBV and SM-rescued SMKO EBV
(9). The effect of SM is highly gene-dependent and primarily
enhances expression of several essential late genes, including
VCA and gp350 (4, 5, 9). It was therefore possible to conduct a
similar global comparison between the effects of SPR on WT
EBV-infected cells and the effect of genetically knocking out SM
function. We treated AGS (epithelial cells) and P3HR1-ZHT
(lymphoma cells) with SPR or vehicle and harvested RNA from
the infected cells 48 h after induction of lytic EBV replication.
The gene expression patterns in the presence and absence of
SPR were then determined by high-throughput sequencing and
transcriptomic analysis in which read counts for each EBV gene
were determined. The results were then computed as binary
ratios between gene expression in the absence or presence of
SPR and gene expression in the presence or absence of SM. As
shown in Fig. 7, many of the genes highly inhibited by SPR in
both cell types were also highly SM-dependent. To examine the
overall correlation between the effects of SM deletion and SPR,
an unsupervised clustering analysis of the differential expression
data was performed. Although the effect of SPR was not iden-
tical in each cell line, there was a high degree of concordance
between the effect of SPR and the effect of inactivating SM (Fig.
S8), with a Pearson’s correlation coefficient of 0.68 and 0.63
between the effect of SM knockout and SPR treatment in P3HR1
Fig. 4.
SPR inhibits virus production at a lytic replicative stage after DNA
replication. (A) Antiviral effect of SPR is not due to inhibition of viral DNA
replication. EBV-positive AGS gastric carcinoma cells were transduced with
a lentivirus expressing EBV transactivator ZTA protein under control of a
doxycycline-inducible promoter to generate a cell line in which EBV rep-
licates robustly when treated with doxycycline (AGSiZ). The AGSiZ cell line
was either mock treated (–) or treated (+) with doxycycline to induce lytic
DNA replication (ind.) and also treated with SPR or EPR at concentrations
shown. DNA copy number was measured by qPCR of cell pellets 70 h
postinduction. RQ, relative quantity of intracellular viral DNA. (B) SPR but
not EPR specifically inhibits infectious virus production. Serial dilutions of
virus-containing supernatant were used to infect 293 cells, and the number
of GFP-positive cells representing infectious viral particles was measured
by flow cytometry. (C) SPR does not affect expression of IE or E EBV pro-
teins. Protein cell lysates from cells treated with SPR (S) or EPR (E) were
immunoblotted using anti-SM, EA-D, RTA, ZTA, or actin antibodies at 24
and 48 h after induction of replication. (D) SPR but not EPR inhibits pro-
duction of extracellular EBV. Extracellular EBV DNA was measured by DNA
qPCR in cell supernatants harvested 5 d after SPR (S) or EPR (E) treatment.
RQ, relative quantity of DNA.
Fig. 3.
Antiviral activity of SPR in epithelial cells. (A) EBV lytic replication
was induced with TPA (+ ind.) in an GFP-EBV–infected gastric carcinoma cell
line (AGS), which was then treated with SPR or EPR at various concentrations
as shown. Virion production was measured by passage to 293 cells and
quantitated by flow cytometry. EBV titer expressed as the number of GFP-
transducing units per mL is shown on the y axis. (B) Antiviral activities of
CAN, TMS, and EPR (E) were compared with SPR as in A. Cells were either
untreated (–) or treated (+) to induce lytic replication (ind). (C) Structures of
SPR, CAN, TMS, and EPR are shown. The thioacetyl group at C-7 of SPR
is circled.
Verma et al.
PNAS
|
March 29, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 13
|
3611
MEDICAL SCIENCES
 and AGS cells, respectively. These data therefore indicate that a
major aspect of the antiviral effect of SPR is mediated by its
inhibitory effect on SM and its target-specific mode of action.
Discussion
In this study, we describe the ability of SPR to inhibit EBV SM
protein function, decreasing accumulation of SM target RNAs
and thereby preventing production of infectious EBV particles.
This property of SPR is not based on its mineralocorticoid re-
ceptor blocking activity, as congeners with antialdosterone ac-
tivity did not possess anti-SM or antiviral activity. The activity of
SPR was structure-dependent, with specific substitutions at the 7
position of SPR altering anti-SM and anti-EBV activity. Con-
sistent with its anti-SM activity, the effect of SPR on EBV gene
expression was highly concordant with the effect of mutation-
ally deleting SM from the EBV genome. The most highly SM-
dependent and SPR-sensitive genes are late lytic genes, and most
encode either tegument proteins or glycoproteins (4, 5, 9). In
addition, two genes that are essential for encapsidation before
tegument incorporation and virion envelopment, the major VCA
and the minor capsid gene (BDLF1) product, are also highly SM-
dependent (9). Inhibition of VCA expression thus represents the
most proximate block in EBV production due to SPR, and SPR
completely prevented capsid formation despite adequate EBV
DNA replication.
The mechanism(s) of action of SM protein remains incom-
pletely characterized. SM binds EBV RNA and affects RNA
stability (15–19). Although it preferentially enhances accumula-
tion of some EBV mRNAs, SM action likely depends on in-
herent characteristics of inefficiently expressed RNAs, such as
stability or nuclear exportability (8, 9). Further, the possibility
that SM exerts transcriptional effects on one or more of its target
genes has not been excluded. ORF57, the KSHV homolog of
SM, may also act transcriptionally as well as posttranscriptionally
(6, 20). SPR may directly interact with SM or cellular partners of
SM to block function. Even if SPR does not directly affect the
ability of SM to interact with target RNAs, it may still act to
interfere with formation of RNA-binding protein complexes
recruited by SM. SPR could also act indirectly by inhibiting ex-
pression of cellular proteins required for SM function at the
transcriptional level. SPR has been shown to exert inhibitory
effects on several transcription factors in mononuclear cells in-
dependently of mineralocorticoid receptor antagonism (21).
Establishing the exact mechanism(s) by which SPR inhibits SM
function will therefore require further investigation of SM’s
mechanism of action.
Substitutions at C-7 of SPR appear to be critical for antiviral
activity. The fact that CAN and SPR retain activity but TMS
does not suggests that the molecules may be acting as an elec-
trophilic trap. The thioacetate at C-7 in SPR may serve as an acyl
donor, or it may be eliminated to the γ,δ-unsaturated form,
producing CAN in vivo. Thus, the target nucleophile would react
to produce an acylated variant or undergo a Michael-addition to
Fig. 6.
SPR inhibits EBV capsid protein expression. AGSiZ cells were either mock-treated (–D), treated with doxycycline (+D) to induce replication, or induced
and also treated with SPR (+D+S) for 48 h. The cells were fixed and stained with BMRF1, SM, ZTA, and VCA antibodies and analyzed by immunofluorescence
microscopy. DAPI-stained nuclei (blue), GFP-positive EBV-infected cells (green), and specific antigen expression (red) are shown. (A) Representative images for
expression of each protein are shown. (B) Percentage of cells positive for each protein is shown.
Fig. 5.
SPR inhibits EBV capsid formation. AGSiZ cells were induced to permit
EBV replication with doxycycline and treated with 10 μM SPR (+S) or vehicle
alone (–S). The cells were harvested, fixed at 4 d postinduction, and analyzed
by electron microscopy. Viral particles were seen in vehicle-treated cells (–S) as
shown in magnifications of 1,500× and 5,000× . No viral particles were de-
tectable in the SPR-treated samples (+S).
3612
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1523686113
Verma et al.
 produce a CAN-alkylated adduct. The thiomethylether in TMS
cannot transfer an acyl group, and elimination is less likely based
on the pKa of the methanethiolate. Either rationale would ex-
plain the lack of activity with TMS.
Although SPR has been used clinically for decades as a di-
uretic and to treat heart failure, hyperaldosteronism, and
edematous states, several side effects limit its use (22, 23). These
include effects on reproductive and other metabolic functions. It
should be noted that the IC50 of SPR (∼2.1 μM) for blocking
infectious EBV production is lower than that of acyclovir
(3.4 μM) in the same assay (Fig. S1). Although the steady-state
levels of SPR achieved in vivo are likely to be lower than the con-
centrations used in vitro in our study (24), the metabolite CAN has a
much longer half-life in vivo (24) and may potentiate the activity
of the parent compound. Nevertheless, because the mineralo-
corticoid antagonist activity of SPR does not seem to be related
to its anti-EBV activity, SPR provides an ideal lead compound
for developing antiherpesvirus drugs without SPR’s known side
effects. Resistance to currently available antiherpesvirus drugs
such as acyclovir and ganciclovir is an emerging problem in the
treatment of immunocompromised patients (25). Cross-resistance
to other agents active against viral DNA polymerase, such as
foscarnet and cidofovir, not infrequently complicates therapy (25).
In addition, these agents have significant myelosuppressive or
nephrotoxic toxicities. Drugs directed against other viral proteins
such as SM therefore have the potential to significantly extend the
antiviral armamentarium. Use of combination therapy with agents
directed against different steps in the viral life cycle also has the
potential to limit the emergence of drug resistance. Each human
herpesvirus expresses an SM homolog that is essential for virus
production (3, 26–28). Although they generally do not cross-
complement each other in rescuing viral replication (3, 26, 29),
they are structurally and functionally similar. SPR and its de-
rivatives therefore have the potential to be active against other
human herpesviruses. Further, the screening assay that we have
used to specifically identify SM inhibitors can be easily adapted
to screen for agents active against SM homologs from other
herpesviruses (8).
In summary, we have shown that SPR specifically acts to in-
hibit EBV SM protein function, which is required for expression
of several late lytic EBV genes and infectious EBV production.
The effect of SPR parallels the effect of knocking out SM
function, which is critical for expression of EBV VCA and
therefore results in an inability of the virus to make viral capsids.
In addition to preventing capsid formation, SPR inhibits ex-
pression of other SM-dependent EBV genes important for in-
fectivity, including gp350, thereby inhibiting EBV at several steps
in virion production. SPR may be used as the template for
development of antiherpesvirus drugs that act at stages of
herpesvirus replication distinct from that of all other currently
available drugs.
Fig. 7.
Comparison of the effect of SPR treatment to SM knockout on EBV gene expression in epithelial and lymphoid cells. (A) SMKO EBV-infected 293 cells
were transfected with ZTA to induce replication or transfected with both ZTA and SM to rescue SM-dependent gene expression. RNA was prepared from cells
48 h postreplication induction. High-throughput RNA sequencing was performed to determine the effects of SPR or SM knockout on the lytic EBV tran-
scriptome. Differential expression of SM-dependent genes is shown as the ratio of RNA expression in SMKO EBV transfected with Z+SM versus SMKO Z alone.
Genes whose expression is most highly dependent on SM are marked in blue. (B) Epithelial AGSiZ cells were treated with doxycycline to induce replication.
The differential expression of SPR-sensitive genes during EBV replication is shown as the ratio of RNA in vehicle-treated (–S) versus that in SPR-treated cells
(+S). The most SPR-sensitive genes therefore have the highest ratios of RNAs. (C) Comparison of SPR-treated versus untreated EBV-infected P3HR1-ZHT
lymphoma cells was performed as in B except that cells were treated with tamoxifen to induce lytic replication. +, values greater than limit of y axis; *, genes
in the region that were deleted in B95.8 and P3HR1 genomes.
Verma et al.
PNAS
|
March 29, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 13
|
3613
MEDICAL SCIENCES
 Materials and Methods
Cell Lines. HEK293 cells stably carrying an ORF59-GFP fusion gene that also
inducibly expresses SM-dependent GFP were maintained as previously de-
scribed (8). P3HR1-ZHT is an EBV-positive lymphoma cell line that contains
the EBV BZLF1 gene fused to the hormone-binding domain of the
4-hydroxytamoxifen (4HT) receptor that allows robust induction of EBV rep-
lication with 4HT treatment (30). The gastric carcinoma cell line AGS was
infected with GFP-expressing EBV Akata BX1 (31). AGS Akata BX1 cells stably
express EBV transactivator protein BZLF1 under control of a doxycycline in-
ducible promoter (AGSiZ). See Supporting Information for details of AGSiZ cell
line construction using lentivirus transduction (32).
Induction Reagents and Antiviral Compound Screening. EBV lytic replication in
AGS Akata BX1, AGSiZ, and P3HR1-ZHT cells was performed by addition of
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA), doxycycline, or 4HT, respectively.
HEK293 reporter cells carrying ORF59-GFP and inducible SM were induced to
express SM with 1 μg/mL doxycycline. SPR (Sigma, S3378), CAN (TOCRIS Bio-
science, 3281), TMS (TRC Toronto, T353500), and EPR (Sigma, E6657) were used
at various concentrations from 0 to 20 μM as indicated. Screening was per-
formed using ORF59-GFP-iSM cells, an assay developed and validated for high
throughput screening of SM inhibitors as previously described (8).
Quantification of Infectious Virion Production and Viral DNA Replication. EBV
lytic replication in AGS and AGSiZ cells was induced by TPA or doxycycline
treatment, respectively, and also treated with either DMSO control or with
SPR, CAN, TMS, or EPR for 5 d. Filtered cell supernatants were used to infect
293T cells, and the numbers of GFP-positive 293T cells representing in-
fectious viral particles were quantitated by flow cytometry as described
previously (14, 33). For P3HR1-ZHT cells, cell supernatants were harvested at
5 d after induction of replication, and EBV DNA released in the supernatant
was measured by qPCR. To measure DNA replication, cell pellets were har-
vested at 70 h after treatment as described above, and EBV DNA copy
number was measured by qPCR as described previously (5, 14).
Electron Microscopy. AGSiZ cells were treated with doxycycline to induce lytic
replication and also treated with SPR. Cells were harvested at 4 d post-
treatment and examined by electron microscopy. At least 150 cells were
examined from three different preparations.
RNA Sequencing and Data Analysis. cDNA libraries were prepared from poly(A)
RNA and were sequenced on a HiSeq2000 instrument with 50 cycle single end
reads. Sequenced reads obtained from EBV-infected AGS and P3HR1 cells
were aligned to the EBV Akata (GenBank accession no. KC207813.1) and
P3HR1 genomes (GenBank accession no. DQ279927.1). Differential gene
expression was measured using USeq’s Defined Region Differential Seq ap-
plication as described previously (14). Heat maps showing clustering of SM-
dependent and SPR-sensitive genes and log2 transformed fold changes were
clustered using the R package pheatmap (cran.r-project.org/web/packages/
pheatmap/index.html). The distance method was “euclidean” and the clus-
tering method was “complete.”
Additional methods are included in Supporting Information.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Linda Nikolova of the University of Utah
School of Medicine EM core facility, Tim Mosbruger of the Huntsman Cancer
Institute Bioinformatics Shared Resource, and Ryan Looper of the Department
of Chemistry for their assistance with electron microscopy, RNAseq data
analysis, and structural analysis, respectively. This work was funded by Public
Health Service Grant R01 81133 (to S.S.) from the National Cancer Institute.
1. Longnecker RM, Kieff E, Cohen JI (2013) Epstein-Barr virus. Fields Virology, eds
Knipe DM, Howley PM (Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Phila-
delphia), 6th Ed, Vol 2, pp 1898–1959.
2. Swaminathan S, Kenney S (2009) The Epstein-Barr virus lytic lifecycle. DNA Tumor
Viruses, eds Damania B, Pipas J (Springer, New York).
3. Gruffat H, et al. (2002) Epstein-Barr virus mRNA export factor EB2 is essential for
production of infectious virus. J Virol 76(19):9635–9644.
4. Batisse J, Manet E, Middeldorp J, Sergeant A, Gruffat H (2005) Epstein-Barr virus
mRNA export factor EB2 is essential for intranuclear capsid assembly and production
of gp350. J Virol 79(22):14102–14111.
5. Han Z, et al. (2007) Multiple roles of Epstein-Barr virus SM protein in lytic replication.
J Virol 81(8):4058–4069.
6. Palmeri D, Spadavecchia S, Carroll KD, Lukac DM (2007) Promoter- and cell-specific
transcriptional transactivation by the Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus ORF57/
Mta protein. J Virol 81(24):13299–13314.
7. Coen DM, Richman DD (2013) Antiviral agents. Fields Virology, eds Knipe DM,
Howley PM (Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia), 6th Ed,
Vol 1, pp 338–373.
8. Verma D, Kim EA, Swaminathan S (2013) Cell-based screening assay for antiviral
compounds targeting the ability of herpesvirus posttranscriptional regulatory pro-
teins to stabilize viral mRNAs. J Virol 87(19):10742–10751.
9. Thompson J, Verma D, Li D, Mosbruger T, Swaminathan S (2016) Identification and
characterization of the physiological gene targets of the essential lytic replicative EBV
SM protein. J Virol 90(3):1206–1221.
10. Kocisko DA, et al. (2003) New inhibitors of scrapie-associated prion protein formation
in a library of 2000 drugs and natural products. J Virol 77(19):10288–10294.
11. Szasz G, Budvari-Barany Z (1990) Pharmaceutical Chemistry of Antihypertensive
Agents (CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL), p 288.
12. Kolkhof P, Borden SA (2012) Molecular pharmacology of the mineralocorticoid re-
ceptor: Prospects for novel therapeutics. Mol Cell Endocrinol 350(2):310–317.
13. Wang HB, et al. (2015) Neuropilin 1 is an entry factor that promotes EBV infection of
nasopharyngeal epithelial cells. Nat Commun 6:6240.
14. Li DJ, Verma D, Mosbruger T, Swaminathan S (2014) CTCF and Rad21 act as host cell
restriction factors for Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) lytic replication
by modulating viral gene transcription. PLoS Pathog 10(1):e1003880.
15. Ruvolo V, Wang E, Boyle S, Swaminathan S (1998) The Epstein-Barr virus nuclear
protein SM is both a post-transcriptional inhibitor and activator of gene expression.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95(15):8852–8857.
16. Ruvolo V, Gupta AK, Swaminathan S (2001) Epstein-Barr virus SM protein interacts
with mRNA in vivo and mediates a gene-specific increase in cytoplasmic mRNA. J Virol
75(13):6033–6041.
17. Han Z, Verma D, Hilscher C, Dittmer DP, Swaminathan S (2009) General and target-
specific RNA binding properties of Epstein-Barr virus SM posttranscriptional regula-
tory protein. J Virol 83(22):11635–11644.
18. Hiriart E, et al. (2003) A region of the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) mRNA export factor EB2
containing an arginine-rich motif mediates direct binding to RNA. J Biol Chem
278(39):37790–37798.
19. Hiriart E, et al. (2003) A novel nuclear export signal and a REF interaction domain
both promote mRNA export by the Epstein-Barr virus EB2 protein. J Biol Chem 278(1):
335–342.
20. Malik P, Blackbourn DJ, Cheng MF, Hayward GS, Clements JB (2004) Functional co-
operation between the Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus ORF57 and ORF50
regulatory proteins. J Gen Virol 85(Pt 8):2155–2166.
21. Sønder SU, Mikkelsen M, Rieneck K, Hedegaard CJ, Bendtzen K (2006) Effects of
spironolactone on human blood mononuclear cells: Mineralocorticoid receptor in-
dependent effects on gene expression and late apoptosis induction. Br J Pharmacol
148(1):46–53.
22. Lainscak M, et al. (2015) Safety profile of mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists:
Spironolactone and eplerenone. Int J Cardiol 200:25–29.
23. Meng Q, et al. (2010) The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded protein kinase, EBV-PK,
but not the thymidine kinase (EBV-TK), is required for ganciclovir and acyclovir in-
hibition of lytic viral production. J Virol 84(9):4534–4542.
24. Gardiner P, et al. (1989) Spironolactone metabolism: Steady-state serum levels of the
sulfur-containing metabolites. J Clin Pharmacol 29(4):342–347.
25. Hanson KE, Swaminathan S (2015) Cytomegalovirus antiviral drug resistance: Future
prospects for prevention, detection and management. Future Microbiol 10(10):
1545–1548.
26. Han Z, Swaminathan S (2006) Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus lytic gene
ORF57 is essential for infectious virion production. J Virol 80(11):5251–5260.
27. Toth Z, Stamminger T (2008) The human cytomegalovirus regulatory protein UL69
and its effect on mRNA export. Front Biosci 13:2939–2949.
28. Sandri-Goldin RM (2011) The many roles of the highly interactive HSV protein ICP27, a
key regulator of infection. Future Microbiol 6(11):1261–1277.
29. Boyer JL, Swaminathan S, Silverstein SJ (2002) The Epstein-Barr virus SM protein is
functionally similar to ICP27 from herpes simplex virus in viral infections. J Virol
76(18):9420–9433.
30. Verma D, Ling C, Johannsen E, Nagaraja T, Swaminathan S (2009) Negative autoregulation
of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) replicative gene expression by EBV SM protein. J Virol 83(16):
8041–8050.
31. Molesworth SJ, Lake CM, Borza CM, Turk SM, Hutt-Fletcher LM (2000) Epstein-Barr
virus gH is essential for penetration of B cells but also plays a role in attachment of
virus to epithelial cells. J Virol 74(14):6324–6332.
32. Linnstaedt SD, Gottwein E, Skalsky RL, Luftig MA, Cullen BR (2010) Virally induced
cellular microRNA miR-155 plays a key role in B-cell immortalization by Epstein-Barr
virus. J Virol 84(22):11670–11678.
33. Li DJ, Verma D, Swaminathan S (2012) Binding of cellular export factor REF/Aly by
Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) ORF57 protein is not required for
efficient KSHV lytic replication. J Virol 86(18):9866–9874.
34. Reynolds ES (1963) The use of lead citrate at high pH as an electron-opaque stain in
electron microscopy. J Cell Biol 17:208–212.
35. Ruvolo V, et al. (2004) Functional analysis of Epstein-Barr virus SM protein: Identifi-
cation of amino acids essential for structure, transactivation, splicing inhibition, and
virion production. J Virol 78(1):340–352.
3614
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1523686113
Verma et al.
