 The new engl and jour nal of medicine
n engl j med 
 nejm.org 
1
From the Centre for Respiratory Medi­
cine and Allergy, Manchester Academic 
Health Sciences Centre, University of Man­
chester and University Hospital of South 
Manchester NHS Foundation Trust (J.V., 
A.W.), Manchester Academic Health Sci­
ences Centre, University of Manchester 
and Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust 
(J.M.G.), and NIHR Clinical Research Net­
work Greater Manchester (S.M.), Man­
chester; Global Respiratory Franchise 
(D.L.) and Respiratory Research and De­
velopment (S.C., J.C., L.F., H.S.), Glaxo­
SmithKline UK, Brentford; Salford Royal 
NHS Foundation Trust (N.D.B., J.N., 
J.M.G.), NorthWest EHealth (J.N., J.M.G.), 
and NHS Salford Clinical Commissioning 
Group (S.M.), Salford; and Global Clini­
cal Safety and Pharmacovigilance, Safety 
Evaluation and Risk Management, Glaxo­
SmithKline UK, Uxbridge (C.H.) — all in 
the United Kingdom. Address reprint re­
quests to Dr. Vestbo at the Centre for Re­
spiratory Medicine and Allergy, 2nd Fl., 
Education and Research Centre, Uni­
versity Hospital of South Manchester, 
Southmoor Rd., Manchester M23 9LT, 
United Kingdom, or at  
jorgen 
. 
vestbo@ 
 
manchester 
. 
ac 
. 
uk.
* 
A complete list of the investigators in 
the Salford Lung Study is provided in the 
Supplementary Appendix, available at 
NEJM.org.
This article was published on September 4, 
2016, at NEJM.org.
DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1608033
Copyright © 2016 Massachusetts Medical Society.
BACKGROUND
Evidence for the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
comes from closely monitored efficacy trials involving groups of patients who 
were selected on the basis of restricted entry criteria. There is a need for random-
ized trials to be conducted in conditions that are closer to usual clinical practice.
METHODS
In a controlled effectiveness trial conducted in 75 general practices, we randomly 
assigned 2799 patients with COPD to a once-daily inhaled combination of flutica-
sone furoate at a dose of 100 μg and vilanterol at a dose of 25 μg (the fluticasone 
furoate–vilanterol group) or to usual care (the usual-care group). The primary 
outcome was the rate of moderate or severe exacerbations among patients who had 
had an exacerbation within 1 year before the trial. Secondary outcomes were the 
rates of primary care contact (contact with a general practitioner, nurse, or other 
health care professional) and secondary care contact (inpatient admission, outpa-
tient visit with a specialist, or visit to the emergency department), modification of 
the initial trial treatment for COPD, and the rate of exacerbations among patients 
who had had an exacerbation within 3 years before the trial, as assessed in a time-
to-event analysis.
RESULTS
The rate of moderate or severe exacerbations was significantly lower, by 8.4% (95% 
confidence interval, 1.1 to 15.2), with fluticasone furoate–vilanterol therapy than 
with usual care (P 
= 
0.02). There was no significant difference in the annual rate 
of COPD-related contacts to primary or secondary care. There were no significant 
between-group differences in the rates of the first moderate or severe exacerbation 
and the first severe exacerbation in the time-to-event analyses. There were no excess 
serious adverse events of pneumonia in the fluticasone furoate–vilanterol group. 
The numbers of other serious adverse events were similar in the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS
In patients with COPD and a history of exacerbations, a once-daily treatment 
regimen of combined fluticasone furoate and vilanterol was associated with a 
lower rate of exacerbations than usual care, without a greater risk of serious ad-
verse events. (Funded by GlaxoSmithKline; Salford Lung Study ClinicalTrials.gov 
number, NCT01551758.)
ABSTR ACT
Effectiveness of Fluticasone Furoate–
Vilanterol for COPD in Clinical Practice
Jørgen Vestbo, D.M.Sc., David Leather, M.B., Ch.B., Nawar Diar Bakerly, M.D., 
John New, M.B., B.S., J. Martin Gibson, Ph.D., Sheila McCorkindale, M.B., Ch.B., 
Susan Collier, M.B., Ch.B., Jodie Crawford, M.Sc., Lucy Frith, M.Sc., 
Catherine Harvey, D.Phil., Henrik Svedsater, Ph.D., and Ashley Woodcock, M.D., 
for the Salford Lung Study Investigators* 
Original Article
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on September 4, 2016. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2016 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med nejm.org 
2
The new engl and jour nal of medicine
G
uidelines on the management of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) are based on numerous random-
ized, controlled trials of efficacy, which are usu-
ally generated for registration purposes.1 How-
ever, these trials have included patients who 
were selected with the use of strict criteria and 
were closely monitored, and therefore the results 
have limited relevance to everyday clinical prac-
tice.2 To counter this, it has been proposed that 
integrated comparative effectiveness trials involve 
more representative patients and be conducted 
in much less restricted environments.3-5
The Salford Lung Study was designed to evalu-
ate the effectiveness and safety of the once-daily 
inhaled combination of fluticasone furoate and 
vilanterol (fluticasone furoate–vilanterol) as com-
pared with existing maintenance therapy (usual 
care) in a large, real-world population of pa-
tients with COPD in conditions of normal care. 
The trial was initiated before the approval of 
fluticasone furoate–vilanterol in the United King-
dom and was conducted in and around Salford, 
United Kingdom, a community served mainly by 
a single hospital with an established electronic 
health record (EHR) system that connects pri-
mary and secondary care. This setting permits 
the unobtrusive observation of patients for ef-
fectiveness and safety monitoring, blended into 
routine clinical care.6
Methods
Patients
Between March 13, 2012, and October 23, 2014, 
we recruited patients who were 40 years of age 
or older, had received a documented diagnosis of 
COPD from a general practitioner, and had had 
one or more COPD exacerbations in the previous 
3 years. Patients had to be taking regular main-
tenance inhaler therapy, defined as the use of 
one or more long-acting bronchodilators; inhaled 
glucocorticoids, alone or in combination with a 
long-acting bronchodilator; or a combination of 
inhaled glucocorticoids, a long-acting beta-ago-
nist (LABA), and a long-acting muscarinic antag-
onist (LAMA). There were no restrictions regard-
ing smoking history or spirometric values. Among 
the few exclusion criteria were an exacerbation 
within the previous 2 weeks and long-term use 
of oral glucocorticoids. Details of the trial de-
sign and the analysis approach have been pub-
lished previously.7,8
Patients were recruited in primary care prac-
tices by the health care professionals who pro-
vided their normal, everyday care. All the pa-
tients provided written informed consent. The 
trial was conducted in accordance with the Inter-
national Conference on Harmonisation Good 
Clinical Practice guidelines and the provisions of 
the 2008 Declaration of Helsinki. The trial pro-
tocol was approved by the National Research 
Ethics Service Committee North West, Greater 
Manchester South. The protocol, including the 
statistical analysis plan, is available with the full 
text of this article at NEJM.org.
Trial Design
This prospective, 12-month, open-label, parallel-
group, randomized trial was conducted in 75 
general practices in Salford and South Manchester, 
United Kingdom. Randomization was performed 
by means of a centralized randomization service, 
with stratification according to baseline mainte-
nance therapy and presence or absence of a COPD 
exacerbation in the previous 12 months. Partici-
pants were assigned, in a 1:1 ratio, to receive one 
of two treatments: combination therapy with 
100 μg of fluticasone furoate and 25 μg of vilan-
terol (Relvar [in Europe] or Breo [in the United 
States], GlaxoSmithKline), administered once 
daily as a dry powder through an inhaler (Ellipta, 
GlaxoSmithKline) (the fluticasone furoate–vilan-
terol group); or the continuation of usual care as 
determined by the general practitioner (the usual-
care group). Patients who were randomly assigned 
to fluticasone furoate–vilanterol and had been 
previously treated with two long-acting broncho-
dilators and an inhaled glucocorticoid were al-
lowed to continue taking a LAMA in addition to 
fluticasone furoate–vilanterol.
At the first trial visit, patients were offered 
participation and provided written informed con-
sent. Within 1 to 60 days after the first visit, 
patients were randomly assigned to receive fluti-
casone furoate–vilanterol or to continue their 
usual maintenance therapy. (The 2 full months 
was the result of being able to use planned ap-
pointments in order to make the trial as close to 
normal practice as possible.) Trial staff trained 
the patients in each treatment group in the cor-
rect inhaler techniques and dosing, obtained base-
line information on disease duration, smoking 
status, lung function, and concomitant medical 
history, and performed baseline assessments of 
COPD symptoms with the use of the COPD As-
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on September 4, 2016. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2016 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 
 nejm.org 
3
Effectiveness of Fluticasone Furoate–Vilanterol for COPD
sessment Test (CAT)9 and of quality of life with 
the use of the European Quality of Life–5 Dimen-
sions (EQ-5D) questionnaire.10 Spirometric find-
ings were evaluated according to the Global 
Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease 
(GOLD), with airflow limitation present when the 
ratio of the forced expiratory volume in 1 second 
(FEV1) to forced vital capacity was less than 0.7. 
Severity was graded according to the level of FEV1.
If at months 3, 6, and 9 patients had had no 
contact with their general practice within the 
previous 8 weeks, they were contacted by tele-
phone by a trial team member to assess any seri-
ous adverse events or nonserious adverse drug 
reactions; there was no additional intervention at 
these assessments. At 12 months, trial staff met 
the patients to make a final assessment of out-
comes. Thus, most patients had contact with trial 
staff only at recruitment, at the baseline visit, and 
at 12 months.
To preserve the real-world nature of the trial, 
the patients’ experience was as close to everyday 
clinical practice care as possible. The key investi-
gators in the trial were the general practitioners, 
who could choose the appropriate therapy accord-
ing to their clinical opinion, and treatments were 
dispensed by community pharmacies in the usual 
way. Patients could switch from fluticasone 
furoate–vilanterol to usual care, but patients in the 
usual-care group were not permitted to switch to 
the fluticasone furoate–vilanterol group. All the 
general practitioners and pharmacy staff received 
training regarding Good Clinical Practice guide-
lines as well as training in trial procedures and 
trial medications as appropriate to their roles.8
Outcome Measurements
The primary outcome was the mean annual rate 
of moderate or severe exacerbations, defined as 
any worsening of respiratory symptoms that led 
to treatment with antibiotic agents or systemic 
glucocorticoids (or both), to hospital admission, 
or to scheduled or unscheduled hospital visits. 
The primary outcome was assessed in the pri-
mary effectiveness analysis population, which 
was a subgroup of the entire trial population 
that included patients who had undergone ran-
domization, received a prescription of the trial 
medication (e.g., fluticasone furoate–vilanterol 
or, in the usual-care group, a COPD-controller 
medication), and had had one or more exacerba-
tions in the preceding year. All the secondary 
outcomes were analyzed in the entire trial popu-
lation (i.e., all the patients who underwent ran-
domization and received a prescription of the 
trial medication) and included the rate of first 
exacerbation, as assessed in a time-to-event analy-
sis, and the annual rates of primary and second-
ary health care contacts. Other outcomes included 
the CAT score and the EQ-5D questionnaire re-
sults. Except for exacerbations, modification to 
trial medication, CAT score, EQ-5D question-
naire, and demographic characteristics, data were 
collected in real time with the use of an inte-
grated primary and secondary care EHR that 
was developed by NorthWest EHealth (NWEH). 
EHR data for the primary outcome were inde-
pendently verified by the research team (general 
practitioner, research nurse, or research doctor).
Safety Evaluation
Safety outcomes included serious adverse events 
of pneumonia (defined as pneumonia, which was 
prespecified as an adverse event of special inter-
est), the frequency and type of other serious 
adverse events, and adverse drug reactions. Ad-
verse events of special interest were defined a 
priori as groups of events of interest that were 
considered to be possibly related to inhaled glu-
cocorticoids or LABAs. Safety monitoring was 
performed by means of continuous real-time 
monitoring of the patients’ EHRs with the use of 
the linked NWEH database system and by means 
of telephone contact every 3 months (unless an-
other contact occurred). Investigators reported 
serious adverse events and adverse drug reactions 
on electronic case-report forms, which were con-
tinuously monitored by near–real-time data mon-
itoring and a dedicated clinical safety team. Cause 
of death was not adjudicated but was assigned by 
the primary investigator for all fatal events.
Trial Oversight
The Salford Lung Study team sought scientific 
advice by means of a joint consultation process 
with the National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence and the Medicines and Healthcare 
Products Regulatory Agency. Informal advice was 
sought from the National Research Ethics Ser-
vice Committee North West, Greater Manchester 
South, United Kingdom, before the formal ethics 
application.
The trial was designed by the sponsor and the 
academic partners. The sponsor and NWEH col-
lected the data. Statistical analyses were per-
formed by a contract research organization on 
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on September 4, 2016. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2016 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med nejm.org 
4
The new engl and jour nal of medicine
behalf of, and with oversight by, employees of 
the sponsor. All the authors had full access to the 
data and vouch for the accuracy and complete-
ness of all the data and analyses and for the fi-
delity of the trial to the protocol. The first draft 
of the manuscript was written jointly by the pri-
mary academic and senior authors, and all the 
authors worked collaboratively to prepare the fi-
nal content and made the decision to submit the 
manuscript for publication. Editorial support was 
provided by a medical writer, paid by the sponsor.
Statistical Analysis
Sample-size calculations were based on the pri-
mary outcome (mean annual rate of moderate or 
severe exacerbations). We calculated that 2238 
patients would need to be enrolled for the trial 
to have 80% power to detect a relative change of 
12% in the mean annual rate of moderate or 
severe exacerbations between the fluticasone 
furoate–vilanterol group and the usual-care group, 
assuming a mean rate of 2.3 exacerbations in 
the usual-care group, as estimated on the basis 
of a retrospective analysis of historical data from 
patients from the Salford area who underwent 
randomization at the time of the protocol 
amendment11 that were collected from the linked 
NWEH database. Calculations were based on a 
negative binomial regression, with a dispersion 
rate of 0.7, and used a two-sided 5% significance 
level. All the analyses were conducted according 
to the intention-to-treat principle (see the Sup-
plementary Appendix, available at NEJM.org).
Results
Trial Population
Of 3161 patients with COPD who were screened, 
2802 underwent randomization (see the Supple-
mentary Appendix). Three patients in the fluti-
casone furoate–vilanterol group never took the 
trial medication, so the overall trial population 
consisted of 2799 patients. Of these, 2269 pa-
tients (81%) had one or more moderate or severe 
exacerbations in the year before the trial and 
made up the primary effectiveness analysis 
population (Table 1). In the overall trial popula-
tion, 1291 patients in the fluticasone furoate–
vilanterol group and 1309 in the usual-care 
group completed the trial; in the primary effec-
tiveness analysis population, 1051 patients in the 
fluticasone furoate–vilanterol group and 1056 in 
the usual-care group completed the trial.
In the primary effectiveness analysis popula-
tion, 276 patients (12%) were taking a LABA, a 
LAMA, or both (35 patients were taking both) 
at the time of randomization. A total of 762 pa-
tients (34%) were receiving inhaled glucocorti-
coids, a combination of inhaled glucocorticoids 
and a LABA, or a combination of inhaled gluco-
corticoids and a LAMA; 119 of these patients 
were using inhaled glucocorticoids as monother-
apy. A total of 1231 patients (54%) were receiving 
combination triple therapy with inhaled gluco-
corticoids, a LABA, and a LAMA.
Overall, 47% of the patients reported having 
had two or more moderate COPD exacerbations 
in the year before entry; 7% reported having had 
one or more severe exacerbations. A total of 22% 
of the patients had a diagnosis of asthma re-
corded. More than three quarters of the patients 
(77%) had coexisting conditions (Table 1).
In the fluticasone furoate–vilanterol group, 
342 patients (24%) modified their medication 
regimen; 302 of these patients (22%) switched 
back to their previous care, of whom 54 (4%) 
switched back because of a need for better con-
trol. In the usual-care group, 160 patients (11%) 
modified their medication regimen, including 
114 (8%) who had a need for better control.
Primary Outcome
In the primary effectiveness analysis population, 
the rate of moderate or severe exacerbations was 
1.74 exacerbations per year in the fluticasone 
furoate–vilanterol group, as compared with 1.90 
per year in the usual-care group, indicating an 
8.4% (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.1 to 15.2) 
lower rate in the fluticasone furoate–vilanterol 
group (P 
= 
0.02) (Fig. 1A). This finding was con-
firmed in the entire trial population, in which 
the rate of moderate or severe exacerbations was 
1.50 exacerbations per year in the fluticasone 
furoate–vilanterol group, as compared with 1.64 
per year in the usual-care group, indicating an 
8.4% (95% CI, 1.4 to 14.9) lower rate in the fluti-
casone furoate–vilanterol group (P 
= 
0.02). In pa-
tients with COPD of GOLD grade 1 or 2 at base-
line (GOLD grade 1, indicating mild disease, is 
defined as an FEV1 ≥80% of the predicted value, 
and GOLD grade 2, indicating moderate disease, 
as an FEV1 ≥50% and <80% of the predicted 
value, both in the presence of a ratio of FEV1 to 
forced vital capacity of <0.7), the rate of exacer-
bations was 1.50 exacerbations per year in the 
fluticasone furoate–vilanterol group, as com-
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on September 4, 2016. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2016 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 
 nejm.org 
5
Effectiveness of Fluticasone Furoate–Vilanterol for COPD
pared with 1.71 per year in the usual-care group, 
indicating a 12.1% (95% CI, 1.0 to 21.9) lower 
rate in the fluticasone furoate–vilanterol group.
Figure 1B shows the percent change in the rate 
of moderate or severe exacerbations between 
the groups in the primary effectiveness analysis 
population, stratified according to prerandom-
ization treatment; the interaction of treatment 
with strata was not significant (P 
= 
0.29). The 
treatment difference was significant among pa-
tients in the primary effectiveness population 
whose randomization stratum and prerandom-
ization treatment included an inhaled glucocor-
ticoid and a LABA (1.87 exacerbations per year 
among 927 patients in the fluticasone furoate–
vilanterol group vs. 2.03 exacerbations per year 
among 908 patients in the usual-care group), 
with an 8.0% (95% CI, 0.11 to 15.4) lower rate in 
the fluticasone furoate–vilanterol group (P 
= 
0.047).
Secondary Outcomes
There was no significant difference in the rate of 
first moderate or severe exacerbation in the time-
to-event analysis in the entire trial population 
(hazard ratio with fluticasone furoate–vilanterol 
vs. usual care, 0.93; 95% CI, 0.85 to 1.02). Simi-
larly, there was no significant difference in the 
rate of severe exacerbations between the flutica-
sone furoate–vilanterol group and the usual-care 
group (0.09 and 0.08 exacerbations per year, 
respectively; the rate with fluticasone furoate–
vilanterol was higher by 9.7% [95% CI, −16.9 to 
44.7]; P 
= 
0.52) or in the rate of first severe exac-
erbation in the time-to-event analysis (hazard 
ratio, 1.27; 95% CI, 0.98 to 1.66; P 
= 
0.08).
There was no significant difference between 
the fluticasone furoate–vilanterol group and the 
usual-care group in the annual rate of COPD-
related contact with primary care; the rate was 
1.7% (95% CI, −5.1 to 8.0) lower in the flutica-
sone furoate–vilanterol group than in the usual-
care group. The annual rate of all primary care 
contacts was slightly higher (12.3%; 95% CI, 5.4 to 
19.6) in the fluticasone furoate–vilanterol group 
than in the usual-care group. There were no 
significant differences in the rate of secondary 
health care contacts.
In an analysis that was based on the entire 
trial population, 596 of 1317 patients (45%) in 
the fluticasone furoate–vilanterol group had a 
Characteristic
Entire 
Trial Population 
(N = 2799)
Usual Care 
(N = 1403)
Fluticasone 
Furoate– 
Vilanterol 
(N = 1396)
Primary 
Effectiveness 
Analysis 
Population 
(N = 2269)
Age — yr
67±10
67±10
67±10
67±10
Female sex — no. (%)
1369 (49)
671 (48)
698 (50)
1122 (49)
Body­mass index†
28±6
28±6
28±7
28±6
Current smoking — no. (%)
1289 (46)
666 (47)
623 (45)
1046 (46)
Postbronchodilator FEV1 — liters
1.62±0.64
1.62±0.65
1.62±0.64
1.59±0.64
No. of exacerbations during the 12 mo  
before randomization
2.01±1.99
2.04±2.08
1.98±1.90
2.48±1.93
Coexisting condition — no. (%)
Any
2145 (77)
1076 (77)
1069 (77)
1758 (77)
Cardiac condition
720 (26)
367 (26)
353 (25)
588 (26)
Vascular condition
1363 (49)
675 (48)
688 (49)
1095 (48)
Asthma
609 (22)
293 (21)
316 (23)
512 (23)
Diabetes
438 (16)
208 (15)
230 (16)
353 (16)
*  
Plus–minus values are means ±SD. There were no significant differences between the treatment groups in any of the 
baseline characteristics. The primary effectiveness analysis population was a subgroup of the entire trial population 
that included patients who had undergone randomization, received a prescription of the trial medication, and had had 
one or more exacerbations in the preceding year. Additional details on the baseline characteristics are provided in Table 
S1 in the Supplementary Appendix. FEV1 denotes forced expiratory volume in 1 second.
†  
The body­mass index is the weight in kilograms divided by the square of the height in meters.
Table 1. Characteristics of the Participants at Baseline.*
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on September 4, 2016. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2016 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med nejm.org 
6
The new engl and jour nal of medicine
decrease in their CAT score by 2 or more points 
(indicating an improvement in COPD-related 
health status), as compared with 481 of 1325 
patients (36%) in the usual-care group (odds 
ratio in favor of fluticasone furoate–vilanterol, 
1.51; 95% CI, 1.28 to 1.77; P<0.001). There was 
no significant between-group difference in the 
change from baseline in the EQ-5D score. Re-
sults in the primary effectiveness analysis popu-
lation were similar to those that were based on 
the entire trial population.
Safety
The incidence of serious adverse events during 
treatment was similar in the fluticasone furoate–
vilanterol group and the usual-care group (with 
events occurring in 404 patients [29%] and 383 
patients [27%], respectively). There was no nota-
ble difference between the two groups with re-
gard to any adverse event of special interest 
(Table 2). A total of 94 patients (7%) in the 
fluticasone furoate–vilanterol group had one or 
more serious adverse events listed as pneumo-
nia, as compared with 83 (6%) in the usual-care 
group (incidence ratio, 1.1; 95% CI, 0.9 to 1.5). 
For the comparison of the fluticasone furoate–
vilanterol group with the usual-care group, there 
was a trend toward a higher mean number of 
serious adverse events of pneumonia in the stra-
tum receiving a treatment regimen without an 
inhaled glucocorticoid at randomization (mean 
annual rate, 3.01 hospitalizations; 95% CI, 0.97 
to 9.33) than in the strata receiving an inhaled 
glucocorticoid at randomization (P 
= 
0.10 for the 
interaction of treatment with baseline mainte-
nance therapy in the analysis across the three 
strata). A total of 13 patients (1%) in each group 
had an event of pneumonia (adverse event of 
special interest) with a fatal outcome. A total of 
45 patients in the fluticasone furoate–vilanterol 
group and 30 in the usual-care group died dur-
ing the trial; reported causes of fatal events are 
listed in the Supplementary Appendix. One pa-
tient in each group died from a serious adverse 
event that was recorded as being related to the 
trial medication (pneumonia in 1 patient in the 
usual-care group, and pulmonary embolism and 
deep-vein thrombosis in 1 in the fluticasone 
furoate–vilanterol group). No subgroups with a 
higher risk of a serious adverse event of pneumo-
nia in the fluticasone furoate–vilanterol group 
than in the usual-care group were identified.
Figure 1. Treatment Effect on Moderate or Severe Exacerbations.
Shown is the effect of the combination of 100 μg of fluticasone furoate and 25 μg of vilanterol, as compared with 
usual care, on the rate of moderate or severe exacerbations. Percent­change estimates and 95% confidence inter­
vals are shown. Panel A shows the primary­outcome analysis and the sensitivity analysis in the entire trial popula­
tion. Panel B shows risk reductions stratified according to maintenance treatment at randomization for the primary 
effectiveness analysis population, which was a subgroup of the entire trial population that included patients who 
had undergone randomization, received a prescription of the trial medication, and had had one or more exacerba­
tions in the preceding year. ICS denotes inhaled glucocorticoid, LABA long­acting beta­agonist, and LAMA long­ 
acting muscarinic antagonist.
−15
0
30
15
Usual Care Better
Fluticasone Furoate– 
Vilanterol Better
Primary effectiveness analysis population
Entire trial population
Percent Change (95% CI)
Subgroup
−8.4 (−15.2 to −1.1)
−30
−8.4 (−14.9 to −1.4)
−15
0
30
15
Usual Care Better
Fluticasone Furoate– 
Vilanterol Better
LABA, LAMA, or LABA+LAMA
ICS, ICS+LABA, or ICS+LAMA
ICS+LABA+LAMA
Percent Change (95% CI)
Subgroup
−11.6 (−31.2 to 13.6 )
−30
−15.7 (−26.3 to −3.4)
−3.6 (−12.8 to 6.5)
A
B
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on September 4, 2016. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2016 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 
 nejm.org 
7
Effectiveness of Fluticasone Furoate–Vilanterol for COPD
Discussion
The Salford Lung Study on COPD was a large, 
randomized, comparative effectiveness trial con-
ducted in a population that was intended to 
represent that seen in everyday clinical practice. 
We found that a simple, once-daily treatment 
with an inhaled combination of fluticasone fu-
roate and vilanterol was superior to usual care 
by the patient’s general practitioner with regard 
to the frequency of moderate or severe exacerba-
tions and was not associated with a significantly 
higher risk of serious adverse events.
The combination of fluticasone furoate and 
vilanterol has been shown previously to result 
in lower rates of exacerbations of COPD than 
vilanterol alone in conventional randomized, 
controlled trials of efficacy.12 However, this trial 
shows that broad populations of patients with 
COPD benefit from treatment with fluticasone 
furoate–vilanterol, and the findings differ from 
those of efficacy trials in which fluticasone fu-
roate–vilanterol was associated with outcomes 
that were similar to those with the twice-daily 
combination of fluticasone propionate and sal-
meterol.13 We found no excess number of serious 
adverse events of pneumonia in the overall com-
parisons, but as expected, we found a trend to-
ward a greater number of serious adverse events 
of pneumonia with fluticasone furoate–vilanterol 
than with a treatment regimen consisting of 
bronchodilators only.14 Also, we cannot rule out 
a higher incidence of mild pneumonia with fluti-
casone furoate–vilanterol than with usual care.
The strength of the trial derives from its in-
novative design. It took place in a single urban 
area, with primary and secondary care connect-
ed through an EHR, integrated with a new data 
recording system to enable the collection of a 
trial-relevant data set that contained more than 
3 million lines of data for all the effectiveness 
and safety outcomes. After randomization, a pa-
tient was contacted by telephone only as a safety 
check on three occasions over a period of 12 
months, and only then if there had been no 
health care contact within a 3-month period. All 
treatment was carried out by the usual caregivers, 
while patients were simultaneously monitored 
remotely with the use of the EHR for the early 
detection of safety events.
This comparative effectiveness trial needs 
careful interpretation. Although randomized, the 
trial was an open-label trial, which could poten-
tially have introduced bias, although we made 
all efforts to have the treatment experience be 
similar for all the patients, by giving them simi-
lar initial training on the use of the inhaler, 
having them obtain their prescriptions from the 
general practitioner, having them collect the med-
ication at their usual pharmacy, and so forth. 
However, the unblinded trial is the likely reason 
for the larger degree of switching of treatment 
over the first 3 months of the trial in the flutica-
sone furoate–vilanterol group than in the usual-
care group. Patients switched to familiar treat-
ment, despite fewer changes that were due to 
treatment failure in the fluticasone furoate–
vilanterol group than in the usual-care group 
(i.e., need for better control). It should be noted 
that approximately 50% of the patients were tak-
ing triple therapy despite well-preserved lung 
function. A considerable proportion of patients 
had a diagnosis of asthma recorded. We do not 
Event
Usual Care 
(N = 1403)
Fluticasone 
Furoate– 
Vilanterol 
(N = 1396)
number (percent)
Cardiovascular event
Any event
107 (8)
108 (8)
Cardiac arrhythmia
54 (4)
52 (4)
Cardiac failure
28 (2)
28 (2)
Cardiac ischemia
33 (2)
34 (2)
Hypertension
1 (<1)
0
Stroke
25 (2)
21 (2)
Pneumonia
83 (6)
94 (7)
Lower respiratory tract infection,  
excluding pneumonia
58 (4)
64 (5)
Decreased bone mineral density  
and associated fracture
45 (3)
45 (3)
Effects on glucose level
16 (1)
23 (2)
Hypersensitivity
10 (1)
10 (1)
Effects on potassium level
2 (<1)
2 (<1)
Glucocorticoid­associated eye disease
2 (<1)
2 (<1)
Local effects from glucocorticoids
1 (<1)
0
*  
Serious adverse events of special interest during treatment that were associated 
with the known pharmacologic action of inhaled glucocorticoids or long­acting 
beta­agonists were identified with the use of standardized Medical Dictionary 
for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA), version 18.1, queries (SMQs) and sponsor­
defined special interest terms when no SMQ was available. The grouping of 
events was defined according to standard MedDRA groups, if available.
Table 2. Serious Adverse Events of Special Interest during Treatment  
in the Entire Trial Population.*
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on September 4, 2016. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2016 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med nejm.org 
8
The new engl and jour nal of medicine
believe that all these patients had an asthma–
COPD overlap syndrome15; instead, the finding 
could indicate that some patients with COPD re-
ceived a diagnosis of asthma early in the course 
of their COPD. This situation would usually have 
led to exclusion from COPD efficacy studies. 
Most of the general practitioners also took part 
in the Salford Lung Study involving patients with 
asthma16 and thus had no incentive to include 
patients with current asthma in this trial.
Our findings challenge the automatic trans-
fer of findings from efficacy studies to clinical 
guidelines or everyday clinical practice. For any 
new treatment, safety and efficacy randomized, 
controlled trials are essential, but they are car-
ried out in carefully selected populations, from 
which patients with coexisting conditions are ex-
cluded, and represent less than 10% of patients 
with COPD.2 Frequent face-to-face monitoring 
ensures high adherence to therapy and good 
inhaler technique. This comparative effectiveness 
trial that was conducted in a population of pa-
tients with COPD was largely unsupervised over 
the yearlong period, which allowed important 
factors in usual clinical care, such as adherence, 
frequency of dosing, and persistence of good 
inhaler technique, to come into play.
In conclusion, patients in general practice who 
had a diagnosis of COPD and a heightened risk 
of exacerbations had a benefit with simple, once-
daily inhaled combination treatment with fluti-
casone furoate and vilanterol, without an ad-
ditional risk of serious adverse events. Future 
effectiveness studies are likely to influence clin-
ical guidelines, not only for COPD but for many 
other chronic diseases.
Supported by GlaxoSmithKline.
Disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with 
the full text of this article at NEJM.org.
We thank Charlotte Kennerley, Ph.D., of Gardiner–Caldwell 
Communications, for assistance with the preparation of an earlier 
version of the figure.
References
1. Vestbo J, Hurd SS, Agustí AG, et al. 
Global strategy for the diagnosis, manage-
ment, and prevention of chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease: GOLD executive 
summary. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2013; 
187: 
347-65.
2. Herland K, Akselsen JP, Skjønsberg 
OH, Bjermer L. How representative are 
clinical study patients with asthma or 
COPD for a larger “real life” population of 
patients with obstructive lung disease? 
Respir Med 2005; 
99: 
11-9.
3. Berger ML, Dreyer N, Anderson F, 
Towse A, Sedrakyan A, Normand SL. Pro-
spective observational studies to assess 
comparative effectiveness: the ISPOR Good 
Research Practices Task Force report. 
Value Health 2012; 
15: 
217-30.
4. Chalkidou K, Tunis S, Whicher D, 
Fowler R, Zwarenstein M. The role for 
pragmatic randomized controlled trials 
(pRCTs) in comparative effectiveness re-
search. Clin Trials 2012; 
9: 
436-46.
5. NorthWest EHealth home page (http://
nweh 
.co 
.uk/ 
).
6. Fiore LD, Lavori PW. Integrating ran-
domized comparative effectiveness re-
search with patient care. N Engl J Med 
2016; 
374: 
2152-8.
7. New JP, Bakerly ND, Leather D, Wood-
cock A. Obtaining real-world evidence: 
the Salford Lung Study. Thorax 2014; 
69: 
1152-4.
8. Bakerly ND, Woodcock A, New JP, 
 
et al. The Salford Lung Study protocol: 
 
a pragmatic, randomised phase III real-
world effectiveness trial in chronic ob-
structive pulmonary disease. Respir Res 
2015; 
16: 
101.
9. Jones PW. COPD assessment test — 
rationale, development, validation and per-
formance. COPD 2013; 
10: 
269-71.
10. EuroQol Group. EuroQol — a new facil-
ity for the measurement of health-related 
quality of life. Health Policy 1990; 
16: 
199-
208.
11. Elkhenini HF, Davis KJ, Stein ND, 
 
et al. Using an electronic medical record 
(EMR) to conduct clinical trials: Salford 
Lung Study feasibility. BMC Med Inform 
Decis Mak 2015; 
15: 
8.
12. Dransfield MT, Bourbeau J, Jones PW, 
et al. Once-daily inhaled fluticasone fu-
roate and vilanterol versus vilanterol only 
for prevention of exacerbations of COPD: 
two replicate double-blind, parallel-group, 
randomised controlled trials. Lancet Respir 
Med 2013; 
1: 
210-23.
13. Agustí A, de Teresa L, De Backer W, 
et al. A comparison of the efficacy and 
safety of once-daily fluticasone furoate/
vilanterol with twice-daily fluticasone 
propionate/salmeterol in moderate to very 
severe COPD. Eur Respir J 2014; 
43: 
763-72.
14. Wedzicha JA, Banerji D, Chapman KR, 
et al. Indacaterol–glycopyrronium versus 
salmeterol–fluticasone for COPD. N Engl J 
Med 2016; 
374: 
2222-34.
15. Postma DS, Rabe KF. The asthma–
COPD overlap syndrome. N Engl J Med 
2015; 
373: 
1241-9.
16. Woodcock A, Bakerly ND, New JP, et al. 
The Salford Lung Study protocol: a prag-
matic, randomised phase III real-world 
effectiveness trial in asthma. BMC Pulm 
Med 2015; 
15: 
160.
Copyright © 2016 Massachusetts Medical Society.
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on September 4, 2016. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2016 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
