 Delayed mortality effects cut the malaria transmission
potential of insecticide-resistant mosquitoes
Mafalda Vianaa,1, Angela Hughesb,1, Jason Matthiopoulosa, Hilary Ransonb,2, and Heather M. Fergusona
aBoyd Orr Centre for Population and Ecosystem Health, Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health and Comparative Medicine, College of Medical, Veterinary
and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, United Kingdom; and bDepartment of Vector Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine,
Liverpool L3 5QA, United Kingdom
Edited by Richard E. Lenski, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, and approved June 1, 2016 (received for review March 1, 2016)
Malaria transmission has been substantially reduced across Africa
through the distribution of long-lasting insecticidal nets (LLINs).
However, the emergence of insecticide resistance within mosquito
vectors risks jeopardizing the future efficacy of this control
strategy. The severity of this threat is uncertain because the
consequences of resistance for mosquito fitness are poorly under-
stood: while resistant mosquitoes are no longer immediately killed
upon contact with LLINs, their transmission potential may be
curtailed because of longer-term fitness costs that persist beyond
the first 24 h after exposure. Here, we used a Bayesian state-space
model to quantify the immediate (within 24 h of exposure) and
delayed (>24 h after exposure) impact of insecticides on daily
survival and malaria transmission potential of moderately and
highly resistant laboratory populations of the major African
malaria vector Anopheles gambiae. Contact with LLINs reduced
the immediate survival of moderately and highly resistant An.
gambiae strains by 60–100% and 3–61%, respectively, and delayed
mortality impacts occurring beyond the first 24 h after exposure
further reduced their overall life spans by nearly one-half. In total,
insecticide exposure was predicted to reduce the lifetime malaria
transmission potential of insecticide-resistant vectors by two-thirds,
with delayed effects accounting for at least one-half of this reduction.
The existence of substantial, previously unreported, delayed mortality
effects within highly resistant malaria vectors following exposure to
insecticides does not diminish the threat of growing resistance, but
posits an explanation for the apparent paradox of continued LLIN
effectiveness in the presence of high insecticide resistance.
Anopheles gambiae | insecticide resistance | long-lasting insecticidal nets |
state-space models | transmission potential
I
nsecticides are the most widespread and successful strategy to
control and eliminate insect pest populations (1–3). However,
their extensive use has inevitably triggered intense selection for
insecticide resistance (IR) in targeted populations (4, 5). Con-
sequently, resistance to one or more classes of insecticides has
now been documented in over 440 insects and mite species (6).
Resistance can spread extremely fast after its initial emergence.
For example, the frequency of mutations associated with pyre-
throid resistance has increased 50- to 1,000-fold in insects such as
aphids and mosquitoes in less than a decade (7, 8).
The challenge of IR is particularly acute in the Anopheles mos-
quitoes that transmit malaria. Malaria remains a leading cause of
mortality and morbidity throughout the tropics, where it is esti-
mated to have killed ∼438,000 people in 2015 alone (9). Histori-
cally, disease burden has been highest in sub-Saharan Africa, but
great progress has been achieved over the past 15 y with the
number of malaria cases being halved (9, 10). The widespread use
of long-lasting insecticidal nets (LLINs) has been the major con-
tributor to this decline (10). LLINs provide physical protection
from mosquito bites to people sleeping under them, but the main
reason for their success is that the insecticides in them kill mos-
quitoes within a few hours of contact. The addition of insecti-
cides to nets can almost double the preventive effect of LLINs (11).
Only one class of insecticides, the pyrethroids, has World Health
Organization (WHO) approval for use on LLINs (12), and their
widespread use has led to the rapid emergence and increase of
pyrethroid resistance all across Africa (13). With alternative in-
secticides for LLINs still several years away from being licensed
(14), there is great concern that rapidly increasing IR levels will
soon erode and reverse current and future malaria control gains.
The WHO classifies mosquitoes as being IR if the population
mortality is <90% in the 24 h following exposure to insecticides in
standardized bioassays (15). According to this definition, resistance
to at least one class of insecticide has been identified in malaria
vectors from 64 countries with ongoing malaria transmission since
2010 (15). Although standardized definitions of resistance are of
value for surveillance, the reliability of current metrics for pre-
dicting the epidemiological consequences of IR are unclear. Spe-
cifically, it is unclear how LLINs maintain high levels of efficacy
despite increasing levels of IR. We hypothesize that, although IR
mosquitoes are no longer killed upon immediate contact with in-
secticides, they may still suffer longer-term consequences from
exposure that indirectly reduce their disease transmission potential.
Mosquito survival is the most important biological determinant
of malaria transmission intensity (16, 17). This is because only
mosquitoes that survive at least 9 further days after consuming
infected blood [i.e., the minimum time required for the parasite to
complete its extrinsic incubation period (18)] are capable of on-
ward transmission. Malaria vector survival rates are typically low in
natural populations, with <20% expected to survive long enough to
transmit (16, 19). Consequently, even if insecticides have no im-
mediate impact on IR vectors, they could still have a considerable
impact on malaria transmission if they reduce the long-term
survival of vectors. Additionally, delayed mortality effects of
Significance
Insecticide resistance poses one of the greatest challenges to the
control of malaria and other vector-borne diseases. Quantifying
the magnitude of its impact is essential to ensure the sustainability
of future control programs. Mosquito vectors are defined as
“resistant” when insecticides are no longer able to kill them on
contact. However, they may suffer longer-term impairment fol-
lowing insecticide exposure that reduces their ability to transmit
disease. We show that even highly resistant strains of the major
malaria vector Anopheles gambiae have their life span cut by ∼50%
after exposure to long-lasting insecticidal nets (LLINs). These
delayed effects are sufficient to reduce their malaria transmission
potential by two-thirds and could partially explain why insecticide
resistance is not inextricably associated with LLIN failure.
Author contributions: H.R. conceived the study; M.V., J.M., H.R., and H.M.F. designed research;
M.V., A.H., J.M., H.R., and H.M.F. performed research; A.H. and H.R. designed and performed
laboratory experiments; M.V., J.M., and H.M.F. performed model development; M.V., J.M.,
and H.M.F. analyzed data; and M.V., H.R., and H.M.F. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
See Commentary on page 8900.
1M.V. and A.H. contributed equally to this work.
2To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: hilary.ranson@lstmed.ac.uk.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1603431113/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1603431113
PNAS
|
August 9, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 32
|
8975–8980
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
SEE COMMENTARY
 insecticides could effectively slow down the spread of resistance by
imposing a cost that prevents resistance genes from going to fix-
ation. Although the potential advantages of slow-acting insecti-
cides have received theoretical consideration (20), there has been
little assessment of whether such effects are already acting within
natural vector populations. In this study, we test whether reduc-
tions in the survival of resistant lines of the major African malaria
vector, Anopheles gambiae, following repeated insecticide expo-
sures, are evident beyond the first 24 h after exposure and quantify
the associated consequences for their malaria transmission po-
tential. Demonstration of delayed mortality impacts from LLIN
exposure in resistant malaria vectors could considerably alter
prediction of the epidemiological risk posed by IR (16, 17).
Results
We investigated the immediate (within 24 h) and lifelong impact
of insecticide exposure in two IR strains of Anopheles gambiae
mosquitoes: (i) Tiassale (TIA) and (ii) Tororo (TOR). Both
strains are defined as pyrethroid-resistant according to the WHO
definition (15), but the exposure duration required to kill 50% of
the TIA is 26 times longer than for the TOR strain, indicating
that the levels of IR are substantially higher in the former (21).
Cohorts of ∼100 females of each strain were exposed either to a
LLIN coated with the pyrethroid deltamethrin (Permanet 2.0;
LLIN treatment) or to an untreated bed net (control) in WHO
standard cone bioassays (15). Over a series of different experi-
ments, the frequency with which mosquitoes were exposed to
these treatments varied: (A) daily exposure for 5 consecutive
days; (B) exposure every 4 d, for a maximum of four exposures
over 16 d; and (C) exposure and feed, where mosquitoes were
exposed every 4–6 d for a maximum of four exposures, and blood
fed during exposure (in contrast to other regimes where mos-
quitoes were fed only sugar water; Methods). These regimes were
selected to investigate a range of biologically plausible expo-
sures. Specifically, under natural conditions, An. gambiae is
expected to blood feed once every 2–4 d (22). If a blood meal is
successfully obtained, the mosquito will refrain from feeding
until eggs have been laid (∼4 d). Regime A mimics a mosquito
that is repeatedly prevented from biting by the presence of a
LLIN (thus contacts LLINs on consecutive nights), whereas re-
gime C corresponds to the scenario where the mosquito is able to
bite through the LLIN while simultaneously feeding. Together,
these regimes cover the likely maximum (daily) and minimum
(every 4 d) exposure that An. gambiae would expect in areas of
high LLIN coverage. In all experiments, mosquitoes were first
exposed to insecticides when they were 4–5 d old, and then
monitored daily to record mortality until no survivors remained
(i.e., maximum of 44 d). Each experiment (A, B, and C) was
replicated twice per strain, with the exception of the daily-
exposure experiment for which there was only one replicate
per strain in the control treatment.
Across all experimental regimes, mosquito survival was lower
after exposure to insecticides in comparison with the control
treatments (Fig. 1, upper plots, black vs. colored lines). Survival
was also higher in the more resistant TIA than TOR strain (red
vs. blue lines), but consistent between replicates of the same
experimental treatment and strain combination (lines of same
color). Overall, mortality rates in the 24 h following exposure to
insecticides ranged from 60% to 100% in the TOR strain, and
from 3% to 61% in the TIA strain. The 24-h mortality of mos-
quitoes exposed to untreated nets was <20% in both strains (Fig.
1, middle panels). The mortality rate between 24 and 72 h
(within 1 and 4 d) after last exposure of TIA ranged from 7% to
100%, which was higher than that of the controls, which ranged
from 2% to 57% (Fig. 1, bottom panels). When present, this
delayed mortality was also higher in the TOR strain (20–100%)
than in the controls.
Impact of Immediate and Delayed Effects on Survival. Our aim was
to test whether reductions in mosquito survival following insecti-
cide exposure persisted beyond the first 24 h after exposure. To
distinguish and quantify these immediate and delayed impacts, we
used a Bayesian nonlinear state-space model (SSM) on the cohort
data, in which observed daily survival was modeled as a binomial
process. Briefly, the model described the daily survival of each strain
under the different exposure regimes (A–C) and treatments (ex-
posed or control). Among the candidate models tested (i.e., models
with varying covariate combinations; see Methods for further de-
tails), the one with the highest degree of support incorporated both
immediate and delayed impacts of insecticide exposure, and se-
nescence (i.e., increase in baseline mortality rate with age; see
Methods and model fit in Fig. S1). Support for the inclusion of both
immediate and delayed impacts of insecticide exposure was par-
ticularly strong (Tables S1 and S2).
The magnitude of insecticide impacts varied between strains
(Fig. 2, blue and red lines). For example, the mean daily survival
of the TOR strain was 3.7 times lower in the 24 h following in-
secticide exposure (at t = 0 in Fig. 2) than in the unexposed
control (Table 1), whereas survival in the TIA strain was only 1.2
times lower than the controls over the same period. Similar
strain differences were observed in the magnitude of delayed
mortality impacts (>24 h after exposure; Fig. 2). Although both
strains experienced a permanent reduction in survival >24 h
following LLIN exposure (i.e., the preexposure age-independent
baseline daily survival levels are never achieved again; Fig. 2,
dotted lines); TIA mosquitoes were predicted to require ∼7 d to
recover their daily survival rate to 95% of the baseline, whereas
TOR mosquitoes required ∼14 d (i.e., Fig. 2). The delayed
mortality effects of TIA disappear faster mainly because the
initial impact on TOR survival (i.e., immediate mortality) was
much greater, which resulted in a longer period of recovery back
(asymptotically) to the baseline daily survival (i.e., control daily
survival rate; Fig. 2). After exposure to untreated nets, the daily
survival of control mosquitoes from either strain was unaffected
Daily exposure
Exposure every 4 days
Exposure & feed
Fig. 1.
Experimental data. Top panels show the observed daily survival
curves, i.e., the proportion of mosquitoes from day x − 1 alive at day x for
each exposure regime (across panels), strain (different colors), and treatment
(filled vs. open symbols) combination. Vertical dotted lines correspond to the
time of exposure. Middle panels show the immediate mortality rate of each
group, i.e., within 24 h of exposure to pyrethroids. Replicates shown with
different shades of the same color. Bottom panels show the delayed mor-
tality rate of each group, i.e., 24–72 h after exposure to pyrethroids.
8976
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1603431113
Viana et al.
 by long-term residual impact of insecticides, and remained at
baseline levels (Fig. 2, dotted line).
To further investigate the magnitude of delayed mortality im-
pacts of insecticide exposure, we used our model to contrast sce-
narios in which these effects were present [as estimated in data
(EST)] and in which they were removed [counterfactual (CF)].
Comparison of the estimated and counterfactual survival estimates
(Fig. 3 and Table 1) indicates that the median life span of TOR
mosquitoes is reduced by 17–57% in the presence of delayed
mortality impacts relative to when they are absent. The median life
span in the TIA strain was also estimated to be reduced by 0–40%
(depending on exposure regime) in the presence of delayed mor-
tality impacts of insecticides (Fig. 3 and Table S3). We investigated
how these delayed mortality impacts influenced the proportion of
mosquitoes surviving for 9 d after first exposure, which is the
minimum necessary time for a mosquito to transmit malaria as-
suming it was infected on first bite (18). The proportion of TIA
mosquitoes expected to live at least 9 d following insecticide ex-
posure was predicted to be 25–60% (across different exposure
regimes) in the presence of observed levels of delayed mortality,
rising to 52–77% when these effects were counterfactually removed
(Table 1). These differences were even more pronounced within
the TOR strain, where <7% were estimated to survive for 9 d fol-
lowing insecticide exposure when delayed mortality impacts were
acting (EST), compared with 16–42% when only immediate im-
pacts were assumed (CF, Table 1).
The impact of insecticides also differed between insecticide ex-
posure regimes (within each strain). In both strains, mosquito
mean daily survival across their life span was higher in regime A,
with consecutive daily exposures, than in the regime B with similar
number but more spaced-out exposures (e.g., Table 1). However, a
smaller proportion of mosquitoes survived until 9 d after first bite
in higher-frequency daily exposure compared with other treatments
(e.g., regime A vs. B and C). For example, no TOR mosquitoes
were estimated to be alive at day 9 in the daily-exposure regime
compared with 2–7% in treatments where exposures were spaced
over 4–5 d. Similarly, 25% of TIA mosquitoes were estimated to
survive until day 9 under the daily-exposure regime, compared with
39–60% when exposures were spaced out (Table 1). For regime C,
the mean daily survival was ∼10% lower in both strains compared
with regimes A and B. However, the comparative magnitude of all
longevity measures (Table 1) between strains was similar with those
of regime B, which had similar exposure frequencies. Despite these
differences across regimes, the magnitude of delayed insecticide
impact was relatively similar. For example, the counterfactual
mean daily survival of the TOR strain was ∼1.9-fold higher than
that estimated under each of the three exposure regimes. Similarly,
the counterfactual mean daily survival of the TIA strain was ∼1.2-
fold across all exposure regimes (Table 1).
Empirically, the delayed effects were higher in regime C (Fig.
1, bottom panels). To guarantee that the detection of delayed
effects was not purely driven by this regime in our models, we
rerun the model without regime C. The magnitudes of immediate
and delayed effects were slightly smaller but still significant in
this analysis, and show clear evidence of delayed effects even
with the exclusion of regime C. These outputs are shown in
Supporting Information (Table S2).
Implications for Malaria Transmission Potential. Using the observed
and counterfactual survival curves, we developed a stochastic
individual-based simulation to investigate the potential epidemio-
logical consequences of delayed mortality following insecticide ex-
posure in IR strains of An. gambiae. These impacts were quantified
in terms of the number of potentially infectious bites a mosquito
would be expected to deliver under scenarios where the mortality
effects following exposure to insecticides is of a similar magnitude to
that detected in our experimental data. Our simulation predicted
the probability distribution of the number of infectious bites that a
TIA and TOR mosquito could deliver over its lifetime (assuming it
was infected on its first bite). Transmission potential (quantified as
the mean of this distribution) was simulated under varying levels of
insecticide exposure and biting probabilities (detailed in Methods
and Dataset S1). Predictions were obtained both in the presence of
immediate and delayed mortality effects following exposure (as
observed in our data), and under the counterfactual scenario where
these delayed mortality effects were absent.
Under the control scenarios (exposure to untreated nets),
transmission potential was dependent only on biting probability
(Fig. 4, left panels) and was relatively high, with 47% of mosquitoes
from both strains having potential to deliver at least one infectious
bite (Fig. 4). Exposure to LLINs was estimated to reduce the
overall transmission potential of both TIA and TOR strains by 3.3
and 7.8 times, respectively (see reduction of dark blue and red
areas across panels in Fig. 4). Notably, there were marked differ-
ences between the transmission potential of mosquitoes exposed to
insecticides, depending on whether they were assumed to experi-
ence immediate mortality impacts, or both immediate and delayed
impacts of the magnitude detected in our experiments (Fig. 4). For
example, across all combinations of biting and exposure probabil-
ities, the proportion of TIA mosquitoes expected to deliver at least
one infectious bite was 33% when only immediate mortality was
considered, compared with 14% when delayed impacts were also
incorporated. Similarly, for the TOR strain, the proportion of
mosquitoes with potential to deliver one infectious bite fell from
0.0
0.4
0.8
Time since last intervention, T
Daily survival
Exposed TIA
Exposed TOR
Baseline survival
Fig. 2.
Estimated impact of delayed effects of exposure to insecticides on
mosquito daily survival of moderately (blue) and highly (red) resistant strains.
The dotted line corresponds to the baseline daily survival (and controls) of both
strains and the shaded area to the 95% credible interval.
Table 1.
EST and CF mean daily mosquito survival
Strain
Regime
Mean daily
survival
Proportion
alive at day 9
EST
CF
EST
CF
TIA (exposed)
A
0.80
0.90
0.25
0.77
B
0.74
0.85
0.60
0.74
C1
0.70
0.79
0.58
0.69
C2
0.64
0.74
0.39
0.52
TOR (exposed)
A
0.46
0.88
0.00
0.29
B
0.43
0.81
0.05
0.42
C1
0.35
0.66
0.07
0.33
C2
0.38
0.70
0.02
0.16
TIA (unexposed)
A
0.83
—
0.75
—
B
0.80
—
0.70
—
C1
0.96
—
0.95
—
C2
0.96
—
0.96
—
TOR (unexposed)
A
0.83
—
0.75
—
B
0.82
—
0.74
—
C1
0.93
—
0.91
—
C2
0.93
—
0.91
—
Estimated (EST) and counterfactual (CF) mean daily survival and mean
proportion of mosquitoes alive at day 9 after first exposure, for each
treatment, strain and exposure regime: A, daily exposure; B, exposure every
4 d; and C1 and C2, exposure with simultaneous blood meal. The dash
reflects absence of CF value.
Viana et al.
PNAS
|
August 9, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 32
|
8977
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
SEE COMMENTARY
 12% to 6% when delayed as well as immediate mortality impacts
were included. Thus, incorporation of delayed mortality effects
from insecticide exposure is expected to significantly curtail the
transmission potential of even technically defined “resistant”
malaria vectors.
Discussion
The cumulative impact of LLIN exposure on the survival of even
highly resistant An. gambiae mosquitoes was estimated to reduce
their expected lifetime transmission by threefold, with delayed
effects accounting for at least one-half of this reduction. If
delayed mortality effects of similar magnitude occur in natural
conditions, estimates of transmission potential of IR mosquitoes
should be reduced to ∼50% to what would be assumed if in-
secticides had no impact on their survival.
To our knowledge, delayed mortality effects of a similar mag-
nitude to ours have not been described in malaria vectors or any
other insecticide resistant insect. Although the distinction between
immediate and delayed mortality has been discussed for other re-
sistant insects [e.g., lesser grain borer, which infects maize (23)], the
magnitude of the effects from exposure to pesticides has not been
accurately quantified. To our knowledge, our results are the first
clear evidence that delayed mortality effects occur in IR Anopheles
sp., and that they are of sufficient magnitude to have important
epidemiological implications for the continued control of malaria.
The magnitude of delayed mortality effects varied between the
two An. gambiae strains used here. These differential impacts
may be reflective of the mechanisms of resistance within these
two strains. Physiological resistance to insecticides can arise
through target site mutations that interfere with insecticide
binding, metabolic resistance in which insecticides are detoxified
by the overproduction of enzymes, and penetration resistance in
which the mosquito cuticle is altered in a way that inhibits in-
secticide uptake (13). The TOR strain exhibits target site resistance
through the L1014S knockdown resistance (kdr) mutation (24) but
has shown no clear evidence for metabolic resistance. In contrast,
the TIA strain has both target site resistance arising from a high
frequency of 1014F kdr allele and metabolic resistance arising from
elevated expression of key P450s (25). It is likely that the long-term
impacts of LLIN exposure on mosquito survival were minimized in
the TIA strain because of its additional capacity to detoxify residual
insecticides. If so, the delayed mortality effects could be a transitory
feature arising along the evolutionary pathway from full suscepti-
bility to “complete” resistance (e.g., resistance via multiple mech-
anisms). For example, delayed mortality impacts may be of most
significance in populations where resistance has newly arisen and is
conferred by a limited range of target site mutations, but have
minimal impact in populations that have developed both multiple
resistance mechanisms and compensatory mutations through years
of intense selection. Thus, even though delayed mortality impacts
of insecticides may be reducing the transmission potential of IR
mosquitoes under current conditions, this mitigating effect could
become eroded by continued, intense selection for resistance in
the future.
Our findings may help explain the apparent paradox of in-
creases in the number of malaria cases averted over time that are
attributed to LLINs across Africa (10), even in the face of in-
creasing resistance. If IR was causing widespread failure of
LLINs, the impact of LLINS on malaria transmission across
Africa would be reduced. The available evidence on how IR
influences malaria risk is small and shows some discrepancies.
For example, parallel studies in Malawi where Anopheles
funestus is moderately resistant variously reported that LLINs
appeared to have little impact [i.e., when the endpoint was
prevalence (26)] or were still reducing transmission by 30% [i.e.,
when the endpoint was incidence (27)]. However, recent models
suggest that LLINs continue to be responsible for the vast ma-
jority of malaria cases averted in Africa over the last decade (10)
even with increasing IR. The presence of these delayed mortality
effects, which reduce the impact of IR on transmission, may help
explain why a widespread, catastrophic impact of IR has not yet
been observed. However, because the reduction in malaria
transmission potential by mosquitoes exposed to LLINs seems to
decrease with increasing intensity of IR (i.e., TOR vs. TIA), our
findings also serve as a warning that resistance could eventually
reduce the public health benefit of pyrethroid-based LLINs.
Some studies have shown that exposure to insecticides alters
the behavior of IR arthropods in a way that could indirectly
reduce their fitness [e.g., altered dispersal, reduced neurosensory
perception and higher risk of predation (13, 28)]. For example,
exposure to neonicotinoid insecticides at sublethal concentra-
tion decreases the feeding activity of the grain aphid (23).
Similarly, An. gambiae exposed to LLINs seem to temporarily
lose the ability to host-seek (29). This study did not test for such
additional indirect impacts; however, preliminary data indicate a
reduction in the feeding success of exposed IR mosquitoes. In
this and other studies (30, 31), it was observed that the legs of
Fig. 4.
Contour plots of the mean number of infectious bites per mosquito
of TOR (blue upper panels) and TIA (red bottom panels) strains obtained for
mosquitoes exposed to untreated (control) and insecticide-treated nets with
and without delayed effects across varying probabilities of biting (x axis) and
exposure (y axis).
10
20
30
40
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Daily exposure
Time (days)
Proportion alive
TIA w/ delayed ef.
TIA w/o delayed ef.
TOR w/ delayed ef.
TOR w/o delayed ef.
10
20
30
40
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Exposure every 4 days
Time (days)
Proportion alive
10
20
30
40
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Exposure/feed A
Time (days)
Proportion alive
10
20
30
40
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Exposure/feed B
Time (days)
Proportion alive
Fig. 3.
Modeled daily survival curves of An. gambiae after different expo-
sure regimes to LLINs. Full lines represent the curve estimated from fitting
the binomial model to the data, and the dotted lines represent the coun-
terfactual curve predicted with no delayed effects. Lines correspond to the
median prediction with shaded 95% credible intervals.
8978
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1603431113
Viana et al.
 mosquitoes can become detached when trying to feed through
nets, which would be one mechanism to explain their subsequent
reduction in blood feeding. Further work is needed to quantify
this phenomenon and other indirect fitness consequences of
LLIN exposure in IR mosquitoes to calculate their combined
impact on transmission (13). Alternatively, contact with LLINs
could prompt behavioral changes that increase the transmission
potential of IR mosquitoes, by, for example, changing the time
and location of their biting to avoid nets [e.g., “behavioral re-
sistance” (32)]. Furthermore, previous studies have suggested
that resistance is associated with changes in the susceptibility of
mosquitoes to infection [ranging from an enhancement, re-
duction, or no change (33–35)]. IR also drives various physio-
logical modifications that may ultimately impact survival and
parasite competence (28). For example, resistant Anopheles and
other taxa have an increased capacity to tolerate oxidative stress,
which in turn reduces long-term survival (36, 37). Thus, although
results presented here constitute valuable proof-of-principle on
delayed mortality impacts from insecticide exposure, consider-
ation of a wider range of indirect consequences is needed to
accurately predict the transmission potential of IR mosquitoes.
A previous study tested for a cumulative impact of low-dose in-
secticide exposure in Anopheles but found no evidence of higher
mosquito mortality following repeated exposures (33). Similarly, our
results show no association between the immediate mortality of
mosquitoes following exposure, and the number of times they had
been previously exposed. However, we also show that mosquitoes’
natural mortality varies with age. Older mosquitoes have been
previously shown to be more susceptible to pyrethroids than their
younger counterparts (33, 38). Our findings suggest this result may
have been driven by changes in the natural mortality of mosquitoes
over time (i.e., senescence) rather than increases in susceptibility to
insecticide exposure. The ability to estimate additional effects, such
as senescence, is one of the advantages of using our modeling ap-
proach. The state-space framework used to analyze the survival
curves was also critical for the quantification of the nonlinear effect
of delayed effects of exposure on mosquito mortality, which would
not be possible with more commonly used survival analysis.
Our findings highlight the importance of investigating the
impacts of resistance beyond immediate mortality. The existence
of previously ignored delayed mortality effects presents a hy-
pothesis for why the presence of pyrethroid resistance in African
malaria vectors does not appear to have resulted in widespread
reductions in LLIN efficacy (10, 27). However, the present study
warns that increasing resistance could erode the ability of LLINs
to hold back malaria. As the degree of resistance increases, the
magnitude of these delayed mortality impacts may diminish and
eventually disappear. This study provides a proof-of-principle for
the existence of these delayed mortality effects at a magnitude
that could have significant implications for malaria transmission.
Ideally, the next step would be to validate these findings in wild
populations and assess their relevance to operational control.
There are currently several constraints to testing this hypothesis
in the field; namely, difficulties in aging and determining the
history of insecticide exposure of wild mosquitoes and mark–
recapture methods for survival estimation have poor efficiency
(39). While technology develops, alternatively, this phenomenon
could be investigated under semifield conditions (40) where wild
mosquitoes can be exposed to LLINs under realistic but con-
tained conditions. Further empirical studies combined with the
modeling framework developed here will be vital for prediction
of the impact of insecticide resistance on malaria control.
Methods
Experimental Design. Two strains of An. gambiae mosquitoes differing in
their IR levels were used in this study: TIA, which originates from Southern
Cote d’Ivoire, and TOR from Uganda. Details of their resistance profile can
be found in ref. 21 and references therein. A fully susceptible strain was not
included in this study as all mosquitoes die within 24 h, and hence delayed
mortality cannot be measured. Cohorts of ∼100 mosquitoes of each strain
were exposed to Permanet 2.0 LLINs containing 50 mg/m2 deltamethrin
(Vestergaard Frandsen), the standard dose to mimic field exposures, or to an
insecticide-free bed net for 3 min using the WHO cone bioassay (15). Details
of the experimental design, such as sample sizes and frequency of exposure,
are detailed in Table S4. Three alternative exposure regimes were used:
(A) daily exposure; (B) exposure every 4 d; and (C) exposure and feed; and
two replicates were carried out for each regime and strain combination. The
mosquitoes for the replicates were taken from different colony cohorts
apart from those in regime A, which were from the same colony cohort
(hence only one replicate was available for A). Mortality was recorded daily
starting 24 h after the first exposure, and all surviving mosquitoes were held
with access to sugar solution ad libitum. For the exposure regime C, mos-
quitoes were starved of sugar water 12 h before exposure and mosquitoes
were aspirated into two containers, one covered with a Permanet 2.0 and
the second with an untreated net. Mosquitoes were provided access to a
blood meal for 20 min via a volunteer’s arm rested on the netting of each
container. Unfed mosquitoes were then counted and discarded. Mortality
was recorded daily starting 24 h after the first exposure. At the end of the
bioassay, daily mortality was available for a total of 1,497 mosquitoes, from
22 different experimental groups (3 exposure regimes; 2 strains; 2 treat-
ments, i.e., exposed and nonexposed to insecticide; and 2 replicates).
Bayesian Survival Model. A Bayesian SSM was constructed to quantify the
impact of the different insecticide exposure regimes on An. gambiae survival,
and disentangle the impacts of immediate (i.e., within 24 h of exposure) and
long-term cumulative mortality. The observed number of mosquitoes alive,
Ni,t, in each experimental replicate i (22 in total), at time t, was modeled as a
binomial variable: Ni,t ∼ binomial (Si,t, Ni,t-1); where Ni,t-1 is the total number
of mosquitoes alive in group i at time t − 1 and Si,t, is the probability of daily
survival described with a logit link to its nonlinear predictor (�
Si,t):
�
Si,t = β0 + β1t + β2t2 − β3,x,sEi,t + ui.
[1]
Here, β0 corresponds to the intercept, and the coefficients β1 and β2 were used
to incorporate natural mortality (i.e., senescence) over time (or age, t). The
short-term “immediate” impact of exposure to a (treated or untreated) bed
net, on mosquito daily survival was represented by the coefficient β3, which was
allowed to have a different value for each treatment x (i.e., exposed or un-
exposed to insecticides) and strain s (i.e., TIA or TOR) combination. Biologically,
β3,x,s corresponds to the magnitude (in the predictor scale) of the reduction in
daily survival occurring after exposure. Exposure is treated as the nonlinear
covariate E and was introduced to quantify the postulated delayed effects of
insecticide, which was constructed as the superposition of multiple, time-
decaying effects corresponding to the multiple exposure regimes:
Ei,t =
X
e−β4,x,sΔTi,t ,
[2]
where, β4 quantifies the decay rate of the delayed mosquito mortality risk after
exposure, and is specific to each treatment x and strain s; and ΔT, the time since
last exposure in each replicate i at time t. The coefficient u was incorporated into
the model as a Gaussian random effect that accounts for other unattributed
differences between replicates. Further details, including prior distributions and
model code (Dataset S1), are provided in Supporting Information.
Model Selection. An initial set of 11 candidate models representing differing,
biologically plausible permutations of our predefined coefficients: i.e., se-
nescence (as a linear or quadratic effect), immediate effects of exposure,
delayed effects of exposure, and random effect of replicate, were constructed
(Table S1). After assessing convergence, model goodness-of-fit and the de-
viance information criterion of all candidate models (41), we chose the best
model (described in Eq. 1). All models were fit using Monte Carlo Markov
chain methods within software JAGS (42) via interface with R (R Develop-
ment Core Team). Further details can be found in Supporting Information.
Prediction of the Impact of Delayed Effects. The survival curves Si,t for each
replicate were estimated as a function of the predicted coefficients obtained
from Eq. 1. The relative impact of delayed effects was quantified by com-
paring these survival curves, which incorporated delayed effects of the
magnitude detected in experimental results, with “counterfactual” scenar-
ios in which their effect had been removed after model fitting. This was
done during the refit of the model by setting the decay rate coefficient of
delayed effects (β4,x,s) to the very high value of 10,000 (i.e., delayed effects
do not exist and only immediate mortality can impact mosquito survival).
Transmission Potential (Tp). A stochastic individual-based simulation was used
to investigate the potential epidemiological consequences [i.e., transmission
Viana et al.
PNAS
|
August 9, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 32
|
8979
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
SEE COMMENTARY
 potential (Tp)] of delayed mortality following insecticide exposure in re-
sistant strains of An. gambiae. These impacts were quantified in terms of the
number of potentially infectious bites a mosquito would be expected to
deliver under scenarios when exposure to insecticides is of a similar mag-
nitude as detected in our experimental data.
We simulated transmission potential for the full range of combinations for
the probabilities of biting and exposure, although some of the combinations
in this space of scenarios are unlikely (e.g., it is near-impossible that with an
exposure probability of 1 implying an intact LLIN, biting probability can ever
approach 1). We explored the space of exposure and biting probabilities
through 400 distinct combination scenarios (20 × 20 values) and each sce-
nario was simulated 1,500 times to obtain a frequency distribution for the
number of infections bites. The simulation used the following assumptions:
(i) adult female mosquitoes began their life on day zero, and were given
their first opportunity to blood feed on day 2; (ii) all mosquitoes became
infected with malaria upon their first blood meal; after feeding, surviving
mosquitoes had the opportunity to blood feed again every 3 d; (iii) feeding
success was determined as a binomial distribution based on the probability
of biting achieved for each draw; (iv) mosquitoes become infectious after an
average of 12 d after becoming infected. This incubation period was drawn
from a normal distribution with mean 12 and SD of 1.5, which resulted in a
range between 9 and 23 d [values known to occur at temperatures between
30 and 20 °C (18)].
Based on these assumptions and the generated probabilities of exposure and
biting, a binomial process was simulated to determine when a mosquito was
exposed to insecticides and when it was successful at biting, during their lifetime
(i.e., from day 1 to day 50). The daily survival of each mosquito was based on the
estimated posterior distributions of the SSM implemented to our experimental
data (i.e., Eq. 1). For each mosquito of each strain (TIA and TOR) and treatment
(exposed to insecticide-treated nets and control), the survival curves (Eq. 1) were
reestimated using the exposure over time (i.e., across the 50 d when exposures
occurred) obtained from the exposure–biting relationship, and independent
draws from the posterior distributions of the coefficients obtained from the SSM
for the respective observed and counterfactual (without delayed effects) survival
curves. The use of the posterior distributions, as opposed to a mean coefficient,
ensured that all uncertainty was correctly propagated through to the estimates
of transmission potential. The survival state of a mosquito at day t (alive or dead
from day 1 to 50) was also defined through a binomial process with a probability
of daily survival.
Finally, the total number of infectious bites expected to be delivered by a
mosquito, or transmission potential (Tp) of each mosquito, was obtained as
follows:
Tp =
X
t
StBtIt,
[3]
where St is the survival state on day t (i.e., alive or dead), Bt is the number of
bites on day t, and It is the infectious state on day t. The Tp of each mosquito
were finally used to generate a heatmap of transmission potential across the
varying exposure and biting probabilities, for each strain, with and without
delayed effects.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. Financial support was provided by European Commission
Seventh Framework Programme Grant 265660 “AvecNet.”
1. Aktar MW, Sengupta D, Chowdhury A (2009) Impact of pesticides use in agriculture:
Their benefits and hazards. Interdiscip Toxicol 2(1):1–12.
2. Dedryver C-A, Le Ralec A, Fabre F (2010) The conflicting relationships between aphids
and men: A review of aphid damage and control strategies. C R Biol 333(6-7):539–553.
3. Hemingway J (2014) The role of vector control in stopping the transmission of malaria:
Threats and opportunities. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 369(1645):20130431.
4. Melander AL (1914) Can insects become resistant to sprays? J Econ Entomol 15:
400–404.
5. Whalon ME, Mota-Sanchez D (2008) Global Pesticide Resistance in Arthropods (CABI,
Wallingford, UK).
6. Roush RT, Tabashnik BE (2002) Pesticide Resistance in Arthropods (Springer, New
York).
7. Foster SP, et al. (2014) A mutation (L1014F) in the voltage-gated sodium channel of
the grain aphid, Sitobion avenae, is associated with resistance to pyrethroid insecti-
cides. Pest Manag Sci 70(8):1249–1253.
8. Toé KH, et al. (2014) Increased pyrethroid resistance in malaria vectors and decreased
bed net effectiveness, Burkina Faso. Emerg Infect Dis 20(10):1691–1696.
9. WHO (2015) World Malaria Report 2015 (WHO, Geneva).
10. Bhatt S, et al. (2015) The effect of malaria control on Plasmodium falciparum in Africa
between 2000 and 2015. Nature 526(7572):207–211.
11. Russell TL, et al. (2010) Impact of promoting longer-lasting insecticide treatment of
bed nets upon malaria transmission in a rural Tanzanian setting with pre-existing
high coverage of untreated nets. Malar J 9:187.
12. Kelly-Hope L, Ranson H, Hemingway J (2008) Lessons from the past: Managing in-
secticide resistance in malaria control and eradication programmes. Lancet Infect Dis
8(6):387–389.
13. Ranson H, et al. (2011) Pyrethroid resistance in African anopheline mosquitoes: What
are the implications for malaria control? Trends Parasitol 27(2):91–98.
14. Ranson H, Lissenden N (2016) Insecticide resistance in African Anopheles mosquitos:
A worsening situation that needs urgent action to maintain malaria control. Trends
Parasitol 32(3):187–196.
15. WHO (2013) Test Procedures for Insecticide Resistance Monitoring in Malaria Vector
Mosquitoes (WHO, Geneva).
16. Garrett-Jones C, Shidrawi GR (1969) Malaria vectorial capacity of a population of
Anopheles gambiae: An exercise in epidemiological entomology. Bull World Health
Organ 40(4):531–545.
17. Ferguson HM, et al. (2012) Selection of mosquito life-histories: A hidden weapon
against malaria? Malar J 11:106.
18. Beier JC (1998) Malaria parasite development in mosquitoes. Annu Rev Entomol 43:
519–543.
19. Noden BH, Kent MD, Beier JC (1995) The impact of variations in temperature on early Plas-
modium falciparum development in Anopheles stephensi. Parasitology 111(Pt 5):539–545.
20. Read AF, Lynch PA, Thomas MB (2009) How to make evolution-proof insecticides for
malaria control. PLoS Biol 7(4):e1000058.
21. Bagi J, et al. (2015) When a discriminating dose assay is not enough: Measuring the
intensity of insecticide resistance in malaria vectors. Malar J 14:210.
22. Gillies MT (1953) The duration of the gonotrophic cycle in Anopheles gambiae and
Anopheles funestus, with a note on the efficiency of hand catching. East Afr Med J
30(4):129–135.
23. Getchell AI, Subramanyam B (2008) Immediate and delayed mortality of Rhyzopertha
dominica (Coleoptera: Bostrichidae) and Sitophilus oryzae (Coleoptera: Curculionidae)
adults exposed to spinosad-treated commodities. J Econ Entomol 101(3):1022–1027.
24. Ramphul U, et al. (2009) Insecticide resistance and its association with target-site
mutations in natural populations of Anopheles gambiae from eastern Uganda. Trans
R Soc Trop Med Hyg 103(11):1121–1126.
25. Edi CVA, Koudou BG, Jones CM, Weetman D, Ranson H (2012) Multiple-insecticide
resistance in Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes, Southern Côte d’Ivoire. Emerg Infect
Dis 18(9):1508–1511.
26. Mathanga DP, et al. (2015) The effectiveness of long-lasting, insecticide-treated nets
in a setting of pyrethroid resistance: A case-control study among febrile children 6 to
59 months of age in Machinga District, Malawi. Malar J 14(1):457.
27. Lindblade KA, et al. (2015) A cohort study of the effectiveness of insecticide-treated bed nets
to prevent malaria in an area of moderate pyrethroid resistance, Malawi. Malar J 14:31.
28. Rivero A, Vézilier J, Weill M, Read AF, Gandon S (2010) Insecticide control of vector-
borne diseases: When is insecticide resistance a problem? PLoS Pathog 6(8):e1001000.
29. Siegert PY, Walker E, Miller JR (2009) Differential behavioral responses of Anopheles
gambiae (Diptera: Culicidae) modulate mortality caused by pyrethroid-treated bed-
nets. J Econ Entomol 102(6):2061–2071.
30. Alexander B, et al. (2009) Susceptibility to chemical insecticides of two Brazilian
populations of the visceral leishmaniasis vector Lutzomyia longipalpis (Diptera: Psy-
chodidae). Trop Med Int Health 14(10):1272–1277.
31. Norris LC, Norris DE (2011) Insecticide resistance in Culex quinquefasciatus mosquitoes
after the introduction of insecticide-treated bed nets in Macha, Zambia. J Vector Ecol
36(2):411–420.
32. Parker JEA, et al. (2015) Infrared video tracking of Anopheles gambiae at insecticide-treated
bed nets reveals rapid decisive impact after brief localised net contact. Sci Rep 5:13392.
33. Glunt KD, Thomas MB, Read AF (2011) The effects of age, exposure history and
malaria infection on the susceptibility of Anopheles mosquitoes to low concentra-
tions of pyrethroid. PLoS One 6(9):e24968.
34. Vontas J, et al. (2007) Transcriptional analysis of insecticide resistance in Anopheles
stephensi using cross-species microarray hybridization. Insect Mol Biol 16(3):315–324.
35. Alout H, Berthomieu A, Hadjivassilis A, Weill M (2007) A new amino-acid substitution
in acetylcholinesterase 1 confers insecticide resistance to Culex pipiens mosquitoes
from Cyprus. Insect Biochem Mol Biol 37(1):41–47.
36. Vontas JG, Small GJ, Hemingway J (2001) Glutathione S-transferases as antioxidant defence
agents confer pyrethroid resistance in Nilaparvata lugens. Biochem J 357(Pt 1):65–72.
37. Oliver SV, Brooke BD (2016) The role of oxidative stress in the longevity and in-
secticide resistance phenotype of the major malaria vectors Anopheles arabiensis and
Anopheles funestus. PLoS One 11(3):e0151049.
38. Jones CM, et al. (2012) Aging partially restores the efficacy of malaria vector control
in insecticide-resistant populations of Anopheles gambiae s.l. from Burkina Faso.
Malar J 11:24.
39. Buonaccorsi JP, Harrington LC, Edman JD (2003) Estimation and comparison of mos-
quito survival rates with release-recapture-removal data. J Med Entomol 40(1):6–17.
40. Ferguson HM, et al. (2008) Establishment of a large semi-field system for experimental
study of African malaria vector ecology and control in Tanzania. Malar J 7(1):158.
41. Spiegelhalter DJ, Best NG, Carlin BP, van der Linde A (2002) Bayesian measures of
model complexity and fit. J R Stat Soc Series B Stat Methodol 64(4):583–639.
42. Plummer M (2003) JAGS: A program for analysis of Bayesian graphical models using
Gibbs sampling. Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Distributed Sta-
tistical Computing, eds Hornik K, Leisch F, Zeileis A. Available at www.r-project.org/
conferences/DSC-2003/Proceedings/Plummer.pdf. Accessed June 27, 2016.
43. Gelman A, Rubin D (1992) Inference from iterative simulation using multiple se-
quences. Statistical Science 7(4):457–511.
8980
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1603431113
Viana et al.
