                           
Vinther, J., Porras, L., Young, F., Budd, G. E., & Edgecombe, G. D. (2016).
The mouth apparatus of the Cambrian gilled lobopodian Pambdelurion
whittingtoni. Palaeontology, 59(6), 841-849.
https://doi.org/10.1111/pala.12256
Peer reviewed version
License (if available):
CC BY-NC
Link to published version (if available):
10.1111/pala.12256
Link to publication record in Explore Bristol Research
PDF-document
This is the author accepted manuscript (AAM). The final published version (version of record) is available online
via Wiley at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/pala.12256/abstract. Please refer to any applicable terms
of use of the publisher.
University of Bristol - Explore Bristol Research
General rights
This document is made available in accordance with publisher policies. Please cite only the published
version using the reference above. Full terms of use are available:
http://www.bristol.ac.uk/pure/about/ebr-terms
 THE MOUTH APPARATUS OF THE CAMBRIAN GILLED LOBOPODIAN 
PAMBDELURION WHITTINGTONI  
 
by JAKOB VINTHER1*, LUIS PORRAS1, FLETCHER YOUNG1, GRAHAM E. BUDD2 
and GREGORY D. EDGECOMBE3* 
 
1Schools of Earth Sciences and Biological Sciences, 24 Tyndall Avenue, University 
of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TQ, UK; e-mail: jakob.vinther@bristol.ac.uk, 
luis.porrasord@gmail.com, fletcherjyoung@gmail.com 
2Department of Earth Sciences, Palaeobiology, Uppsala University, Villavägen 
16,75236 Uppsala, Sweden; e-mail: graham.budd@pal.uu.se 
3Department of Earth Sciences, The Natural History Museum, Cromwell Road, 
London SW7 5BD, UK; e-mail: g.edgecombe@nhm.ac.uk 
*Corresponding authors 
 
Abstract: Omnidens is a large feeding apparatus composed of circlets of teeth, 
first documented from the early Cambrian of China. Originally interpreted as the 
oral cone of a radiodontan, it was later reinterpreted as the introvert of a 
priapulan. In both cases the Omnidens mouthparts underpinned estimates of 
gigantic (ca 2 metres) body size. Recent evidence has been used to suggest that 
pharyngeal teeth and radially-arranged oral plates in the stem-group 
onychophoran Hallucigenia and the lower stem-group euarthropod 
Jianshanopodia are homologous to structures of the introvert in priapulans and 
other scalidophorans, and are thus primitive characters for moulting animals 
(Ecdysozoa) as a whole. Here we show that the early Cambrian gilled lobopodian 
Pambdelurion whittingtoni from Sirius Passet, Greenland, possesses a mouth 
apparatus identical to Omnidens, being composed of the same three zones with 
detailed similarities of sclerites in each zone.  An oral cone with rings of 
pharyngeal teeth, radial plates, and outer scalid-like plates are ecdysozoan 
characters retained in the euarthropod stem group. Omnidens from China likely 
belongs to an unrecognised Pambdelurion-like animal rather than being part of a 
giant priapulan.  
 
 Keywords: Cambrian, Pambdelurion, Sirius Passet Lagerstätte, Ecdysozoa,  
 
 
CONSIDERATION of the affinities of radiodontans such as Anomalocaris and 
allied Cambrian animals such as gilled lobopodians has drawn heavily on the 
anatomy of the mouth apparatus. Morphological knowledge of Radiodonta was 
fundamentally illuminated by complete specimens from the Burgess Shale in 
Canada and the Chengjiang Biota in China. Chengjiang radiodontans came to light 
with the documentation of new taxa and anatomical structures in the 1990s 
(Chen et al. 1994; Hou et al. 1995), prompting hypotheses about evolutionary 
relationships to other giant predators of the Cambrian, and opening up a 
controversy over whether these animals are stem-group euarthropods (Budd 
1997, 1999) or more closely related to cycloneuralian worms such as priapulans 
and nematodes (Hou et al. 1995). A position on the euarthropod stem group has 
since gained further support (Daley et al. 2009; Smith and Ortega-Hernández 
2014), and radiodontans are now interpreted as apex predators of the Early 
Palaeozoic (Daley et al. 2013; Vinther et al. 2014; Van Roy et al. 2015). They 
possess a mouth apparatus composed of radial plates of different sizes and 
shapes, originally described as a separate entity in the Burgess Shale (Peytoia) 
(Whittington and Briggs 1985). 
Associated with Chengjiang specimens are large tooth plates, which were 
interpreted as being part of the radiodontan Amplectobelua Hou et al. 1995. The 
size of these oral elements prompted an estimate of a >2 metre body length, 
greater than any estimates based on frontal appendages (Chen et al. 1994). 
However, a radiodontan identity for the mouth plates was subsequently rejected 
and they were reinterpreted as parts of the introvert of a large priapulan, named 
Omnidens amplus (Hou et al. 2006). Similarly, the large tooth plates prompted a 
reconstruction of O. amplus as the largest known priapulan in history.  
Recent discoveries have demonstrated the presence of pharyngeal teeth 
and radially-arranged circumoral plates in the lower stem-group  euarthropod 
Jianshanopodia (Liu et al. 2004; Vannier et al. 2014) and the stem-group 
onychophoran Hallucigenia (Smith and Caron 2015). These have been 
homologised with elements of the introvert of scalidophorans and nematoids, 
 and homologues of these have been proposed in extant Tardigrada and 
Euarthropoda (Smith and Caron 2015). This distribution suggests that the stem 
lineages of the three panarthropod phyla (tardigrades, onychophorans and 
euarthropods) retained modified oral cones inherited from the common ancestor 
of Ecdysozoa (Dewel and Dewel 1997; Smith and Caron 2015).  
Here we demonstrate that the lower stem-group euarthropod (sensu 
Ortega-Hernández 2016) Pambdelurion whittingtoni Budd, 1997 from the Sirius 
Passet Konservat-Lagerstätte in North Greenland (Budd 1997) possesses an 
Omnidens mouth apparatus (Figs. 1, 2). This contradicts a priapulan identity for 
Omnidens mouthparts in China and instead supports a stem-group euarthropod 
identity for these intriguing fossils. Implications for homologies of mouthparts in 
Panarthropoda are considered in light of these new findings. 
 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
 
Several hundred specimens of Pambdelurion whittingtoni have been collected 
from Sirius Passet (Conway Morris et al. 1987; Ineson and Peel 2011), sourced 
from both talus and outcrop. All specimens are preserved in dorsoventral aspect, 
and due to their large size, most are incomplete. Four specimens preserve the 
mouth apparatus in reasonable detail, one of them associated with very large 
button-shaped sclerites. They are housed in the Natural History Museum of 
Denmark (prefix MGUH). The oral cone was originally recognised as a “Peytoia” 
mouthpart (Budd 1997), but other than being radial and situated ventrally in the 
head, anatomical details were ambiguous. 
Specimens were photographed in low angle lighting, coated with 
magnesium oxide smoke or ammonium chloride sublimate. Some specimens 
were also photographed at various angles for post-processing via polynomial 
texture mapping (Hammer and Spocova 2013). Reflective Transformation 
Imaging (Malzbender et al. 2001) used the Hemispherical Harmonic algorithm 
(Wang et al. 2009) in FTIBuilder v. 2.02. Specimens collected in situ preserve 
features visible as reflective films (Vinther et al. 2011a, b; Vinther et al. 2014), 
which were visualised under water and high angle illumination. Interpretative 
 drawings were made by camera lucida or in Adobe Illustrator from photographic 
images. 
To estimate maximum body size, complete specimens were measured for 
length and distance from the midline to the first trunk flap. Specimens 
preserving oral cones all lack the posterior end but preserve their lateral extent. 
Ratios between triangular plates and oval sclerites in the mouth apparatus in 
relation to body-width at the first trunk segment were measured and scaled to 
the relation of the body width and length in the largest complete specimen.  
The phylogenetic context and taxonomic nomenclature used herein follow 
Ortega-Hernández  (2016, fig. 2). Jianshanapodia/Megadictyon, Kerygmachela, 
Pambdelurion, Opabinia and Radiodonta are interpreted as a paraphyletic series 
on the euarthropod stem-lineage that is collectively grouped as lower stem-
group Euarthropoda.    
 
DESCRIPTION 
 
The head of Pambdelurion whittingtoni has a rounded anterior margin that bears 
paired sets of three spine-like elements (Fig. 3A, B; Ortega-Hernández and Budd 
2016), flanked by a pair of ventrolaterally attached, annulated frontal 
appendages, the latter equipped with paired spines along their inner margins.  
The mouth apparatus is situated ventrally on the head in variable 
configurations relative to the anterior margin and frontal appendages. Different 
specimens (MGUH 24508, 30506) preserve the apparatus either in posteriorly- 
or anteriorly-facing lateral view, suggesting some degree of mobility from which 
we infer that the apparatus was accommodated on a mobile, protrusible cone. 
The apparatus consists of three distinct, radially arranged elements: 1) outer 
plates; 2) large triangular plates, forming a ring; 3) an inner array of small 
pectinate sclerites. The outer plates (Fig. 4E, F) are ovate or button shaped in 
outline. They are arranged radially around the mouth, but our specimens only 
preserve them along the anterior half of the mouth apparatus (Fig. 1). These 
plates bear tubercles and blunt cusps disposed in two parallel rows. The number 
of cusps seems to differ between specimens of different sizes. The triangular 
plates (Figs. 2A, B, 4C, D) contact each other at their bases, but some specimens 
 show some degree of overlap. We interpret the overlap as a taphonomic 
alteration because in those cases the tips of the plates do not point towards the 
centre of the mouth (Fig. 2B). The number of triangular plates in the ring cannot 
be counted with precision in any specimen (being consistently partly 
incomplete), but the most complete specimen has 13-14 definite plates (Fig. 2B). 
Extrapolating based on consistent size throughout the ring predicts a total of ca. 
16 plates. The triangular plates have a median crest along the apical region that 
extends at least half the length of the plate (Fig. 4D). The inner sclerites (Figs. 2A, 
4E, F) are poorly preserved but bear five or six spines, their apices directed 
towards the centre of the mouth apparatus. The precise number of whorls of 
inner sclerites is not discernible but there appear to be at least two. The outer 
oval plates are sometimes superimposed on the basal parts of the triangular 
plates (Figs. 3A, B, 4C, D), and are either concave and smooth or convex and 
tuberculate. It appears that these plates are embedded in an integument because 
they are occasionally superimposed on the basal part of the circlet of triangular 
plates, which in such specimens appears effaced, in contrast to the sharp margins 
of the distal parts of the triangular plates (Fig. 2A). The exceptional quality of 
preservation of these specimens, showing fine details of annulations on the 
frontal appendage and having a complete, arcuate anterior margin (Fig. 1, 2A) 
suggests a concealing integument over the mouth apparatus that bore these oval 
plates rather than displacement due to decay. The sclerite arrangement seen in 
SP-2009-0939 (Figs. 1A, B, 2A, 4C, D) is interpreted as the result of dorsoventral 
compaction of the extruded mouth cone. As the mouth bent on top of itself the 
oval plates of the posterior margin were flipped under the mouth cone, hence 
leading to variable preservation and relief (Fig. 3C). 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
The mouth cones of Pambdelurion whittingtoni and Omnidens amplus (Fig. 5) 
share the following characters that attest to their close affinities: 1) the outer 
part of the mouth apparatus bears ovate plates with radially arranged tubercles 
and cusps; 2) a single ring of large triangular plates (“very large spines” (Hou et 
al. 2006), each with a median crest-like apical spine; 3) the numbers of 
 triangular plates is apparently conserved (an estimated 14-16 in Omnidens 
matches that of Pambdelurion); 4) the inner part of the oral cone contains circlets 
of oval tooth plates that each bears a pectinate spine fringe. Large, denticulate 
sclerites associated with Omnidens (Hou et al. 2006, fig. 3E) are of uncertain 
identity and have been interpreted as parts of another organism, such as the 
radiodontan Amplectobelua (Hou et al. 2006). Although comparable sclerites 
have not been found in or near the mouth apparatus of Pambdelurion, 
comparison with the latter opens the possibility that they could be the distal part 
of the frontal appendage, which in some specimens is configured as a cluster of 
recurved spines (Fig. 1C, D; Vannier et al. 2014, fig. S2g). 
The similarity in the relationships of the three main components of the oral 
region and the details of each component are so exact that the taxonomic 
distinction between Pambdelurion and Omnidens is open to question. Presently 
we defer formal synonymy of Omnidens in the absence of associated body parts 
in its type area, Chengjiang. The correspondence between Pambelurion and 
Omnidens indicates that priapulan affinities for the latter are untenable, given 
that the whole-body morphology of Pambdelurion is known and is demonstrably 
that of a gilled lobopodian. Pambdelurion now provides a search image for the 
Chengjiang animal that bears the Omnidens mouthpart. Currently no gilled 
lobopodians are known from this biota and, based on size and phylogenetic 
proximity, the only plausible candidates are large-bodied lobopodians such as 
Megadictyon cf. haikouensis (Liu et al. 2007) and Jianshanopodia decora (Liu et al. 
2006). The pharynx of J. decora bears circlets of teeth comparable to those of 
priapulans (Vannier et al. 2014). If such lobopodians are indeed the bearers of 
the Omnidens mouth apparatus, then the detailed similarity to Pambdelurion 
would imply a remarkable degree of conservatism in mouthparts in the lower 
euarthropod stem group.  
A reassessment of body size as outlined in Material and Methods draws on 
the largest complete specimen of Pambdelurion, which is 46 cm in length. The 
largest individual skeletal element of Omnidens is a triangular plate of length 47 
mm (Hou et al. 2006); an association of oval sclerites from Pambdelurion (Fig. 
4A) of 8 mm is its largest mouthpart element. Comparison of the relationship of 
the body length to the size of the mouth apparatus leads to an estimate that 
 Pambdelurion could have grown to 55 cm in length, while Omnidens would have 
reached 1.5 metres. These estimates of Omnidens are larger than those for any 
Cambrian radiodontan, thus the Pambdelurion/Omnidens-grade lobopodians are 
likely to represent the largest vagile Cambrian organisms known. 
Although no specimens of Pamdbelurion preserve the mouth apparatus in 
side view, we interpret it as a muscular cone similar to that in some specimens of 
Opabinia regalis (Whittington 1975) based on the fact that the mouth cone can 
be preserved in different positions without post-mortem alteration, which points 
to a motile nature of the apparatus. Furthermore, some specimens preserve 
phosphatised muscles in the oral region that could potentially be homologised to 
the retractors and protractors of tardigrades and scalidophorans, further 
suggestive of the mouth having some degree of kinesis. From a functional point 
of view we envision the mouth of Pambdelurion as a structure similar to the 
eversible pharynx of priapulids and errant annelids. A proposed model for the 
sequence of eversion in Pambdelurion (Fig. 3D) draws on inferences from the 
phylogenetic bracket of extant ecdysozoans.  
For some two decades, morphology of the mouthparts has been cited as 
depicting shared derived characters of Ecdysozoa, based on features shared by 
cycloneuralians, tardigrades and other panarthropods. Particular similarities 
include a mouth cone with radial or biradial symmetry (Dewell and Dewell 
1997) and circumoral plates (Waggoner 1996). The discovery of a potentially 
protrusible, radial mouth cone and circlets of pharyngeal teeth in the gilled 
lobopodian Pambdelurion (Fig. 6) demonstrates that these characters are not 
exclusive to cycloneuralians and stem-group onychophorans (Smith and Caron 
2015). Rather, as anticipated by Jianshanopodia (Vannier et al. 2014) and more 
clearly shown by the the radial mouth cone of Radiodonta, these characters 
arepresent in the euarthropod stem-group as well (Budd 1998). This character 
distribution is consistent with radial circumoral plates and a protrusible pharynx 
bearing radially-arranged teeth being ground-pattern characters of Ecdysozoa. 
Similarity between the ovate sclerites of Omnidens and the scalids of priapulans 
was noted by Hou et al. (2006), and served as an argument for the proposed 
identity of that taxon as a priapulan. We reiterate this similarity, shared by the 
ovate sclerites of Omnidens as well, which includes their position and detailed 
 morphology (Fig. 2D for scalids of the extant Priapulus caudatus). Homology of 
scalids and the ovate plates of stem-group euarthropods would imply that scalids 
are not necessarily an autapomorphy of Scalidophora but may instead be a 
general character of Ecdysozoa, or a subgroup that includes scalidophorans and 
panarthropods.     
 
Acknowledgements. Specimens were collected on expeditions led by J. Peel and 
D.A.T. Harper. We thank them and others who assisted with collecting, M. Stein 
for discussions, and the journal’s referees for thoughtful reviews. Hou Xianguang 
kindly provided images of Omnidens from Chengjiang. Cultural Heritage Imaging 
provided FTIBuilder. POLOG provided logistical support in Greenland. Expeditions 
to Greenland were supported by Agouron, Carlsberg and Geocenter Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES  
 
BUDD, G. E. 1997. Stem group arthropods from the Lower Cambrian Sirius Passet 
fauna of north Greenland.  125–138. In FORTEY, R. A. and THOMAS, R. H. (eds). 
Arthropod relationships. Chapman & Hall. 
 
–––– 1998. The morphology and phylogenetic significance of Kerygmachela 
kierkegaardi Budd (Buen Formation, Lower Cambrian, N Greenland). 
Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh: Earth Sciences 89, 249–290. 
 
CHEN, J.-Y., RAMSKÖLD, L. and ZHOU, G.-Q. 1994. Evidence for Monophyly and 
Arthropod Affinity of Cambrian Giant Predators. Science 264, 1304–1308. 
 
CONWAY MORRIS, S., PEEL, J. S., HIGGINS, A. K., SOPER, N. J. and DAVIS, N. C. 
1987. A Burgess shale-like fauna from the Lower Cambrian of North Greenland. 
Nature 326, 181–183. 
 
 DALEY, A. C., BUDD, G. E., CARON, J.-B., EDGECOMBE, G. D. and COLLINS, D. 2009. 
The Burgess Shale anomalocaridid Hurdia and its significance for early 
euarthropod evolution. Science 323, 1597–1600. 
 
DALEY, A. C., PATERSON, J. R., EDGECOMBE, G. D., GARCÍA-BELLIDO, D. C. & JAGO, 
J. B. 2013. New anatomical information on Anomalocaris from the Cambrian Emu 
Bay Shale of South Australia and a reassessment of its inferred predatory habits. 
Palaeontology 56, 971–990.  
 
DEWEL, R. and DEWEL, W. 1997. The place of tardigrades in arthropod evolution.  
109–123. In FORTEY, R. A. and THOMAS, R. H. (eds). Arthropod relationships. 
Chapman & Hall. 
 
HAMMER, Ø. and SPOCOVA, J. 2013 Virtual whitening of fossils using polynomial 
texture mapping. In Palaeontologia Electronica  
 
HOU, X.-G., BERGSTRÖM, J. and AHLBERG, P. 1995. Anomalocaris and other large 
animals in the lower Cambrian Chengjiang fauna of southwest China. GFF 117, 
163–183. 
 
–––– –––– and YANG, J. 2006. Distinguishing anomalocaridids from arthropods 
and priapulids. Geological Journal 41, 259–269. 
 
INESON, J. R. and PEEL, J. S. 2011. Geological and depositional setting of the 
Sirius Passet Lagerstätte (Early Cambrian), North Greenland. Canadian Journal of 
Earth Sciences 48, 1259–1281.  
 
LIU, J., SHU, D., HAN, J., ZHANG, Z. and ZHANG, X. 2006. A large xenusiid lobopod 
with complex appendages from the Lower Cambrian Chengjiang Lagerstatte. 
Acta Palaeontol Pol 51, 215. 
 
 –––– –––– –––– –––– and ––––. 2007. Morpho-anatomy of the lobopod 
Magadictyon cf. haikouensis from the Early Cambrian Chengjiang Lagerstätte, 
South China. Acta Zoologica 88, 279–288. 
 
MALZBENDER, T., GELB, D. and WOLTHERS, H. 2001. Polynomial texture maps. 
519–528. In Proceedings of the 28th annual conference on computer graphics and 
interactive techniques. ACM. 
 
ORTEGA-HERNÁNDEZ, J. 2016. Making sense of ‘lower’ and ‘upper’ stem-group 
Euarthropoda, with comments on the strict use of the name Arthropoda von 
Siebold, 1848. Biological Reviews 91, 255–273. (doi:10.1111/brv.12168). 
 
–––– and BUDD, G. E. 2016. The nature of non-appendicular anterior paired 
projections in Palaeozoic total-group Euarthropoda. Arthropod Structure & 
Development 45, 185–199. 
 
SMITH, M. R. and CARON, J.-B. 2015. Hallucigenia’s head and the pharyngeal 
armature of early ecdysozoans. Nature 523, 75–78. 
 
–––– and ORTEGA-HERNÁNDEZ, J. 2014. Hallucigenia's onychophoran-like claws 
and the case for Tactopoda. Nature 514, 363–366. 
 
VANNIER, J., LIU, J., LEROSEY-AUBRIL, R., VINTHER, J. and DALEY, A .C. 2014. 
Sophisticated digestive systems in early arthropods. Nature Communications 5, 
3641.  
 
VAN ROY, P., DALEY, A. C. and BRIGGS, D. E. G. 2015. Anomalocaridid trunk limb 
homology revealed by a giant filter-feeder with paired flaps. Nature  522, 77–81. 
 
VINTHER, J., EIBYE-JACOBSEN, D. and HARPER, D.  A. T. 2011. An Early Cambrian 
stem polychaete with pygidial cirri. Biology Letters 7, 929–932. 
 
 –––– SMITH, M. P. and HARPER, D. A. T. 2011. Vetulicolians from the Lower 
Cambrian Sirius Passet Lagerstätte, North Greenland, and the polarity of 
morphological characters in basal deuterostomes. Palaentology 54, 711–719. 
 
–––– STEIN, M., LONGRICH, N. R. and HARPER, D. A. T. 2014. A suspension-
feeding anomalocarid from the Early Cambrian. Nature 507, 496–499. 
 
WAGGONER, B.  M. 1996. Phylogenetic hypotheses of the relationships of 
arthropods to Precambrian and Cambrian problematic fossil taxa. Systematic 
Biology 45, 190–222. 
 
WANG, O., GUNAWARDANE, P., SCHER, S. and DAVIS, J. 2009. Material 
classification using BRDF slices. 2805–2811. In Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition, 2009. CVPR 2009. IEEE. 
 
WENNBERG, S. A.,  JANSSEN, R, and BUDD, G. E. 2009. Hatching and earliest 
larval stages of the priapulid worm Priapulus caudatus. Invertebrate Biology 128. 
157–171. 
 
WHITTINGTON, H. B. 1975. The enigmatic animal Opabinia regalis, Midle 
Cambrian, Burges Shale, British Columbia. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B 271, 1–43.  
 
––––  and BRIGGS, D. E. G. 1985. The largest Cambrian animal, Anomalocaris, 
Burgess Shale, British-Columbia. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 
309, 569–609.  
 
 
 
  
 
FIG 1. Mouth apparatus of Pambdelurion whittingtoni. A, B, head and first trunk 
segment, and detail of mouth apparatus, MGUH 31553. C, D, head and anterior 
part of trunk, MGUH 30506. Photos created using polynomial texture mapping. 
Abbreviations: gut/m, phosphatised gut and muscle tissue; op, oval plates; ps, 
pharyngeal spines; tp, triangular plates. Scale bars 20 mm. 
 
  
FIG 2. A-C, mouth apparatus of Pambdelurion whittingtoni. A, MGUH 31553, scale 
bar 10 mm. B, mouth apparatus, MGUH 31554. C, schematic representation of 
plate associations. D, Priapulus caudatus, second loricate larva with partly 
protruded mouth cone (from Wennberg et al. 2009).  
 
  
FIG 3. Mouth apparatus of Pambdelurion whittingtoni. A, B, holotype MGUH 
24508, frontal region, preserving laterally compressed mouth apparatus, 
photographed with ammonium chloride sublimate. Scale bar 10 mm. C, 
schematics explaining mouth orientation. Oral cone everted and posteriorly 
projected when buried, compaction resulted in oval plates being superimposed 
by the oral cone with the inner, smooth surface exposed while oval plates on the 
exposed top surface show tubercles. D, sequence of eversion of mouth cone.  
 
  
 
FIG. 4. Mouth apparatus of Pambdelurion whittingtoni. A, B, detail of oval plates, 
MGUH 31555. C ,D, detail of triangular plates (note superimposed oval plates), 
MGUH 31553. E, F, detail of pharyngeal teeth, MGUH 24508. A, C, polynomial 
texture maps; E photographed with ammonium chloride sublimate. Scale bars 5 
mm (A, B),10 mm (C, D).  
 
  
FIG. 5. Mouth apparatus of Omnidens amplus Hou et al., 2006. A, YKLP 10157. B, 
YKLP 101053, 10154. Abbreviations: ps, pharyngeal sclerites; tp, triangular 
plates. 
 
 
  
FIG 6.  Reconstruction of head region of Pambdelurion whittingtoni. courtesy of 
Bob Nicholls, palaeocreations.com 
 
 
