  
1 
 
PALLIATIVE MEDICINE 
 
Dying in the hospital setting: A systematic review of 
quantitative studies identifying the elements of end-of-life care 
that patients and their families rank as being most important  
 
Claudia Virdun1, Tim Luckett1,2,3, Patricia M Davidson1,2,4 and Jane Phillips1,2,5,6  
1 Faculty of Health, University of Technology, Sydney, NSW, Australia 
2 Improving Palliative Care through Clinical Trials (ImPaCCT), Sydney, NSW, Australia 
3 South Western Sydney Clinical School, University of New South Wales (UNSW), Sydney, NSW, 
Australia 
4School of Nursing, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA 
5 School of Nursing, The University of Notre Dame Australia, Sydney, NSW, Australia 
6School of Medicine, The University of Sydney, NSW, Australia  
Abstract 
 
Background: The majority of expected deaths occur in hospitals where optimal end-of-life care is not yet 
fully realised, as evidencedby recent reviews outlining experience of care. Better understanding what 
patients and their families consider to be the most important elements of inpatient end-of-life care is 
crucial to addressing this gap. 
Aim and design: This systematic review aimed to ascertain the five most important elements of inpatient 
end-of-life care as identified by patients with palliative care needs and their families. 
Data sources: Nine electronic databases from 1990 to 2014 were searched along with key internet 
search engines and handsearching of included article reference lists. Quality of included studies was 
appraised by two researchers. 
Results: Of 1859 articles, 8 met the inclusion criteria generating data from 1141 patients and 3117 
families. Synthesis of the top 
five elements identified four common end-of-life care domains considered important to both patients and 
their families, namely,(1) effective communication and shared decision making, (2) expert care, (3) 
respectful and compassionate care and (4) trust and confidence in clinicians. The final domains differed 
with financial affairs being important to families, while an adequate environment for care and minimising 
burden both being important to patients. 
Conclusion: This review adds to what has been known for over two decades in relation to patient and 
family priorities for end-of-life care within the hospital setting. The challenge for health care services is to 
act on this evidence, reconfigure care systems accordinglyand ensure universal access to optimal end-of-
life care within hospitals. 
 
 
 
Palliative Medicine 2015, Vol. 29(9) 774–796  © The Author(s) 2015 
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav  DOI: 10.1177/0269216315583032   pmj.sagepub.com  
 
  
2 
 
Introduction 
In high income countries, the hospital remains the most common place for expected deaths2, 
3. Despite the expansion of specialist palliative care services, promotion of a palliative 
approach and other reforms, dying inpatients cannot be guaranteed optimal end-of-life care4-6 
and continue to have unmet needs7-9. Basing reforms on what dying in-patients and their 
families (‘consumers’) consider most important for optimal end-of-life hospital care values the 
uniqueness of living with a terminal illness 10, upholds a person-centred approach to care 1 and 
is central to improving care outcomes11. 
Since 1995, numerous studies have described what consumers feel is important for optimal 
end-of-life hospital care 1, 12-35. Despite the emphasis placed on person-centred care, little 
attention has been given to integrating these findings into practice, partly because this data 
has not previously been synthesised. In an attempt to address this gap, a recent systematic 
review of quantitative studies1 completed by this authorship team, identified key themes of 
importance to patients and families (Refer Box 1 ). 
Box 1 – Themes of importance for end-of-life hospital care identified in a recent systematic 
review of quantitative data 1 
Themes identified by both 
patients and families 
 
Additional themes 
identified by patients only 
Additional themes 
identified by families only 
Effective communication 
and shared decision making 
 
Adequate environment for 
care 
Financial affairs 
Expert care (incorporating 
good physical care, 
symptom management and 
integrated care) 
Minimising burden 
 
Respectful and 
compassionate care 
 
 
 
Trust and confidence in 
clinicians 
 
 
  
3 
 
 
While the recent systematic review1 provides valuable insights from survey responses, there 
are opportunities to gain deeper insights from patient and family narratives. A metasynthesis 
of existing consumer narratives was undertaken to add to the evidence and help improve care 
of the dying in hospitals through policy and practice change at the systems, health 
professional and consumer levels. 
Aim  
To gain a richer and deeper understanding of elements of end-of-life care that consumers 
consider most important within the hospital setting. 
Method 
A metasynthesis of consumer narratives reporting important elements of end-of-life hospital 
care. In this review ‘hospital’ ‘refers to all acute inpatient care excluding psychiatric, hospice 
or inpatient specialist palliative care, and alcohol and drug treatment centres’ 1. Preferred 
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) method 36 guided the 
sourcing, inclusion and quality review of all papers 37.The reporting of results adheres to the 
Enhancing Transparency in Reporting the Synthesis of Qualitative Research (ENTREQ) criteria 
38. 
Eligibility criteria 
Manuscripts generating empirical qualitative data were included if they met the inclusion 
criteria (Table 1). Limiting the inclusion to primary qualitative studies allowed thematic 
synthesis of verbatim consumer narratives.  Qualitative studies were defined as those aimed 
at providing in-depth exploration of the experience of people dying in hospital and/or their 
families. The starting date was determined by a large US based study focusing on care 
  
4 
 
preferences for seriously ill hospitalised adults published in 1995 39. Hand searching of 
reference lists enabled relevant studies to be included as appropriate.  
Table 1: Inclusion and exclusion criteria 
Inclusion criteria 
Exclusion criteria 
 
Peer reviewed articles from 1990 - 
2015 
 
English language 
 
Focus on end-of-life care in the 
hospital setting 
 
Focus on experience / satisfaction / 
importance in relation to end-of-life 
care  
 
Report original patient and/or family 
data 
 
Raw data provided to illustrate 
themes 
 
Qualitative methodology 
 
Patient sample have an expected 
prognosis of 1 year or less 
 
Focus only on one explicit area of care (not 
broadly asking about end-of-life care). 
Examples include advance care planning / 
communication / site of care preference  
 
No primary patient and/or family data 
 
Little or no focus on end-of-life care in the 
hospital setting 
 
Conference/Poster abstract 
 
Focus of study does not answer research 
question 
 
Quantitative methodology 
 
Re-reporting raw data in a synthesised form 
 
 
Search 
The Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) and key words (Table 2) were developed (C.V. and J.P.), 
with support from a librarian and informed by key terms from publications. This search 
focused on identifying what patients and/or families (next-of-kin, significant others, 
surrogates and/or informal caregivers), when asked about their experiences, perceived to be 
important elements of hospital end-of-life care. Search terms varied slightly to account for 
differences required across multiple electronic databases and to identify articles for inclusion 
in either the quantitative or qualitative review. The search was undertaken during the first 
quarter of 2014 1 and updated in April 2015. 
Table 2: Search terms used 
 
1. dying, death, ‘end of life’, terminal, ‘terminal care’, terminally ill, palliative, ‘final day*’ 
(combine with OR) 
2. ‘good death’, ‘consumer satisfaction’, ‘patient satisfaction’, perspective*,  important, 
  
5 
 
experience (combine all with ‘or’) 
3. Hospital, acute care, intensive care, emergency, inpatient* (combine all with ‘or’) 
4. Patient*, family, families, consumer*, carer* (combine all with ‘or’) 
5. Adult* 
6. Qualitative or quantitative 
7. 1 and 2 and 3 and 4 and 5 and 6 
8. Limit ‘7’ with 1990 – current and English language 
 
 
Information sources 
Databases were chosen for their focus on multidisciplinary health care and included: 
Academic Search Complete (EBSCO), AMED (OVID), CINAHL (EBSCO), MEDLINE (EBSCO), 
MEDLINE (OVID), EMBASE (OVID), PsycINFO (OVID), PubMed and Cochrane. Key internet 
search engines were searched (Google, Google Scholar and CareSearch) along with 
handsearching. Reference lists of all included studies were searched manually to identify 
other potentially relevant papers. 
Study selection 
Articles returned were managed through Endnote (version X5). Titles and abstracts were 
examined (C.V) according to inclusion criteria. Uncertainty regarding inclusion was resolved 
through consensus discussion (CV, JP and TL). 
Data collection and items 
Data were extracted into an electronic proforma (Table 3). The raw data (consumer quotes) 
reported in each study was extracted for synthesis. 
Bias rating 
Quality appraisal of potential studies was completed independently by two researchers (C.V. 
and T.L.) using predefined criteria noted to enhance transfer of findings to practice 40  
(Appendix 1). 
  
6 
 
Synthesis 
The three stage thematic analysis approach developed by Thomas and Harden 41 facilitated 1) 
line by line coding (C.V); 2) descriptive theme development (C.V, J.P, T.L); and 3) analytical 
theme generation (C.V, J.P, T.L)  37, 41.  Critical analysis of data allowed key areas to emerge 
within each theme. The analytical framework was informed by domains identified in the 
systematic review1 (refer Box 1). Data included for theming was led by the research question 
37 and limited to patient and family quotes (raw data). Privileging the raw data ensured the 
consumer voice was central to analytical theme generation and limited bias due to secondary 
interpretation of themes generated by others.    
Quotes were extracted and imported into EPPI-Reviewer 4 42. Initial coding (C.V) was audited 
for accuracy and consistency (T.L and J.P), with disagreements resolved through discussion. 
Original coding was transferred into a Word document for development of descriptive themes 
(C.V, J.P, T.L). C.V commenced theming and met with team members (J.P, T.L) to ensure 
agreement. Finally, descriptive themes were examined to generate analytical themes (C.V, J.P, 
T.L) informed by the aforementioned analytical framework 1. Where qualitative data did not 
fit a domain, new themes were developed in accordance with an inductive approach. All data 
contributed to theme development irrespective of number of studies or times reported. 
Results 
Study selection 
Of 1922 articles returned by searches, 16 eligible studies (Table 3) were included in the 
metasynthesis, providing patient and family data for analysis (Figure 1).  
 
 
  
7 
 
Figure 1: Qualitative PRISMA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Records identified through 
database searching  
(n = 1922) 
Screening 
Included 
Eligibility 
Identification 
Additional records identified through 
other sources  
(n = 33) 
Records after duplicates removed  
(n = 988) 
Records screened  
(n = 988) 
Records excluded  
(n =888) 
Full-text articles assessed 
for eligibility  
(n = 100) 
Full-text articles excluded, 
with reasons 
(n = 84) 
Quantitative, n= 22 
Not primary pt / fam data,  
n = 9 
Little or no focus on the 
hospital setting, n = 8 
Not a research article,  
n = 1 
Focus of study does not 
explicitly answer research 
question, n = 37 
Site of care focus, n = 2 
Reporting on same data 
set without new 
perspective, n=3 
Excluded after quality 
review, n = 1 
Article in German, n= 1 
Studies included in 
qualitative synthesis  
(n = 16) 
  
8 
 
Table 3: Summary of articles included in metasynthesis 
Source / 
Country  
Aim 
Design and method 
Participants and 
hospital setting 
Participant details 
Results / findings  
Bussman et 
al. 2015 
Germany 
To analyse family 
members’ 
suggestions for 
improvement in 
end-of-life care in 
general hospitals 
Cross-sectional survey with 
one open-ended question. 
Free text analysis of 
responses made 
Randomly chosen 
family members 
(N=633) of inpatients 
who were 
hospitalized during 
the last 4 weeks of 
life 
Participants (n=270) 
52% female 
Seven main categories concerning improvement suggestions and 
reported deficiencies generated from the 270 responses, namely:  
1. Medical care and nursing; 2. Care before and during dying;  
3. Interpersonal humane interaction; 4. Support for families;  
5. Psychological and spiritual welfare; 6. Consultation, information 
and communication; and 7. Structural aspects in hospital 
management. 
Steinhauser 
et al. 2014 
USA 
 
 
To define the 
relevant aspects of 
quality of 
experience for 
families of 
hospitalized 
patients 
Focus groups (n=2) using 
semi structured 
interviews. In-depth 
interviews with 2 members 
of each group to provide 
additional detail. Content 
analysis used open and 
axial coding 
Family members 
(n=14) of patients 
who had died 6-12 
months prior in one 
of 2 large hospitals 
Age range: 46-83, 
mean 62 yrs.  
100% female.  
64% Caucasian; 21% 
African American; 
14% did not report 
ethnicity 
Participants were asked what was important, most needed and what 
constituted quality of experience. Content analysis yielded 64 
attributes within 8 domains: 1. Completion; 2. Symptom impact 
3. Decision making; 4. Preparation; 5. Relationship with healthcare 
providers; 6. Affirmation of the whole person; 7. Post-death care; 8. 
Supportive services 
Kongsuwan et 
al. 2012 
Thailand 
To describe a 
peaceful death 
from the 
perspective of Thai 
Buddhist family 
Descriptive qualitative 
study informed by a 
phenomenological 
approach using interviews, 
Family members 
(n=9) of Buddhist 
people who died 
peacefully in an ICU 
in one hospital from 
Age range:30-62, 
mean 47 yrs.  
78% female. 
Daughters 5; sons 2 ; 
5 core qualities of a peaceful death: 
1. Knowing death was impending; 2. Preparing for a peaceful state of 
mind; 3. Not suffering; 4. Being with family members and not alone; 
and 5. Family members were not mourning 
  
9 
 
 
members of 
people dying in ICU 
and transcript analysis  
southern Thailand 
wives 2  
 
Mossin and 
Landmark 
2011 
Norway 
To gain an in-depth 
understanding of 
family experience 
of a loved one 
dying in hospital  
Grounded theory using in-
depth semi-structured 
interviews. Data analysis 
via coding and use of 
memoes  
Family members 
(n=15) of patients 
who died of cancer in 
a nine bed oncology / 
palliative care ward 
in 2006. Interviewed 
10-15 weeks after 
death 
Age range: 55-82, 
mean 66 yrs;  
Female: 100% 
All long term 
relationships 
 
Participants n = 8 (RR = 53%) with 7 people declining participation. 
After 5 interviews only a few nuances were seen. After the 8th 
interview – theoretical saturation was considered to have been 
achieved.  
Core category = Maintaining presence for the other and for one’s 
own sake. Including 4 categories: 1. to find one’s place; 2. to know;  
3. to support each other; and 4. to terminate.  
Dzul-Church 
et al. 2010 
USA 
To describe 
experiences of 
serious illness 
including concerns, 
preferences, and 
perspectives on 
improving end-of-
life care in 
underserved 
inpatients  
Qualitative analysis of 1 
hour semi-structured 
interviews, with thematic 
analysis to enable 
development of themes 
Patients (n=20) with 
a terminal illness in 
an American hospital 
with an estimated 
prognosis of <1 year 
Age range: 38-78, 
mean= 54.5 yrs 
Female 30% 
Black  30%; White  
25%; Hispanic 35%; 
American Indian 5%; 
Other 5% 
Data themed into three categories: 1. a description of the 
participants’ lives;  2. how their past histories influenced end of life; 
3. suggestions about how to improve end of life care (centre around 
improved relationships with providers (health care professionals), 
accessible chaplaincy and community support, feeling welcome in 
the hospital and the need for a humanist approach).  
Nelson et al. 
2010 
USA 
To understand how 
patients and 
families, who have 
experienced care 
in the ICU for at 
least 5 days, define 
high-quality 
Focus groups (n= 9) with 
open-ended questions and 
scripted probes. Content 
coding and domain 
development 
Randomly selected 
patients who 
survived the ICU 
(length of stay >5 
days), families of 
survivors and families 
of patients who died 
Age range: patients 
34-87, mean= 58.5yrs 
yrs; family 24-86, 
mean = 60.4 yrs; 
Female: patients 
46.7%; family 78.8% 
Race: patients- White 
Participants n = 48 (patients 15; family members 33)  
A shared definition emerged from the data in relation to important 
domains of high-quality ICU palliative care: 
1. Communication by clinicians about the patient’s condition, 
treatment and prognosis; 2. Patient-focused medical decision 
making; 3. Clinical care of the patient to maintain comfort, dignity, 
personhood, and privacy; 4. Care of the family: Providing access, 
  
10 
 
palliative care 
 
in one of 3 hospitals, 
in 2007 – 2008  
 
73.3%, Black 6.7%, 
Hispanic 6.7%; 
Family- White 60.6%,  
Black 21.9%, Hispanic 
12.5% 
Family relationship to 
patient: Spouse 
43.8%; adult child 
21.9%; other 34.4% 
proximity, and support. 
Furthermore, participants endorsed important care processes and 
structural aspects of high-quality ICU Palliative Care:  
1. Regular family meetings with attending physician and nurse;   
2. Flexible, liberal policy on visiting; 3. Early identification of 
surrogate decision-maker/advance directive/resuscitation status;  
4. Frequent assessment of pain and titration of analgesia to 
maximize comfort and achieve desired level of consciousness;  
5. Offer of pastoral care with sensitivity and without mandate;  
6. Offer of practical and emotional (social work) support; 7. Printed 
information about ICU for families; 8. Offer of bereavement support 
to families of patients dying in the ICU; 9. Waiting room affording 
comfort and privacy to families. 
Spichiger 
2008 
Switzerland 
To explore 
terminally ill 
patients’ and their 
families’ 
experiences of 
hospital end-of-life 
care 
Interpretive 
phenomenology including 
participant observations, 
conversations with 
patients and interviews 
with family members 
Terminally ill patients 
from a general 
medical ward within 
a Swiss public 
tertiary care hospital 
(1000 beds) and their 
designated family 
member 
Patients:  Age range 
38 – 85; mean = 62.7 
yrs. Female 30%  
Family:  Age range 41 
– 82; mean = 64.6yrs. 
Female 70%  
Relationship to pt: 4 
spouses, 3 partners, 
1 mother, 1 brother, 
1 sister-in-law 
Participants n = 20 (10 patients and 10 family members) 
Key findings:  
1. Leading a unique life with a terminal illness – people continue to 
live; 2. Hospital was experienced differently by patients – prison, 
heaven, necessary sojourn; 3. Providers’ commitment and caring is 
crucial to quality of experience; and 4. Patients’ and family members’ 
experiences with care interventions affects quality of life inclusive of 
the need for valuing the individual 
Payne et al. 
2007 
England 
To explore the 
experiences of 
patients and carers 
of end-of-life care 
in community 
Qualitative semi-
structured interviews 
analysed using principles 
of Grounded Theory 
Participants were  
patients and carers 
admitted for end-of-
life care in one of six 
Patients:  Age ranges 
65-69 - 3; 70-79 - 10; 
>80 - 3; unknown -2 
Female 55.5%;  
Family: Female 82%; 
Participants: Patients n = 18 and Family carers n= 11 
The following was valued within a community hospital setting: 
flexibility, locality (facilitating visiting) and personalised care. Most 
preferred community hospitals over district general hospitals and 
  
11 
 
 
hospitals 
community hospitals 
Relationship to pt: 
spouse 6; child 5 
considered them to be acceptable places for end-of-life care 
Hawker et al. 
2006 
England 
 
To obtain 
retrospective carer 
views about the 
nature and quality 
of end of life care 
in community 
hospitals 
Qualitative case study 
approach using semi-
structured interviews 
followed by line by line 
coding to inform results 
 
Next of kin for all 
patients aged over 65 
who died in one of 6 
hospitals. Hospitals 
chosen to reflect 
variance in size, 
rurality and medical 
model 
Participants:  Age 
range 68 – 99, Mean 
80.2 yrs 
Female 78.4%;  
Relationship to pt: 
wife 17; daughter 14; 
son 7; husband 4; 
friend 4; sister 3; 
niece 1; daughter-in-
law 1 
Participants n =51 (RR = 51%) 
Overall bereaved carers were positive about care received and 
specifically noted the following areas as advantages of receiving end-
of-life care in a community hospital: Locality; Environment; 
Familiarity; Nursing staff.  
Issues of concern noted: Unpredictability of death for older patients; 
Staffing; Noise 
Ogasawara et 
al. 2003 
Japan 
To examine how 
families of patients 
with cancer, in a 
large university 
hospital, perceive 
and are satisfied 
with terminal care 
and to identify 
barriers to best 
care for patients 
and families 
Descriptive survey study 
using a 23 item 
questionnaire where the 
last 3 questions were 
open-ended. This review 
reports on these last 3 
questions only that asked 
about expectations of 
doctors and nurses and 
noted areas for change in 
care 
Family members who 
had cared for a 
patient with cancer 
treated at the 
university hospital 
between April 1996 
and October 1998 
Age range 26 – 87, 
Mean 56.1 yrs 
Female 57%;  
Relationship: spouse 
69%, child 18%, 
sibling 6%, parent 
6%, no response 3%  
Participants n =73 (RR = 55%) 
5 categories to be involved in terminal care: 1. Pain control and 
symptom management;  2. Spiritual care; 3. Reduction of medical 
treatment of the cancer itself; 4. Support for family members;  
5. Appropriate information about diagnosis and prognosis  
5 categories regarding expectation of nurses:  1. Patient and family-
oriented nursing;  2. Improvement of bedside manner and 
techniques; 3. Concern for psychological care and support; 4. Quick 
responses; 5. Individualised care   
7 categories regarding expectation of doctors: 1. Appropriate 
informed consent for the family; 2. Psychological support for the 
patient and family; 3. Desire for satisfactory treatment; 4. Minimal 
medical tests; 5. Patient-centred treatment; 6. Treatment 
corresponding to palliative and home care instead of research and 
treatment-based care; 7. Appropriate timing of treatment  
  
12 
 
Kirchhoff et 
al. 2002 
USA 
 
To obtain a 
detailed overview 
of the experience 
of family members 
whose loved one 
dies in the ICU 
Qualitative  semi-
structured focus group 
design followed by content 
analysis 
Patients (>55 years) 
who had died in the 
previous 6-18 
months, in one of 8 
ICUs of 2 large 
American hospitals 
Age range 38-84, 
Mean 59 yrs  
Females 75% 
Relationship:  spouse 
6; son 1; 
granddaughter 1 
Participants n = 8 (RR = 19.5%)  
Communication or lack of it, was a common theme. Families talked 
about the need for contact and targeted communication with a 
physician and those who had this, felt the best possible outcome was 
achieved 
McGrath 
2001 
Australia 
 
To document the 
experience of the 
dying trajectory for 
patients with 
haematological 
malignancies and 
their families 
Qualitative open-ended 
interviews focused on the 
caregiver’s description of 
the experience of illness 
for the patient and his or 
her family. Data analysed 
via coding and thematic 
analysis 
Relatives who were 
known to the grief 
support service of 
the Leukaemia 
Foundation of 
Queensland  
Females 90% 
Relationship: Spouse 
5; Mother 3; Sister 2    
 
Participants n =10 (RR = 100%) 
The following themes were found:  
 
Caregiver Demands 
 
Caregiver–Patient Relationship and the Need to Be There 
 
Patient Advocate 
 
The Need for Information 
 
Doctor Communication 
 
Nurse Communication 
Dunne and 
Sullivan. 2000 
Northern 
Ireland 
To gain 
understanding and 
insights into the 
lived experience of 
families who 
journeyed with 
their loved one 
during the 
palliative phase of 
illness in the acute 
hospital setting 
Husserlian 
phenomenology using  
unstructured interviews. 
Analysis via Colaizzi’s 
(1978) seven-stage process 
for the analysis of 
phenomenological data  
 
Family members 
involved in the end-
of-life care of a loved 
one who was an 
inpatient in a medical 
or surgical ward 
between Sept 1998 
and Feb 1999, who 
lived in a local 
postcode area and 
had been bereaved 
1-2 yrs 
 
Details not provided 
Participants n = 8 (RR = 60%, n= 15). 8 interviewed (not the full 15 
who responded) as data saturation met at this time. 
Four core themes emerged from analysis of the data:  1. The hospital 
environment as a place to deliver palliative care;  2. Needs and 
feelings expressed by family members; 3. The family’s experience of 
the patient in pain; 4. Communication as experienced by family 
members 
 
Rogers et al. 
2000 
To examine causes 
of dissatisfaction 
with hospital-
Analysis of data obtained 
from 14 open ended 
questions within a 
Two-thirds of a 
random sample of 
deaths of people 
Details not provided 
Participants n = 138 who answered free text questions from 229 
surveys returned 
Dissatisfaction arose from:  
  
13 
 
England 
 
based end-of-life 
care 
postbereavement survey 
(VOICES).  Content analysis 
used where data was 
organised into categories 
and themes 
who had died from 
cancer between July 
1995 and June 1996 
from a particular 
health authority.  
1. feeling devalued, dehumanized and/or disempowered 
2. a breaking of the expectation of the health professional-patient 
relationship 
Suggestion that the palliative care approach could reduce 
dissatisfaction 
Pierce 1999 
USA 
To describe family 
members’ 
reactions to 
experiencing death 
of a loved one 
within a tertiary 
care setting 
Qualitative in-depth 
interviews. Data analysed 
via thematic analysis using 
the constant comparative 
method 
194 deceased people 
from 4 counties 
identified with 75 
randomised into the 
study. The next-of-
kin for these 75 
people contacted 
Age range 30 – 80, 
Mean 53 yrs.  
Female 72% 
 
 
Participants n =29 (RR 39%) 
Common, recurrent experiences: Impact of individual caregivers; 
Persistence of regrets and sadness 
Concerns and suggestions: The routinized nature of a complex 
system; The impact of a routinized system on patients and families; 
Ameliorate the negative impact of systems on people; Facilitate 
improved interaction between the dying patient and the family; 
Improve interactions between caregivers and patients / families; 
Create a more conducive setting / milieu 
Tanaka et al. 
1999 
Japan 
 
To clarify how 
terminally ill 
patients think and 
feel while 
hospitalised to 
inform 
improvements in 
the quality of 
palliative care 
Qualitative semi-
structured interviews. 
Analysis included coding to 
lead to the development 
of themes 
Patients with 
terminal cancer 
within a large (502 
bed) hospital in 
Japan 
Age range 51 – 93, 
Mean 63.3 yrs. 
Female 50% 
 
 
Participants n = 8 
4 major categories:  
1. Maintaining pain control 
2. Living an ordinary life 
3. Hoping for improvement of physical condition 
4. Having family nearby 
  
14 
 
One article 43 was excluded based on poor quality of reporting (Appendix 1). Included articles 
(n = 16) all provided a clear aim and data collection techniques, 15 outlined their data analysis 
approach and 13 were informed by theory relevant to practice and/or policy. However, more 
than three-quarters (n=12) failed to provide a rationale for their research design and/or detail 
researcher reflexivity. 
Study characteristics 
Study location 
Countries represented include: USA (n=5) 21, 24, 25, 30, 34, England (n=3)27, 28, 33, Northern Ireland 
(n=1) 32, Japan (n=2) 29, 35, Norway (n=1) 23, Switzerland (n=1) 26, Germany (n=1) 20, Australia 
(n=1) 31 and Thailand (n=1) 22.  
Study design 
Data collection occurred through 1:1 interviewing (n = 7) 22, 24, 26-28, 31, 32, 34, 35; focus groups (n = 
3) 21, 25, 30; survey with open ended questions (n=3) 20, 29, 33. Approaches to data analysis 
included content analysis (n = 11) 20, 21, 24, 25, 28-31, 33-35; Husserlian (n=1) 32 and Interpretive 
Phenomenology (n = 2) 22, 26; and Grounded Theory (n = 2) 23, 27.  
Sample characteristics 
Eleven studies 20-23, 28-34 focused on family participants, three 25-27 included both patients and 
families and two 24, 35 included patients only.  
Fifty-seven percent of patient participants 24-27, 35 were male, with a mean age across papers 
reporting age ranging between 54.5 – 63.3 years 24-26, 35. Only the USA papers 24, 25 reported 
ethnicity with one study recruiting predominately white patients (73.3%) 25 and the other 24 
recruiting a broader patient sample (Table 3). 
Fourteen papers included family participants 20-23, 25-34, with a larger proportion of females 
represented (75.6%). Eight papers 21-23, 25, 26, 28, 30, 34 reported family participants’ mean ages 
ranging from 47 – 80.2 years. Two USA papers 21, 25 described ethnicity showing a majority 
  
15 
 
Caucasian family sample (>60%).  Six papers 26-31 described family participants’ relationship to 
the patient, with the most common relationship being spousal (60%) or offspring (20%).  
Synthesis 
One hundred percent of patient (n= 71) quotes (n=74) were relevant to the research question 
and analysed, while 99% of family (n=672) quotes (n= 278) were relevant and analysed. The 
patient data generated 32 codes, 10 descriptive themes and 7 analytical themes, while the 
family data generated 72 codes, 21 descriptive themes and 10 analytical themes (Figure 2). 
Key areas emerged within each theme, with exemplar quotes included, while all theme quotes 
are detailed in Appendix 2 (patient data) and Appendix 3 (family data).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
16 
 
Figure 2: Summary of themes from both patient and family data 
 
Important areas from patient data 
Expert care (good physical 
care, symptom management 
and integrated care) 
Effective communication and 
shared decision making 
Respectful and compassionate 
care 
Adequate environment for 
care 
Family involvement in care 
provision 
Financial affairs 
Maintenance of sense of self / 
identity 
Important areas from family data 
Expert care (good physical 
care, symptom management 
and integrated care) 
Effective communication and 
shared decision making 
Respectful and compassionate 
care 
Adequate environmental and 
organisational characteristics 
Recognising and supporting 
the family role in care 
including valuing their expert 
knowledge of the patient and 
advocating for patient needs 
Financial affairs 
Maintenance of patient safety 
and prevention of harm 
Preparation for death 
Duty of care extending to the 
family after patient death 
Enabling patient choice at the 
end-of-life   
  
17 
 
 
Patient data 
Synthesis of patient data generated seven themes: expert care; effective communication and 
shared decision making; respectful and compassionate care; an adequate environment for 
care; family involvement in care provision; financial affairs; and maintenance of sense of self / 
identity.  
Expert Care 
Three sub-themes were identified within the broad theme of ‘expert care’: good physical care, 
symptom management and integrated care and are used within both the patient and family 
results. 
Good physical care: One study 35 noted the importance of good physical care including 
maintaining hygiene:  I’m thankful for my hair being shampooed 35 and independence: I can 
eat at a table when I wear a corset 35. 
Symptom management: Patients noted the importance of regular, person centred pain 
assessment and management and enabling a rapid response when analgesia is required 25.  
How can they expect the doctors and the nurses to know what your pain is? They do 
not know, unless you tell them . . . 25  
And the one thing I used to hate, when it’s coming on and you’re pressing the button, 
and they do not come, and you’re in a lot of pain 25  
Note: Shaded boxes refer to themes from the analytical framework used (themes from a 
previous systematic review 1). Unshaded boxes are new themes that have developed from 
this metasynthesis. 
  
18 
 
Patients described the negative impact of poorly managed pain both in hospital 25, 35 and at 
home, and how hospital admission enabled profound and rapid relief 26. Clinicians 
demonstrating they cared about patients’ symptoms was also important 26.  
They almost suffered themselves. One told me that the whole unit was preoccupied 
with me. That’s good. 26  
Finally, a patient described the importance of sufficient pain assessment and management for 
a person with a known opioid dependency 24.  
They ain’t got it under control. They keep thinking because I’m a heroin addict I’m 
trying to get more pills 24 
Pain was the key symptom discussed with mention also of vomiting and restless legs. Of note 
is the need for prompt individualised assessment and management delivered through a caring 
approach.  
Integrated care: The importance of staff working as a team was highlighted and contributed to 
patients receiving safer care and better outcomes 24, 25. 
It’s like a team effort. If you’re a team and they’re all together working with the 
patient itself, it’s going to work out really good 24 
Effective communication and shared decision making 
There are three areas within this theme. Firstly, the need for honest and clear information to 
enable a shared understanding, noting the need for layman’s language and communication 
delivered with compassion 25.  
Using terms that a person that’s not a doctor could understand . . . 25 
Communication, with compassion . . . because, being in the dark is like being in oil 25 
  
19 
 
Secondly, patients detail the importance of adequate information throughout a 
hospitalisation, inclusive of family members, to support decision making, decrease stress and 
prevent surprises.  
Knowledge is power, and if my family is informed, then they could have comfort 
knowing what my status is and how I am progressing or not progressing, day to day, 
what to expect in the near future 25 
Thirdly, patients described their need to be engaged in care planning, inclusive of advance 
care planning 24, 25, to remove the burden for decisions from family members 25. 
One patient thought it was crucial for the ICU to “know what I prefer” so that her 
family “would never feel guilty about having to make a decision.” 25 
Respectful and compassionate care 
This theme encompasses three areas: firstly, patients feeling welcomed and deserving of a 
hospital admission 24.  
I can see where the wheels are turning and people are thinking should he be here? Is 
he costing us too much? 24 
Secondly, patients being treated with care, respect and with a focus on dignity 24-26.  
What really made it different was she treated me with respect and dignity, and the 
dignity was what made it above and beyond. . . 25 
Thirdly, staff anticipating patient / family needs, being responsive and demonstrating 
cheerfulness and care for their work 26, 27. 
  
20 
 
So I can only speak good really, you know, I’ve got no complaints whatsoever. They are 
so attentive, they’re so cheerful, they don’t mind how many times you ring your 
buzzer… 27 
An adequate environment for care 
The concept of space was personal, one patient described the importance of having their own 
quiet space whilst another said the opposite was true 27.  Patients described the positive 
impact of community based hospitals in preference to tertiary hospitals, which was attributed 
to a nicer atmosphere, feeling closer to home, more accessible parking and an increased 
feeling of safety 27.  
It’s [community hospital] such a nice atmosphere, you feel so safe. 27 
However, lower levels of nursing availability in smaller hospitals was noted with patients 
having to readjust expectations as a result 27.  
Family involvement in care provision 
Company and family connection, including family support, is indispensable in providing 
comfort and emotional healing 24, 25, 35.  
My friends and, more importantly, my family played a very, very big part in my, in my 
comfort level, and my emotional healing 25 
Financial affairs 
Patients in a Japanese study 35 outlined concerns about the financial implications of a hospital 
admission.  
I’m concerned about my hospital and living expenses for my family as I have been in 
hospital for a long time 35 
  
21 
 
Maintenance of sense of self / identity 
Two areas emerged within this theme, namely: the profound impact of a terminal illness: ‘It is 
always there, it is never again not there.’ 26.  Having a terminal illness was likened to being in 
prison; and the need to maintain independence, to live well in the context of disease and for 
some, to maintain a focus on work 35. 
‘I will make an effort to maintain this improved condition.’ …. ‘I’m not going to look 
backwards; I want to live with this disease with all my strength and maintain my 
quality of life as a human being 35 
Family data 
Ten themes emerged from the synthesis of family data:  expert care; effective communication 
and shared decision making; respectful and compassionate care; adequate environmental and 
organisational characteristics; recognising and supporting the family role in care including 
valuing their expert knowledge of the patient and advocating for patient needs; financial 
affairs; maintenance of patient safety and prevention of harm; preparation for death; duty of 
care extending to the family after patient death and enabling patient choice at the end-of-life.  
Expert care  
Good physical care: Families noted expert provision of core nursing care alongside more 
specialist nursing competencies 28.  
They really were fantastically caring and you know, the process of turning and mouth 
care, all that was done in an exemplary fashion 28 
I’m not sure how well trained they were for when he needed his bag changing. …. 28 
  
22 
 
Symptom management: Families identified the importance of symptom management 
generally 29 and specifically effective pain management 20, 29, 32, timeliness of interventions 21, 31 
and management of breathlessness 22. Sub-optimal pain management was most commonly 
referred to as a source of distress 21, 32. 
Symptom management is the highest priority 29 
Integrated Care:  Families referred to provision of care to the whole person physically, 
emotionally and/or spiritually 20 and to the importance of one’s physician being in charge 25. 
Challenges in treating the person as a ‘whole’, 20 receiving conflicting information and lack of 
clarity about who is in charge 25 were all attributed to medical sub-specialisation. 
Multidisciplinary care that included social worker and pastoral care input was valued 25, 34. 
The specification of professions involves that everyone treats only one aspect. Man as 
a whole is falling by the wayside 20 
Effective communication and shared decision making 
There are three areas within this theme. Firstly, effective communication leading to a shared 
understanding was important and dependent upon the compassionate delivery of 
understandable and honest information 20, 21, 25, 32.  
‘The doctor did come in and tried to explain to us what it was, but I really wasn’t 
understanding it. It was kind of over my head because we’re not doctors’ 21 
Secondly, having the necessary information was important as end-of-life decision making is 
affected by medical complexity, emotional and financial factors 25, 30.  
‘The doctor would tell you, you can do this or this or this …... And, it’s a medical 
decision, but it’s also an emotional decision and a financial decision, and . . . I did not 
know what was best.’ 25 
  
23 
 
Thirdly, sufficient, timely and proactive information provision 20, 23, 34, involvement in day to 
day care planning 25, 32 and regular planned discussions with the healthcare team25 are all 
important. Given the complexities experienced generally in accessing information 32, 33 families 
valued discussions with physicians 25, 27, 30. However, they noted how hard this was to arrange 
32, 33 and that a family meeting assisted them greatly 21. 
…that would be the very best thing that I can say all day today. If they would just say, 
okay, we’re real busy, but we can be there at 10:20, then the family member can make 
it there. 25 
Respectful and compassionate care 
Three areas were found within this theme. Firstly, approaches to care that are respectful, 
compassionate and preserve dignity are important 20, 21, 25, 33, 34.  
Everything matters-what people say, how they touch the patient-and you-how they 
look at you- whether or not you matter 34 
Secondly, patients identified a number of staff attributes they valued in addition to necessary 
task–oriented care. These included being helpful, empathic, affectionate, appreciative, 
comforting, gentle, considerate and capable 20, 28, 29, 33. The need to distinguish between 
nursing and technical care was outlined 33. Competence in care was noted in terms of care of 
the dying (noting a need to increase capability in this area)20 and managing a specialised need 
such as a colostomy 28.  
First and foremost employment of capable nursing staff characterized by the qualities: 
helpful, empathic, affectionate, appreciative, comforting 20 
Finally, individualised care valuing the patient and their family is important. 
  
24 
 
 [That] they don’t become a ‘number’ but stay a human being and person 20 
Adequate environmental and organisational characteristics 
Three areas are noted within this theme. Hospital rules and processes need to make sense 
and shouldn’t detract from optimal patient care 20, 25, 29, 33, 34. Examples were provided where a 
patient experienced symptomatic distress awaiting formal ‘admission’ 33, a distressed relative 
was asked to move her car 34, poor process management of an Advance Care Directive 25 and 
visiting hours restrictions for dying patients 20.  
… that shouldn't happen to people. Rules need to make sense 34 
Environmental characteristics contribute to quality end-of-life care particularly noting the 
need for privacy 20, 32, 34, cleanliness 28, 33 and quiet 27, 28. The need for privacy was noted by 
numerous family members across several studies with a lack of privacy leading to a feeling of 
simply ‘watching’ and not being with their loved one or able to talk openly.  
I just wanted to be alone with him-that seemed so hard in the ICU. They let us come in 
and all, but it wasn't like being with him-it was watching 34 
Space for cultural practices such as congregating family members, chanting or other important 
rituals is also important 22.  
Recognising and supporting the family role in care including valuing their expert 
knowledge of the patient and advocating for patient needs 
There are three areas within this theme. Family members want their expertise as ‘carer’ to be 
recognised and respected 31. They want to be involved both in care provision and care 
planning 23, 31, 32, 34and value their role as patient advocates 25, 31.  
  
25 
 
One nurse, one time, asked me to help turn Barbara, while she made the bed. . . . I got 
to hold her, and touch her. It was the only time-the only time that I felt like I was able 
to do something for her. I wanted to do so much to help her-there seemed to be 
nothing I could do 34 
Failure to be welcomed as a partner in care leaves carers feeling like an observer and out of 
place 31, 32.  
As caregiver, quite often, they didn’t talk to me. So you felt like you were the third 
person watching the events . . . I found that difficult 31 
Given family desire to being involved in care, removing them from distressing situations, 
especially if the patient dies, may cause longer term harm 31. 
I believe (the patient) would have known that I left the room and that hurts me to this 
day 31. 
Financial affairs 
A UK study 33 noted the importance of proactively supporting patients and families with 
information about financial supports to enhance comfort and decrease stress. 
I am an 83-year-old pensioner not in the best of health...had we been told of 
attendance allowance before Graham died his last few months may have been a bit 
more comfortable 33 
Maintenance of patient safety and prevention of harm 
Three areas were found within this theme. Families noted that hospitalisation did not always 
provide improved care compared with the care they provided at home 32, 33. Indeed, one 
  
26 
 
family member explicitly stated they feel the inpatient care received made the patient’s 
condition worse 33.  
I think the 'care' he received made him worse not better 33 
Sub-optimal care impacts adversely on patient safety affecting care outcomes and leading to 
patient harm 26, 28, 31, 33, 34. Patient safety at the end-of-life was perceived to have been 
compromised by: poor communication 31, 33; not considering a palliative approach 34; not 
considering a patient’s unique care needs 34; families not feeling aware of how to best support 
the patient 26, 34; poor nursing care 28, 33 and lack of timely attention 31.  
Henry couldn't hear and the nurse just stood at the bottom of the bed and asked if he 
wanted anything, when he didn't answer she just left him, if we hadn't asked for drinks 
he would have died of dehydration 33 
Families in one study 34 noted a need for support to ‘speak up’ about care to ensure patient 
safety without repercussions.  
I'm so glad for this opportunity to say something- and not have it tied to me or my 
husband in any way. These things need to be said; but you can't when you so 
desperately need their help 34 
Preparation for death 
Families noted the importance of being prepared for the patient’s death to ensure they were 
able to say goodbye and to assist with their bereavement 21, 25, 30, 34. 
And, I believe I would have benefited greatly, if previous to this, I had been told by the 
doctor that this is the possibility, you need to start thinking about this. I just wasn’t 
ready for it . . .25 
  
27 
 
Duty of care extending to the family after patient death 
One study 25 noted the need for the family members to be followed up after the patients’ ICU 
death to prevent them feeling disconnected and rushed away from the hospital at such a 
profound time. 
. . . they just came and closed his eyes, started doing whatever they do when 
somebody dies, and basically just said to move. And, I just left. I did not know what 
else to do. . . . I would’ve liked a piece of follow-up, somehow. A call... 25 
Enabling patient choice at the end-of-life   
There are two areas within this theme.  Firstly, the importance of following established 
Advance Care Directives 20, 25, 30, and secondly a German study noted the need for legalised 
euthanasia for critically ill patients 20. 
Physicians: should comply with existing patient advance directive and not prolong the 
suffering and dying for a few months 20 
Discussion 
This metasynthesis validates and adds deeper insights into themes identified in a recent 
systematic review 1. It also highlights additional areas of importance including the need for 
care and involvement of family, the maintenance of self-identity for patients and factors 
affecting patient safety. Additional insights into environmental needs emerging from the 
metasynthesis suggest privacy is of greater importance to families20, 27, 32, 34 than patients 27. 
Table 4 provides an overview of congruent data across the studies included in the systematic 
review1 and metasynthesis, as well as highlighting new themes emerging from this study. 
Table 4: Comparison of themes from metasynthesis (this study) with systematic review1  
 
Theme / Domain 
Identified by 
Identified by 
Identified by 
Identified by 
  
28 
 
metasynthesis 
- patient data 
metasynthesis 
- family data 
systematic 
review - 
patient data 
systematic 
review -  
family data 
Expert care (good physical care, 
symptom management and 
integrated care) 
 
 
 
 
Effective communication and 
shared decision making 
 
 
 
 
Respectful and compassionate 
care 
 
 
 
 
Adequate environment for care* 
 
x 
  
x 
Adequate environmental and 
organisational characteristics* 
x 
 
x 
x 
Family involvement in care 
provision** 
 
x 
x 
x 
Recognising and supporting the 
family role in care including 
valuing their expert knowledge of 
the patient and advocating for 
patient needs** 
x 
 
x 
x 
Financial affairs 
 
 
x 
 
Maintenance of sense of self / 
identity 
 
x 
x 
x 
Trust and confidence in clinicians 
 
x 
x 
 
 
Minimising burden 
 
x 
x 
   
x 
Maintenance of patient safety 
and prevention of harm 
 
x 
 
x 
x 
Preparation for death 
 
x 
 
x 
x 
Duty of care extending to the 
family after patient death 
 
x 
 
x 
x 
Enabling patient choice at the 
end-of-life   
 
x 
 
x 
x 
*Separated themes despite similarity due to the addition of organisational characteristics evident in the 
family data **Separated themes due to additional information available for the family theme 
 
The congruence of areas of importance (themes) across patients and families and across the 
systematic review1 and metasynthesis is noteworthy. This alignment both validates and 
emphasises the importance of effective communication and shared decision making, 
respectful and compassionate care and expert care (encompassing good physical care, 
symptom management and integrated care) at the end-of-life. Collectively, the systematic 
  
29 
 
review1 and the metasynthesis emphasise the need for practice change. The themes 
generated from this work ought to inform future patient-centred palliative care delivery, 
policy frameworks, education and research.  However, the challenge is how to best enact this 
within a system dominated by the medical paradigm and focused on acute and episodic care 
44. Given the complexity of care, a whole of system approach is required to enable real change 
with consideration of: positive policy reform (macro); appropriate policy, structure and 
processes at each local hospital (meso); and a focus on adequate processes and measurement 
of outcomes to inform ongoing quality review alongside locally relevant improvement 
strategies (micro). Similarly to the systematic review 1 the insights generated by this 
metasynthesis largely reflect findings detailed in publications dating back to 1999 34, 35. The 
fact that consumers today continue to echo earlier patient and family perceptions confirms 
that urgent hospital end-of-life reform is required.  
Globally, key policy initiatives have recently been released 45-47, and are in various stages of 
being actioned. Countries vary in their approaches with the English government revising 
guidelines 45 and recommending change based within a continuous improvement 
methodology; The Australian government has redrafted national hospital accreditation 
standards 48 to include end-of-life care requirements; while the USA does not have a national 
policy framework for palliative care, a recent report from a non-government agency 47 
provides recommendations in order to improve care of the dying both within and outside 
hospital settings; and in Europe the discussion on how to best measure quality end-of-life care 
to inform improvement efforts has commenced 49 50. However, concise and readily 
implementable hospital end-of-life care measures that both support service assessments and 
guide local improvement efforts, remain elusive. The European Association of Palliative Care 
has published a guidance statement on the development and implementation of patient 
reported outcome measures 51, providing a useful first step in progressing this agenda. Having 
  
30 
 
adopted a person-centred approach, the results of this metasynthesis provide an ideal 
foundation for the development of hospital end-of-life care measures. 
Recommendations for future practice 
This metasynthesis, when considered in conjunction with the partnering systematic review, 1 
provides a comprehensive overview of what patients with palliative care needs and their 
families state as important to enable optimal end-of-life hospital care. This work provides 
information to guide policy development for the hospital setting and provides useful reading 
for practitioners working within this setting, to guide everyday practice. It also offers a 
framework for the development, piloting and refining of a suite of measures that assess 
quality end-of-life care provided by hospitals to assist improvement efforts and future 
research. 
Strengths and limitations 
The systematic approach taken to source and analyse the available qualitative data is a 
considerable strength of this metasynthesis. Adopting the same search strategy as the earlier 
systematic review 1 has enabled direct comparison for a more in-depth understanding.  
Whilst focusing analysis on raw data as opposed to full published results increased the 
likelihood that our findings represent the perspectives of patients and families rather than 
article authors 52, 53, this approach is limited by the fact we only had access to raw data 
reported by original researchers. There may have been selection bias when authors’ chose 
quotes to illustrate their codes and themes. Also, the decision to analyse raw quotes only and 
exclude author narrative resulted in loss of meaning generated through their interpretations.  
These interpretations were excluded to bring the patient/caregiver perspectives into sharper 
relief. The large number of quotes informing this metasynthesis, and the congruence of 
qualitative data with the quantitative data,1 confers confidence that this review has captured 
the voice of a wide range of patients and families receiving hospital based end-of-life care. A 
  
31 
 
further limitation of this review is that the quality of reporting across included papers was 
variable (Appendix 1) and we could not confirm with the primary authors whether the data 
reviewed is representative of the full sample. We excluded studies that focused purely on one 
aspect of end-of-life care to generate greater insight into which aspects were perceived by 
consumers as most important. However, this may have resulted in some lost data for analysis. 
Patient/family perspectives and structural health care differences across studies have been 
highlighted but did not contribute to the synthesis; caution should be exercised when 
reviewing and extrapolating this study’s results. Finally, results are presented based on data 
from across all ward settings (generalist wards, intensive care and speciality wards). This could 
mean some themes are relevant to one setting more than another.  
Conclusion 
Patients with palliative care needs and their families have been consistent in what they 
consider to be most important in relation to end-of-life care within the hospital setting. The 
need for expert care (inclusive of physical care, symptom management and integrated care), 
optimal communication, respectful and compassionate care, valued family involvement in 
care planning and delivery, maintenance of self-identity for patients, environmental privacy 
for families, ensuring patient safety, supporting patient choices, preparing families for death 
and providing contact for families after a patient has died, cannot be over stated. This 
research adds depth of information and understanding and should be used in conjunction 
with a recent systematic review 1 to provide a base for clinicians and policy makers to move 
forward from. We know what is important for patients and families and now need to act to 
ensure all receive care in line with such areas of identified need. 
Acknowledgements 
All authors contributed to defining the search aims and methodology used for identification 
and analysis of all included data. C.V. conducted the focused search for this study. Study 
  
32 
 
selection and quality rating were completed by C.V. and T.L. Data extraction was completed 
by C.V. and synthesis was completed by C.V, T.L. and J.P. All authors contributed to the writing 
of this manuscript. 
Declaration of conflicting interests 
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest. 
Funding 
This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial or 
not-for-profit sectors. 
 
  
33 
 
References 
 
1. 
Virdun C, Luckett T, Davidson PM and Phillips J. Dying in the hospital setting: A 
systematic review of quantitative studies identifying the elements of end-of-life care that 
patients and their families rank as being most important. Palliative medicine. 2015; 29 (9): 
774– 96. 
2. 
Broad J, Gott M, Kim H, Boyd M, Chen H and Connolly M. Where do people die? An 
international comparison of the percentage of deaths occurring in hospital and residential 
aged care settings in 45 populations, using published and available statistics. International 
Journal of Public Health. 2013; 58: 257-67. 
3. 
Tang ST and Chen C-H. Place of death and end-of-life care. In: Cohen J and Deliens L, 
(eds.). A Public Health Perspective on End of Life Care. United States: Oxford University Press, 
2012, p. 21-34. 
4. 
Hillman KM. End-of-life care in acute hospitals. Australian Health Review. 2011; 35: 
176-7. 
5. 
Clark D, Armstrong M, Allan A, Graham F, Carnon A and Isles C. Imminence of death 
among hospital inpatients: Prevalent cohort study. Palliative Medicine. 2014; 28: 474-9. 
6. 
Gott M, Ingleton C, Bennett MI and Gardiner C. Transitions to palliative care in acute 
hospitals in England: qualitative study. BMJ Supportive & Palliative Care. 2011; 1: 42-8. 
7. 
Robinson J, Gott M and Ingleton C. Patient and family experiences of palliative care in 
hospital: What do we know? An integrative review. Palliative Medicine. 2014; 28: 18-33. 
8. 
To T, Greene A, Agar M and Currow D. A point prevalence survey of hospital inpatients 
to define the proportion with palliation as the primary goal of care and the need for specialist 
palliative care. Internal Medicine Journal. 2011; 41: 430-3. 
9. 
Gott CM, Ahmedzai SH and Wood C. How many inpatients at an acute hospital have 
palliative care needs? Comparing the perspectives of medical and nursing staff. Palliative 
Medicine. 2001; 15: 451-60. 
10. 
Teno JM. Putting patient and family voice back into measuring quality of care for the 
dying. The Hospice journal. 1998; 14: 167-76. 
11. 
Leape L, Berwick D, Clancy C, et al. Transforming healthcare: a safety imperative. 
Quality and Safety in Health Care. 2009; 18: 424-8. 
12. 
Osborn TR, Curtis JR, Nielsen EL, Back AL, Shannon SE and Engelberg RA. Identifying 
elements of ICU care that families report as important but unsatisfactory: decision-making, 
control, and ICU atmosphere. CHEST. 2012: 1185-92. 
13. 
Heyland DK, Cook DJ, Rocker GM, et al. Defining priorities for improving end-of-life 
care in Canada. CMAJ: Canadian Medical Association Journal. 2010; 182: E747-52. 
14. 
Young AJ, Rogers A, Dent L and Addington-Hall JM. Experiences of hospital care 
reported by bereaved relatives of patients after a stroke: a retrospective survey using the 
VOICES questionnaire. Journal of Advanced Nursing. 2009; 65: 2161-74. 
15. 
Rocker GM, Dodek PM and Heyland DK. Toward optimal end-of-life care for patients 
with advanced chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: insights from a multicentre study. 
Canadian Respiratory Journal: Journal Of The Canadian Thoracic Society. 2008; 15: 249-54. 
16. 
Heyland D, Dodek P, Rocker G, et al. What matters most in end-of-life care: 
perceptions of seriously ill patients and their family members. Canadian Medical Association 
Journal. 2006; 174: 627-33. 
17. 
Baker R, Wu A, Teno J, et al. Family satisfaction with end-of-life care in seriously ill 
hospitalized adults. Journal of American Geriatrics Society. 2000; 48: S61-9. 
  
34 
 
18. 
Steinhauser K, Christakis N, Clipp E, McNeilly M, McIntyre L and Tulsky J. Factors 
considered important at the end of life by patients, family, physicians, and other care 
providers. JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association. 2000; 284: 2476-82. 
19. 
Kristjanson LJ. Quality of terminal care: salient indicators identified by families. 
Journal of palliative care. 1989; 5: 21-30. 
20. 
Bussmann S, Muders P, Zahrt-Omar CA, et al. Improving End-of-Life Care in Hospitals A 
Qualitative Analysis of Bereaved Families’ Experiences and Suggestions. American Journal of 
Hospice and Palliative Medicine. 2015; 32: 44-51. 
21. 
Steinhauser KE, Voils CI, Bosworth H and Tulsky JA. What constitutes quality of family 
experience at the end of life? Perspectives from family members of patients who died in the 
hospital. Palliative and Supportive Care. 2014: 1-8. 
22. 
Kongsuwan W, Chaipetch O and Matchim Y. Thai Buddhist families' perspective of a 
peaceful death in ICUs. Nursing in Critical Care. 2012; 17: 151-9. 
23. 
Mossin H and Landmark BT. Being present in hospital when the patient is dying - a 
grounded theory study of spouses experiences. European journal of oncology nursing : the 
official journal of European Oncology Nursing Society. 2011; 15: 382-9. 
24. 
Dzul-Church V, Cimino JW, Adler SR, Wong P and Anderson WG. "I'm sitting here by 
myself ...": experiences of patients with serious illness at an urban public hospital. Journal of 
Palliative Medicine. 2010; 13: 695-701. 
25. 
Nelson JE, Puntillo KA, Pronovost PJ, et al. In their own words: patients and families 
define high-quality palliative care in the intensive care unit. Critical Care Medicine. 2010; 38: 
808-18. 
26. 
Spichiger E. Living with terminal illness: patient and family experiences of hospital 
end-of-life care. International Journal of Palliative Nursing. 2008; 14: 220-8. 
27. 
Payne S, Hawker S, Kerr C, et al. Experiences of end-of-life care in community 
hospitals. Health & Social Care in the Community. 2007; 15: 494-501. 
28. 
Hawker S, Kerr C, Payne S, et al. End-of-life care in community hospitals: the 
perceptions of bereaved family members. Palliative medicine. 2006; 20: 541-7. 
29. 
Ogasawara C, Kume Y and Andou M. Family satisfaction with perception of and 
barriers to terminal care in Japan. Oncology nursing forum. Onc Nurs Society, 2003, p. E100-
E5. 
30. 
Kirchhoff KT, Walker L, Hutton A, Spuhler V, Cole BV and Clemmer T. The vortex: 
families' experiences with death in the intensive care unit. American Journal of Critical Care. 
2002; 11: 200-9. 
31. 
McGrath P. Caregivers’ insights on the dying trajectory in hematology oncology. 
Cancer nursing. 2001; 24: 413-21. 
32. 
Dunne K and Sullivan K. Family experiences of palliative care in the acute hospital 
setting. International Journal of Palliative Nursing. 2000; 6: 170-8. 
33. 
Rogers A, Karlsen S and Addington‐Hall J. ‘All the services were excellent. It is when 
the human element comes in that things go wrong’: dissatisfaction with hospital care in the 
last year of life. Journal of advanced nursing. 2000; 31: 768-74. 
34. 
Pierce SF. Improving end-of-life care: gathering suggestions from family members. 
Nursing Forum. 1999; 34: 5-14. 
35. 
Tanaka A, Iwamoto T, Kaneyasu H and Petrini MA. Thoughts and feelings of in‐patients 
with advanced terminal cancer: Implications for terminal care improvement. Nursing & health 
sciences. 1999; 1: 189-93. 
36. 
Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J and Altman DG. Preferred Reporting Items for 
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses: The PRISMA StatementThe PRISMA Statement. 
Annals of Internal Medicine. 2009; 151: 264-9. 
  
35 
 
37. 
Popay J, Roberts H, Sowden A, et al. Guidance on the conduct of narrative synthesis in 
systematic reviews. A product from the ESRC Methods Programme, Version 1. 2006. 
38. 
Tong A, Flemming, K., McInnes, E., Oliver, S. and Craig, J. Enhancing transparency in 
reporting the synthesis of qualitative research: ENTREQ. BMC medical research methodology. 
2012; 12(1): 1-8. 
39. 
Connors AF, Jr, Dawson NV, Desbiens NA and et al. A controlled trial to improve care 
for seriously ill hospitalized patients: The study to understand prognoses and preferences for 
outcomes and risks of treatments (support). JAMA. 1995; 274: 1591-8. 
40. 
Kitto SC, Chesters J and Grbich C. Quality in qualitative research. Medical Journal of 
Australia. 2008; 188: 243. 
41. 
Thomas J and Harden A. Methods for the thematic synthesis of qualitative research in 
systematic reviews. BMC medical research methodology. 2008; 8: 45. 
42. 
Thomas J BJ, Graziosi S. EPPI-Reviewer 4: software for research synthesis. EPPI-Centre 
Software. London: Social Science Research Unit, UCL Institute of Education., 2010. 
43. 
Czerwiec M. When a Loved One Is Dying Families Talk About Nursing Care. The 
American Journal of Nursing. 1996; 96: 32-6. 
44. 
Bloomer MJ, Endacott R, O’Connor M and Cross W. The ‘dis-ease’of dying: challenges 
in nursing care of the dying in the acute hospital setting. A qualitative observational study. 
Palliative medicine. 2013; 27: 757-64. 
45. 
National Health Service England. Transforming end of life care in acute hospitals: The 
route to success ‘how to’ guide. In: Medical, (ed.). England: NHS, 2015. 
46. 
Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care. National Consensus 
Statement: Essential Elements for Safe and High-Quality End-of-Life Care in Acute Hospitals. 
Consultation draft, January 2014. Australia 2014. 
47. 
IOM (Institute of Medicine). Dying in America: Improving quality and honoring 
individual preferences near the end of life. Washington, DC: The National Academies 
Press.2015. 
48. 
Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care. National Safety and 
Quality Health Service Standards Version 2: Consultation draft. Sydney2015. 
49. 
Radbruch L and Payne S. White paper on standards and norms for hospice and 
palliative care in Europe: part 1. European journal of palliative care. 2009; 16: 278-89. 
50. 
Leemans K, Cohen J, Francke A, et al. Towards a standardized method of developing 
quality indicators for palliative care: protocol of the Quality indicators for Palliative Care (Q-
PAC) study. BMC Palliative Care. 2013; 12: 6. 
51. 
Bausewein C, Daveson BA, Currow DC, et al. EAPC White Paper on outcome 
measurement in palliative care: Improving practice, attaining outcomes and delivering quality 
services – Recommendations from the European Association for Palliative Care (EAPC) Task 
Force on Outcome Measurement. Palliative Medicine. 2016; 30: 6-22. 
52. 
Heaton J. Secondary analysis of qualitative data : an overview. Historical Social 
Research. 2008; 33: 33-45. 
53. 
Szabo V and Strang VR. Secondary Analysis of Qualitative Data. Advances in Nursing 
Science. 1997; 20: 66-74. 
  
36 
 
Appendix 1: Overview of quality rating following dual assessment (C.V and T.L) in accordance with published criteria for assessing qualitative research 40 
 
 
Clear 
aim  
 
 
 
Clear 
research 
question 
 
 
Appropriate 
method 
choice 
 
 
Outline 
of why 
research 
design 
chosen 
 
 
Clear data 
collection 
techniques 
 
 
Transparent 
data 
analysis 
 
 
Clear  
sampling 
techniques  
 
 
Sampling 
techniques 
support 
conceptual 
generalisability 
 
 
Conceptual 
discussion 
of results 
and linkage 
to new or 
existing 
theory to 
explain 
relevance of 
findings to 
targeted 
audience  
 
Negative 
case 
inclusion 
 
 
 
Clear 
statement of 
effect on the 
data of 
researcher’s 
views  
 
 
 
Clear 
evaluation 
of the 
relationship 
between 
researcher 
and those 
under 
research, 
addressing 
any ethical 
issues 
 
Ethics 
approval 
obtained 
from an 
appropriate 
institution 
 
 
Critical 
evaluation 
of 
application 
of findings 
to other 
similar 
contexts  
 
 
Relevance 
of findings 
to policy 
and 
practice 
discussed 
 
 
 
Include? 
 
 
 
1 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
2 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
3 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
4 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
5 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
6 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
7 
Yes 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
8 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
9 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
10 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
11 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
12 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
13 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
14 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
15 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
16 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
17 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
 
Key for Table 4: 
 
Reference 
 
Reference 
1. 
Bussman et al. 2015 
10. 
 
Ogasawara et al. 2003 
2. 
Steinhauser et al. 2014 
11. 
 
Kirchhoff et al. 2002 
3. 
Kongsuwan et al. 2012 
12. 
 
McGrath. 2001 
4. 
Mossin and Landmark. 2011 
13. 
 
Rogers et al. 2000 
5. 
Nelson et al. 2010 
14. 
 
Dunne and Sullivan. 2000 
6. 
Dzul-Church et al. 2010 
15. 
 
Tanaka et al. 1999 
7. 
Spichiger. 2008 
16. 
 
Pierce. 1999 
8. 
Payne et al. 2007 
17. 
 
Czerwiec. 1996 
9. 
Hawker et al. 2006 
 
  
37 
 
Percentage of articles who met the criteria as outlined by Kitto, Chesters 40 
 
Quality element as described by Kitto et al. (2008) 
% of papers (n=17) 
who had evidence of 
this  
Clear aim  
 
100% 
Clear research question 
 
12% 
Appropriate method choice 
 
65% 
Outline of why research design chosen 
 
24% 
Clear data collection techniques 
 
94% 
Transparent data analysis 
 
88% 
Clear  sampling techniques  
 
88% 
Sampling techniques support conceptual generalisability 
 
65% 
Conceptual discussion of results and linkage to new or existing theory to 
explain relevance of findings to targeted audience  
 
76% 
Negative case inclusion 
 
0% 
Clear statement of effect on the data of researcher’s views  
 
24% 
Clear evaluation of the relationship between researcher and those 
under research, addressing any ethical issues 
 
18% 
Ethics approval obtained from an appropriate institution 
 
71% 
Critical evaluation of application of findings to other similar contexts  
 
65% 
Relevance of findings to policy and practice discussed 
 
88% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
38 
 
Appendix 2 
 
Themed patient data inclusive of raw quotes (red font denotes quotes also used in-text) 
Theme 
Expert Care  
Example 
quotes 
from 
included 
papers 
Good physical care 
 
I’m thankful for my hair being shampooed 35 
 
I can eat at a table when I wear a corset 35 
Symptom management 
 
How can they expect the doctors and the nurses to know what your pain is? They do not know, 
unless you tell them . . . and it will change . . . Every time they come in the room they should 
ask, ‘How is your pain today, how is your pain tonight, what can we do to help you with it? 25 
 
And the one thing I used to hate, when it’s coming on and you’re pressing the button, and they 
do not come, and you’re in a lot of pain 25 
 
[Relief of pain] is very important to your recovery. You do not feel good, you just do not care 25 
 
I am most delighted when the pain is gone 35 
 
At home I kept vomiting, but in the emergency department this was remedied within half an 
hour, an hour. They probably gave me morphine. And the restless legs didn’t bother me any 
longer, I didn’t vomit anymore, I wasn’t nauseated. I felt like I was in heaven that afternoon, 
because I had improved so much 26 
 
They almost suffered themselves. One told me that the whole unit was preoccupied with me. 
That’s good. And it is good that one realizes it 26 
 
I don’t see any reason why I should be in pain. They ain’t got it under control. They keep 
thinking because I’m a heroin addict I’m trying to get more pills 24 
Integrated care 
 
There’s good work to be done. It’s like a team effort. If you’re a team and they’re all together 
working with the patient itself, it’s going to work out really good 24 
 
The communication between doctors and nurses, that’s paramount . . . You want to make sure 
that the chain of communication between doctors, nurses, and patients is not broken, because 
if it is broken, the patient is gonna get lost  25 
Theme 
Effective communication and shared decision making 
Example 
quotes 
from 
included 
papers 
 
Put this in layman’s terms for my family to understand. Why are you doing these tests and 
things that are painful and intrusive? Is there really reason enough to do it? 25 
 
Using terms that a person that’s not a doctor could understand . . . You did not need to go get 
a dictionary to look it up . . . they explained themselves well 25 
 
The lack of communication was so severe that my wife could not even make informed 
decisions as to my care. She could not find out enough . . . Nobody told her anything, and this 
went on for eight days. Nothing. The doctors wouldn’t come by. If they did, they wouldn’t tell 
her anything. She had no idea what was going on 25 
 
The family’s stress level is so high to begin with, and this just adds more stress, not knowing 
what my condition is 25 
 
Be honest, so, if you do not come out alive, [the family members] are not surprised, they 
expected that, they are going to be disappointed, but they realized that you might not make it 
25 
 
Knowledge is power, and if my family is informed, then they could have comfort knowing what 
my status is and how I am progressing or not progressing, day to day, what to expect in the 
near future 25 
 
Communication, with compassion . . . because, being in the dark is like being in oil 25 
 
I think there are a lot of patients who are either not well enough to do anything about [their 
care], or not smart enough to do anything about [their care], don’t voice their opinions and 
they just take it. But I’m not one to take it 24 
 
One patient thought it was crucial for the ICU to “know what I prefer” so that her family 
“would never feel guilty about having to make a decision.” 25 
 
Another, whose preeminent concern was to avoid “being a burden to my family,” stressed that 
she “would want the ICU to know that . . . at the beginning, absolutely,” and when asked if 
  
39 
 
investigation of patient preferences should occur on admission to ICU, replied, “they should 
know before you even get into ICU.” 25 
Theme 
Respectful and compassionate care 
Example 
quotes 
from 
included 
papers 
 
I can see where the wheels are turning and people are thinking should he be here? Is he 
costing us too much? Is he an outpatient? Or is he a hospice patient? Don’t make him too 
comfortable. If he wants to be bathed, cleaned, he’s not supposed to be in a hospital. That’s 
not what we do—I can feel it from the staff. 24 
 
I think every patient deserves to be treated with love and respect . . . think of them not that 
they’re just kind of specimens, but they’re human beings . . . ask the patient what they feel . . . 
I want to talk to somebody maybe about what I’m feeling that day, just to have a conversation 
with them. 24 
 
[The nurse did]…just the absolute minimum that she had to do. There was the medications at 
night. She entered, didn’t say “Good evening”, did something with the equipment and, “Good 
night”, and out and gone. Didn’t ask, “How are you”, didn’t say, as the others did, “Call me, 
ring the bell, if you don’t feel well or whatever 26 
 
What really made it different was she treated me with respect and dignity, and the dignity 
was what made it above and beyond. . . And that really contributed to my healing, and getting 
better 25 
 
. . . they could bring the father here more often so you get communion. Because they want 
people going downstairs [for mass] . . . if you go in a wheelchair, usually you don’t have 
underwear on— when you get up to get communion . . . everybody’s looking at your rear end 
24 
 
So I can only speak good really, you know, I’ve got no complaints whatsoever. They are so 
attentive, they’re so cheerful, they don’t mind how many times you ring your buzzer and 
whether it’s in the middle of the night or whatever. 27 
 
One could say that 90% of all who are here anticipate one’s every wish. And are concerned. 26 
Theme 
An adequate environment for care 
Example 
quotes 
from 
included 
papers 
 
Patient: It’s not so peaceful as the other room. I like it [being in a single room]. I like being on 
my own. Because they [nurses] all giggle, you know a lot, and I’m glad they do, but it gets on 
my nerves, that’s me, I mean nothing against the girls laughing, they like a good laugh, ... I’d 
sooner be quiet ... 27 
 
No, I wouldn’t want a room on my own ... I couldn’t be better cared for if I was in a private 
place with a room of my own, I couldn’t. It’s more fun with other people there to talk to ... 27 
 
It’s [community hospital] such a nice atmosphere, you feel so safe. I can see now how 
necessary they [DGH] are, but it’s a different atmosphere in here. 27 
 
I like it because it is near home and my son can get to me conveniently, which is a main plus, I 
feel nearer home, I feel safer. 27 
 
Well, the nursing is quite different and there is hardly any nursing, there are only two or three 
of them on duty, so the nursing is quite different and you’ve got to tune yourself to that to 
accept that things that you used to get done at the hospital [DGH] they don’t do here. 27 
 
As long as I am in hospital, I feel safe 35 
 
It would be more convenient for my family if I was to pass away here [the hospital], because 
then they could start my funeral arrangements going . . .No [I haven’t talked about these 
things with them]24 
Theme 
Family involvement in care provision 
Example 
quotes 
from 
included 
papers 
 
I’m sitting here by myself. And just like everybody else, I need the company of somebody and 
to have the family. I need my family, too 24 
 
With my family I have always overcome difficult times. My family is the very source of my 
support 35 
 
The presence of my spouse has been indispensable to me. We have lived together through 
times of difficulties with the disease 35 
 
My friends and, more importantly, my family played a very, very big part in my, in my comfort 
level, and my emotional healing. And for me, the emotional healing is high, right there with 
physical healing. It’s all one. I would stare at the clock, and wait for visiting hours to come, and 
that was just very, very crucial for my personal healing, to get better and get out of here 25 
 
The mind of the patient is not on himself only; his mind is also toward the family that is beside 
  
40 
 
him, that is caring for him. Most times, most of the patients do not care much about 
themselves. But they care for the family that has been giving them support. 25 
Theme 
Financial affairs 
Example 
quotes 
from 
included 
papers 
 
I’m concerned about my hospital and living expenses for my family as I have been in hospital 
for a long time. I wouldn’t care about the expenses if my stay were shorter. 35 
 
Theme 
Maintenance of sense of self / identity 
Example 
quotes 
from 
included 
papers 
 
‘It is always there, it is never again not there.’ 26.  
 
‘I feel like I’m in prison.’ 26 
 
‘I will make an effort to maintain this improved condition.’ …. ‘I’m not going to look 
backwards; I want to live with this disease with all my strength and maintain my quality of life 
as a human being 35 
 
I’m concerned if the important documents are kept in order at home 35 
 
I wish I could go back to work even for a short while 35 
  
 
 
  
41 
 
Appendix 3 
 
Themed family data inclusive of raw quotes (red font denotes quotes also used in-text) 
Theme 
Expert care (good physical care, symptom management and integrated care) 
Example 
quotes 
from 
included 
papers 
Good physical care 
 
I’m not sure how well trained they were for when he needed his bag changing. There was 
mess made then, and stuff like that 28 
 
They really were fantastically caring and you know, the process of turning and mouth care, all 
that was done in an exemplary fashion 28 
Symptom management 
 
Symptom management is the highest priority 29 
 
My husband went into hospital because he was in severe pain but I don’t think he was any 
better off. The pain never went away, he was always uncomfortable. I felt annoyed about that 
because if I had known I wouldn’t have let him go to hospital 32 
 
Critically ill people should be free of pain in the terminal phase 20 
 
My husband had secondaries in his spine and he was paralysed. He suffered very severe pain 
and although he had drugs given for the pain, it never seemed to go away. He had pain right 
up until he died. The staff tried to do their best. Nobody seemed to be able to get to the 
bottom of it. It was very distressing for us as a family  32 
 
Want the patient to be free from pain 29 
 
It was important for him to have immediate care because he was very sick, and it hurt to have 
to wait and see him suffer. And there wasn’t anything I could do to relieve that 21 
 
He was in obvious pain and they paged the doctor . . . then we just waited and waited and 
waited and waited and it was getting worse 31 
 
I don’t agree with allowing the patient to have shortness of breath before death. This is 
because when we say anything to them, the mind will not receive it. The mind can only receive 
these ideas when the body is not suffering 22 
 
Integrated care 
 
The specification of professions involves that everyone treats only one aspect. Man as a whole 
is falling by the wayside 20 
 
More psychological support for the ill as well as the families 20 
 
The mentally and emotionally part of a dying person receive too little support 20 
 
If anybody has the story down and the plot and how it is going to turn out, the social worker 
does. They know what they need to bring to the table and what you are going to need help 
with . . . especially when you have a family member that is critically ill . . . They say the right 
things, know what to do . . . It should be an integral part of the care 25 
 
I want to start by giving praises, because I cannot praise the chaplain enough. I can't say 
enough about Paul Jones. He was just great . . . a great service 34 
 
The power of prayer cannot be outdone, especially in times of crisis, that is when people are 
looking for some place to go, for help. . . . Having someone that is going to come by and offer 
you prayers, it should not be forced upon anybody but it should be looked upon as a part of 
treatment that can help people 25 
 
A lot of times, we did not know who was in charge . . . Do they ever sit down and have 
somebody leading the discussion that’s the patient’s main doctor? You had all kinds of 
specialists 25 
 
If you gotta talk to two or three specialists, they come in with conflicting information 25 
 
So many different teams of doctors and nurses were involved . . . but those people were all 
communicating . . . were all on the same page 25 
 
Theme 
Effective communication and shared decision making 
Example 
quotes 
from 
Effective communication leading to a shared understanding 
 
‘We were all generally happy enough with the information we got. It was understandable and 
we knew what to expect. The staff seemed concerned about us and were keen to do their best 
  
42 
 
included 
papers 
for us. I found this particularly in the last day or so.’ 32   
 
‘The doctor did come in and tried to explain to us what it was, but I really wasn’t 
understanding it. It was kind of over my head because we’re not doctors’ 21 
 
“I do not have a medical background,” said a family member, “so . . . I would be saying, 
please, tell me in English.” 25 
 
Physicians beat around the bush instead of talking in plain language. What a pity. 20 
 
“She’s going to tell you, she’s not going to give you a line, but she’s still sensitive. That’s the 
key.” 25 
Complexity involved in decision making at the end-of-life both in relation to medical complexity 
but also the fact such decisions also have significant emotional and financial implications 
 
"Here you are, you are so medically untrained, you have to put your faith and trust in people 
you have never seen and you don’t know….If they said ‘Should we do this or do that?’ I didn’t 
know what to tell them to do." 30 
 
‘The doctor would tell you, you can do this or this or this or this or this. And, it’s a medical 
decision, but it’s also an emotional decision and a financial decision, and . . . I did not know 
what was best.’25 
 
The doctor would say, ‘well, I cannot advise you, but these are your options.’ But if I asked, 
‘what would you do?’, then he could answer that question. And then I had more information 
to make my decision on, whereas he was, ‘you’ve got these choices.’ 25 
Need for sufficient and timely information provision with a particular focus on being informed 
ahead of time, being included in the day to day care plan outlines and the importance of regular 
planned discussions with the healthcare team, specifically valuing discussions with medical 
physicians. 
 
Family members should be informed ‘early enough’ to support him ( . . . ). 20 
 
Why are they so afraid to talk with you about what they think might be happening? I wish 
they had told me sooner that they thought my son was dying . . . the sooner the better. 34 
 
She was there 45 days. . . . On Friday, the doctors and nurses knew she would die-she probably 
knew, too- but she wasn't told. . . . If they had just come out and said it, then we could have all 
said our goodbyes; we didn't. 34 
 
Doctors need to tell you more about what to expect, though-like how close to the end and 
what might happen next. You don't think to ask-they need to say what is likely to happen next 
. . . like, with her congestive failure, she got very short of breath-but I don't think she suffered; 
they gave her morphine on the last day. 34 
 
‘When I approached the nurses to say or ask anything I got the impression they were busy. 
Nobody explained how things were progressing. I mean we weren’t kept informed about daily 
events. It came as quite a shock to me when I became aware that my wife had only about 2 
days to live. I knew this would happen of course but I didn’t realize she was as near to dying as 
she was at that time.’ 32 
 
Even if it is also hard to know, I think it is better than not knowing, just wondering. Yes, it is 
positive, even if it is hard. To be present and to know what is going on. 23 
 
“that would be the very best thing that I can say all day today. If they would just say, okay, 
we’re real busy, but we can be there at 10:20, then the family member can make it there. 
We’ll go along with their schedule. We know they’re busy, but man, would that be helpful.” 25 
 
“ICU has rounds at a certain time in the morning. And after that time, when everybody that 
works there has met and talked, that would be a good time to arrange a family meeting, so 
we could find out what are they all thinking, what are their plans, just for today, to know 
what’s going on, instead of day after day, not being sure, not being able to get a hold of the 
doctor.” 25 
 
" You sit around waiting for the doctor to come in and tell you something….They say, ‘I will talk 
to you later,’ and….you don’t know when later is….so you don’t dare leave.” 30 
 
“Nothing, nothing was important to me as much as just being able to talk to the doctor and to 
get the information there.” 25 
 
I follow his routine, so I see him when he is here. To see him outside those hours is difficult, he 
is a busy man, but I thought there would be somebody here who would have a file, some 
information, so that I wouldn’t need to chase after the doctor ... 27 
 
She [sister] felt like I didn’t give him a chance to get better. If they [the medical team] had 
  
43 
 
called a family meeting, then everybody would have gotten the same information at the same 
time. 21 
 
...we were never invited to discuss his condition...I felt that we were gathering information 
from several people, squirreling it out of them. 33 
 
Theme 
Respectful and compassionate care 
Example 
quotes 
from 
included 
papers 
Provision of respectful and compassionate care noting this to include the preservation of dignity 
 
Everything matters-what people say, how they touch the patient-and you-how they look at 
you- whether or not you matter 34 
 
They once discharged her back to nursing home at midnight in her nightdress, with no coat — 
wouldn't even give us a blanket. Didn't inform nursing home 33 
 
To my mind even a dying man deserves dignity and Henry was not given this during his stay in 
hospital 33 
 
That was my mother. They need to realize that that’s somebody’s loved one in there . . . It’s 
not like they need to have an emotional bond with each and every one of our relatives, but 
they need to have some compassion for these people 25 
 
Better humane care – affectionate care of patients!!! 20 
 
I did have the sense-sort of a bad experience----of people being cold, inattentive, like all 
routine stuff to them 34 
 
My brother came to get me and we went over to get my Dad's body released. Everyone was so 
nonchalant and really cool-like they couldn't care less 34 
 
They came in and stretched him out and put one pillow under his head and wiped his face. 
They had already come in a little bit earlier and changed him because he was very particular 
about his hygiene. (. . .) They had shaved him, bathed him, put him in clean pajamas before he 
died. After he died, the kind of propped him, and told me I could stay with him as long as I 
wanted to 21 
 
No diagnosis like ‘You have metastases in the brain, there is nothing that can be done about 
that’ and then leaving the patient without any help 20 
 
To still treat the deceased with dignity 20 
Care was provided by capable staff with key attributes principally centred on approaches to care 
provision rather than purely skilled task completion. 
 
First and foremost employment of capable nursing staff characterized by the qualities: helpful, 
empathic, affectionate, appreciative, comforting 20 
 
More sympathy of hospital staff and physicians, which know what families have to expect 20 
 
speaking gently to the patient 29 
 
approaches with a smile 29 
 
gentle touching 29 
 
want nurses to be constantly considerate of the patient’s feelings 29 
 
Henry couldn't hear and the nurse just stood at the bottom of the bed and asked if he wanted 
anything, when he didn't answer she just left him, if we hadn't asked for drinks he would have 
died of dehydration 33 
 
The nurses were very nice and worked very hard, but I think they have become technicians 
rather than providing what we used to consider 'nursing care' 33 
 
but no, he was just left in his pyjamas and if he was out sat by his bed or lounging on his bed, 
he had no help to feed himself and he had no use of his right hand, so he needed all his food 
cut up and they weren’t doing that for him. I’m not sure how well trained they were for when 
he needed his bag changing. There was mess made then, and stuff like that 28 
 
Better training for the caregivers attending the dying during the last hours 20 
Individualised care provision valuing the patient and their family – ‘the little things are the 
important things’ 28 
 
[That] they don’t become a ‘number’ but stay a human being and person. [That they are] 
treated humanely and [are] not used as a guinea pig 20 
 
That was my mother. They need to realize that that’s somebody’s loved one in there . . . It’s 
not like they need to have an emotional bond with each and every one of our relatives, but 
they need to have some compassion for these people 25 
  
44 
 
 
I think that while their focus is medical and saving lives and, you know, the science, I think 
also, along with that comes the responsibility of some kind of support to a relative or a family, 
that patient’s loved one or caregiver. Yeah, and they actually did that, and that is part of high-
quality care 25 
 
Some were good, and I thought some had a blank face, looking at my mother as just a 
number, number 35. So what I did, I said, my mother is not just an old lady, my mother had a 
life, of course now she’s hooked up to a million cables. I brought in pictures of my mother 
when she was born, and when she got married to my father in 1936, and how she looked later 
on. And they saw her differently. It’s not just a piece of meat that is sitting in that hospital bed. 
It’s a life. That is 100% important 25 
 
He sat with us, listened to us, cared about Frank as a person-who he was, what he liked doing, 
what he meant to us 34 
 
One of the hardest things-that is burned indelibly right in my brain [drawing a line across her 
fore head]-is what a nurse said to me when I questioned why Ben had a feeding tube. She said: 
"These patients do better when they are fed early" -these patients!-these patients!-not ''Ben" -
not "your husband" -but "these patients!"-like he were a number, or one of a herd or 
something-that hurt a lot-I'll never forget it- I wanted to scream: "He's not a 'these patients!"'- 
he's Ben-he's my husband 34 
 
The whole atmosphere is very different from the General . . . they ignore you there, you know 
nobody comes and says ‘‘he’s done this, he’s done that, he’s done anything’’ in the General, 
whereas when I went to [community hospital] they all recognised me and at least would say 
‘‘hullo’’ or ‘‘he’s such and such today’’ or make a comment about my husband, you know, even 
in the corridor for example, so I was connecting with them _ and I mean that helped ever such 
a lot. It was very homely, if that’s the right word, and if he was sitting in the sitting room 
everyone immediately told you where he was, and where he was sitting, and take you to him 
and things like that _ which was very, which was nice. And I know they were all little things, 
but the little things are the important things 28 
 
One time, one of the nurses was clearly doing things her own way; her own routine. I wanted 
to suggest some things that I knew made Ed more comfortable; but . . . she clearly was moving 
to her own ways 34 
 
it was very important to my mother to tell her life story . . . it was important to my father to, 
to relate that, to others-who she was and what she spent her life doing 34 
Theme 
Adequate environmental and organisational characteristics 
Example 
quotes 
from 
included 
papers 
Hospital rules and processes – these need to make sense and ought not to detract from optimal 
patient care 
 
Admittance procedure was dreadful and distressing. Charles was in great pain — had eaten 
nothing since breakfast and was vomiting. He was taken up to a ward at 12 00 and made to 
sit in a chair for two hours until a doctor could see him and officially admit him 33 
 
By the time I got to the hospital, he had been moved from the Emergency Room to the ICU, 
but I didn't know that. I went to the Emergency Room and the person at the desk told me that 
I couldn't go to the ICU to see him until I moved my car from emergency parking because he 
was no longer a patient in the Emergency Department. I couldn't believe it! I started crying-I 
only wanted to go see Carl- finally, another person saw me and said: 'For Pete's sake, let her 
leave her car there!' but that shouldn't happen to people. Rules need to make sense 34 
 
Visiting hours for the families of dying patients should not be restricted 20 
 
Ease up on hospital rules depending on the patient’s situation 29 
 
More assistance concerning questions about care, [and] the options one has. Quicker aid, less 
bureaucracy; you need certifications and forms for everything! 20  
 
He had esophageal cancer, so we know it’s got a very, very low survival rate, so, as soon as he 
was diagnosed, he got [an advance directive] in place . . . One of the nurses came out and said, 
‘it’s getting to the time where we need to decide’ . . . and I said, we’re not going to prolong 
this, and she said, ‘do you have paperwork?’ I said, yes, I’ve got paperwork, it’s on file here. 
She called downstairs to medical records, they could not find it, and so I am just panicking, 
because I’m thinking he’s going to code, and they’re going to try, and he only weighs 80 
pounds, so I sent my husband immediately to get it, and we live in another city. An hour and a 
half of anguish, and it wasn’t necessary 25 
  
45 
 
 
Allowing more time for nursing staff and hospital nurses so that they can care for the patients 
wholeheartedly 20 
 
. . . with a lack of personnel, documentation has high priority instead of treatment or care of 
the patient 20 
Environmental characteristics contribute to quality end-of-life care with a particular noting of the 
need for privacy, cleanliness and quiet 
 
Dying in a separate room with the possibility of a personal farewell – that would have been 
important for me 20 
 
And he had a lovely, lovely room, a little doorway out on to a little patio. Yes, gorgeous, as I 
say he was really happy there 27 
 
One big thing: There needs to be a more private space for family to be when death is 
imminent. Frank was moved out of ICU on the 24th-when they were sure that he would not 
recover from that second stroke. I spent the night with him. That next morning-there was a 
beautiful view out his window-the sun rose right over his bed-it was the most beautiful sunrise 
I had ever seen. He died that morning-the whole family had come in to be with him. I had 
wondered what was the purpose of moving him out of the ICU-then, I knew. It was beautiful 34 
 
One should not put up critically ill persons in three- or four-bed rooms without shower and WC 
20 
 
In the ward where my husband was there really was no privacy. There didn’t seem to be any 
place in the ward where you could talk in private to the staff or indeed to my husband. I never 
felt at ease when we were talking because I always thought there was somebody who could 
hear you  32 
 
I never felt there was any privacy in the ward, there was only a curtain between the beds. I felt 
I couldn’t talk about things that I wanted to because I was aware that others could hear me. 
We were disappointed that there wasn’t a bit more privacy 32 
 
I just wanted to be alone with him-that seemed so hard in the ICU. They let us come in and all, 
but it wasn't like being with him-it was watching 34 
 
You hear so much about dirty beds, dirty pillows, things not being changed, my mum’s linen 
was changed every day and she wasn’t incontinent, um, I mean I’d go there when they didn’t 
expect me, so it wasn’t sort of, oh, she’s coming, we’ll do it, I remember going there one 
lunchtime, and they said, you’ll have to hang on a minute, we’re in the middle of doing your 
mum’s bed, you know, so I was most impressed with the cleanliness I must admit 28 
 
The hospital ward was not up to standard in hygiene (cleaning). I clean a locker and a bath 
before allowing him to use it 33 
 
I do not think the standards of hygiene are good in hospital compared to the past. Odd rubbish 
seems to lie about 33 
 
I appreciate the staff are working and that, but they do make a clatter sometimes, most of the 
time there is something going on. Yes, well those last few days we were in a ward directly 
opposite the nurses’ station, and it was a tiny bit on the noisy side I mean you can’t expect 
them to walk around whispering, but there were times when it was noisy. And the bell seemed 
to ring an awful lot, but I mean, they are patients, they need help. The casualty bell is a very 
strident bell, you know . . . I’m not complaining about it at all, its just they are constantly busy, 
it’s not a quiet place. It’s not a peaceful place 28 
 
They shout from one end to the other. Yes, if they want somebody, they don’t go and look for 
them, they shout for them 27 
Space for cultural practices whether this be congregating family members, chanting or other 
important rituals to support optimal end-of-life care. This information came from one article only 
22. 
 
At the end, all relatives and cousins have to be there. . .this will help the dying person to leave 
with happiness and in peace. . .not feeling alone. . . 22 
 
I came to be with him and did some short chanting. I whispered that he should not worry, I will 
take care of mom. After that my younger brother came in to speak into his ear. Then my mom 
said to him to have a comfortable sleep, our sons were already grown, not to worry about her 
and to go to sleep in comfort 22 
 
I knew that my dad was dying soon. . . in the moment of being informed of the impending 
death by the doctor. He said to me that dad would not survive. Then, I asked the nurse to turn 
  
46 
 
on the taperecording of the monk’s chanting. When dad heard the chanting voice, he grasped 
my hand and closed his eyes. He wanted to hold every person’s hand. I said to him that please 
pass peacefully, and prayed for his spirit to depart peacefully, not worrying about anything 22 
Theme 
Recognising and supporting the family role in care including valuing their expert knowledge of 
the patient and advocating for patient needs 
Example 
quotes 
from 
included 
papers 
Wanting to be involved, to advocate and for their expertise as ‘carer’ to be recognised and valued 
 
From the time my mother went into the hospital and us knowing that she was going to die 
was an extremely trying time for all of us. I had looked after my mother at home and I still 
wanted to do that in hospital. I felt I didn’t have a lot of contact with the staff. I felt helpless 32 
 
One nurse, one time, asked me to help turn Barbara, while she made the bed. . . . I got to hold 
her, and touch her. It was the only time-the only time that I felt like I was able to do something 
for her. I wanted to do so much to help her-there seemed to be nothing I could do. They let me 
help to turn him and hold him-that was important to me-I was helping keep him comfortable 
34 
 
To me it felt safe to be there, but for him you might say it was a need. And to be able to help I 
felt was a good thing. Yes, I thought it was very good! (Spouse 2) 23 
 
I went to the doctor and I said that there is something wrong and I know (the patient) . . . and 
they found fifteen blood clots blocking the urethra . . . all the water was coming in and nothing 
was going out! I just said ‘Sorry, but I know (the patient) better and he is in pain 31 
 
I probably made a nuisance of myself, but I really feel that my sister got much better care 
because I was there every day. I was a decision-maker, and I was a prodder, and I was a 
nagger, and I was an everything else 25 
 
Right from the word go, (the patient) never went anywhere without me. From the time (the 
patient) got sick and they put in the central line, I stuck by (the patient) 31 
 
The case seemed to be ‘Just shut up. We are the experts; we will do what we think is right. We 
don’t want to hear from you’ 31 
 
There was no attempt to say, ‘Are you concerned about it? Do you think things are going OK?’ 
That sort of thing 31 
The importance of feeling welcomed as a partner in care so the carer is certain of their role 
 
It almost feels like it wasn’t your place there. It was the patients’, and they deal with the 
patient 31 
 
As caregiver, quite often, they didn’t talk to me. So you felt like you were the third person 
watching the events . . . I found that difficult 31 
 
I will never forget that time in the hospital with my husband. I had cared for him at home. It 
was very hard knowing that he was going to die. I wasn’t sure how to cope with it. I seemed to 
be in a panic all the time and when I went to the hospital I wasn’t sure what I should do for my 
husband. I don’t think we were helped much. I felt ill at ease and never seemed to be able to 
settle 32 
It is not necessarily beneficial to remove carers from distressing situations – involvement remains 
key for some and therefore should be supported 
 
And she just said “Would you like to sit in the lounge?” and I said, “No, I don’t want to sit in 
the lounge; I will stand at the door, thank you.” When they came out it was only a matter of a 
few minutes, I believe, and she said “Sorry (the patient) has gone,” and I said “I want to be 
with (the patient).” I wanted to be with (the patient) all along and they tend to try to shoo you 
out. I did not see him when he was dying. (The patient) had wires all over his head and 
everything and that may not look good . . . but I could deal with all that. I would have 
preferred to be with (the patient) holding hands, even though it might only have been a small 
time 31 
 
They tried to get me out of the room saying this is not beautiful for your eyes . . . let’s get you 
out of the room. And I said, “No, I am not going . . . this is someone I care about.” And this 
other nurse said to me (later) that I held (your loved one’s) hand and (the patient) breathed 
four times after everything was turned off and I held (the patients hand) and tried to comfort 
(the patient). (Crying) That really hurt me because that is my role. It was my role, and I just 
believe from hearing from people who were unconscious or had those near-death experiences 
that they know who is with them and know what is going on. I believe (the patient) would 
have known that I left the room and that hurts me to this day 31 
  
47 
 
 
Theme 
Financial affairs 
Example 
quotes 
from 
included 
papers 
 
I am an 83-year-old pensioner not in the best of health...had we been told of attendance 
allowance before Graham died his last few months may have been a bit more comfortable 33 
 
The advice in completing social security forms and finding out about benefits he was entitled 
to claim was very poor. Because of this, he lost benefits in the first 8 weeks of illness. It was 
only through pulling their finances together and by financial assistance from 'Help the Aged' 
that eased our situation. This initial failure led Dad to worrying about bills being paid. He did 
not need this sort of additional stress in the last few months of his life 33 
 
Theme 
Maintenance of patient safety and prevention of harm 
Example 
quotes 
from 
included 
papers 
Families feeling hospitalisation did not provide any improved level of care compared with care at 
home – hospitalisation is not always the answer 
 
My husband went into hospital because he was in severe pain but I don’t think he was any 
better off. The pain never went away, he was always uncomfortable. I felt annoyed about that 
because if I had known I wouldn’t have let him go to hospital 32 
 
I will never forget that time in the hospital with my husband. I had cared for him at home. It 
was very hard knowing that he was going to die. I wasn’t sure how to cope with it. I seemed to 
be in a panic all the time and when I went to the hospital I wasn’t sure what I should do for my 
husband. I don’t think we were helped much. I felt ill at ease and never seemed to be able to 
settle 32 
 
I think the 'care' he received made him worse not better 33 
 
From the time my mother went into the hospital and us knowing that she was going to die 
was an extremely trying time for all of us. I had looked after my mother at home and I still 
wanted to do that in hospital. I felt I didn’t have a lot of contact with the staff. I felt helpless 32 
Poor care leads to a lack of patient safety with the following key areas particularly noted: poor 
communication; not considering a palliative approach as needed; not considering a patient’s 
unique care needs; ensuring families feel aware of how to best support their loved ones; poor 
levels of core nursing care; lack of timely attention 
Poor communication 
 
One night I arrived and (the patient) was panicking after a doctor’s visit and there was a total 
misunderstanding and basically what the doctor said was that (the patient) would die. I had to 
find the doctor and identify what was said. I told the doctors that in the future I want to be 
there for future meetings. My instructions were ignored by them 31 
 
Edward never wanted to be told he was going to die. It was clear on his hospital notes that he 
did not want to be told. The doctor at the hospital told him while he was alone. This upset 
everyone for a long time 33 
 
(she) understood enough about her illness to know the prognosis was poor. It was clearly not 
necessary to spell it out and it undermined my morale at a time when it was important to give 
Elizabeth encouragement 33 
Not considering a palliative approach  
 
My Dad was alert. He could squeeze my hand- but he had a breathing tube in. He seemed like 
he wanted to talk-I am regretful that I didn't ask to have that tube removed . . . . When it's 
happening, you do the best that you can . . . it's not a good situation for thinking straight 34 
Not considering a patient’s unique care needs 
 
One time, one of the nurses was clearly doing things her own way; her own routine. I wanted 
to suggest some things that I knew made Ed more comfortable; but . . . she clearly was 
moving to her own ways. 34 
Ensuring families feel aware of how to best support the patient 
 
One of the things that is helpful for the family is to know that they have done as much as they 
can. . . It's not knowing, necessarily, that they have had as much medical treatment as they 
could, but maybe as much caring as they could-touching, music, listening . . . 34 
 
I would never want to experience that again, such a New Year. That was the most brutal; New 
Year’s Eve at midnight, that was absolutely unbearable 26 
Poor nursing care 
 
Admittance procedure was dreadful and distressing. Charles was in great pain — had eaten 
  
48 
 
nothing since breakfast and was vomiting. He was taken up to a ward at 12 00 and made to 
sit in a chair for two hours until a doctor could see him and officially admit him 33 
 
They once discharged her back to nursing home at midnight in her nightdress, with no coat — 
wouldn't even give us a blanket. Didn't inform nursing home. 33 
 
Nobody would take responsibility for him, nobody seemed to care. He was discharged before 
Christmas when they should never have sent him out. Never checked there was anyone there 
to look after him, they didn't arrange any support for him 33 
 
To my mind even a dying man deserves dignity and Henry was not given this during his stay in 
hospital 33 
 
Henry couldn't hear and the nurse just stood at the bottom of the bed and asked if he wanted 
anything, when he didn't answer she just left him, if we hadn't asked for drinks he would have 
died of dehydration 33 
 
On visiting Henry one evening we found his breakfast tray on his bed 33 
 
…but no, he was just left in his pyjamas and if he was out sat by his bed or lounging on his bed, 
he had no help to feed himself and he had no use of his right hand, so he needed all his food 
cut up and they weren’t doing that for him. I’m not sure how well trained they were for when 
he needed his bag changing. There was mess made then, and stuff like that 28 
Lack of timely attention 
 
He was in obvious pain and they paged the doctor . . . then we just waited and waited and 
waited and waited and it was getting worse 31 
There is a need to support families and patients to ‘speak up’ about their care to ensure patient 
safety 
 
I thought that you weren't supposed to do that- but I was afraid to say anything 34 
 
You just don't want to complain about anything. You are at their mercy; your loved one is at 
their mercy . . . what would happen if they got mad at you? 34 
 
I'm so glad for this opportunity to say something- and not have it tied to me or my husband in 
any way. These things need to be said; but you can't when you so desperately need their help 
34 
Theme 
Preparation for death 
Example 
quotes 
from 
included 
papers 
 
[We] needed this, our grandchildren especially needed that moment 30 
 
It would have been advantageous for me and my family if, at a point, of the better than 2 
weeks that he was in ICU, we could have had some kind of counselling on end of life issues 25 
 
And, I believe I would have benefited greatly, if previous to this, I had been told by the doctor 
that this is the possibility, you need to start thinking about this. I just wasn’t ready for it . . . 
We got a call at 5 AM and my brother was gone. And I never had the chance, you know 25 
 
She was there 45 days. . . . On Friday, the doctors and nurses knew she would die-she probably 
knew, too-but she wasn't told. . . . If they had just come out and said it, then we could have all 
said our goodbyes; we didn't 34 
 
The whole thing about the experience with me was I didn’t know he was dying, so it was very 
hard 21 
 
Theme 
Duty of care extending to the family after patient death 
Example 
quotes 
from 
included 
papers 
 
I think that I did get very good attention and my father had the best of care, but . . . they just 
came and closed his eyes, started doing whatever they do when somebody dies, and basically 
just said to move. And, I just left. I did not know what else to do. . . . I would’ve liked a piece of 
follow-up, somehow. A call: ‘Ms.___, I know your father just recently died, how are you doing? 
Did you know there’s a group? Would you be interested in talking to someone? . . . It’s 
important for people who have recently lost their loved ones,’ or something like that 25 
 
At 8:00 PM, I went out there and felt like I was going into a war zone. I was put out like, out on 
the street. No one told me anything. They knew several days beforehand that I had arranged 
the date [for ventilator withdrawal], but nobody approached me . . . Nothing was addressed at 
all . . . Nobody asked, ‘Are you able to take care of yourself; are you able to find a place to go 
to, as far as for grief, for death of your mother?’ Where do you go, what do you do? . . . 
Prepare one for it a little bit. Not to walk out into the cold night 25 
 
After he died, they just came in there and pronounced him dead, and started covering him up 
and moving him, and pulling out all these things. And, I thought, do they need the room right 
  
49 
 
now? They do not give me a minute to just kind of get up and grab my stuff and get out? So, I 
just left. I would have appreciated some follow-up or grief support or social work or anything. 
Because I did not cry over my father. . . . I did not cry at all, until 2 months ago, I finally had 
myself a good little fit. I did not know that I was so messed up. I wished that I had spoken with 
someone. Or someone had reached out to me. In some way 25 
Theme 
Enabling patient choice at the end-of-life   
Example 
quotes 
from 
included 
papers 
The importance of following established Advance Care Directives and for processes to be in place 
to facilitate this 
 
Physicians: should comply with existing patient advance directive and not prolong the 
suffering and dying for a few months 20 
 
My mother had made a decision against a nourishing probe in advance but everyone 
(paramedical and nursing staff, some physicians) made me a bad conscience: ‘Do you want to 
let your mother starve?’ 20 
 
For patients who had previously expressed preferences in an advance directive, there was 
agreement among participants that “the ICU needs to know immediately” before major 
decisions were actually at hand, if possible, “before something tragic happens.” “What’s the 
point of making one out if the information’s not passed on?” in a timely way, a family member 
asked, rhetorically 25 
 
He had esophageal cancer, so we know it’s got a very, very low survival rate, so, as soon as he 
was diagnosed, he got [an advance directive] in place . . . One of the nurses came out and said, 
‘it’s getting to the time where we need to decide’ . . . and I said, we’re not going to prolong 
this, and she said, ‘do you have paperwork?’ I said, yes, I’ve got paperwork, it’s on file here. 
She called downstairs to medical records, they could not find it, and so I am just panicking, 
because I’m thinking he’s going to code, and they’re going to try, and he only weighs 80 
pounds, so I sent my husband immediately to get it, and we live in another city. An hour and a 
half of anguish, and it wasn’t necessary 25  
 
One man had told his wife, " . . . [l]f I am physically able, but I have lost my mental facilities, . . 
. I would choose not to live, . . . [but] I would like to live to see these little kids (grandchildren] 
grow up (Kirchhoff, 2002 #130) 
The fact decision making at the end-of-life is complex, even when in the context of being guided 
by an Advance Care Directive 
 
I knew [he] did not want to be on life support systems. . . . I made us up a living will every year, 
. . . but when you're actually faced with the reality, [that is] something! You have to go with 
the decision. . . . [but] I would have taken [him] under any circumstances 30 
The need for legalised euthanasia for critically ill patients 
 
Critically ill patients should get the legal option to end their lives painlessly and without 
complications if they wish ( . . . ) 20 
 
 
