 Global Strategy for the Diagnosis,
Management, and Prevention of Chronic
Obstructive Lung Disease 2017 Report:
GOLD Executive Summary
Claus F. Vogelmeier1,21, Gerard J. Criner2,21, Fernando J. Martinez3,21,
Antonio Anzueto4, Peter J. Barnes5, Jean Bourbeau6, Bartolome R. Celli7,
Rongchang Chen8, Marc Decramer9, Leonardo M. Fabbri10, Peter Frith11,
David M.G. Halpin12, M. Victorina López Varela13, Masaharu Nishimura14,
Nicolas Roche15, Roberto Rodriguez-Roisin16, Don D. Sin17, Dave Singh18,
Robert Stockley19, Jørgen Vestbo18, Jadwiga A. Wedzicha5 and Alvar Agusti20
Affiliations:
1University of Marburg, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Marburg,
Germany. 2Lewis Katz School of Medicine at Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 3New York Presbyterian
Hospital, Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, NY, USA. 4University of Texas Health Science Center and
South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX, USA. 5National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College, London, UK. 6McGill University Health Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Canada. 7Brigham and
Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. 8State Key Lab for Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory
Disease, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China. 9University of Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium. 10University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy. 11Flinders University Faculty of
Medicine, Bedford Park, Australia.
12Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, Exeter, UK.
13Universidad de la
República, Hospital Maciel, Montevideo, Uruguay. 14Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.
15Hôpital Cochin (APHP), University Paris Descartes, Paris, France. 16Thorax Institute, Hospital Clinic Universitat
de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. 17St Paul’s Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
18University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
19University Hospital, Birmingham, UK.
20Hospital Clínic,
Universitat de Barcelona, Ciberes, Barcelona, Spain. 21These authors contributed equally to the manuscript.
Correspondence: Claus F. Vogelmeier, Dept of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of
Marburg, Baldingerstraße, 35043 Marburg, Germany. E-mail: claus.vogelmeier@med.uni-marburg.de
@ERSpublications
Read the executive summary of the new @GOLD_COPD 2017 report in the European Respiratory
Journal http://ow.ly/XxfD308BDfc
Cite this article as: Vogelmeier CF, Criner GJ, Martinez FJ, et al. Global Strategy for the Diagnosis,
Management, and Prevention of Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease 2017 Report: GOLD Executive
Summary. Eur Respir J 2017; 49: 1700214 [https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017].
ABSTRACT
This Executive Summary of the Global Strategy for the Diagnosis, Management, and
Prevention of COPD (GOLD) 2017 Report focuses primarily on the revised and novel parts of the document.
The most significant changes include: 1) the assessment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease has been
refined to separate the spirometric assessment from symptom evaluation. ABCD groups are now proposed to
be derived exclusively from patient symptoms and their history of exacerbations; 2) for each of the groups A
to D, escalation strategies for pharmacological treatments are proposed; 3) the concept of de-escalation of
therapy
is
introduced
in
the
treatment
assessment
scheme;
4)
nonpharmacologic
therapies
are
comprehensively presented and; 5) the importance of comorbid conditions in managing COPD is reviewed.
This article has been amended according to the erratum published in the June 2017 issue of the European Respiratory Journal.
This article has supplementary material available from erj.ersjournals.com
Received: Jan 30 2017 | Accepted: Jan 30 2017
Conflict of interest: Disclosures can be found alongside this article at erj.ersjournals.com
Copyright ©2017 the American Thoracic Society. Published with permission from the American Thoracic Society.
Design and branding are copyright ©ERS 2017.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
Eur Respir J 2017; 49: 1700214
TASK FORCE REPORT
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
 Introduction
This Executive Summary of the Global Strategy for the Diagnosis, Management, and Prevention of COPD
(GOLD) 2017 Report is based on peer-reviewed publications to October 2016.
Levels of evidence are assigned to evidence-based recommendations where appropriate. Categories used to
grade the levels of evidence are provided in table S1 in the supplementary material.
Definition and factors that influence chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
development and progression
Key points
• Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common, preventable and treatable disease that is
characterised by persistent respiratory symptoms and airflow limitation due to airway and/or alveolar
abnormalities usually caused by significant exposure to noxious particles or gases.
• Dyspnoea, cough and/or sputum production are the most frequent symptoms; symptoms are commonly
under-reported by patients.
• Tobacco smoking is the main risk exposure for COPD, but environmental exposures like biomass fuel
exposure and air pollution may contribute. Besides exposures, host factors (genetic abnormalities,
abnormal lung development and accelerated aging) predispose individuals to develop COPD.
• COPD may be punctuated by acute worsening of respiratory symptoms, called exacerbations.
• In most patients, COPD is associated with significant concomitant chronic diseases, which increase
morbidity and mortality.
Definition and pathogenesis
COPD is a common, preventable and treatable disease that is characterised by persistent respiratory
symptoms and airflow limitation that is due to airway and/or alveolar abnormalities usually caused by
significant exposure to noxious particles or gases.
The chronic airflow limitation that characterises COPD is caused by a mixture of small airways disease
(e.g., obstructive bronchiolitis) and parenchymal destruction (emphysema), the relative contributions of
which vary from person to person. Chronic inflammation causes structural changes, small airways
narrowing and destruction of lung parenchyma. A loss of small airways may contribute to airflow
limitation and mucociliary dysfunction, a characteristic feature of the disease.
Chronic respiratory symptoms may precede the development of airflow limitation and be associated with
acute respiratory events [1]. Chronic respiratory symptoms may exist in individuals with normal
spirometry [1, 2] and a significant number of smokers without airflow limitation have structural evidence
of lung disease manifested by the presence of emphysema, airway wall thickening and gas trapping [1, 2].
Factors that influence disease development and progression
Although cigarette smoking is the most well studied COPD risk factor, epidemiologic studies demonstrate
that non-smokers may also develop chronic airflow limitation [3]. Compared to smokers with COPD,
never smokers with chronic airflow limitation have fewer symptoms, milder disease and a lower burden of
systemic inflammation [4]. Never smokers with chronic airflow limitation do not have an increased risk of
lung cancer, or cardiovascular comorbidities; however, they have an increased risk of pneumonia and
mortality from respiratory failure [4].
Processes occurring during gestation, birth, and exposures during childhood and adolescence affect lung
growth [5, 6]. Reduced maximal attained lung function (as measured by spirometry) may identify
individuals at increased risk for COPD [2, 7]. Factors in early life termed “childhood disadvantage factors”
are as important as heavy smoking in predicting lung function in adult life [8]. An examination of three
different longitudinal cohorts found that approximately 50% of patients developed COPD owing to an
accelerated decline in forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1); the other 50% developed COPD owing to
abnormal lung growth and development.
This document is an executive summary of the Global Strategy for the Diagnosis, Management, and Prevention of
COPD (GOLD) 2017 Report. The documents were peer reviewed by GOLD before submission to the European
Respiratory Journal, the American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Archivos de Bronconeumología and
Respirology for joint publication.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
2
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 Cigarette smokers have a higher prevalence of respiratory symptoms and lung function abnormalities, a
greater annual rate of decline in FEV1, and a greater COPD mortality rate than non-smokers [9]. Other
types of tobacco (e.g., pipe, cigar, water pipe) [10–12] and marijuana [13] are also risk factors for COPD.
Passive exposure to cigarette smoke, also known as environmental tobacco smoke (ETS), may also
contribute to respiratory symptoms and COPD [14] by increasing the lung’s total burden of inhaled
particles and gases. Smoking during pregnancy may pose a risk for the fetus by affecting in utero lung
growth and development, and possibly priming the immune system [15].
Occupational exposures, including organic and inorganic dusts, chemical agents and fumes, are
under-appreciated risk factors for COPD development [16, 17].
Wood, animal dung, crop residues, and coal, typically burned in open fires or poorly functioning stoves,
may lead to indoor air pollution [18]. Indoor pollution from biomass cooking and heating, in poorly
ventilated dwellings, is a risk for COPD [19–21].
Asthma may be a risk for the development of chronic airflow limitation and COPD [22].
Airway hyper-responsiveness can exist without a clinical diagnosis of asthma and is an independent
predictor of COPD and respiratory mortality in population studies [23, 24], and may indicate a risk for
excessive lung function decline in mild COPD [25].
A history of severe childhood respiratory infection is associated with reduced lung function and increased
respiratory symptoms in adulthood [26]. HIV infection accelerates the onset of smoking-related
emphysema and COPD [27]; tuberculosis has also been identified as a risk for COPD as well as a potential
comorbidity [28–30].
Diagnosis and initial assessment
Key points
• COPD should be considered in any patient with dyspnoea, chronic cough or sputum production, and/or a
history of exposure to risk factors.
• Spirometry is required to make the diagnosis; a post-bronchodilator FEV1/forced vital capacity (FVC) <0.70
confirms the presence of persistent airflow limitation.
• The goals of COPD assessment are to determine the level of airflow limitation, the impact of disease on
the patient’s health status, and the risk of future events (such as exacerbations, hospital admissions, or
death) to guide therapy.
• Concomitant chronic diseases occur frequently in COPD patients and should be treated because they can
independently affect mortality and hospitalisations.
Diagnosis
COPD should be considered in any patient with dyspnoea, chronic cough or sputum production, and/or a
history of exposure to risk factors for the disease (figure 1 and table 1). Spirometry is required to make the
diagnosis in this clinical context [31]; a post-bronchodilator FEV1/FVC <0.70 confirms the presence of
persistent airflow limitation and identifies the presence of COPD in patients with appropriate symptoms
and predisposing risks.
Symptoms
Chronic and progressive dyspnoea is the most characteristic symptom of COPD.
Dyspnoea
Dyspnoea is a major cause of disability and anxiety in COPD [32]. The terms used to describe dyspnoea
vary individually and culturally [33].
FIGURE 1 Pathways to the diagnosis
of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.
Symptoms
Shortness of breath
Chronic cough
Sputum
Risk factors
Host factors
Tobacco
Occupation
Indoor/outdoor pollution
Spirometry: required to establish diagnosis
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
3
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 Cough
Chronic cough is often the first symptom of COPD and frequently discounted by the patient as a
consequence of smoking and/or environmental exposures.
Sputum production
Regular sputum production ⩾3 months in 2 consecutive years is the classical definition of chronic
bronchitis [34]; an arbitrary definition that does not reflect the range of sputum production reported in
COPD. Patients producing large volumes of sputum may have underlying bronchiectasis.
Wheezing and chest tightness
Wheezing and chest tightness may vary between days, and throughout a single day.
Additional features in severe disease
Fatigue, weight loss and anorexia are common in patients with more severe forms of COPD [35, 36].
Medical history
A detailed medical history of any patient who is known, or suspected, to have COPD should include:
• Exposure to risk factors, such as smoking and occupational or environmental exposures.
• Past medical history, including asthma, allergy, sinusitis, or nasal polyps; respiratory infections in
childhood; other chronic respiratory and non-respiratory diseases.
• Family history of COPD or other chronic respiratory diseases.
• Pattern of symptom development: age of onset, type of symptom, more frequent or prolonged “winter
colds,” and social restriction.
• History of exacerbations or previous hospitalisations for a respiratory disorder.
• Presence of comorbidities, such as heart disease, osteoporosis, musculoskeletal disorders, and
malignancies.
• Impact of disease on patient’s life, including limitation of activity, missed work and economic impact,
and feelings of depression or anxiety.
• Social and family support available to the patient.
• Possibilities for reducing risk factors, especially smoking cessation.
Physical examination
Although important for general health, a physical examination is rarely diagnostic in COPD. Physical signs
of airflow limitation/hyperinflation are usually not identifiable until significantly impaired lung function is
present [37, 38].
Spirometry
Spirometry is the most reproducible and objective measurement of airflow limitation. It is a noninvasive
and readily available test. Good quality spirometry is possible in any healthcare setting; all healthcare
workers who care for COPD patients should have access to spirometry.
TABLE 1 Key indicators for considering a diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
Consider COPD, and perform spirometry, if any of these indicators are present in an individual over age 40. These indicators are not
diagnostic themselves, but the presence of multiple key indicators increases the probability of a diagnosis of COPD. Spirometry is required
to establish a diagnosis of COPD.
Dyspnoea that is
Progressive over time
Characteristically worse with exercise
Persistent
Chronic cough
May be intermittent and may be unproductive
Recurrent wheeze
Chronic sputum production
With any pattern
Recurrent lower respiratory tract infections
History of risk factors
Host factors (such as genetic factors, congenital/developmental abnormalities etc.)
Tobacco smoke
Smoke from home cooking and heating fuels
Occupational dusts, vapours, fumes, gases and other chemicals
Family history of COPD and/or childhood factors
For example low birthweight, childhood respiratory infections
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
4
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 A post-bronchodilator fixed ratio of FEV1/FVC <0.70 is the spirometric criterion for airflow limitation.
This criterion is simple and independent of reference values and has been used in numerous clinical trials.
However, it may result in more frequent diagnosis of COPD in the elderly [39, 40], and less frequent
diagnosis in adults <45 years [40], especially in mild disease, compared to a cut-off based on the lower
limit of normal (LLN) values for FEV1/FVC. Several limitations occur with using LLN as the diagnostic
criterion for spirometric obstruction: 1) LLN values are dependent on the choice of reference equations
that use post-bronchodilator FEV1, 2) there are no longitudinal studies that validate using the LLN, and
3) studies using LLN in populations where smoking is not the major cause of COPD are lacking.
Normal spirometry may be defined by a new approach from the Global Lung Initiative (GLI) [41, 42]. Using
GLI equations, z scores were calculated for FEV1, FVC, and FEV1/FVC and compared to fixed ratio data. The
findings suggest that among adults with GLI-defined normal spirometry, the use of a fixed ratio may misclassify
individuals as having respiratory impairment. These findings await additional study in other cohorts.
The risk of misdiagnosis and over-treatment using the fixed ratio as a diagnostic criterion is limited since
spirometry is only one parameter used to establish the clinical diagnosis of COPD. GOLD favours using
the fixed ratio over LLN since diagnostic simplicity and consistency are crucial for the busy clinician.
Assessing the degree of reversibility of airflow limitation (e.g., measuring FEV1 before and after bronchodilator
or corticosteroids) to make therapeutic decisions is not recommended [43] since it does not aid the diagnosis
of COPD, differentiate COPD from asthma, or predict the long-term response to treatment [44].
In asymptomatic individuals without exposures to tobacco or other noxious stimuli, screening spirometry is not
indicated. However, in those with symptoms and/or risk factors (e.g. >20 pack-years of smoking or recurrent
chest infections), the diagnostic yield for COPD is relatively high and spirometry should be considered [45, 46].
GOLD advocates active case finding [45, 47] i.e., performing spirometry in patients with symptoms and/or risk
factors, but not routine screening spirometry in asymptomatic individuals without COPD risk factors.
Assessment
The goals of COPD assessment to guide therapy are 1) to determine the level of airflow limitation; 2) to
define its impact on the patient’s health status and; 3) to identify the risk of future events (such as
exacerbations, hospital admissions or death).
To achieve these goals, COPD assessment must consider separately the following aspects of the disease:
• Presence and severity of the spirometric abnormality
• Current nature and magnitude of symptoms
• History/future risk of exacerbations
• Presence of comorbidities
Classification of severity of airflow limitation
Spirometry should be performed after administration of an adequate dose of at least one short-acting
inhaled bronchodilator in order to minimise variability.
The role of spirometry for the diagnosis, assessment and follow-up of COPD is summarised in table 2.
Assessment of symptoms
COPD was previously viewed as a disease largely characterised by breathlessness. A simple measure of
breathlessness such as the Modified British Medical Research Council (mMRC) Questionnaire [48] was
considered adequate for assessment of symptoms [49–51]. However, COPD impacts patients well beyond
dyspnoea [52]. For this reason, a comprehensive assessment of symptoms is recommended. The most
TABLE 2 Role of spirometry
Diagnosis
Assessment of severity of airflow obstruction (for prognosis)
Follow-up assessment
Therapeutic decisions
Pharmacological in selected circumstances (e.g., discrepancy between spirometry and level of
symptoms)
Consider alternative diagnoses when symptoms are disproportionate to degree of airflow obstruction
Nonpharmacological (e.g., interventional procedures)
Identification of rapid decline
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
5
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 comprehensive disease-specific health status questionnaires include the Chronic Respiratory Questionnaire
(CRQ) [53] and St. George’s Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) [54]. These are too complex to use in
clinical practice, but shorter measures e.g., the COPD Assessment Test (CAT) are suitable.
Choice of thresholds
SGRQ scores <25 are uncommon in COPD patients [55] and scores ⩾25 are very uncommon in healthy
persons [56, 57]. The equivalent cut-off point for the CAT is 10 [58]. A mMRC threshold of ⩾2 is used to
separate “less breathlessness” from “more breathlessness”.
Assessment of exacerbation risk
The best predictor of frequent exacerbations (defined as ⩾2 exacerbations per year) is a history of earlier
treated events [59]. Hospitalisation for a COPD exacerbation has a poor prognosis and an increased risk of
death [60].
Blood eosinophil count
Post-hoc analysis of two clinical trials in COPD patients with an exacerbation history showed that higher
blood eosinophil counts may predict increased exacerbation rates in patients treated with long acting beta
agonists (LABA) (without inhaled corticosteroid, ICS) [61, 62]. The treatment effect of ICS/LABA versus
LABA on exacerbations was greater in patients with higher blood eosinophil counts. These findings
suggest that blood eosinophil counts are 1) a biomarker of exacerbation risk in patients with a history of
exacerbations and 2) can predict the effects of ICS on exacerbation prevention. Prospective trials are
required to validate the use of blood eosinophil counts to predict ICS effects, to determine a cut-off
threshold for blood eosinophils that predicts exacerbation risk, and to clarify blood eosinophil cut-off
values that could be used in clinical practice.
Assessment of concomitant chronic diseases (comorbidities)
Patients with COPD often have important concomitant chronic illnesses as COPD represents an important
component of multimorbidity particularly in the elderly [60, 63–65].
Revised combined COPD assessment
The “ABCD” assessment tool of the 2011 GOLD Report was a major step forward from the simple
spirometric grading system of earlier GOLD Reports because it incorporated patient-reported outcomes
and highlighted the importance of exacerbation prevention in COPD management. However, there were
important limitations. ABCD assessment performed no better than spirometric grades for mortality
prediction or other important health outcomes [66–68]. Moreover, group “D” outcomes were modified by
two parameters: lung function and/or exacerbation history, which caused confusion [69]. To address these
concerns, the 2017 GOLD Report provides a refinement of the ABCD assessment that separates
spirometric grades from ABCD groupings. For some therapy recommendations, especially pharmacologic
treatments, ABCD groups are derived exclusively from patient symptoms and their exacerbation history.
However, spirometry, in conjunction with patient symptoms and exacerbation history, remains vital for the
diagnosis, prognostication and consideration of other important therapeutic approaches, especially
nonpharmacological therapies. This new approach to assessment is illustrated in figure 2.
In the refined assessment scheme, patients should undergo spirometry to determine the severity of airflow
limitation (i.e., spirometric grade). They should also undergo assessment of either dyspnoea using mMRC
or symptoms using CAT. Finally, their history of exacerbations (including prior hospitalisations) should be
recorded.
The number provides information regarding severity of airflow limitation (spirometric grades 1–4) while
the letter (groups A–D) provides information regarding symptom burden and risk of exacerbation. FEV1
is a very important parameter at the population level in the prediction of important clinical outcomes such
as mortality and hospitalisations or prompting consideration for nonpharmacologic therapies such as lung
reduction or lung transplantation. However, at the individual patient level, FEV1 loses precision and thus
cannot be used alone to determine all therapeutic options. Furthermore, in some circumstances, such as
during hospitalisation or urgent presentation to the clinic or emergency room, the ability to assess patients
based on symptoms and exacerbation history, independent of the spirometric value, allows clinicians to
initiate a treatment plan based on the revised ABCD scheme. This approach acknowledges the limitations
of FEV1 in making treatment decisions for individualised patient care and highlights the importance of
patient symptoms and exacerbation risks in guiding therapies in COPD. The separation of airflow
limitation from clinical parameters makes it clearer what is being evaluated and ranked. This should
facilitate more precise treatment recommendations based on parameters that are driving the patient’s
symptoms at any given time.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
6
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 Example
Consider two patients – both patients with FEV1 <30% of predicted and CAT scores of 18, and one with
no exacerbations in the past year, and the other with three exacerbations in the past year. Both would have
been labelled GOLD D in the prior classification scheme. However, with the new proposed scheme, the
subject with 3 exacerbations in the past year would be labelled GOLD grade 4, group D. Individual
decisions on pharmacotherapeutic approaches would use the recommendations based on the ABCD
assessment to treat the patient’s major problem at this time, i.e., persistent exacerbations. The other
patient, who has had no exacerbations, would be classified as GOLD grade 4, group B. In such patients –
besides pharmacotherapy and rehabilitation – lung reduction, lung transplantation or bullectomy may be
important therapeutic considerations given their symptom burden and level of spirometric limitation.
α1-antitrypsin deficiency
The World Health Organization recommends that all patients with a diagnosis of COPD be screened once
for α1-antitrypsin deficiency [70]. A low concentration (<20% normal) is suggestive of homozygous
deficiency. Family members should be screened and together with the patient referred to specialist centres
for advice and management.
Additional investigations
In order to rule out other concomitant disease contributing to respiratory symptoms, or in cases where
patients do not respond to the treatment plan as expected, additional testing may be required. Thoracic
imaging (chest X-ray, chest computed tomography (CT)), assessment of lung volumes and/or diffusion
capacity, oximetry and arterial blood gas measurement, and exercise testing and assessment of physical
activity should be considered.
Composite scores
The BODE (body mass index, obstruction, dyspnoea, and exercise) method gives a composite score that is
a better predictor of subsequent survival than any single component [71]. Simpler alternatives that do not
include exercise testing need validation to confirm suitability for routine clinical use [72, 73].
Differential diagnoses
In some patients, features of asthma and COPD may coexist. The terms “asthma–COPD overlap
syndrome” or “asthma–COPD overlap” acknowledge the overlap of these two common disorders causing
chronic airflow limitation rather than designating it a distinct syndrome. Most other potential differential
diagnoses are easier to distinguish from COPD.
Other considerations
Some patients without evidence of airflow limitation have evidence of structural lung disease on chest
imaging (emphysema, gas trapping, airway wall thickening). Such patients may report exacerbations of
Spirometrically 
confirmed diagnosis
Post-bronchodilator
FEV1/FVC <0.7
Assessment of 
airflow limitation
Assessment of 
symptoms/risk 
of exacerbations
Exacerbation history
mMRC ≥2
CAT ≥10
mMRC 0–1
CAT <10
≥2 or
≥1 leading to
 hospital admission
0 or 1
(not leading to 
hospital admission)
C
D
A
B
GOLD 1
GOLD 2
GOLD 3
GOLD 4
≥80
50–79
FEV1
% predicted
30–49
<30
FIGURE 2 The refined ABCD assessment tool. FEV1: forced expiratory volume in 1 s; FVC: forced vital
capacity; GOLD: Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease; mMRC: modified Medical Research
Council; CAT: COPD Assessment Test.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
7
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 respiratory symptoms or even require treatment with respiratory medications on a chronic basis. Whether
these patients have acute or chronic bronchitis, a persistent form of asthma or an earlier presentation of
what will become COPD as it is currently defined, is unclear and requires further study.
Prevention and maintenance therapy
Key points
• Smoking cessation is key. Pharmacotherapy and nicotine replacement increase long-term smoking
abstinence rates.
• The effectiveness and safety of e-cigarettes as a smoking cessation aid is uncertain.
• Pharmacologic therapy can reduce COPD symptoms, reduce the frequency and severity of exacerbations,
and improve health status and exercise tolerance.
• Each pharmacologic treatment regimen should be individualised and guided by the severity of symptoms,
risk of exacerbations, side-effects, comorbidities, drug availability and cost, and the patient’s response,
preference and ability to use various drug delivery devices.
• Inhaler technique needs to be assessed regularly.
• Influenza and pneumococcal vaccinations decrease the incidence of lower respiratory tract infections.
• Pulmonary rehabilitation improves symptoms, quality of life, and physical and emotional participation in
everyday activities.
• In patients with severe resting chronic hypoxaemia, long-term oxygen therapy improves survival.
• In patients with stable COPD and resting or exercise-induced moderate desaturation, long-term oxygen
treatment should not be prescribed routinely, however, individual patient factors should be considered.
• In patients with severe chronic hypercapnia and a history of hospitalisation for acute respiratory failure,
long-term non-invasive ventilation (NIV) may decrease mortality and prevent re-hospitalisation.
• In select patients with advanced emphysema refractory to optimised medical care, surgical or
bronchoscopic interventional treatments may be beneficial.
• Palliative approaches are effective in controlling symptoms in advanced COPD.
Smoking cessation
Smoking cessation influences the natural history of COPD. If effective resources and time are dedicated to
smoking cessation, long-term quit success rates of up to 25% can be achieved [74].
Nicotine replacement products
Nicotine replacement therapy increases long-term smoking abstinence rates [75–77] and is more effective
than placebo. E-cigarettes are increasingly used as a form of nicotine replacement therapy, although their
efficacy remains controversial [78–82].
Pharmacologic products
Varenicline [83], bupropion [84], and nortriptyline [85] increase long-term quit rates [85], but should be
used as part of an interventional programme rather than as a sole intervention.
Smoking cessation programmes
A five-step programme for intervention [75] provides a framework to guide healthcare providers to help
patients stop smoking [75, 77, 86]. Counselling delivered by health professionals significantly increases
quit rates over self-initiated strategies [87]. The combination of pharmacotherapy and behavioural support
increases smoking cessation rates [88].
Vaccinations
Influenza vaccine and pneumococcal vaccines
Influenza vaccination reduces serious illness [89], death [90–93], the risk of ischaemic heart disease [94]
and the total number of exacerbations [90]. Vaccines containing either killed or live inactivated viruses are
recommended [95] as they are more effective in elderly patients with COPD [96].
The pneumococcal vaccinations, the 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13) and 23-valent
pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23), are recommended for all patients ⩾65 years of age (table S2).
Pharmacologic therapy for stable COPD
Overview of medications
Pharmacologic therapy for COPD reduces symptoms, the frequency and severity of exacerbations, and
improves exercise tolerance and health status. No existing medication modifies the long-term decline in
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
8
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 lung function [97–101]. The classes of medications used to treat COPD are shown in table S3. The choice
within each class depends on the availability and cost of medication and favourable clinical response
balanced against side-effects. Each treatment regimen needs to be individualised as the relationship
between severity of symptoms, airflow limitation, and severity of exacerbations varies between patients.
Bronchodilators
Bronchodilators increase FEV1, reduce dynamic hyperinflation, at rest and during exercise [102, 103], and
improve exercise performance. Bronchodilator medications are usually given on a regular basis to prevent
or reduce symptoms. Toxicity is dose-related.
β2-agonists
β2-agonists, including short-acting (SABA) and long-acting (LABA) agents, relax airway smooth muscle.
Stimulation of β2-adrenergic receptors can produce resting sinus tachycardia and precipitate cardiac
rhythm disturbances in susceptible patients. Exaggerated somatic tremor occurs in some patients treated
with higher doses of β2-agonists.
Antimuscarinic drugs
Ipratropium, a short-acting muscarinic antagonist, provides small benefits over short-acting β2-agonist in
terms of lung function, health status and requirement for oral steroids [104]. Long-acting muscarinic
antagonist (LAMA) treatment improves symptoms and health status [105, 106], improves the effectiveness
of pulmonary rehabilitation [107, 108] and reduces exacerbations and related hospitalisations[107].
Clinical trials have shown a greater effect on exacerbation rates for LAMA treatment (tiotropium) versus
LABA treatment [109, 110]. An unexpected small increase in cardiovascular events was reported in COPD
patients regularly treated with ipratropium bromide [111, 112]. A large trial reported no difference in
mortality, cardiovascular morbidity or exacerbation rates when using tiotropium as a dry-powder inhaler
compared to a mist delivered by the Respimat inhaler [113].
Methylxanthines
Theophylline exerts a modest bronchodilator effect in stable COPD [114], and improves FEV1 and
breathlessness when added to salmeterol [115, 116]. There is limited and contradictory evidence regarding
the effect of low-dose theophylline on exacerbation rates [114, 119]. Toxicity is dose-related, which is a
problem as most of the benefit occurs when near-toxic doses are given [116, 121].
Combination bronchodilator therapy
Combining bronchodilators with different mechanisms and durations of action may increase the degree of
bronchodilation with a lower risk of side-effects compared to increasing the dose of a single
bronchodilator (table 3) [120]. There are numerous combinations of a LABA and LAMA in a single
inhaler available (table S3). These combinations improve lung function compared to placebo [120] and
TABLE 3 Bronchodilators in stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
Inhaled bronchodilators in COPD are central to symptom management and commonly given on a regular
basis to prevent or reduce symptoms (evidence A)
Regular and as-needed use of SABA or SAMA improves FEV1 and symptoms (evidence A)
Combinations of SABA and SAMA are superior compared to either medication alone in improving FEV1 and
symptoms (evidence A)
LABAs and LAMAs significantly improve lung function, dyspnoea, health status, and reduce exacerbation
rates (evidence A)
LAMAs have a greater effect on exacerbation reduction compared with LABAs (evidence A) and decrease
hospitalisations (evidence B)
Combination treatment with a LABA and LAMA increases FEV1 and reduces symptoms compared to
monotherapy (evidence A)
Combination treatment with a LABA and LAMA reduces exacerbations compared to monotherapy (evidence
B) or ICS/LABA (evidence B)
Tiotropium improves the effectiveness of pulmonary rehabilitation in increasing exercise performance
(evidence B)
Theophylline exerts a small bronchodilator effect in stable COPD (evidence A) that is associated with
modest symptomatic benefits (evidence B)
SABA: short-acting β2-agonist; SAMA: short-acting muscarinic antagonist; FEV1: forced expiratory volume
in 1 s; LABA: long-acting β2-agonist; ICS: inhaled corticosteroid.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
9
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 have a greater impact on patient reported outcomes compared to monotherapies [121–124]. LABA/LAMA
improves symptoms and health status in COPD patients [125], is more effective than long-acting
bronchodilator monotherapy for preventing exacerbations [126], and decreases exacerbations to a greater
extent than ICS/LABA combination [127].
Anti-inflammatory agents
Exacerbations represent the main clinically relevant end-point used for the efficacy assessment of
anti-inflammatory drugs (table 4).
Inhaled corticosteroids
In patients with moderate to very severe COPD and exacerbations, an ICS combined with a LABA is more
effective than either component alone in improving lung function and health status, and reducing
exacerbations [128, 129]. However, survival is not affected by combination therapy [130, 131].
ICS use has a higher prevalence of oral candidiasis, hoarse voice, skin bruising and pneumonia [132].
Patients at higher risk of pneumonia include those who currently smoke, are aged ⩾55 years, or have a
history of prior exacerbations or pneumonia, a body mass index (BMI) <25 kg·m−2, a poor MRC dyspnoea
grade and/or severe airflow limitation [133].
Results from randomised controlled trials (RCTs) have yielded variable results regarding the risk of
decreased bone density and fractures with ICS treatment [99, 134–137]. Observational studies suggest that
ICS treatment could be associated with increased risks of diabetes/poor control of diabetes [138], cataracts
[139], and mycobacterial infection [140] including tuberculosis [141, 142].
ICS withdrawal
Withdrawal studies provide equivocal results regarding the consequences of withdrawal on lung function,
symptoms and exacerbations [143–147].
TABLE 4 Anti-inflammatory therapy in stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
ICS
An ICS combined with a LABA is more effective than the individual components in improving lung
function and health status and reducing exacerbations in patients with exacerbations and moderate
to very severe COPD (evidence A)
Regular treatment with ICS increases the risk of pneumonia especially in those with severe disease
(evidence A)
Triple inhaled therapy of ICS/LAMA/LABA improves lung function, symptoms and health status
(evidence A) and reduces exacerbations (evidence B) compared to ICS/LABA or LAMA monotherapy
Oral glucocorticoids
Long-term use of oral glucocorticoids has numerous side-effects (evidence A) with no evidence
of benefits (evidence C)
PDE4 inhibitors
In patients with chronic bronchitis, severe to very severe COPD and a history of exacerbations
A PDE4 inhibitor improves lung function and reduces moderate and severe exacerbations (evidence A)
A PDE4 inhibitor improves lung function and decreases exacerbations in patients who are on
fixed-dose LABA/ICS combinations (evidence B)
Antibiotics
Long-term azithromycin and erythromycin therapy reduces exacerbations over 1 year (evidence A)
Treatment with azithromycin is associated with an increased incidence of bacterial resistance
(evidence A) and hearing test impairment (evidence B)
Mucolytics/antioxidants
Regular use of NAC and carbocysteine reduces the risk of exacerbations in select populations
(evidence B)
Other anti-inflammatory agents
Simvastatin does not prevent exacerbations in COPD patients at increased risk of exacerbations and
without indications for statin therapy (evidence A); however, observational studies suggest that statins
may have positive effects on some outcomes in patients with COPD who receive them for
cardiovascular and metabolic indications (evidence C)
Leukotriene modifiers have not been tested adequately in COPD patients
ICS: inhaled corticosteroid; LABA: long-acting β2-agonist; LAMA: long-acting muscarinic antagonist;
PDE: phosphodiesterase; N-acetylcysteine.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
10
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 Triple inhaled therapy
Combination of LABA plus LAMA plus ICS (triple therapy) may improve lung function and patient
reported outcomes [148–151] and reduce exacerbation risk [149, 152–154]. However, one RCT failed to
demonstrate any benefit of adding an ICS to LABA plus LAMA on exacerbations [155]. More evidence is
needed to compare the benefits of triple therapy (LABA/LAMA/ICS) to LABA/LAMA.
Oral glucocorticoids
Oral glucocorticoids have no role in the chronic daily treatment of COPD because of a lack of benefit
balanced against a high rate of systemic complications.
Phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors
Roflumilast reduces moderate and severe exacerbations treated with systemic corticosteroids in patients with
chronic bronchitis, severe to very severe COPD, and a history of exacerbations [156]. Phosphodiesterase-4
(PDE4) inhibitors have more adverse effects than inhaled medications for COPD [157]. The most
frequent are diarrhoea, nausea, reduced appetite, weight loss, abdominal pain, sleep disturbance, and
headache. Roflumilast should be avoided in underweight patients and used with caution in patients
with depression.
Antibiotics
Azithromycin (250 mg·day−1 or 500 mg three times per week) or erythromycin (500 mg two times per day)
for 1 year reduces the risk of exacerbations in patients prone to exacerbations [158–160]. Azithromycin use
showed a reduced exacerbation rate in former smokers only and was associated with an increased incidence
of bacterial resistance and impaired hearing tests [160]. Pulse moxifloxacin therapy in patients with chronic
bronchitis and frequent exacerbations does not reduce exacerbation rate [161].
Mucolytic (mucokinetics, mucoregulators) and antioxidant agents (N-acetylcysteine, carbocysteine)
Regular treatment with mucolytics such as carbocysteine and N-acetylcysteine may reduce exacerbations
and modestly improve health status in patients not receiving ICS [162, 163].
Other drugs with anti-inflammatory potential
Although RCTs suggest that immunoregulators decrease the severity and frequency of exacerbations [164, 165],
the long-term effects of this therapy are unknown. Nedocromil and leukotriene modifiers have not been
adequately tested in COPD [166]. There was no evidence of benefit, and some evidence of harm, following
treatment with an anti-tumour necrosis factor-α antibody (infliximab) in moderate to severe COPD [167].
Simvastatin did not prevent exacerbations in patients with COPD who had no metabolic or cardiovascular
indication for statin treatment [168]. An association between statin use and improved outcomes has been
reported in observational studies of patients with COPD who received them for cardiovascular and metabolic
indications [169]. There is no evidence that vitamin D supplementation reduces exacerbations in unselected
patients [170].
Issues related to inhaled delivery
Observational studies have identified a significant relationship between poor inhaler use and symptom
control in COPD [171]. Determinants of poor inhaler technique include older age, use of multiple devices,
and lack of previous education on inhaler technique [172]. Education improves inhalation technique in
some but not all patients [172], especially when the “teach-back” approach is implemented [173].
Other pharmacologic treatments for COPD are summarised in table S4.
α1-Antitrypsin augmentation therapy
Observational studies suggest a reduction in spirometric progression in α1-antitrypsin deficiency patients
treated with augmentation therapy versus non-treated patients [174]. Studies using sensitive parameters of
emphysema progression determined by CT scans provide evidence for an effect on preserving lung tissue
compared to placebo [175–177].
Antitussives
The role of antitussives in patients with COPD is inconclusive [178].
Vasodilators
Available studies report worsening gas exchange [179] with little improvement in exercise capacity or
health status in COPD patients [180, 181].
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
11
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 Rehabilitation, education, and self-management
Pulmonary rehabilitation
Pulmonary rehabilitation is a comprehensive intervention based on thorough patient assessment followed by
patient-tailored therapies (e.g., exercise training, education, self-management interventions aimed at behaviour
changes to improve physical and psychological condition and promote adherence to health-enhancing
behaviours in patients with COPD) [182]. The benefits of pulmonary rehabilitation are considerable (table S5).
Pulmonary rehabilitation can reduce readmissions and mortality in patients following a recent exacerbation
(⩽4 weeks from prior hospitalisation) [183]. Initiating pulmonary rehabilitation before hospital discharge,
however, may compromise survival [184].
Pulmonary rehabilitation represents integrated patient management that includes a range of healthcare
professionals [185] and sites, including hospital inpatient and outpatient settings and/or the patient’s
home [182].
Education, self-management, and integrative care
Education
Smoking cessation, correct use of inhaler devices, early recognition of exacerbation, decision making, when to
seek help, surgical interventions, and the consideration of advance directives, are examples of educational topics.
Self-management
Self-management interventions that use written negotiated action plans for worsening symptoms may lead to
less respiratory-related hospitalisation and all cause hospitalisations and improved health status [186]. The
health benefits of COPD self-management programmes may be negated by increased mortality [187, 188].
Generalisation to real life remains difficult.
Integrated care programmes
Integrated care programmes improve several clinical outcomes, although not mortality [189]. However, a
large multi-centre study within an existing well-organised system of care did not confirm this [190].
Delivering integrated interventions by telemedicine provided no significant benefit [191].
Supportive, palliative, end-of-life, and hospice care
Symptom control and palliative care
The goal of palliative care is to prevent and relieve suffering, and to improve quality of life for patients and
their families, regardless of the stage of disease or the need for other therapies [192]. Palliation efforts
should be focussed on the relief of dyspnoea, pain, anxiety, depression, fatigue, and poor nutrition.
End-of-life and hospice care
End-of-life care discussions should include patients and their families [193]. Advance care planning can
reduce anxiety for patients and their families; ensure that care is consistent with their wishes and avoid
unnecessary, unwanted and costly invasive therapies [194, 195] (table S6) the approach to palliation,
end-of-life and hospice care
Other treatments
Oxygen therapy and ventilatory support
Oxygen therapy
The long-term administration of oxygen (>15 h per day) to patients with chronic respiratory failure increases
survival in patients with severe resting hypoxaemia [196]. Long-term oxygen therapy does not lengthen time
to death or first hospitalisation or provide sustained benefit for any of the measured outcomes in patients
with stable COPD and resting or exercise-induced moderate arterial oxygen desaturation [197].
Ventilatory support
Whether to use noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NPPV) chronically at home to treat patients
with acute on chronic respiratory failure following hospitalisation remains undetermined. Retrospective
studies have provided inconclusive data [198, 199]. RCTs have yielded conflicting data on the use of home
NPPV on survival and re-hospitalisation in chronic hypercapnic COPD [200–203]. In patients with both
COPD and obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) continuous positive airway pressure improves survival and
avoids hospitalisation (table S7) [204].
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
12
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 Interventional therapy
Surgical interventions
Lung volume reduction surgery
A RCT confirmed that COPD patients with upper-lobe emphysema and low post-rehabilitation exercise
capacity experienced improved survival when treated with lung volume reduction surgery (LVRS) compared
to medical treatment [205]. In patients with high post-pulmonary rehabilitation exercise capacity, no
difference in survival was noted after LVRS, although health status and exercise capacity improved. LVRS
has been demonstrated to result in higher mortality than medical management in severe emphysema
patients with an FEV1 ⩽20% predicted and either homogeneous emphysema in high-resolution computed
tomography (HRCT) or a diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide of ⩽20% of predicted [206].
Bullectomy
In selected patients with relatively preserved underlying lung, bullectomy is associated with decreased
dyspnoea, improved lung function and exercise tolerance [207].
Lung transplantation
In selected patients lung transplantation has been shown to improve health status and functional capacity
but not to prolong survival [207–209]. Bilateral lung transplantation has been reported to have longer
survival than single lung transplantation in COPD patients, especially those <60 years of age [210].
Bronchoscopic interventions to reduce hyperinflation in severe emphysema
Less invasive bronchoscopic approaches to lung reduction have been developed [211]. Prospective studies
have shown that the use of bronchial stents is not effective [212] while use of lung sealant caused
significant morbidity and mortality [213]. A RCT of endobronchial valve placement showed statistically
significant improvements in FEV1 and 6-min walk distance compared to control therapy at 6 months post
intervention [214] but the magnitude of the observed improvements was not clinically meaningful.
Subsequently, efficacy of the same endobronchial valve has been studied in patients with heterogeneous
[215], or heterogeneous and homogenous emphysema [216] with mixed outcomes.
Two multi-centre trials have examined nitinol coils implanted into the lung compared to usual care
reported increases in 6-min walk distance with coil treatment compared to control and smaller
improvements in FEV1 and quality of life measured by St George’s Respiratory Questionnaire [217, 218].
Additional data are needed to define the optimal patient population to receive a specific bronchoscopic
lung volume technique and to compare the long-term durability of improvements in functional or
physiological performance to LVRS relative to side effects [218].
Key points for interventional therapy in stable COPD are summarised in table S8.
Management of stable COPD
Key points
• The management strategy for stable COPD should be based on individualised symptom assessment and
future risk of exacerbations.
• All individuals who smoke should be supported to quit.
• The main treatment goals are reduction of symptoms and future risk of exacerbations.
• Management strategies are not limited to pharmacologic treatments, and should be complemented by
appropriate nonpharmacologic interventions.
Effective COPD management should be based on an individualised assessment to reduce both current
symptoms and future risks of exacerbations (figure S1).
We propose personalisation of initiating and escalating/de-escalating treatments based on the level of
symptoms and an individual’s risk of exacerbations. The basis for these recommendations is partially
based on evidence generated in RCTs. These recommendations are intended to support clinician
decision-making.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
13
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 Identify and reduce exposure to risk factors
Cigarette smoking is the most commonly encountered and easily identifiable risk factor for COPD; smoking
cessation should be continually encouraged for current smokers. Reduction of total personal exposure to
occupational dusts, fumes, and gases, and to indoor and outdoor air pollutants, should be addressed.
Treatment of stable COPD
Pharmacologic treatment
Pharmacologic therapies can reduce symptoms, the risk and severity of exacerbations, and improve health
status and exercise tolerance. The choice within each class depends on the availability of medication and
the patient’s response and preference (tables 5–7).
Pharmacologic treatment algorithms
A proposed model for the initiation, and then subsequent escalation and/or de-escalation of pharmacologic
management according to the individualised assessment of symptoms and exacerbation risk is shown in
figure 3. In past GOLD Reports, recommendations were only given for initial therapy. However, many COPD
patients are already on treatment and return with persistent symptoms after initial therapy, or less commonly
with resolution of some symptoms that may subsequently require less therapy. Therefore, we now suggest
escalation and de-escalation strategies. The recommendations are based on available efficacy and safety data. We
acknowledge that treatment escalation has not been systematically tested; trials of de-escalation are also limited
and only include ICS. There is a lack of direct evidence supporting the therapeutic recommendations for
patients in groups C and D. These recommendations will be re-evaluated as additional data become available.
Group A
All Group A patients should be offered a bronchodilator to reduce breathlessness. This can be either a
short or a long-acting bronchodilator based on the individual patient’s preference. The bronchodilator
should be continued if symptomatic benefit is noted.
TABLE 5 Key points for the use of bronchodilators
LABAs and LAMAs are preferred over short-acting agents except for patients with only occasional
dyspnoea (evidence A)
Patients may be started on single long-acting bronchodilator therapy or dual long-acting bronchodilator
therapy. In patients with persistent dyspnoea on one bronchodilator treatment should be escalated to
two (evidence A).
Inhaled bronchodilators are recommended over oral bronchodilators (evidence A)
Theophylline is not recommended unless other long-term treatment bronchodilators are unavailable or
unaffordable (evidence B)
LABA: long-acting β2-agonist; LAMA: long-acting muscarinic antagonist.
TABLE 6 Key points for the use of anti-inflammatory agents
Long-term monotherapy with ICS is not recommended (evidence A)
Long-term treatment with ICS may be considered in association with LABAs for patients with a history of
exacerbations despite appropriate treatment with long-acting bronchodilators (evidence A)
Long-term therapy with oral corticosteroids is not recommended (evidence A)
In patients with exacerbations despite LABA/ICS or LABA/LAMA/ICS, chronic bronchitis and severe to very
severe airflow obstruction, the addition of a PDE4 inhibitor can be considered (evidence B)
In former smokers with exacerbations despite appropriate therapy, macrolides can be considered
(evidence B)
Statin therapy is not recommended for prevention of exacerbations (evidence A)
Antioxidant mucolytics are recommended only in selected patients (evidence A)
ICS: inhaled corticosteroid; LABA: long-acting β2-agonist; LAMA: long-acting muscarinic antagonist; PDE:
phosphodiesterase.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
14
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 Group B
Initial therapy should be a long acting bronchodilator. Long-acting bronchodilators are superior to short-acting
bronchodilators taken intermittently [104, 219]. There is no evidence to recommend one class of long-acting
bronchodilators over another for symptom relief; the choice should depend on individual patient response.
For patients with persistent breathlessness on monotherapy [220] the use of two bronchodilators is
recommended. For patients with severe breathlessness, initial therapy with two bronchodilators may be
considered.
Group C
Initial therapy should be a single long-acting bronchodilator. In two head-to-head comparisons [110, 111]
the LAMA tested superior to the LABA regarding exacerbation prevention, therefore we recommend
initiating a LAMA in this group.
Patients with persistent exacerbations may benefit from adding a second long-acting bronchodilator
(LABA/LAMA), or using LABA/ICS. As ICS increases the risk for developing pneumonia, our primary
choice is LABA/LAMA.
Group D
We recommend initiating a LABA/LAMA combination because:
• In studies with patient reported outcomes as the primary endpoint, LABA/LAMA combinations
showed superior results compared to a single bronchodilator.
• LABA/LAMA combination was superior to LABA/ICS combination in preventing exacerbations and
improving other patient reported outcomes in Group D patients.
• Group D patients are at higher risk for pneumonia when receiving ICS treatment [111, 133].
If a single bronchodilator is initially chosen, a LAMA is preferred for exacerbation prevention based on
comparison to LABAs.
LABA/ICS may be the first choice for initial therapy in some patients. These patients may have a history
and/or findings suggestive of asthma–COPD overlap and/or high blood eosinophil counts.
In patients who develop additional exacerbations on LABA/LAMA therapy we suggest two alternative pathways:
• Escalation to LABA/LAMA/ICS.
• Switch to LABA/ICS. If LABA/ICS therapy does not positively impact exacerbations/symptoms, a
LAMA can be added.
If patients treated with LABA/LAMA/ICS still have exacerbations the following options may be considered:
• Add roflumilast. This may be considered in patients with an FEV1 <50% predicted and chronic
bronchitis [221], particularly if they experienced at least one hospitalisation for an exacerbation in the
previous year [222].
• Add a macrolide in former smokers. The possibility of developing resistant organisms should be
factored into the decision making.
• Stopping ICS. This recommendation is supported by data that shows an elevated risk of adverse effects
(including pneumonia) and no significant harm from ICS withdrawal.
Nonpharmacologic treatment
Education and self-management
An individual patient’s evaluation and risk assessment (e.g., exacerbations, patient’s needs, preferences, and
personal goals) should aid the design of personalised self-management.
TABLE 7 Key points for the use of other pharmacologic treatments
Patients with severe hereditary α1-antitrypsin deficiency and established emphysema may be candidates
for α1-antitrypsin augmentation therapy (evidence B)
Antitussives cannot be recommended (evidence C)
Drugs approved for primary pulmonary hypertension are not recommended for patients with pulmonary
hypertension secondary to COPD (evidence B)
Low-dose long acting oral and parenteral opioids may be considered for treating dyspnoea in COPD
patients with severe disease (evidence B)
COPD: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
15
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 Pulmonary rehabilitation programmes
Patients with high symptom burden and risk of exacerbations (groups B, C and D), should take part in a full
rehabilitation programme that considers the individual’s characteristics and comorbidities [182, 187, 223].
Exercise training
A combination of constant load or interval training with strength training provides better outcomes than
either method alone [224]. Adding strength training to aerobic training is effective in improving strength,
but does not improve health status or exercise tolerance [225]. Upper extremity exercise training improves
arm strength and endurance and improves capacity for upper extremity activities [226].
Self-management education
An educational programme should include smoking cessation; basic information about COPD; aspects of
medical treatment (respiratory medications and inhalation devices); strategies to minimise dyspnoea;
advice about when to seek help; and possibly a discussion of advance directives and end-of-life issues.
End-of-life and palliative care
Patients should be informed that should they become critically ill, they or their family members may need
to decide whether a course of intensive care is likely to achieve their personal goals of care. Simple,
structured conversations about these possible scenarios should be discussed while patients are in their
stable state [227].
Nutritional support
For malnourished patients with COPD nutritional supplementation is recommended.
Group C
Consider roflumilast if FEV1 
<50% pred and patient has 
chronic bronchitis
Further
exacerbation(s)
Further
exacerbation(s)
Persistent 
symptoms/
further 
exacerbation(s)
Consider macrolide
(in former smokers)
LAMA+LABA
Group D
LAMA+LABA
Further
exacerbation(s)
Persistent 
symptoms
LAMA
LAMA+ICS
LAMA
LABA+ICS
LAMA
+LABA
+ICS
Group A
Group B
A bronchodilator
: preferred treatment
Evaluate effect
Continue, stop or try alternative 
class of bronchodilator
A long-acting bronchodilator
(LABA or LAMA)
LAMA+LABA
FIGURE 3 Pharmacologic treatment algorithms by Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease grade. Highlighted boxes and arrows
indicate preferred treatment pathways. In patients with a major discrepancy between the perceived level of symptoms and severity of airflow
limitation, further evaluation is warranted. LAMA: long-acting muscarinic antagonist; LABA: long-acting β2-agonist; ICS: inhaled corticosteroid;
FEV1: forced expiratory volume in 1 s.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
16
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 Vaccination
Influenza vaccination is recommended for all patients with COPD. The pneumococcal vaccinations PCV13
and PPSV23 are recommended for all patients >65 years of age. PPSV23 is also recommended for younger
COPD patients with significant comorbid conditions including chronic heart or lung disease [228].
Oxygen therapy
Long-term oxygen therapy is indicated for stable patients who have:
• arterial oxygen tension (PaO2) at or below 7.3 kPa (55 mmHg) or arterial oxygen saturation (SaO2) at or
below 88%, with or without hypercapnia confirmed twice over a three-week period; or
• PaO2 between 7.3 kPa (55 mmHg) and 8.0 kPa (60 mmHg), or SaO2 of 88%, if there is evidence of
pulmonary hypertension, peripheral oedema suggesting congestive cardiac failure, or polycythaemia
(haematocrit >55%).
Ventilatory support
NIV is occasionally used in patients with stable very severe COPD. NIV may be considered in a selected
group of patients, particularly those with pronounced daytime hypercapnia and recent hospitalisation,
although contradictory evidence exists regarding its effectiveness [229]. In patients with both COPD and
OSA continuous positive airway pressure is indicated [204].
Interventional bronchoscopy and surgery
• In selected patients with heterogeneous or homogenous emphysema and significant hyperinflation
refractory to optimised medical care, surgical or bronchoscopic modes of lung volume reduction (e.g.,
endobronchial one-way valves or lung coils) may be considered [230].
• In selected patients with a large bulla, surgical bullectomy may be considered.
• In
selected
patients
with
very
severe
COPD
and
without
relevant
contraindications,
lung
transplantation may be considered.
Choosing bronchoscopic lung reduction or LVRS to treat hyperinflation in a patient with emphysema
depends on a number of factors that include: the extent and pattern of emphysema identified on HRCT;
the presence of interlobar collateral ventilation measured by fissure integrity on HRCT or physiological
assessment (endoscopic balloon occlusion and flow assessment); local proficiency in the performance of
the procedures; and patient and provider preferences. An algorithm depicting the various interventions
based on radiological and physiological features is shown in figure 4.
Criteria for referral for lung transplantation include COPD with progressive disease, not a candidate for
endoscopic or surgical lung volume reduction, BODE index of 5–6, carbon dioxide tension >50 mmHg or
Advanced COPD
Emphysema predominant phenotype with severe hyperinflation
Not candidate for bullectomy, BLVR or LVRS
Bullectomy
Heterogeneous 
emphysema
Large bulla
No large bulla
Lung transplant
–collateral 
ventilation
+collateral 
ventilation
Homogeneous 
emphysema
–collateral 
ventilation
+collateral 
ventilation
LVRS
BLVR
(EBV, LVRC)
LVRS
BLVR
(LVRC)
BLVR
(EBV, LVRC)
LVRS#
BLVR
(LVRC)
LVRS#
FIGURE 4 Interventional bronchoscopic and surgical treatments for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Overview of various therapies
used to treat patients with COPD and emphysema worldwide. Note that not all therapies are approved for clinical care in all countries.
Additionally, the effects of bronchoscopic lung volume reduction (BLVR) or survival on other long-term outcomes or comparison to lung volume
reduction surgery (LVRS) are unknown. EBV: endobronchial valve; LVRC: lung volume reduction coil. #: at some but not all centres.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
17
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 6.6 kPa and/or PaO2 <60 mmHg or 8 kPa, and FEV1 <25% predicted [231]. Recommended criteria for
listing include one of the following: BODE index >7, FEV1 <15–20% predicted, three or more severe
exacerbations during the preceding year, one severe exacerbation with acute hypercapnic respiratory
failure, or moderate to severe pulmonary hypertension [231, 232].
Key points for the use of nonpharmacologic treatments are summarised in table S9.
Monitoring and follow-up
Routine follow-up of COPD patients is essential. Symptoms, exacerbations and objective measures of airflow
limitation should be monitored to determine when to modify management and to identify any complications
and/or comorbidities that may develop. In order to adjust therapy appropriately as the disease progresses, each
follow-up visit should include a discussion of the current therapeutic regimen. Symptoms that indicate
worsening or development of another comorbid condition should be evaluated and treated.
Management of exacerbations
Key points
• An exacerbation of COPD is an acute worsening of respiratory symptoms that results in additional therapy.
• Exacerbations can be precipitated by several factors. The most common causes are respiratory tract
infections.
• The goal for treatment of exacerbations is to minimise the negative impact of the current exacerbation and
to prevent subsequent events.
• Short-acting inhaled β2-agonists, with or without short-acting anticholinergics, are recommended as the
initial bronchodilators to treat an acute exacerbation.
• Maintenance therapy with long-acting bronchodilators should be initiated as soon as possible before
hospital discharge.
• Systemic corticosteroids improve lung function (FEV1), oxygenation and shorten recovery time and
hospitalisation duration.
• Antibiotics, when indicated, shorten recovery time, and reduce the risk of early relapse or treatment
failure, and hospitalisation duration.
• Methylxanthines are not recommended owing to side-effects.
• Non-invasive mechanical ventilation should be the first mode of ventilation used to treat acute respiratory
failure.
• Following an exacerbation, appropriate measures for exacerbation prevention should be initiated.
Exacerbations are important events in the management of COPD because they negatively impact health
status, rates of hospitalisation and readmission, and disease progression [237, 238]. COPD exacerbations
are complex events usually associated with increased airway inflammation, increased mucus production
and marked gas trapping. Increased dyspnoea is the key symptom of an exacerbation. Other symptoms
include increased sputum purulence and volume, together with increased cough and wheeze [239]. As
comorbidities are common in COPD patients, exacerbations must be differentiated from acute coronary
syndrome, worsening congestive heart failure, pulmonary embolism and pneumonia.
COPD exacerbations are classified as:
• Mild (treated with short-acting bronchodilators (SABDs) only),
• Moderate (treated with SABDs plus antibiotics and/or oral corticosteroids) or
• Severe (patient requires hospitalisation or visits the emergency room). Severe exacerbations may be
associated with acute respiratory failure.
Exacerbations are mainly triggered by respiratory viral infections although bacterial infections and
environmental factors may also initiate and/or amplify these events [236].
Exacerbations can be associated with increased sputum production and, if purulent, increased bacteria may
be found in the sputum [235, 237, 238]. Some evidence supports the concept that eosinophils are
increased in the airways, lung, and blood in a significant proportion of patients with COPD. Exacerbations
associated with an increase in sputum or blood eosinophils may be more responsive to systemic steroids
[239] although more prospective data are needed [239].
Symptoms usually last between 7 to 10 days during an exacerbation, but some events may last longer. At
8 weeks, 20% of patients have not recovered to their pre-exacerbation state [240]. COPD exacerbations
increase susceptibility to additional events [59, 245].
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
18
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 COPD patients susceptible to frequent exacerbations (defined as ⩾2 exacerbations per year) have worse
health status and morbidity than patients with less frequent exacerbations [234]. Other factors associated
with an increased risk of acute exacerbations and/or severity of exacerbations include an increase in the
ratio of the pulmonary artery to aorta cross sectional dimension (i.e., ratio >1) [242], a greater percentage
of emphysema or airway wall thickness [243] measured by chest CT imaging and the presence of chronic
bronchitis [244, 248].
Treatment options
Treatment setting
The goals of exacerbation treatment are to minimise the negative impact of the current exacerbation, and
to prevent the development of subsequent events [246]. Depending on the severity of an exacerbation and/
or the severity of the underlying disease, an exacerbation can be managed in either the outpatient or
inpatient setting. More than 80% of exacerbations are managed on an outpatient basis with
bronchodilators, corticosteroids, and antibiotics [59, 247, 248].
The indications for hospitalisation during a COPD exacerbation are shown in table S10. When patients
with a COPD exacerbation come to the emergency department, they should be given supplemental oxygen
and assessed to determine whether the exacerbation is life-threatening and requires consideration for NIV
and intensive care unit (ICU) or respiratory unit hospitalisation.
Long-term prognosis following hospitalisation for COPD exacerbation is poor; the 5-year mortality rate is
about 50% [249]. Factors associated with poor outcomes include older age, lower BMI, comorbidities (e.g.,
cardiovascular disease or lung cancer), previous hospitalisations for COPD exacerbations, clinical severity
of the index exacerbation, and need for long-term oxygen therapy at discharge [250, 251]. Patients with a
higher prevalence and severity of respiratory symptoms, poorer quality of life, worse lung function, lower
exercise capacity, lower lung density and thickened bronchial walls on CT scan are at increased mortality
risk following an acute exacerbation [252].
Key points for the management of all exacerbations are given in table 8.
Pharmacologic treatment
The most commonly used classes of medications for COPD exacerbations are bronchodilators,
corticosteroids, and antibiotics.
Bronchodilators
Short-acting
inhaled
β2-agonists,
with
or
without
short-acting
anticholinergics,
are
the
initial
bronchodilators recommended for acute treatment of exacerbations [253, 254]. There are no significant
differences in FEV1 when using metered dose inhalers (with or without a spacer device) or nebulisers to
deliver the agent [255], although the latter may be an easier delivery method for sicker patients.
Intravenous methylxanthines are not recommended owing to side-effects [256, 257].
Glucocorticoids
Systemic glucocorticoids in COPD exacerbations shorten recovery time and improve FEV1. They also
improve oxygenation [258–261], the risk of early relapse, treatment failure [262], and the length of
hospitalisation [258, 260, 263]. A dose of 40 mg prednisone per day for 5 days is recommended [264].
TABLE 8 Key points for the management of exacerbations
Short-acting inhaled β2-agonists, with or without short-acting anticholinergics, are recommended as the
initial bronchodilators to treat an acute exacerbation (evidence C)
Systemic corticosteroids improve lung function (FEV1), oxygenation and shorten recovery time and
hospitalisation duration. Duration of therapy should not be more than 5–7 days (evidence A).
Antibiotics, when indicated, can shorten recovery time, reduce the risk of early relapse, treatment failure,
and hospitalisation duration. Duration of therapy should be 5–7 days (evidence B).
Methylxanthines are not recommended due to increased side effect profiles (evidence B)
NIV should be the first mode of ventilation used in COPD patients with acute respiratory failure who have
no absolute contraindication because it improves gas exchange, reduces work of breathing and the need
for intubation, decreases hospitalisation duration and improves survival (evidence A)
FEV1: forced expiratory volume in 1 s; NIV: non-invasive ventilation; COPD: chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
19
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 Therapy with oral prednisolone is equally effective to intravenous administration [265]. Glucocorticoids
may be less efficacious to treat exacerbations in patients with lower blood eosinophil levels [59, 239, 266].
Antibiotics
The use of antibiotics in exacerbations remains controversial [267–269]. Evidence supports the use of
antibiotics in patients with exacerbations and increased sputum purulence [268, 269]. One review reported
that antibiotics reduce the risk of short-term mortality by 77%, treatment failure by 53% and sputum
purulence by 44% [270]. Procalcitonin-guided antibiotic treatment may reduce antibiotic exposure and
side-effects with the same clinical efficacy [271, 272]. A study in patients with exacerbations requiring
mechanical ventilation (invasive or non-invasive) reported increased mortality and a higher incidence of
secondary nosocomial pneumonia when antibiotics were not given [273]. Antibiotics should be given to
patients with acute exacerbations who have three cardinal symptoms: increase in dyspnoea, sputum
volume, and sputum purulence; have two of the cardinal symptoms, if increased purulence of sputum is
one of the two symptoms; or require mechanical ventilation (invasive or noninvasive) [235, 236]. The
recommended length of antibiotic therapy is 5–7 days [274].
Antibiotic choice should be based on the local bacterial resistance pattern. Usual initial empirical
treatment is an aminopenicillin with clavulanic acid, a macrolide, or a tetracycline. In patients with
frequent exacerbations, severe airflow limitation [275, 276], and/or exacerbations requiring mechanical
ventilation [277], cultures from sputum or other materials from the lung should be performed to identify
the presence of resistant pathogens. Administration route depends on the patient’s ability to eat and the
pharmacokinetics of the antibiotic.
Respiratory support
Oxygen therapy
Supplemental oxygen should be titrated to improve hypoxaemia with a target saturation of 88–92% [278].
Once oxygen is started, blood gases should be checked to ensure satisfactory oxygenation without carbon
dioxide retention and/or worsening acidosis.
Ventilatory support
Some patients require admission to the ICU. Admission of patients with severe exacerbations to
intermediate or special respiratory care units may be appropriate if adequate personnel skills and
equipment exist to manage acute respiratory failure.
Noninvasive mechanical ventilation
NIV is preferred over invasive ventilation as the initial mode of ventilation to treat acute respiratory failure
in patients hospitalised for acute exacerbations of COPD. NIV has been studied in RCTs showing a
success rate of 80–85% [279–283]. Mortality and intubation rates are reduced by NIV [279, 284–286].
Invasive mechanical ventilation
The indication for initiating invasive mechanical ventilation during an exacerbation includes failure of an
initial trial of NIV [287]. In patients who fail NIV as initial therapy and receive invasive ventilation as
subsequent rescue therapy, morbidity, hospital length of stay and mortality are greater [282].
Hospital discharge and follow-up
Lack of spirometric assessment and arterial blood gas analysis have been associated with re-hospitalisation
and mortality [288]. Mortality relates to patient age, the presence of acidotic respiratory failure, the need
for ventilatory support and comorbidities including anxiety and depression [289].
The introduction of care bundles at hospital discharge to include education, optimisation of medication,
supervision and correction of inhaler technique, assessment and optimal management of comorbidities,
early rehabilitation, telemonitoring and continued patient contact have been investigated [290]. There is
insufficient data that they influence readmission rates, short-term mortality [288, 289, 291, 292] or
cost-effectiveness [289].
Early follow-up (<30 days) following discharge should be undertaken when possible and has been related
to less exacerbation-related readmissions [184, 293]. Early follow-up permits a careful review of discharge
therapy and an opportunity to make changes in therapy. Patients not attending early follow-up have
increased 90-day mortality.
Additional follow-up at 3 months is recommended to ensure return to a stable state and review of patient’s
symptoms, lung function (by spirometry), and when possible the assessment of prognosis using multiple
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
20
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 scoring systems such as BODE [293, 294]. An assessment of the presence and management of
comorbidities should also be undertaken (table S11) [295].
Prevention of exacerbations
After an acute exacerbation, measures for prevention of further exacerbations should be initiated
(table S12).
COPD and comorbidities
Key points
• COPD often coexists with other diseases (comorbidities) that may significantly impact patient outcomes.
• The presence of comorbidities should not alter COPD treatment and comorbidities should be treated per
usual standards regardless of the presence of COPD.
• When COPD is part of a multi-morbidity care plan, attention should be directed to ensure simplicity of
treatment and minimise polypharmacy.
COPD often coexists with other diseases (comorbidities) that may have a significant impact on prognosis
[63, 296–302]. Some of these arise independently of COPD whereas others may be causally related, either
with shared risk factors, or by one disease increasing the risk or compounding the severity of the other
[303]. Management of the COPD patient must include identification and treatment of its comorbidities;
the most common in COPD are outlined below.
Cardiovascular disease
Heart failure
The prevalence of systolic or diastolic heart failure in COPD patients ranges from 20% to 70% [304].
Unrecognised heart failure may mimic or accompany acute exacerbations of COPD; 40% of COPD
patients that are mechanically ventilated because of hypercapnic respiratory failure have evidence of left
ventricular dysfunction [305, 306]. Treatment with β1-blockers improves survival in chronic heart failure
and is recommended. Selective β1-blockers should be used [307].
Ischaemic heart disease
There is an increased risk of myocardial damage in patients with concomitant ischaemic heart disease who
have an acute exacerbation of COPD. Patients who demonstrate abnormal cardiac troponins are at an
increased risk of adverse outcomes including short-term (30-day) and long-term mortality [308].
Arrhythmias
Cardiac arrhythmias are common in COPD and vice versa. Atrial fibrillation is frequent and directly
associated with FEV1. Bronchodilators have been previously described as potentially pro-arrhythmic agents
[309, 310]; however, evidence suggests an overall acceptable safety profile for LABA [311] and
anticholinergic drugs (and ICS) [101, 113, 248, 312–316].
Peripheral vascular disease
In a large cohort of patients with COPD of all degrees of severity, 8.8% were diagnosed with peripheral
artery disease (PAD), which was higher than the prevalence in non-COPD controls (1.8%) [317]. COPD
patients with PAD reported a worse functional capacity and worse health status compared to those
without PAD.
Hypertension
Hypertension is likely to be the most frequently occurring comorbidity in COPD and may have
implications for prognosis [303, 318].
Osteoporosis
Osteoporosis is often associated with emphysema [319, 320], decreased BMI [321] and low fat-free mass
[322]. Low bone mineral density and fractures are common in COPD patients even after adjustment for
steroid use, age, pack-years of smoking, current smoking and exacerbations [323, 324]. An association
between ICS and fractures has been found in pharmaco-epidemiological studies. Systemic corticosteroids
significantly increase the risk of osteoporosis.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
21
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 Anxiety and depression
Anxiety and depression are both associated with a poor prognosis [325, 326].
Lung cancer
The association between emphysema and lung cancer is stronger than between airflow limitation and lung
cancer [327–329]. Increased age and greater smoking history further increase risk [330]. Two studies of
low-dose chest computed tomography (LDCT) screening report improved survival in subjects aged
55–74 years, current smokers or those who quit within the previous 15 years, with a smoking history of at
least 30 pack-years [331, 332]. LDCT is now recommended in the USA for patients meeting these
demographics; however, this is not a worldwide practice.
Metabolic syndrome and diabetes
Metabolic syndrome and diabetes are more frequent in COPD and the latter is likely to affect prognosis
[297]. The prevalence of metabolic syndrome has been estimated to be >30% [332].
Gastro-oesophageal reflux
Gastro-oesophageal reflux is an independent risk factor for exacerbations and is associated with worse
health status [59, 334, 335].
Bronchiectasis
Bronchiectasis is associated with longer exacerbations [336] and increased mortality [295].
Obstructive sleep apnoea
Patients with “overlap syndrome” (COPD and OSA) have a worse prognosis compared with COPD or
OSA. Apnoeic events in patients with OSA and COPD have more profound hypoxaemia and more cardiac
arrhythmias [337] and are more likely to develop daytime pulmonary hypertension [338, 339] than
patients with just OSA or COPD alone.
References
1
Woodruff PG, Barr RG, Bleecker E, et al. Clinical significance of symptoms in smokers with preserved
pulmonary function. N Engl J Med 2016; 374: 1811–1821.
2
Regan EA, Lynch DA, Curran-Everett D, et al. Clinical and radiologic disease in smokers with normal
spirometry. JAMA Intern Med 2015; 175: 1539–1549.
3
Lamprecht B, McBurnie MA, Vollmer WM, et al. COPD in never smokers: results from the population-based
burden of obstructive lung disease study. Chest 2011; 139: 752–763.
4
Thomsen M, Nordestgaard BG, Vestbo J, et al. Characteristics and outcomes of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease in never smokers in Denmark: a prospective population study. Lancet Respir Med 2013; 1: 543–550.
5
Barker DJ, Godfrey KM, Fall C, et al. Relation of birth weight and childhood respiratory infection to adult lung
function and death from chronic obstructive airways disease. BMJ 1991; 303: 671–675.
6
Todisco T, de Benedictis FM, Iannacci L, et al. Mild prematurity and respiratory functions. Eur J Pediatr 1993;
152: 55–58.
7
Stern DA, Morgan WJ, Wright AL, et al. Poor airway function in early infancy and lung function by age 22
years: a non-selective longitudinal cohort study. Lancet 2007; 370: 758–764.
8
Lawlor DA, Ebrahim S, Davey Smith G. Association of birth weight with adult lung function: findings from the
British Women’s Heart and Health Study and a meta-analysis. Thorax 2005; 60: 851–858.
9
Kohansal R, Martinez-Camblor P, Agusti A, et al. The natural history of chronic airflow obstruction revisited: an
analysis of the Framingham offspring cohort. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2009; 180: 3–10.
10
Raad D, Gaddam S, Schunemann HJ, et al. Effects of water-pipe smoking on lung function: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Chest 2011; 139: 764–774.
11
She J, Yang P, Wang Y, et al. Chinese water-pipe smoking and the risk of COPD. Chest 2014; 146: 924–931.
12
Gunen H, Tarraf H, Nemati A, et al. Waterpipe tobacco smoking. Tuberk Toraks 2016; 64: 94–96.
13
Tan WC, Lo C, Jong A, et al. Marijuana and chronic obstructive lung disease: a population-based study.
CMAJ 2009; 180: 814–820.
14
Yin P, Jiang CQ, Cheng KK, et al. Passive smoking exposure and risk of COPD among adults in China: the
Guangzhou Biobank Cohort Study. Lancet 2007; 370: 751–757.
15
Tager IB, Ngo L, Hanrahan JP. Maternal smoking during pregnancy. Effects on lung function during the first 18
months of life. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1995; 152: 977–983.
16
Paulin LM, Diette GB, Blanc PD, et al. Occupational exposures are associated with worse morbidity in patients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2015; 191: 557–565.
17
Eisner MD, Anthonisen N, Coultas D, et al. An official American Thoracic Society public policy statement:
Novel risk factors and the global burden of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2010; 182: 693–718.
18
Orozco-Levi M, Garcia-Aymerich J, Villar J, et al. Wood smoke exposure and risk of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Eur Respir J 2006; 27: 542–546.
19
Gan WQ, FitzGerald JM, Carlsten C, et al. Associations of ambient air pollution with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease hospitalization and mortality. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2013; 187: 721–727.
20
Ezzati M. Indoor air pollution and health in developing countries. Lancet 2005; 366: 104–106.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
22
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 21
Zhou Y, Zou Y, Li X, et al. Lung function and incidence of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease after improved
cooking fuels and kitchen ventilation: a 9-year prospective cohort study. PLoS Med 2014; 11: e1001621.
22
Silva GE, Sherrill DL, Guerra S, et al. Asthma as a risk factor for COPD in a longitudinal study. Chest 2004; 126:
59–65.
23
Rijcken B, Schouten JP, Weiss ST, et al. The relationship of nonspecific bronchial responsiveness to respiratory
symptoms in a random population sample. Am Rev Respir Dis 1987; 136: 62–68.
24
Hospers JJ, Postma DS, Rijcken B, et al. Histamine airway hyper-responsiveness and mortality from chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: a cohort study. Lancet 2000; 356: 1313–1317.
25
Tashkin DP, Altose MD, Connett JE, et al. Methacholine reactivity predicts changes in lung function over time in
smokers with early chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The Lung Health Study Research Group. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 1996; 153(6 Pt 1): 1802–1811.
26
de Marco R, Accordini S, Marcon A, et al. Risk factors for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in a European
cohort of young adults. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2011; 183: 891–897.
27
Drummond MB, Kirk GD. HIV-associated obstructive lung diseases: insights and implications for the clinician.
Lancet Respir Med 2014; 2: 583–592.
28
Menezes AM, Hallal PC, Perez-Padilla R, et al. Tuberculosis and airflow obstruction: evidence from the
PLATINO study in Latin America. Eur Respir J 2007; 30: 1180–1185.
29
Jordan TS, Spencer EM, Davies P. Tuberculosis, bronchiectasis and chronic airflow obstruction. Respirology 2010;
15: 623–628.
30
Byrne AL, Marais BJ, Mitnick CD, et al. Tuberculosis and chronic respiratory disease: a systematic review. Int J
Infect Dis 2015; 32: 138–146.
31
Buist AS, McBurnie MA, Vollmer WM, et al. International variation in the prevalence of COPD (the BOLD
Study): a population-based prevalence study. Lancet 2007; 370: 741–750.
32
Miravitlles M, Worth H, Soler Cataluna JJ, et al. Observational study to characterise 24-hour COPD symptoms
and their relationship with patient-reported outcomes: results from the ASSESS study. Respir Res 2014; 15: 122.
33
Elliott MW, Adams L, Cockcroft A, et al. The language of breathlessness. Use of verbal descriptors by patients
with cardiopulmonary disease. Am Rev Respir Dis 1991; 144: 826–832.
34
Medical Research Council Committee on the Aetiology of Chronic Bronchitis. Definition and classification of
chronic bronchitis for clinical and epidemiological purposes. A report to the Medical Research Council by their
Committee on the Aetiology of Chronic Bronchitis. Lancet 1965; 1: 775–779.
35
von Haehling S, Anker SD. Cachexia as a major underestimated and unmet medical need: facts and numbers.
J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle 2010; 1: 1–5.
36
Schols AM, Soeters PB, Dingemans AM, et al. Prevalence and characteristics of nutritional depletion in patients
with stable COPD eligible for pulmonary rehabilitation. Am Rev Respir Dis 1993; 147: 1151–1156.
37
Holleman DR Jr, Simel DL. Does the clinical examination predict airflow limitation? JAMA 1995; 273: 313–319.
38
Kesten S, Chapman KR. Physician perceptions and management of COPD. Chest 1993; 104: 254–258.
39
van Dijk W, Tan W, Li P, et al. Clinical relevance of fixed ratio vs lower limit of normal of FEV1/FVC in COPD:
patient-reported outcomes from the CanCOLD cohort. Ann Fam Med 2015; 13: 41–48.
40
Guder G, Brenner S, Angermann CE, et al. GOLD or lower limit of normal definition? A comparison with
expert-based diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in a prospective cohort-study. Respir Res 2012; 13: 13.
41
Vaz Fragoso CA, McAvay G, Van Ness PH, et al. Phenotype of normal spirometry in an aging population. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2015; 192: 817–825.
42
Vaz Fragoso CA, McAvay G, Van Ness PH, et al. Phenotype of spirometric impairment in an aging population.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2016; 193: 727–735.
43
Albert P, Agusti A, Edwards L, et al. Bronchodilator responsiveness as a phenotypic characteristic of established
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Thorax 2012; 67: 701–708.
44
Hansen JE, Porszasz J. Counterpoint: Is an increase in FEV1 and/or FVC ⩾12% of control and ⩾200 mL the best
way to assess positive bronchodilator response? No. Chest 2014; 146: 538–541.
45
Hill K, Goldstein RS, Guyatt GH, et al. Prevalence and underdiagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
among patients at risk in primary care. CMAJ 2010; 182: 673–678.
46
Lopez Varela MV, Montes de Oca M, Rey A, et al. Development of a simple screening tool for opportunistic
COPD case finding in primary care in Latin America: The PUMA study. Respirology 2016; 21: 1227–1234.
47
Dirven JA, Tange HJ, Muris JW, et al. Early detection of COPD in general practice: implementation, workload
and socioeconomic status. A mixed methods observational study. Prim Care Respir J 2013; 22: 338–343.
48
Fletcher CM. Standardised questionnaire on respiratory symptoms: a statement prepared and approved by the
MRC Committee on the Aetiology of Chronic Bronchitis (MRC breathlessness score). BMJ 1960; 2: 1662.
49
Bestall JC, Paul EA, Garrod R, et al. Usefulness of the Medical Research Council (MRC) dyspnoea scale as a
measure of disability in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Thorax 1999; 54: 581–586.
50
Sundh J, Janson C, Lisspers K, et al. The Dyspnoea, Obstruction, Smoking, Exacerbation (DOSE) index is
predictive of mortality in COPD. Prim Care Respir J 2012; 21: 295–301.
51
Nishimura K, Izumi T, Tsukino M, et al. Dyspnea is a better predictor of 5-year survival than airway obstruction
in patients with COPD. Chest 2002; 121: 1434–1440.
52
Jones PW. Health status measurement in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Thorax 2001; 56: 880–887.
53
Guyatt GH, Berman LB, Townsend M, et al. A measure of quality of life for clinical trials in chronic lung
disease. Thorax 1987; 42: 773–778.
54
Jones PW, Quirk FH, Baveystock CM, et al. A self-complete measure of health status for chronic airflow
limitation. The St. George’s Respiratory Questionnaire. Am Rev Respir Dis 1992; 145: 1321–1327.
55
Agusti A, Calverley PM, Celli B, et al. Characterisation of COPD heterogeneity in the ECLIPSE cohort.
Respir Res 2010; 11: 122.
56
Nishimura K, Mitsuma S, Kobayashi A, et al. COPD and disease-specific health status in a working population.
Respir Res 2013; 14: 61.
57
Miravitlles M, Soriano J, Garcia-Rio F, et al. Prevalence of COPD in Spain: impact of undiagnosed COPD on
quality of life and daily life activities. Thorax 2009; 64: 863–868.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
23
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 58
Jones PW, Tabberer M, Chen WH. Creating scenarios of the impact of COPD and their relationship to COPD
Assessment Test (CAT) scores. BMC Pulm Med 2011; 11: 42.
59
Hurst JR, Vestbo J, Anzueto A, et al. Susceptibility to exacerbation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
N Engl J Med 2010; 363: 1128–1138.
60
Soler-Cataluna JJ, Martinez-Garcia MA, Roman Sanchez P, et al. Severe acute exacerbations and mortality in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Thorax 2005; 60: 925–931.
61
Pascoe S, Locantore N, Dransfield M, et al. Blood eosinophil counts, exacerbations, and response to the addition
of inhaled fluticasone furoate to vilanterol in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a secondary
analysis of data from two parallel randomised controlled trials. Lancet Respir Med 2015; 3: 435–442.
62
Siddiqui SH, Guasconi A, Vestbo J, et al. Blood eosinophils: a biomarker of response to extrafine beclomethasone/
formoterol in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2015; 192: 523–525.
63
Soriano JB, Visick GT, Muellerova H, et al. Patterns of comorbidities in newly diagnosed COPD and asthma in
primary care. Chest 2005; 128: 2099–2107.
64
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Multimorbidity: clinical assessment and management, in press.
2016. www.nice.org.uk/guidance/indevelopment/gid-cgwave0704/documents Date last accessed: August 1, 2016.
65
Vanfleteren LE, Spruit MA, Groenen M, et al. Clusters of comorbidities based on validated objective
measurements and systemic inflammation in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 2013; 187: 728–735.
66
Soriano JB, Lamprecht B, Ramirez AS, et al. Mortality prediction in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
comparing the GOLD 2007 and 2011 staging systems: a pooled analysis of individual patient data. Lancet Respir
Med 2015; 3: 443–450.
67
Goossens LM, Leimer I, Metzdorf N, et al. Does the 2013 GOLD classification improve the ability to predict lung
function decline, exacerbations and mortality: a post-hoc analysis of the 4-year UPLIFT trial. BMC Pulm Med
2014; 14: 163.
68
Kim J, Yoon HI, Oh YM, et al. Lung function decline rates according to GOLD group in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2015; 10: 1819–1827.
69
Han MK, Muellerova H, Curran-Everett D, et al. GOLD 2011 disease severity classification in COPDGene: a
prospective cohort study. Lancet Respir Med 2013; 1: 43–50.
70
WHO meeting participants. Alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency: memorandum from a WHO meeting. Bull World
Health Organ 1997; 75: 397–415.
71
Celli BR, Cote CG, Marin JM, et al. The body-mass index, airflow obstruction, dyspnea, and exercise capacity
index in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. N Engl J Med 2004; 350: 1005–1012.
72
Jones RC, Donaldson GC, Chavannes NH, et al. Derivation and validation of a composite index of severity in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: the DOSE Index. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2009; 180: 1189–1195.
73
Puhan MA, Garcia-Aymerich J, Frey M, et al. Expansion of the prognostic assessment of patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: the updated BODE index and the ADO index. Lancet 2009; 374: 704–711.
74
van Eerd EA, van der Meer RM, van Schayck OC, et al. Smoking cessation for people with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016; CD010744.
75
The tobacco use and dependence clinical practice guideline panel, staff, and consortium representatives.
A clinical practice guideline for treating tobacco use and dependence. JAMA 2000; 28: 3244–3254.
76
van der Meer RM, Wagena EJ, Ostelo RW, et al. Smoking cessation for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2003; 2: CD002999.
77
A clinical practice guideline for treating tobacco use and dependence: 2008 update. A U.S. Public Health Service
report. Am J Prev Med 2008; 35: 158–176.
78
McNeill A, Brose LS, Calder R, et al. E-cigarettes: an evidence update. A report commissioned by Public Health
England. London, Public Health England, 2015.
79
McRobbie H, Bullen C, Hartmann-Boyce J, et al. Electronic cigarettes for smoking cessation and reduction.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; 12: CD010216.
80
Kalkhoran S, Glantz SA. E-cigarettes and smoking cessation – authors’ reply. Lancet Respir Med 2016; 4: e26–e27.
81
Malas M, van der Tempel J, Schwartz R, et al. Electronic cigarettes for smoking cessation: a systematic review.
Nicotine Tob Res 2016; 18: 1926–1936.
82
Beard E, West R, Michie S, et al. Association between electronic cigarette use and changes in quit attempts,
success of quit attempts, use of smoking cessation pharmacotherapy, and use of stop smoking services in
England: time series analysis of population trends. BMJ 2016; 354: i4645.
83
Tashkin DP, Rennard S, Hays JT, et al. Effects of varenicline on smoking cessation in patients with mild to
moderate COPD: a randomized controlled trial. Chest 2011; 139: 591–599.
84
Tashkin D, Kanner R, Bailey W, et al. Smoking cessation in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:
a double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomised trial. Lancet 2001; 357: 1571–1575.
85
The Tobacco Use and Dependence Clinical Practice Guideline Panels, and Consortium Representatives. A clinical
practice guideline for treating tobacco use and dependence. JAMA 2000; 28: 3244–3254.
86
Glynn T, Manley M. How to help your patients stop smoking. A National Cancer Institute manual for
physicians. NIH Publication No. 90-3064. Bethesda, National Cancer Institute, 1990.
87
Stead LF, Buitrago D, Preciado N, et al. Physician advice for smoking cessation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2013; 5: CD000165.
88
Stead LF, Koilpillai P, Fanshawe TR, et al. Combined pharmacotherapy and behavioural interventions for
smoking cessation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016; 3: CD008286.
89
Wongsurakiat P, Maranetra KN, Wasi C, et al. Acute respiratory illness in patients with COPD and the
effectiveness of influenza vaccination: a randomized controlled study. Chest 2004; 125: 2011–2020.
90
Poole PJ, Chacko E, Wood-Baker RW, et al. Influenza vaccine for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006; CD002733.
91
Wongsurakiat P, Lertakyamanee J, Maranetra KN, et al. Economic evaluation of influenza vaccination in Thai
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients. J Med Assoc Thai 2003; 86: 497–508.
92
Nichol KL, Margolis KL, Wuorenma J, et al. The efficacy and cost effectiveness of vaccination against influenza
among elderly persons living in the community. N Engl J Med 1994; 331: 778–784.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
24
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 93
Fiore AE, Shay DK, Broder K, et al. Prevention and control of seasonal influenza with vaccines: recommendations
of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP), 2009. MMWR Recomm Rep 2009; 58: 1–52.
94
Huang CL, Nguyen PA, Kuo PL, et al. Influenza vaccination and reduction in risk of ischemic heart disease
among chronic obstructive pulmonary elderly. Comput Methods Programs Biomed 2013; 111: 507–511.
95
Edwards KM, Dupont WD, Westrich MK, et al. A randomized controlled trial of cold-adapted and inactivated
vaccines for the prevention of influenza A disease. J Infect Dis 1994; 169: 68–76.
96
Hak E, van Essen GA, Buskens E, et al. Is immunising all patients with chronic lung disease in the community
against influenza cost effective? Evidence from a general practice based clinical prospective cohort study in
Utrecht, The Netherlands. J Epidemiol Community Health 1998; 52: 120–125.
97
Burge PS, Calverley PM, Jones PW, et al. Randomised, double blind, placebo controlled study of fluticasone
propionate in patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: the ISOLDE trial.
BMJ 2000; 320: 1297–1303.
98
Anthonisen NR, Connett JE, Kiley JP, et al. Effects of smoking intervention and the use of an inhaled
anticholinergic bronchodilator on the rate of decline of FEV1. The Lung Health Study. JAMA 1994; 272: 1497–1505.
99
Pauwels RA, Lofdahl CG, Laitinen LA, et al. Long-term treatment with inhaled budesonide in persons with mild
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease who continue smoking. European Respiratory Society Study on Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease. N Engl J Med 1999; 340: 1948–1953.
100
Vestbo J, Sorensen T, Lange P, et al. Long-term effect of inhaled budesonide in mild and moderate chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 1999; 353: 1819–1823.
101
Tashkin DP, Celli B, Senn S, et al. A 4-year trial of tiotropium in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. N Engl
J Med 2008; 359: 1543–1554.
102
O’Donnell DE, Fluge T, Gerken F, et al. Effects of tiotropium on lung hyperinflation, dyspnoea and exercise
tolerance in COPD. Eur Respir J 2004; 23: 832–840.
103
O’Donnell DE, Sciurba F, Celli B, et al. Effect of fluticasone propionate/salmeterol on lung hyperinflation and
exercise endurance in COPD. Chest 2006; 130: 647–656.
104
Appleton S, Jones T, Poole P, et al. Ipratropium bromide versus long-acting beta-2 agonists for stable chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006; 3: Cd006101.
105
Karner C, Chong J, Poole P. Tiotropium versus placebo for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2014; 7: CD009285.
106
Melani AS. Long-acting muscarinic antagonists. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol 2015; 8: 479–501.
107
Kesten S, Casaburi R, Kukafka D, et al. Improvement in self-reported exercise participation with the combination of
tiotropium and rehabilitative exercise training in COPD patients. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2008; 3: 127–136.
108
Casaburi R, Kukafka D, Cooper CB, et al. Improvement in exercise tolerance with the combination of tiotropium
and pulmonary rehabilitation in patients with COPD. Chest 2005; 127: 809–817.
109
Vogelmeier C, Hederer B, Glaab T, et al. Tiotropium versus salmeterol for the prevention of exacerbations of
COPD. N Engl J Med 2011; 364: 1093–1103.
110
Decramer ML, Chapman KR, Dahl R, et al. Once-daily indacaterol versus tiotropium for patients with severe
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (INVIGORATE): a randomised, blinded, parallel-group study. Lancet
Respir Med 2013; 1: 524–533.
111
Anthonisen NR, Connett JE, Enright PL, et al. Hospitalizations and mortality in the Lung Health Study. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2002; 166: 333–339.
112
Michele TM, Pinheiro S, Iyasu S. The safety of tiotropium – the FDA’s conclusions. N Engl J Med 2010; 363:
1097–1099.
113
Wise RA, Anzueto A, Cotton D, et al. Tiotropium Respimat inhaler and the risk of death in COPD. N Engl J
Med 2013; 369: 1491–1501.
114
Ram FS, Jones PW, Castro AA, et al. Oral theophylline for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2002; 4: CD003902.
115
ZuWallack RL, Mahler DA, Reilly D, et al. Salmeterol plus theophylline combination therapy in the treatment of
COPD. Chest 2001; 119: 1661–1670.
116
Zacarias EC, Castro AA, Cendon S. Effect of theophylline associated with short-acting or long-acting inhaled
β2-agonists in patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a systematic review. J Bras Pneumol
2007; 33: 152–160.
117
Cosio BG, Shafiek H, Iglesias A, et al. Oral low-dose theophylline on top of inhaled fluticasone-salmeterol does
not reduce exacerbations in patients with severe COPD: a pilot clinical trial. Chest 2016; 150: 123–130.
118
Zhou Y, Wang X, Zeng X, et al. Positive benefits of theophylline in a randomized, double-blind, parallel-group,
placebo-controlled study of low-dose, slow-release theophylline in the treatment of COPD for 1 year. Respirology
2006; 11: 603–610.
119
McKay SE, Howie CA, Thomson AH, et al. Value of theophylline treatment in patients handicapped by chronic
obstructive lung disease. Thorax 1993; 48: 227–232.
120
Cazzola M, Molimard M. The scientific rationale for combining long-acting beta2-agonists and muscarinic
antagonists in COPD. Pulm Pharmacol Ther 2010; 23: 257–267.
121
van der Molen T, Cazzola M. Beyond lung function in COPD management: effectiveness of LABA/LAMA
combination therapy on patient-centred outcomes. Prim Care Respir J 2012; 21: 101–108.
122
Mahler DA, Decramer M, D’Urzo A, et al. Dual bronchodilation with QVA149 reduces patient-reported
dyspnoea in COPD: the BLAZE study. Eur Respir J 2014; 43: 1599–1609.
123
Singh D, Ferguson GT, Bolitschek J, et al. Tiotropium + olodaterol shows clinically meaningful improvements in
quality of life. Respir Med 2015; 109: 1312–1319.
124
Bateman ED, Chapman KR, Singh D, et al. Aclidinium bromide and formoterol fumarate as a fixed-dose
combination in COPD: pooled analysis of symptoms and exacerbations from two six-month, multicentre,
randomised studies (ACLIFORM and AUGMENT). Respir Res 2015; 16: 92.
125
Mahler DA, Kerwin E, Ayers T, et al. FLIGHT1 and FLIGHT2: efficacy and safety of QVA149 (indacaterol/
glycopyrrolate) versus its monocomponents and placebo in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2015; 192: 1068–1079.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
25
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 126
Wedzicha JA, Decramer M, Ficker JH, et al. Analysis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations
with the dual bronchodilator QVA149 compared with glycopyrronium and tiotropium (SPARK): a randomised,
double-blind, parallel-group study. Lancet Respir Med 2013; 1: 199–209.
127
Wedzicha JA, Banerji D, Chapman KR, et al. Indacaterol-glycopyrronium versus salmeterol-fluticasone for
COPD. N Engl J Med 2016; 374: 2222–2234.
128
Nannini LJ, Lasserson TJ, Poole P. Combined corticosteroid and long-acting β2-agonist in one inhaler versus
long-acting β2-agonists for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012; 9: CD006829.
129
Nannini LJ, Poole P, Milan SJ, et al. Combined corticosteroid and long-acting β2-agonist in one inhaler versus
inhaled corticosteroids alone for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013; 8:
CD006826.
130
Calverley PM, Anderson JA, Celli B, et al. Salmeterol and fluticasone propionate and survival in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. N Engl J Med 2007; 356: 775–789.
131
Vestbo J, Anderson JA, Brook RD, et al. Fluticasone furoate and vilanterol and survival in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease with heightened cardiovascular risk (SUMMIT): a double-blind randomised controlled trial.
Lancet 2016; 387: 1817–1826.
132
Yang IA, Clarke MS, Sim EH, et al. Inhaled corticosteroids for stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012; 7: CD002991.
133
Crim C, Dransfield MT, Bourbeau J, et al. Pneumonia risk with inhaled fluticasone furoate and vilanterol
compared with vilanterol alone in patients with COPD. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2015; 12: 27–34.
134
Johnell O, Pauwels R, Lofdahl CG, et al. Bone mineral density in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease treated with budesonide Turbuhaler. Eur Respir J 2002; 19: 1058–1063.
135
Ferguson GT, Calverley PM, Anderson JA, et al. Prevalence and progression of osteoporosis in patients with
COPD: results from the TOwards a Revolution in COPD Health study. Chest 2009; 136: 1456–1465.
136
Dransfield MT, Bourbeau J, Jones PW, et al. Once-daily inhaled fluticasone furoate and vilanterol versus
vilanterol only for prevention of exacerbations of COPD: two replicate double-blind, parallel-group, randomised
controlled trials. Lancet Respir Med 2013; 1: 210–223.
137
Loke YK, Cavallazzi R, Singh S. Risk of fractures with inhaled corticosteroids in COPD: systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials and observational studies. Thorax 2011; 66: 699–708.
138
Suissa S, Kezouh A, Ernst P. Inhaled corticosteroids and the risks of diabetes onset and progression. Am J Med
2010; 123: 1001–1006.
139
Wang JJ, Rochtchina E, Tan AG, et al. Use of inhaled and oral corticosteroids and the long-term risk of cataract.
Ophthalmology 2009; 116: 652–657.
140
Andrejak C, Nielsen R, Thomsen VO, et al. Chronic respiratory disease, inhaled corticosteroids and risk of
non-tuberculous mycobacteriosis. Thorax 2013; 68: 256–262.
141
Dong YH, Chang CH, Lin Wu FL, et al. Use of inhaled corticosteroids in patients with COPD and the risk of TB
and influenza: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Chest 2014; 145: 1286–1297.
142
Lee CH, Kim K, Hyun MK, et al. Use of inhaled corticosteroids and the risk of tuberculosis. Thorax 2013; 68:
1105–1113.
143
Nadeem NJ, Taylor SJ, Eldridge SM. Withdrawal of inhaled corticosteroids in individuals with COPD – a
systematic review and comment on trial methodology. Respir Res 2011; 12: 107.
144
van der Valk P, Monninkhof E, van der Palen J, et al. Effect of discontinuation of inhaled corticosteroids in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: the COPE study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002; 166:
1358–1363.
145
Wouters EF, Postma DS, Fokkens B, et al. Withdrawal of fluticasone propionate from combined salmeterol/
fluticasone treatment in patients with COPD causes immediate and sustained disease deterioration: a randomised
controlled trial. Thorax 2005; 60: 480–487.
146
Kunz LI, Postma DS, Klooster K, et al. Relapse in FEV1 decline after steroid withdrawal in COPD. Chest 2015;
148: 389–396.
147
Magnussen H, Disse B, Rodriguez-Roisin R, et al. Withdrawal of inhaled glucocorticoids and exacerbations of
COPD. N Engl J Med 2014; 371: 1285–1294.
148
Welte T, Miravitlles M, Hernandez P, et al. Efficacy and tolerability of budesonide/formoterol added to tiotropium
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2009; 180: 741–750.
149
Singh D, Brooks J, Hagan G, et al. Superiority of “triple” therapy with salmeterol/fluticasone propionate and
tiotropium bromide versus individual components in moderate to severe COPD. Thorax 2008; 63: 592–598.
150
Jung KS, Park HY, Park SY, et al. Comparison of tiotropium plus fluticasone propionate/salmeterol with
tiotropium in COPD: a randomized controlled study. Respir Med 2012; 106: 382–389.
151
Hanania NA, Crater GD, Morris AN, et al. Benefits of adding fluticasone propionate/salmeterol to tiotropium in
moderate to severe COPD. Respir Med 2012; 106: 91–101.
152
Frith PA, Thompson PJ, Ratnavadivel R, et al. Glycopyrronium once-daily significantly improves lung function
and health status when combined with salmeterol/fluticasone in patients with COPD: the GLISTEN study,
a randomised controlled trial. Thorax 2015; 70: 519–527.
153
Siler TM, Kerwin E, Singletary K, et al. Efficacy and safety of umeclidinium added to fluticasone propionate/
salmeterol in patients with COPD: results of two randomized, double-blind studies. COPD 2016; 13: 1–10.
154
Singh D, Papi A, Corradi M, et al. Single inhaler triple therapy versus inhaled corticosteroid plus long-acting
β2-agonist therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (TRILOGY): a double-blind, parallel group,
randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2016; 388: 963–973.
155
Aaron SD, Vandemheen KL, Fergusson D, et al. Tiotropium in combination with placebo, salmeterol, or
fluticasone-salmeterol for treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized trial. Ann Intern
Med 2007; 146: 545–555.
156
Calverley PM, Rabe KF, Goehring UM, et al. Roflumilast in symptomatic chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:
two randomised clinical trials. Lancet 2009; 374: 685–694.
157
Chong J, Leung B, Poole P. Phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitors for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2013; 11: CD002309.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
26
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 158
Seemungal TA, Wilkinson TM, Hurst JR, et al. Long-term erythromycin therapy is associated with decreased
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2008; 178: 1139–1147.
159
Uzun S, Djamin RS, Kluytmans JA, et al. Azithromycin maintenance treatment in patients with frequent
exacerbations
of
chronic
obstructive
pulmonary
disease
(COLUMBUS):
a
randomised,
double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Respir Med 2014; 2: 361–368.
160
Albert RK, Connett J, Bailey WC, et al. Azithromycin for prevention of exacerbations of COPD. N Engl J Med
2011; 365: 689–698.
161
Sethi S, Jones PW, Theron MS, et al. Pulsed moxifloxacin for the prevention of exacerbations of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized controlled trial. Respir Res 2010; 11: 10.
162
Cazzola M, Calzetta L, Page C, et al. Influence of N-acetylcysteine on chronic bronchitis or COPD exacerbations:
a meta-analysis. Eur Respir Rev 2015; 24: 451–461.
163
Poole P, Chong J, Cates CJ. Mucolytic agents versus placebo for chronic bronchitis or chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015; 7: CD001287.
164
Collet JP, Shapiro P, Ernst P, et al. Effects of an immunostimulating agent on acute exacerbations and
hospitalizations in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The PARI-IS Study Steering Committee
and Research Group. Prevention of Acute Respiratory Infection by an Immunostimulant. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 1997; 156: 1719–1724.
165
Li J, Zheng JP, Yuan JP, et al. Protective effect of a bacterial extract against acute exacerbation in patients with
chronic bronchitis accompanied by chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Chin Med J 2004; 117: 828–834.
166
Lee JH, Kim HJ, Kim YH. The effectiveness of anti-leukotriene agents in patients with COPD: a systemic review
and meta-analysis. Lung 2015; 193: 477–486.
167
Rennard SI, Fogarty C, Kelsen S, et al. The safety and efficacy of infliximab in moderate to severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2007; 175: 926–934.
168
Criner GJ, Connett JE, Aaron SD, et al. Simvastatin for the prevention of exacerbations in moderate-to-severe
COPD. N Engl J Med 2014; 370: 2201–2210.
169
Ingebrigtsen TS, Marott JL, Nordestgaard BG, et al. Statin use and exacerbations in individuals with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Thorax 2015; 70: 33–40.
170
Lehouck A, Mathieu C, Carremans C, et al. High doses of vitamin D to reduce exacerbations in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2012; 156: 105–114.
171
Melani AS, Bonavia M, Cilenti V, et al. Inhaler mishandling remains common in real life and is associated with
reduced disease control. Respir Med 2011; 105: 930–938.
172
Rootmensen GN, van Keimpema AR, Jansen HM, et al. Predictors of incorrect inhalation technique in patients
with asthma or COPD: a study using a validated videotaped scoring method. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv
2010; 23: 323–328.
173
Dantic DE. A critical review of the effectiveness of “teach-back” technique in teaching COPD patients
self-management using respiratory inhalers. Health Educ J 2014; 73: 41–50.
174
Chapman KR, Stockley RA, Dawkins C, et al. Augmentation therapy for α1 antitrypsin deficiency: a meta-analysis.
COPD 2009; 6: 177–184.
175
Chapman KR, Burdon JG, Piitulainen E, et al. Intravenous augmentation treatment and lung density in severe α1
antitrypsin deficiency (RAPID): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 2015; 386: 360–368.
176
Dirksen A, Dijkman JH, Madsen F, et al. A randomized clinical trial of α1-antitrypsin augmentation therapy. Am
J Respir Crit Care Med 1999; 160: 1468–1472.
177
Dirksen A, Piitulainen E, Parr DG, et al. Exploring the role of CT densitometry: a randomised study of
augmentation therapy in alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency. Eur Respir J 2009; 33: 1345–1353.
178
Schildmann EK, Remi C, Bausewein C. Levodropropizine in the management of cough associated with cancer or
nonmalignant chronic disease – a systematic review. J Pain Palliat Care Pharmacother 2011; 25: 209–218.
179
Barbera JA, Roger N, Roca J, et al. Worsening of pulmonary gas exchange with nitric oxide inhalation in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Lancet 1996; 347: 436–440.
180
Blanco I, Santos S, Gea J, et al. Sildenafil to improve respiratory rehabilitation outcomes in COPD: a controlled
trial. Eur Respir J 2013; 42: 982–992.
181
Goudie AR, Lipworth BJ, Hopkinson PJ, et al. Tadalafil in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a
randomised, double-blind, parallel-group, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Respir Med 2014; 2: 293–300.
182
Spruit MA, Singh SJ, Garvey C, et al. An official American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society
statement: key concepts and advances in pulmonary rehabilitation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2013; 188: e13–e64.
183
Puhan MA, Gimeno-Santos E, Scharplatz M, et al. Pulmonary rehabilitation following exacerbations of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011; 10: CD005305.
184
Greening NJ, Williams JE, Hussain SF, et al. An early rehabilitation intervention to enhance recovery during hospital
admission for an exacerbation of chronic respiratory disease: randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2014; 349: g4315.
185
Vogiatzis I, Rochester CL, Spruit MA, et al. Increasing implementation and delivery of pulmonary rehabilitation:
key messages from the new ATS/ERS policy statement. Eur Respir J 2016; 47: 1336–1341.
186
Zwerink M, Brusse-Keizer M, van der Valk PD, et al. Self management for patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; 3: CD002990.
187
Fan VS, Gaziano JM, Lew R, et al. A comprehensive care management program to prevent chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease hospitalizations: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 2012; 156: 673–683.
188
Peytremann-Bridevaux I, Taffe P, Burnand B, et al. Mortality of patients with COPD participating in chronic
disease management programmes: a happy end? Thorax 2014; 69: 865–866.
189
Kruis AL, Smidt N, Assendelft WJ, et al. Integrated disease management interventions for patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013; 10: CD009437.
190
Kruis AL, Boland MR, Assendelft WJ, et al. Effectiveness of integrated disease management for primary care
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients: results of cluster randomised trial. BMJ 2014; 349: g5392.
191
Cartwright M, Hirani SP, Rixon L, et al. Effect of telehealth on quality of life and psychological outcomes over 12
months (Whole Systems Demonstrator telehealth questionnaire study): nested study of patient reported outcomes
in a pragmatic, cluster randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2013; 346: f653.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
27
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 192
American Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine Center to Advance Palliative Care Hospice, Palliative
Nurses Association Last Acts Partnership National Hospice and Palliative Care Organization. National Consensus
Project for Quality Palliative Care: Clinical Practice Guidelines for quality palliative care, executive summary.
J Palliat Med 2004; 7: 611–627.
193
Halpin DMG, Seamark DA, Seamark CJ. Palliative and end-of-life care for patients with respiratory diseases.
In: Bellia V, Antonelli Incalzi R, eds. Respiratory Diseases in the Elderly (ERS Monograph). Sheffield, European
Respiratory Society, 2009; pp. 327–353.
194
Weber C, Stirnemann J, Herrmann FR, et al. Can early introduction of specialized palliative care limit intensive
care, emergency and hospital admissions in patients with severe and very severe COPD? a randomized study.
BMC Palliat Care 2014; 13: 47.
195
Ek K, Andershed B, Sahlberg-Blom E, et al. “The unpredictable death” – the last year of life for patients with
advanced COPD: relatives’ stories. Palliat Support Care 2015; 13: 1213–1222.
196
Cranston JM, Crockett AJ, Moss JR, et al. Domiciliary oxygen for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005; 4 CD001744.
197
Long-term Oxygen Treatment Trial Research Group. A randomized trial of long-term oxygen for COPD with
moderate desaturation. N Engl J Med 2016; 375: 1617.
198
Galli JA, Krahnke JS, James Mamary A, et al. Home non-invasive ventilation use following acute hypercapnic
respiratory failure in COPD. Respir Med 2014; 108: 722–728.
199
Coughlin S, Liang WE, Parthasarathy S. Retrospective assessment of home ventilation to reduce rehospitalization
in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. J Clin Sleep Med 2015; 11: 663–670.
200
Clini E, Sturani C, Rossi A, et al. The Italian multicentre study on noninvasive ventilation in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease patients. Eur Respir J 2002; 20: 529–538.
201
Kohnlein T, Windisch W, Kohler D, et al. Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for the treatment of severe
stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a prospective, multicentre, randomised, controlled clinical trial.
Lancet Respir Med 2014; 2: 698–705.
202
Struik FM, Sprooten RT, Kerstjens HA, et al. Nocturnal non-invasive ventilation in COPD patients with
prolonged hypercapnia after ventilatory support for acute respiratory failure: a randomised, controlled,
parallel-group study. Thorax 2014; 69: 826–834.
203
Casanova C, Celli BR, Tost L, et al. Long-term controlled trial of nocturnal nasal positive pressure ventilation in
patients with severe COPD. Chest 2000; 118: 1582–1590.
204
Marin JM, Soriano JB, Carrizo SJ, et al. Outcomes in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and
obstructive sleep apnea: the overlap syndrome. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2010; 182: 325–331.
205
Fishman A, Martinez F, Naunheim K, et al. A randomized trial comparing lung-volume-reduction surgery with
medical therapy for severe emphysema. N Engl J Med 2003; 348: 2059–2073.
206
National Emphysema Treatment Trial Research Group. Patients at high risk of death after lung-volume-reduction
surgery. N Engl J Med 2001; 345: 1075–1083.
207
Marchetti N, Criner GJ. Surgical approaches to treating emphysema: lung volume reduction surgery, bullectomy,
and lung transplantation. Semin Respir Crit Care Med 2015; 36: 592–608.
208
Christie JD, Edwards LB, Kucheryavaya AY, et al. The Registry of the International Society for Heart and Lung
Transplantation: 29th adult lung and heart-lung transplant report – 2012. J Heart Lung Transplant 2012; 31:
1073–1086.
209
Stavem K, Bjortuft O, Borgan O, et al. Lung transplantation in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease in a national cohort is without obvious survival benefit. J Heart Lung Transplant 2006; 25: 75–84.
210
Thabut G, Christie JD, Ravaud P, et al. Survival after bilateral versus single lung transplantation for patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a retrospective analysis of registry data. Lancet 2008; 371: 744–751.
211
Criner GJ, Cordova F, Sternberg AL, et al. The National Emphysema Treatment Trial (NETT) Part II: Lessons
learned about lung volume reduction surgery. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2011; 184: 881–893.
212
Shah PL, Slebos DJ, Cardoso PF, et al. Bronchoscopic lung-volume reduction with Exhale airway stents for
emphysema (EASE trial): randomised, sham-controlled, multicentre trial. Lancet 2011; 378: 997–1005.
213
Come CE, Kramer MR, Dransfield MT, et al. A randomised trial of lung sealant versus medical therapy for
advanced emphysema. Eur Respir J 2015; 46: 651–662.
214
Sciurba FC, Ernst A, Herth FJ, et al. A randomized study of endobronchial valves for advanced emphysema.
N Engl J Med 2010; 363: 1233–1244.
215
Davey C, Zoumot Z, Jordan S, et al. Bronchoscopic lung volume reduction with endobronchial valves for patients
with heterogeneous emphysema and intact interlobar fissures (the BeLieVeR-HIFi trial): study design and
rationale. Thorax 2015; 70: 288–290.
216
Klooster K, ten Hacken NH, Hartman JE, et al. Endobronchial valves for emphysema without interlobar
collateral ventilation. N Engl J Med 2015; 373: 2325–2335.
217
Deslee G, Mal H, Dutau H, et al. Lung volume reduction coil treatment vs usual care in patients with severe
emphysema: the REVOLENS randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2016; 315: 175–184.
218
Sciurba FC, Criner GJ, Strange C, et al. Effect of endobronchial coils vs usual care on exercise tolerance in
patients with severe emphysema: the RENEW randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2016; 315: 2178–2189.
219
Barr RG, Bourbeau J, Camargo CA, et al. Inhaled tiotropium for stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005; 2 CD002876.
220
Karner C, Cates CJ. Long-acting β2-agonist in addition to tiotropium versus either tiotropium or long-acting
β2-agonist alone for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012; 4: CD008989.
221
Martinez FJ, Calverley PM, Goehring UM, et al. Effect of roflumilast on exacerbations in patients with severe
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease uncontrolled by combination therapy (REACT): a multicentre randomised
controlled trial. Lancet 2015; 385: 857–866.
222
Martinez FJ, Rabe KF, Sethi S, et al. Effect of roflumilast and inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist on
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations (RE(2)SPOND). A randomized clinical trial. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 2016; 194: 559–567.
223
Garvey C, Bayles MP, Hamm LF, et al. Pulmonary rehabilitation exercise prescription in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: review of selected guidelines: an official statement from the american association of
cardiovascular and pulmonary rehabilitation. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev 2016; 36: 75–83.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
28
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 224
Ortega F, Toral J, Cejudo P, et al. Comparison of effects of strength and endurance training in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002; 166: 669–674.
225
Bernard S, Whittom F, Leblanc P, et al. Aerobic and strength training in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999; 159: 896–901.
226
Velloso M, do Nascimento NH, Gazzotti MR, et al. Evaluation of effects of shoulder girdle training on strength
and performance of activities of daily living in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Int J Chron
Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2013; 8: 187–192.
227
Au DH, Udris EM, Engelberg RA, et al. A randomized trial to improve communication about end-of-life care
among patients with COPD. Chest 2012; 141: 726–735.
228
Tomczyk S, Bennett NM, Stoecker C, et al. Use of 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine and 23-valent
pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine among adults aged ⩾65 years: recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2014; 63: 822–825.
229
Struik FM, Lacasse Y, Goldstein RS, et al. Nocturnal noninvasive positive pressure ventilation in stable COPD:
a systematic review and individual patient data meta-analysis. Respir Med 2014; 108: 329–337.
230
Tiong LU, Davies R, Gibson PG, et al. Lung volume reduction surgery for diffuse emphysema. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2006; 4: CD001001.
231
Weill D, Benden C, Corris PA, et al. A consensus document for the selection of lung transplant candidates:
2014 – an update from the Pulmonary Transplantation Council of the International Society for Heart and Lung
Transplantation. J Heart Lung Transplant 2015; 34: 1–15.
232
ISHLT. Slide Sets – Overall Lung Transplantation Statistics. www.ishlt.org/downloadables/slides/2015/lung_adult.
pptx Date last accessed: September 18, 2016.
233
Wedzicha JA, Seemungal TA. COPD exacerbations: defining their cause and prevention. Lancet 2007; 370: 786–796.
234
Seemungal TA, Donaldson GC, Paul EA, et al. Effect of exacerbation on quality of life in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998; 157: 1418–1422.
235
Anthonisen NR, Manfreda J, Warren CP, et al. Antibiotic therapy in exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Ann Intern Med 1987; 106: 196–204.
236
Woodhead M, Blasi F, Ewig S, et al. Guidelines for the management of adult lower respiratory tract infections.
Eur Respir J 2005; 26: 1138–1180.
237
White AJ, Gompertz S, Stockley RA. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 6: The aetiology of exacerbations of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Thorax 2003; 58: 73–80.
238
Papi A, Bellettato CM, Braccioni F, et al. Infections and airway inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease severe exacerbations. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2006; 173: 1114–1121.
239
Bafadhel M, McKenna S, Terry S, et al. Blood eosinophils to direct corticosteroid treatment of exacerbations of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized placebo-controlled trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2012;
186: 48–55.
240
Seemungal TA, Donaldson GC, Bhowmik A, et al. Time course and recovery of exacerbations in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000; 161: 1608–1613.
241
Hurst JR, Donaldson GC, Quint JK, et al. Temporal clustering of exacerbations in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2009; 179: 369–374.
242
Wells JM, Washko GR, Han MK, et al. Pulmonary arterial enlargement and acute exacerbations of COPD.
N Engl J Med 2012; 367: 913–921.
243
Han MK, Kazerooni EA, Lynch DA, et al. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations in the
COPDGene study: associated radiologic phenotypes. Radiology 2011; 261: 274–282.
244
Kim V, Han MK, Vance GB, et al. The chronic bronchitic phenotype of COPD: an analysis of the COPDGene
Study. Chest 2011; 140: 626–633.
245
Burgel PR, Nesme-Meyer P, Chanez P, et al. Cough and sputum production are associated with frequent
exacerbations and hospitalizations in COPD subjects. Chest 2009; 135: 975–982.
246
Martinez FJ, Han MK, Flaherty K, et al. Role of infection and antimicrobial therapy in acute exacerbations of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther 2006; 4: 101–124.
247
Celli BR, Thomas NE, Anderson JA, et al. Effect of pharmacotherapy on rate of decline of lung function in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: results from the TORCH study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2008; 178: 332–338.
248
Tashkin DP, Celli B, Decramer M, et al. Bronchodilator responsiveness in patients with COPD. Eur Respir J
2008; 31: 742–750.
249
Hoogendoorn M, Hoogenveen RT, Rutten-van Molken MP, et al. Case fatality of COPD exacerbations: a
meta-analysis and statistical modelling approach. Eur Respir J 2011; 37: 508–515.
250
Piquet J, Chavaillon JM, David P, et al. High-risk patients following hospitalisation for an acute exacerbation of
COPD. Eur Respir J 2013; 42: 946–955.
251
Singanayagam A, Schembri S, Chalmers JD. Predictors of mortality in hospitalized adults with acute exacerbation
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2013; 10: 81–89.
252
Garcia-Aymerich J, Serra Pons I, Mannino DM, et al. Lung function impairment, COPD hospitalisations and
subsequent mortality. Thorax 2011; 66: 585–590.
253
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in over 16s: diagnosis
and management. 2010. www.nice.org.uk/guidance/CG101 Date last accessed: February 8, 2017.
254
Celli BR, MacNee W, ATS ERS Task Force. Standards for the diagnosis and treatment of patients with COPD:
a summary of the ATS/ERS position paper. Eur Respir J 2004; 23: 932–946.
255
Turner MO, Patel A, Ginsburg S, et al. Bronchodilator delivery in acute airflow obstruction. A meta-analysis.
Arch Intern Med 1997; 157: 1736–1744.
256
Barr RG, Rowe BH, Camargo CA Jr. Methylxanthines for exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: meta-analysis of randomised trials. BMJ 2003; 327: 643.
257
Duffy N, Walker P, Diamantea F, et al. Intravenous aminophylline in patients admitted to hospital with
non-acidotic exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a prospective randomised controlled trial.
Thorax 2005; 60: 713–717.
258
Davies L, Angus RM, Calverley PM. Oral corticosteroids in patients admitted to hospital with exacerbations of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a prospective randomised controlled trial. Lancet 1999; 354: 456–460.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
29
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 259
Maltais F, Ostinelli J, Bourbeau J, et al. Comparison of nebulized budesonide and oral prednisolone with placebo
in the treatment of acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized controlled trial.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002; 165: 698–703.
260
Niewoehner DE, Erbland ML, Deupree RH, et al. Effect of systemic glucocorticoids on exacerbations of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Department of Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study Group. N Engl J Med 1999;
340: 1941–1947.
261
Thompson WH, Nielson CP, Carvalho P, et al. Controlled trial of oral prednisone in outpatients with acute
COPD exacerbation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1996; 154: 407–412.
262
Alia I, de la Cal MA, Esteban A, et al. Efficacy of corticosteroid therapy in patients with an acute exacerbation of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease receiving ventilatory support. Arch Intern Med 2011; 171: 1939–1946.
263
Aaron SD, Vandemheen KL, Hebert P, et al. Outpatient oral prednisone after emergency treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. N Engl J Med 2003; 348: 2618–2625.
264
Leuppi JD, Schuetz P, Bingisser R, et al. Short-term vs conventional glucocorticoid therapy in acute exacerbations
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: the REDUCE randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2013; 309: 2223–2231.
265
de Jong YP, Uil SM, Grotjohan HP, et al. Oral or IV prednisolone in the treatment of COPD exacerbations:
a randomized, controlled, double-blind study. Chest 2007; 132: 1741–1747.
266
Bafadhel M, McKenna S, Terry S, et al. Acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:
identification of biologic clusters and their biomarkers. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2011; 184: 662–671.
267
Vollenweider DJ, Jarrett H, Steurer-Stey CA, et al. Antibiotics for exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012; 12: CD010257.
268
Miravitlles M, Kruesmann F, Haverstock D, et al. Sputum colour and bacteria in chronic bronchitis
exacerbations: a pooled analysis. Eur Respir J 2012; 39: 1354–1360.
269
Stockley RA, O’Brien C, Pye A, et al. Relationship of sputum color to nature and outpatient management of
acute exacerbations of COPD. Chest 2000; 117: 1638–1645.
270
Ram FS, Rodriguez-Roisin R, Granados-Navarrete A, et al. Antibiotics for exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006; 2: CD004403.
271
Schuetz P, Christ-Crain M, Thomann R, et al. Effect of procalcitonin-based guidelines vs standard guidelines on
antibiotic use in lower respiratory tract infections: the ProHOSP randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2009; 302:
1059–1066.
272
Schuetz P, Muller B, Christ-Crain M, et al. Procalcitonin to initiate or discontinue antibiotics in acute respiratory
tract infections. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012; 9: CD007498.
273
Nouira S, Marghli S, Belghith M, et al. Once daily oral ofloxacin in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
exacerbation requiring mechanical ventilation: a randomised placebo- controlled trial. Lancet 2001; 358:
2020–2025.
274
Masterton RG, Burley CJ. Randomized, double-blind study comparing 5- and 7-day regimens of oral levofloxacin
in patients with acute exacerbation of chronic bronchitis. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2001; 18: 503–512.
275
Adams SG, Melo J, Luther M. Antibiotics are associated with lower relapse rates in outpatients with acute
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Chest 2000; 117: 1345–1352.
276
Miravitlles M, Espinosa C, Fernandez-Laso E, et al. Relationship between bacterial flora in sputum and
functional impairment in patients with acute exacerbations of COPD. Study Group of Bacterial Infection in
COPD. Chest 1999; 116: 40–46.
277
Soler N, Torres A, Ewig S, et al. Bronchial microbial patterns in severe exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) requiring mechanical ventilation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998; 157: 1498–1505.
278
Austin MA, Wills KE, Blizzard L, et al. Effect of high flow oxygen on mortality in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease patients in prehospital setting: randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2010; 341: c5462.
279
Brochard L, Mancebo J, Wysocki M, et al. Noninvasive ventilation for acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. N Engl J Med 1995; 333: 817–822.
280
Lightowler JV, Wedzicha JA, Elliott MW, et al. Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation to treat respiratory
failure resulting from exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: Cochrane systematic review and
meta-analysis. BMJ 2003; 326: 185.
281
Meyer TJ, Hill NS. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation to treat respiratory failure. Ann Intern Med 1994;
120: 760–770.
282
Chandra D, Stamm JA, Taylor B, et al. Outcomes of noninvasive ventilation for acute exacerbations of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease in the United States, 1998–2008. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2012; 185: 152–159.
283
Consensus development conference committee. Clinical indications for noninvasive positive pressure ventilation
in chronic respiratory failure due to restrictive lung disease, COPD, and nocturnal hypoventilation – a consensus
conference report. Chest 1999; 116: 521–534.
284
Bott J, Carroll MP, Conway JH, et al. Randomised controlled trial of nasal ventilation in acute ventilatory failure
due to chronic obstructive airways disease. Lancet 1993; 341: 1555–1557.
285
Kramer N, Meyer TJ, Meharg J, et al. Randomized, prospective trial of noninvasive positive pressure ventilation
in acute respiratory failure. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1995; 151: 1799–1806.
286
Plant PK, Owen JL, Elliott MW. Early use of non-invasive ventilation for acute exacerbations of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease on general respiratory wards: a multicentre randomised controlled trial. Lancet
2000; 355: 1931–1935.
287
Conti G, Antonelli M, Navalesi P, et al. Noninvasive vs. conventional mechanical ventilation in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease after failure of medical treatment in the ward: a randomized trial.
Intensive Care Med 2002; 28: 1701–1707.
288
Jennings JH, Thavarajah K, Mendez MP, et al. Predischarge bundle for patients with acute exacerbations of
COPD to reduce readmissions and ED visits: a randomized controlled trial. Chest 2015; 147: 1227–1234.
289
Singh G, Zhang W, Kuo YF, et al. Association of psychological disorders with 30-day readmission rates in
patients with COPD. Chest 2016; 149: 905–915.
290
Ringbaek T, Green A, Laursen LC, et al. Effect of tele health care on exacerbations and hospital admissions in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized clinical trial. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis
2015; 10: 1801–1808.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
30
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 291
Hartl S, Lopez-Campos JL, Pozo-Rodriguez F, et al. Risk of death and readmission of hospital-admitted COPD
exacerbations: European COPD Audit. Eur Respir J 2016; 47: 113–121.
292
Jordan RE, Majothi S, Heneghan NR, et al. Supported self-management for patients with moderate to severe
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): an evidence synthesis and economic analysis. Health Technol
Assess 2015; 19: 1–516.
293
Gavish R, Levy A, Dekel OK, et al. The association between hospital readmission and pulmonologist follow-up
visits in patients with COPD. Chest 2015; 148: 375–381.
294
Oga T, Tsukino M, Hajiro T, et al. Predictive properties of different multidimensional staging systems in patients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2011; 6: 521–526.
295
Martinez-Garcia MA, de la Rosa Carrillo D, Soler-Cataluna JJ, et al. Prognostic value of bronchiectasis in patients
with moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2013; 187: 823–831.
296
Barnes PJ, Celli BR. Systemic manifestations and comorbidities of COPD. Eur Respir J 2009; 33: 1165–1185.
297
Mannino DM, Thorn D, Swensen A, et al. Prevalence and outcomes of diabetes, hypertension and cardiovascular
disease in COPD. Eur Respir J 2008; 32: 962–969.
298
Sin DD, Anthonisen NR, Soriano JB, et al. Mortality in COPD: Role of comorbidities. Eur Respir J 2006; 28:
1245–1257.
299
Iversen KK, Kjaergaard J, Akkan D, et al. The prognostic importance of lung function in patients admitted with
heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail 2010; 12: 685–691.
300
Almagro P, Soriano JB, Cabrera FJ, et al. Short- and medium-term prognosis in patients hospitalized for COPD
exacerbation: the CODEX index. Chest 2014; 145: 972–980.
301
Miller J, Edwards LD, Agusti A, et al. Comorbidity, systemic inflammation and outcomes in the ECLIPSE cohort.
Respir Med 2013; 107: 1376–1384.
302
Campo G, Napoli N, Serenelli C, et al. Impact of a recent hospitalization on treatment and prognosis of
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. Int J Cardiol 2013; 167: 296–297.
303
Fabbri LM, Luppi F, Beghe B, et al. Complex chronic comorbidities of COPD. Eur Respir J 2008; 31: 204–212.
304
Bhatt SP, Dransfield MT. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and cardiovascular disease. Transl Res 2013;
162: 237–251.
305
Matamis D, Tsagourias M, Papathanasiou A, et al. Targeting occult heart failure in intensive care unit patients
with acute chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbation: effect on outcome and quality of life. J Crit Care
2014; 29: 315.e7–14.
306
MacDonald MI, Shafuddin E, King PT, et al. Cardiac dysfunction during exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Lancet Respir Med 2016; 4: 138–148.
307
Lipworth B, Wedzicha J, Devereux G, et al. Beta-blockers in COPD: time for reappraisal. Eur Respir J 2016; 48:
880–888.
308
Hoiseth AD, Neukamm A, Karlsson BD, et al. Elevated high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T is associated with
increased mortality after acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Thorax 2011; 66: 775–781.
309
Singh S, Loke YK, Enright P, et al. Pro-arrhythmic and pro-ischaemic effects of inhaled anticholinergic
medications. Thorax 2013; 68: 114–116.
310
Wilchesky M, Ernst P, Brophy JM, et al. Bronchodilator use and the risk of arrhythmia in COPD: part 2:
reassessment in the larger Quebec cohort. Chest 2012; 142: 305–311.
311
Salpeter SR, Ormiston TM, Salpeter EE. Cardiovascular effects of beta-agonists in patients with asthma and
COPD: a meta-analysis. Chest 2004; 125: 2309–2321.
312
Tashkin DP, Fabbri LM. Long-acting beta-agonists in the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:
current and future agents. Respir Res 2010; 11: 149.
313
Calverley P, Pauwels R, Vestbo J, et al. Combined salmeterol and fluticasone in the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2003; 361: 449–456.
314
Szafranski W, Cukier A, Ramirez A, et al. Efficacy and safety of budesonide/formoterol in the management of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Eur Respir J 2003; 21: 74–81.
315
Calverley PM, Boonsawat W, Cseke Z, et al. Maintenance therapy with budesonide and formoterol in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Eur Respir J 2003; 22: 912–919.
316
Calverley PM, Anderson JA, Celli B, et al. Cardiovascular events in patients with COPD: TORCH study results.
Thorax 2010; 65: 719–725.
317
Houben-Wilke S, Jorres RA, Bals R, et al. Peripheral artery disease and its clinical relevance in patients with
COPD in the COSYCONET study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2017; 195: 189–197.
318
Divo M, Cote C, de Torres JP, et al. Comorbidities and risk of mortality in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2012; 186: 155–161.
319
Bon J, Fuhrman CR, Weissfeld JL, et al. Radiographic emphysema predicts low bone mineral density in a
tobacco-exposed cohort. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2011; 183: 885–890.
320
McAllister DA, Maclay JD, Mills NL, et al. Arterial stiffness is independently associated with emphysema severity
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2007; 176: 1208–1214.
321
Bolton CE, Cannings-John R, Edwards PH, et al. What community measurements can be used to predict bone
disease in patients with COPD? Respir Med 2008; 102: 651–657.
322
Bolton CE, Ionescu AA, Shiels KM, et al. Associated loss of fat-free mass and bone mineral density in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004; 170: 1286–1293.
323
Jaramillo JD, Wilson C, Stinson DS, et al. Reduced bone density and vertebral fractures in smokers. Men and
COPD patients at increased risk. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2015; 12: 648–656.
324
Jaramillo J, Wilson C, Stinson D, et al. Erratum: reduced bone density and vertebral fractures in smokers. Men
and COPD patients at increased risk. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2015; 12: 1112.
325
Ng TP, Niti M, Tan WC, et al. Depressive symptoms and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: effect on
mortality, hospital readmission, symptom burden, functional status, and quality of life. Arch Intern Med 2007;
167: 60–67.
326
Eisner MD, Blanc PD, Yelin EH, et al. Influence of anxiety on health outcomes in COPD. Thorax 2010; 65:
229–234.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
31
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
 327
de Torres JP, Bastarrika G, Wisnivesky JP, et al. Assessing the relationship between lung cancer risk and
emphysema detected on low-dose CT of the chest. Chest 2007; 132: 1932–1938.
328
Wilson DO, Leader JK, Fuhrman CR, et al. Quantitative computed tomography analysis, airflow obstruction, and
lung cancer in the pittsburgh lung screening study. J Thorac Oncol 2011; 6: 1200–1205.
329
Wilson DO, Weissfeld JL, Balkan A, et al. Association of radiographic emphysema and airflow obstruction with
lung cancer. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2008; 178: 738–744.
330
de-Torres JP, Wilson DO, Sanchez-Salcedo P, et al. Lung cancer in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Development and validation of the COPD Lung Cancer Screening Score. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2015; 191: 285–291.
331
Aberle DR, Adams AM, Berg CD, et al. Reduced lung-cancer mortality with low-dose computed tomographic
screening. N Engl J Med 2011; 365: 395–409.
332
Infante M, Cavuto S, Lutman FR, et al. Long-term follow-up results of the DANTE trial, a randomized study of
lung cancer screening with spiral computed tomography. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2015; 191: 1166–1175.
333
Cebron Lipovec N, Beijers RJ, van den Borst B, et al. The prevalence of metabolic syndrome in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: a systematic review. COPD 2016; 13: 399–406.
334
Martinez CH, Okajima Y, Murray S, et al. Impact of self-reported gastroesophageal reflux disease in subjects
from COPDGene cohort. Respir Res 2014; 15: 62.
335
Ingebrigtsen TS, Marott JL, Vestbo J, et al. Gastro-esophageal reflux disease and exacerbations in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Respirology 2015; 20: 101–107.
336
Patel IS, Vlahos I, Wilkinson TM, et al. Bronchiectasis, exacerbation indices, and inflammation in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004; 170: 400–407.
337
Shepard JW Jr, Garrison MW, Grither DA, et al. Relationship of ventricular ectopy to nocturnal oxygen
desaturation in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Med 1985; 78: 28–34.
338
Bradley TD, Rutherford R, Grossman RF, et al. Role of daytime hypoxemia in the pathogenesis of right heart
failure in the obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Am Rev Respir Dis 1985; 131: 835–839.
339
Weitzenblum E, Krieger J, Apprill M, et al. Daytime pulmonary hypertension in patients with obstructive sleep
apnea syndrome. Am Rev Respir Dis 1988; 138: 345–349.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00214-2017
32
GOLD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | C.F. VOGELMEIER ET AL.
