 NASPGHAN Clinical Practice Guideline for the Diagnosis and 
Treatment of Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease in Children:
Recommendations from the Expert Committee on NAFLD (ECON) and the North American 
Society of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition (NASPGHAN)
Miriam B. Vos, MD, MSPH, FAHA1,2, Stephanie H. Abrams, MD3,4, Sarah E. Barlow, MD, 
FAAP3,4, Sonia Caprio, MD5, Stephen R. Daniels, MD, PhD, FAAP6,7, Rohit Kohli, MBBS, 
MS8,9, Marialena Mouzaki, MD, MSc10,11, Pushpa Sathya, MD, FRCPC12,13, Jeffrey B. 
Schwimmer, MD14,15, Shikha S. Sundaram, MD, MSCI6,7, and Stavra A. Xanthakos, MD, MS, 
FAAP8,9
1School of Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA
2Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, GA
3Texas Children’s Hospital, Houston, TX
4Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
5School of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT
6School of Medicine, University of Colorado, Denver, CO
7Children’s Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO
8Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH
9Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH
10Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, CAN
11School of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, CAN
12Janeway Children’s Health and Rehabilitation Centre, St. John’s, NL, CAN
13Discipline of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John’s, 
NL, CAN
14School of Medicine, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA
15Rady Children’s Hospital, San Diego, CA
Contact Information: Miriam B. Vos, MD, MSPH, FAHA, 1760 Haygood Drive, Atlanta, GA, 30322. mvos@emory.edu; Phone: 
404-727-1463; Fax: 404-727-4069. 
Endorsed by the American Academy of Pediatrics
Author contributions: All authors were involved in the literature review, summarizing the literature, formulating and revising the 
recommendations. MV synthesized the summaries and wrote the first draft. All authors reviewed and corrected the drafts and had final 
approval of the submitted version.
POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST / FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
MV has research funding from Resonance Health Inc, serves on a DSMB for Aegerion and as a consultant for Shire, Immuron, 
Intercept and Target Pharmasolutions. SD serves on a DMC for Novo Nordisk and consults for Sanofi. RK has research funding from 
Raptor. The remaining authors have no personal or financial conflicts of interest to declare.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Published in final edited form as:
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2017 February ; 64(2): 319–334. doi:10.1097/MPG.0000000000001482.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Abstract
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a highly prevalent chronic liver disease that occurs in 
the setting of insulin resistance and increased adiposity. It has rapidly evolved into the most 
common liver disease seen in the pediatric population and is a management challenge for general 
pediatric practitioners, subspecialists and for health systems. In this guideline, the expert 
committee on NAFLD (ECON) reviewed and summarized the available literature, formulating 
recommendations to guide screening and clinical care of children with NAFLD.
Keywords
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease; children; treatment; recommendations
INTRODUCTION
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a chronic liver disease resulting from excessive 
fat accumulation in the liver. Due to its close association with obesity, it has become the 
most common liver disease in children in the United States. NAFLD can result in 
progressive fibrosis and lead to end-stage liver disease. Within the last decade, it has become 
one of the leading indications for liver transplantation in adults (1).
Best practices in management of pediatric NAFLD are not clearly defined. A guideline 
focused primarily on care of adults with NAFLD was released in 2011 (2). 
Recommendations addressing diagnosis of pediatric NAFLD were published in 2012 (3), 
however did not include screening, treatment and public health implications. The North 
American Society of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition (NASPGHAN) 
commissioned the Expert Committee on NAFLD (ECON) to address this gap. The 
committee included specialists in general pediatrics, hepatology, gastroenterology, nutrition, 
cardiology, endocrinology, and pediatric obesity management.
The following recommendations are based on a formal review and analysis of the recently 
published world literature (Pubmed and EMBASE search through May 2015), guidelines 
from other societies when applicable, and the experience of the expert committee. These 
guidelines are intended for pediatricians, allied health professionals caring for children, 
pediatric gastroenterologists, hepatologists, endocrinologists and preventive cardiologists. 
They suggest preferred evidence-based approaches for the clinical care of children related to 
NAFLD but remain flexible and adjustable for individual patients and circumstances. In 
areas where insufficient evidence existed, the committee drew on the collective experience 
of the members to provide guidance.
The Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) 
system was used to classify the quality of evidence and strength of recommendations (Table 
1). The strength of recommendation in the GRADE system is classified as 1) strong or 2) 
weak. The quality of evidence for each recommendation is characterized as A) high B) 
moderate or C) low quality. The GRADE system assesses the quality of evidence available. 
Specifically, it evaluates the methodological limitations of studies, whether the results of 
Vos et al.
Page 2
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 different studies are consistent or generalizable, and whether treatment approaches have 
been found to be effective (clinicalevidence.bmj.com). In this guideline, the term “children” 
includes 0–18 years.
NAFLD DEFINITION AND SUBGROUPS
Pediatric NAFLD is defined as chronic hepatic steatosis in children (≤ 18 years), which is 
not secondary to genetic/metabolic disorders, infections, use of steatogenic medications, 
ethanol consumption or malnutrition. In most children, NAFLD is associated with insulin 
resistance, central or generalized obesity, and dyslipidemia characterized by high 
triglyceride and low high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) levels.
Based on histology, NAFLD can be divided into nonalcoholic fatty liver (NAFL), which 
denotes bland steatosis, and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), which is marked by 
steatosis plus lobular inflammation and hepatocellular injury (Table 2). A further 
characterization is presence of fibrosis, which may indicate a more severe phenotype even in 
the absence of NASH. In some children, a unique periportal pathologic pattern of injury 
exists that has been termed “portal predominant NASH.” The significance of the periportal 
pattern for future clinical events is unknown and it is rarely seen in adults. In this document, 
the terms for NAFLD phenotypes are defined in Table 2.
INCIDENCE AND PREVALENCE IN CHILDREN AND CLINICAL RISK 
FACTORS
At the time of the guideline development, there were no studies describing the incidence of 
NAFLD in children. Prevalence of NAFLD has been described both in the US and 
internationally. The prevalence varies by method of detection, which may include screening 
by ALT, imaging for steatosis, or confirmation by liver biopsy. In North American studies, 
NAFLD prevalence ranges from 0.7% in very young children aged 2–4 years (confirmed at 
autopsy), to 29–38% in obese children (by studies of ALT elevation as well as an autopsy 
study) (4–8). Moreover, the prevalence of NAFLD increased 2.7 fold from the late 1980’s to 
the current era (2007–2010), and at a more rapid rate than childhood obesity, based on 
analysis of ALT elevation in serial NHANES cohorts (7).
Prevalence varies by race/ethnicity. US studies have revealed a 4-fold increased risk of 
hepatic steatosis in Hispanic, compared to non-Hispanic adolescents (11–22 years old) (8). 
White and Asian children also have high prevalence, compared to African-American 
children (5). The prevalence also differs by gender, with most studies showing higher 
percentages in male compared to female children (5, 9, 10). Prevalence is higher in obese 
children compared to normal weight, although not all children with NAFLD are obese (5).
Several comorbidities have been associated with increased prevalence and/or severity of 
pediatric NAFLD, although the pathophysiology of these associations remains incompletely 
understood. Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) was associated with the presence of NASH in 2 
pediatric studies, independently of BMI and standard metabolic risk factors (11, 12). It is not 
known whether OSA treatment ameliorates NASH. Among children newly diagnosed with 
Vos et al.
Page 3
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), elevated ALT is more frequent in Hispanic children 
compared to African American children (13). In addition, pediatric patients with 
panhypopituitarism appear to have increased risk of NAFLD, NASH, and even cirrhosis (14, 
15), similar to the increased prevalence (77%) and severity of NAFLD reported among 
adults with hypopituitarism (16).
In summary, NAFLD is highly prevalent in children, with a greater risk in certain 
subpopulations; obese children; male children; Caucasian, Asian and Hispanic children; and 
those with pre-diabetes, diabetes, OSA and panhypopituitarism.
NATURAL HISTORY OF NAFLD IN CHILDREN
Two small retrospective studies reported results of repeat liver biopsies done for clinical 
indications in children receiving usual clinical care for NAFLD. The first study showed that 
fibrosis remained stable or resolved in 11 of 18 patients after an average of 28 months (17). 
Worsening fibrosis was reported in 4 out of 5 patients reviewed in a retrospective study at a 
mean time frame of 41 months (18).
The natural history of pediatric NAFLD in the setting of lifestyle counseling was represented 
by the placebo arm of the TONIC trial, a 2 year randomized control trial designed to 
compare vitamin E, metformin and placebo with liver biopsies at baseline and at 2 year 
follow up (19). All 3 arms received nutrition and physical activity (lifestyle) advice. In the 
placebo cohort, 28% had resolution of NASH, 40% improved fibrosis, 40% improved 
steatosis and 43% improved lobular inflammation. Progression of disease was seen in 25%. 
The mean change in ALT from baseline to week 96 was −35 (−57 to −14).
Longitudinal studies in adults demonstrate that patients with NAFLD have increased 
mortality compared to matched control populations (20). The increased mortality in adults is 
secondary to cardiovascular disease (CVD), cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma. In 
adults, fibrosis stage at baseline is the most predictive feature of future liver disease related 
mortality (21). Pediatric NAFLD may be more severe compared to NAFLD identified in 
adulthood (22). Limited data suggest that children diagnosed with NAFLD have increased 
morbidity and mortality in adulthood (18).
Although limited, the pediatric data on the natural history of pediatric NAFLD support some 
conclusions. Fifteen percent of children with NAFLD have stage 3 fibrosis or higher at 
diagnosis (23) and disease in children appears to be more severe compared to adults (22). 
Given that pediatric disease is by definition early onset disease, it may represent an 
aggressive phenotype of the disease. Reports show that a few children have rapid 
progression to clinical events from NAFLD (death, transplant, diabetes, CVD). Because 
such clinical events from pediatric NAFLD typically do not occur under the age of 21 years, 
studies determining clinical outcomes from pediatric NAFLD will require long-term follow 
up into adulthood. Extrapolation from adult natural history studies may not be sufficient 
because today’s children are more likely to experience early onset of obesity, increased 
severity of obesity and exposure in utero to maternal obesity and insulin resistance compared 
to children of prior decades (24).
Vos et al.
Page 4
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 SCREENING FOR NAFLD IN CHILDREN
Similar to other chronic liver diseases, NAFLD is often asymptomatic. Historically, NAFLD 
was frequently identified incidentally due to blood liver biochemistries or abdominal 
imaging, such as ultrasound or computed tomography (CT), ordered for other indications. 
Screening for NAFLD is appropriate because it can be detected prior to the onset of 
irreversible, end-stage liver disease. Identification of children with NAFLD is important 
because effective treatment is available (weight management through lifestyle 
improvements). While more challenging to implement than prescribing a medication, 
lifestyle intervention can be effective at reversing NAFLD and even NASH, particularly if 
initiated early in the course of disease, before advanced fibrosis has developed.
Screening Tests
The currently recommended screening test, alanine aminotransferase (ALT), is an 
inexpensive, universally available blood test. ALT is minimally invasive and has an 
acceptable sensitivity. The assay is standardized between facilities; however the reporting of 
normal values is not. Several studies have evaluated upper limits of normal in children. In 
the US, gender-specific biologically based cutoffs have been determined from nationally 
representative data and have been validated in a fairly diverse cohort (25). These cutoffs are 
22 mg/dl for girls and 26 mg/dl for boys. A Canadian study found the upper limit of normal 
for ALT to be 30 mg/dl in children 1–12 years of age, and 24 mg/dl in those between 13–19 
years (26). For the diagnosis of NAFLD, the use of two times the gender-specific ALT (ALT 
≥50 for boys and ≥44 for girls) in overweight and obese children age ≥ 10 has a sensitivity 
of 88% and a specificity of 26% (27). NASH is more common in children with ALT ≥ 80 
U/L compared to those with ALT < 80 U/L (41% compared to 21% respectively) (27).
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and (gamma glutamyl transferase) GGT have not been 
independently tested as screening tools for NAFLD in children. In the context of elevated 
ALT, higher AST and higher GGT are associated with worse histology (27). However 
elevated AST or GGT in the context of normal ALT may represent a condition other than 
NAFLD.
Imaging has also been utilized as a screening tool for NAFLD. Clinically available, routine 
ultrasonography performs poorly for the detection of steatosis in children because of its low 
sensitivity and specificity particularly in children who have lower degrees of steatosis (i.e. 
involving <33% of hepatocytes) (28). In addition, ultrasound is inaccurate for quantification 
of steatosis in children with NAFLD. More precise ultrasound methodology has been 
developed (29); however, it is not widely available. The limitations of ALT and 
ultrasonography as screening tools for NAFLD can lead to inconsistencies, as patients with 
NAFLD can have an ALT<40 U/L in the context of ultrasonography that suggests the 
presence of steatosis and vice versa (27). Magnetic resonance imaging and spectroscopy 
(MRI and MRS) have been validated and shown to be accurate for detection and 
quantification of hepatic steatosis in both adults and children (30, 31). Clinical applications 
for MRI and MRS-based measurement of hepatic steatosis are rapidly becoming available in 
pediatric centers. At this time, MR-based methods are not used widely for screening because 
of cost, lack of availability and lack of validated cutoffs to determine NAFLD. This area is 
Vos et al.
Page 5
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 rapidly developing however, and some pediatric centers are already using MR in clinical 
practice for the quantification of steatosis. Hepatic steatosis is sometimes also identified by 
CT scans, often performed for other clinical indications. Combined adult and pediatric data 
show that CT detects steatosis with a sensitivity of 46–72% and specificity 88–95% but is 
not typically performed as a screening test for NAFLD due to concerns about radiation 
exposure (32). When hepatic steatosis is incidentally identified by imaging studies 
performed for other clinical indications, further diagnostic work-up to determine the cause 
of steatosis is needed (see Diagnosis section).
The relative cost-effectiveness of these various screening modalities (ALT vs. imaging) has 
not been studied. ALT is significantly less expensive compared to imaging modalities and 
therefore is preferred as the first-line screening test for NAFLD, despite its limitations.
At-Risk Populations to Screen
Overweight and obese children are at increased risk for NAFLD. Risk increases in the 
setting of cardio-metabolic risk factors, including insulin resistance, pre-diabetes, diabetes, 
dyslipidemia, central adiposity, as well as in certain races and ethnicities as discussed above. 
Non-overweight children with these cardiometabolic risk factors are also at risk for NAFLD. 
Genetic predisposition strongly affects the risk of NAFLD development and the overweight 
siblings and overweight parents of patients with NAFLD are at high risk of NAFLD (33). 
Siblings who are ≥ 10 years old and have a BMI ≥ 85th percentile are at high risk of 
NAFLD.
The optimal age to screen for NAFLD and the need for repeat screening are undetermined 
because of the lack of pediatric studies on incidence and natural history. A cross sectional, 
autopsy-based study revealed a large prevalence difference between children age 5–9 years 
and children 10–15 years (5). A limitation of this study was relatively few subjects within 
the mid-ages and the cross-sectional nature. Certain groups, such as Hispanics, may be at 
risk for earlier onset disease (34).
Recommendations
1
Selected children should be screened for NAFLD. Strength – 1, Evidence – B
a.
Screening should be considered beginning between ages 9–11 years for 
all obese children (BMI ≥95th percentile) and for overweight children 
(BMI ≥85th and < 94th percentile) with additional risk factors (central 
adiposity, insulin resistance, pre-diabetes or diabetes, dyslipidemia, 
sleep apnea or family history of NAFLD/NASH). Strength - 1, 
Evidence – B
b.
Earlier screening can be considered in younger patients with risk 
factors such as severe obesity, family history of NAFLD/NASH or 
hypopituitarism. Strength - 2, Evidence – B
c.
Consider screening of siblings and parents of children with NAFLD if 
they have known risk factors for NAFLD (obesity, Hispanic ethnicity, 
Vos et al.
Page 6
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 insulin resistance, pre-diabetes, diabetes, dyslipidemia). Strength - 2, 
Evidence - C.
2
Currently, the best screening test for NAFLD in children is ALT, however it has 
substantial limitations. Strength – 1, Evidence - B
a.
Interpretation of ALT should be based upon gender specific upper 
limits of normal in children (22 U/L for girls and 26 U/L for boys) and 
not individual laboratory upper limits of normal. Strength – 1, 
Evidence - A
b.
Persistently (> 3 months) elevated ALT more than twice the upper limit 
of normal should be evaluated for NAFLD or other causes of chronic 
hepatitis. Strength 1, Evidence – C
c.
ALT of >80 U/L warrants increased clinical concern and timely 
evaluation, as the likelihood of significant liver disease is higher. 
Strength - 2, Evidence - C
d.
Clinically available routine ultrasound is not recommended as a 
screening test for NAFLD in children due to inadequate sensitivity and 
specificity. Strength – 1, Evidence – B
3
Follow-up screening for NAFLD is recommended. Strength - 2, Evidence – C
a.
When the initial screening test is normal, consider repeating ALT every 
2–3 years if risk factors remain unchanged. Strength – 2, Evidence - C
b.
Consider repeating screening sooner if clinical risk factors of NAFLD 
increase in number or severity. Examples include excessive weight gain 
or development of other medical problems that increase risk of 
NAFLD, such as type 2 diabetes or obstructive sleep apnea. Strength – 
2, Evidence - C
DIAGNOSIS OF PEDIATRIC NAFLD
Initial Evaluation
NAFLD is a diagnosis of exclusion requiring presence of hepatic steatosis and exclusion of 
other causes of hepatic steatosis besides NAFLD (Table 3). Importantly, an obese or 
overweight child with chronically elevated liver enzymes should not be assumed to have 
NAFLD. Evaluating the cause of chronically elevated liver enzymes to establish a diagnosis 
is of NAFLD is very important because it excludes other hepatic conditions which may 
require specific treatments distinct from treatment of NAFLD. This cost-effectivness of this 
approach is unknown but consequences of missing another liver disease requiring alternate 
treatment can be significant and serious. , Until a test is developed specifically for NAFLD, 
it remains a diagnosis of exclusion.
The utility of non-invasive tools for the diagnosis of NAFLD has been assessed against the 
currently accepted clinical reference, which is hepatic histology. A review of the literature 
suggests that to date surrogate markers and scores developed to predict steatosis (e.g. 
Vos et al.
Page 7
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 “NAFLD liver fat score,” “fatty liver index,” “hepatic steatosis index,” and the “pediatric 
prediction score”) are not accurate enough or sufficiently validated to be clinically useful 
(35). Other scores have also been shown to be inadequate in predicting the presence of 
steatosis (36) or remain to be validated (37).
Similar to the issues noted under screening, clinically available ultrasound technology is not 
accurate for the diagnosis of hepatic steatosis because of its low sensitivity and specificity 
(28, 38). Although ultrasound is widely available and can exclude hepatic masses, cysts, or 
gallbladder pathology, a normal hepatic ultrasound cannot exclude the presence of NAFLD 
and therefore is not useful for diagnosis or follow-up. CT though reasonably sensitive and 
specific for hepatic steatosis is not recommended for diagnosis due to radiation risk. When 
available, MRI and MRS are highly accurate for estimating steatosis (31, 39, 40). Further 
studies are needed in children to identify and validate cutoffs that have diagnostic accuracy 
for NAFLD.
Assessment of Steatosis Severity
It is currently not known whether the severity of steatosis in children with NAFLD predicts 
short- or long-term clinical outcomes. Non–invasive techniques for quantifying the degree of 
steatosis include investigative ultrasonography techniques and MR-based technologies but 
these are not widely available. (31, 41). Steatosis involving greater than 5% of hepatocytes 
or liver tissue by weight is considered abnormal (42, 43). The validated NAFLD Activity 
Score (NAS) is a semi-quantitative assessment of NAFLD histopathology frequently utilized 
in clinical trials and research (44, 45). The NAS uses a semi-quantitative scale of 0–3 to 
assess steatosis seen on histology (< 5% of hepatocytes, 5–33%, 34–66% and >67%).
Diagnosing Steatohepatitis and Determining NASH Severity
NASH is defined as the presence of hepatic steatosis with necroinflammation and 
hepatocellular injury with or without fibrosis (45). Identification of fibrosis in children with 
NASH and NAFLD is important because these phenotypes are expected to be more likely to 
progress to cirrhosis (46). Clinical parameters, such as the degree of obesity or the severity 
of metabolic dysregulation (47), as well as non-invasive markers of hepatocellular injury 
(e.g. keratin 18) do not adequately distinguish patients with NAFL from those with NASH 
(48–55). ALT is not sensitive enough to predict with certainty the NAFLD phenotype or 
severity; however NASH is more common in children with ALT ≥ 80 U/L compared to those 
with ALT < 80 U/L (41% compared to 21% respectively) (27).
Liver biopsy is the current standard to define the presence and severity of NAFLD, including 
the presence of NASH, and to eliminate alternative and/or concurrent diagnoses. Liver 
biopsy has inherent limitations for staging NAFLD because of the non-uniformity of disease 
throughout the liver in reference to the small sample of liver obtained. Adequate sample 
length (≥ 2 cm) and width decreases the risk of misclassification, but does not eliminate it. 
The NAFLD activity score (NAS) is a research tool for semi-quantitatively rating features of 
the histology and its use was not intended to include the confirmation of a clinical diagnosis 
(56).
Vos et al.
Page 8
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Liver biopsy is generally safe in children (57–60), including those who are overweight or 
obese (61), as it is associated with a low risk of complications. Children who are extremely 
obese (BMI ≥ 120% of the 95th percentile or BMI > 35 kg/m2, whichever is lower) may 
present special challenges due to difficulty assessing the position of the liver and increased 
depth of the subcutaneous adipose tissue layer, and may warrant referral to interventional 
radiology. The optimal timing of liver biopsy to confirm the diagnosis of NAFLD and to 
follow-up on its progression has not been established. Currently, clinical practice varies 
widely. Proceeding to liver biopsy should be a shared decision with the child’s caregiver 
made after discussion of the benefits and risks. Benefits of liver biopsy include identifying 
those with more severe or progressive disease so that they can pursue more intensive 
treatment if office based lifestyle counseling fails. More intensive weight-management 
options may include referrals to multidisciplinary intensive lifestyle interventions or even 
surgical weight loss in a severely obese adolescent who meets additional clinical criteria. 
Importantly, liver biopsy differentiates other chronic liver diseases, such as autoimmune 
hepatitis, which can be challenging to exclude non-invasively.
Assessment of Fibrosis
Fibrosis in the setting of NAFLD is currently determined by liver histology and staged using 
a semi-quantitative scale of 0–4 (56). Children with NAFLD may have fibrosis without 
NASH. In general, clinical signs and symptoms of advanced fibrosis and cirrhosis may 
include fatigue, splenomegaly, low platelets, AST/ALT ratio > 1, spider angiomata and 
palmar erythema. Decompensated cirrhosis can also present with abnormal bruising, variceal 
bleeding, ascites, jaundice, pruritus and encephalopathy. However, overt signs and 
symptoms of advanced fibrosis or cirrhosis are very uncommon in children with NAFLD 
and NASH. Limited data suggest that clinical markers, such as higher BMI and increased 
waist circumference, are associated with the presence of fibrosis in patients with NAFLD/
NASH (62, 63). In a predominantly adult population, the NAFLD fibrosis score predicts the 
presence of fibrosis with moderate accuracy (64). The Pediatric NAFLD fibrosis score is less 
accurate; however these results remain to be validated (65). Limited data suggest that the 
combined Pediatric NAFLD Fibrosis Index (PNFI) and Enhanced Liver Fibrosis (ELF) 
scores are accurate in estimating fibrosis in children with NAFLD; however, the PNFI alone 
and the Pediatric NAFLD fibrosis score are less accurate (65–67). The accuracy of currently 
marketed fibrosis biomarker tests in children, as well as markers such as AST to platelet 
ratio and hyaluronic acid (and their optimal cutoffs), remain to be determined (68–72). In a 
predominantly Hispanic cohort of children presenting to an outpatient gastroenterology 
clinic for suspected fatty liver disease, an ALT ≥ 80 was associated with advanced fibrosis 
(bridging or cirrhosis) with a sensitivity of 76% and specificity of 59% (27).
In terms of imaging modalities for the assessment of fibrosis, acoustic radiation force impact 
(ARFI), Transient Elastography (TE) and Magnetic Resonance Elastography (MREl) have 
predominantly been assessed in adults and are becoming more widely available at many 
centers. However, the pediatric literature is characterized by small sample size, and 
particularly small numbers of patients with clinically significant fibrosis (≥2).TE has been 
shown to have an ROC of 0.79–1.0 for predicting clinically significant fibrosis (73–75). 
MRE detects clinically significant fibrosis with an ROC of 0.92 and is scanner and reader 
Vos et al.
Page 9
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 independent (76). These technologies would benefit from further validation studies to 
determine optimal cut-points and ability to longitudinally track fibrosis in children.
Recommendations
4
When evaluating a child suspected to have NAFLD, it is recommended to 
exclude alternative etiologies for elevated ALT and/or hepatic steatosis and 
investigate the presence of co-existing chronic liver diseases. (Figure 1). 
Strength – 1, Evidence – A
5
Liver biopsy should be considered for the assessment of NAFLD in children 
who have increased risk of NASH and/or advanced fibrosis. Potential clinical 
signs of increased risk of fibrosis in children with NASH may include higher 
ALT (>80 U/L), splenomegaly, and AST/ALT >1. Known clinical risk factors 
for NASH and advanced fibrosis include panhypopituitarism and type 2 
diabetes. Strength – 1, Evidence – B
6
The use of ultrasound is not recommended for the determination or 
quantification of steatosis due to poor sensitivity and specificity. Ultrasound may 
be useful for assessing other causes of liver disease such as masses, gallbladder 
disease, changes associated with portal hypertension etc. Strength – 1, Evidence 
– B
7
The use of CT is not recommended for determination or quantification of 
steatosis due to radiation risk. Strength -1, Evidence – B.
TREATMENT OF NAFLD IN CHILDREN
In the review of treatment of pediatric NAFLD, 42 clinical trials performed in children with 
NAFLD were identified. Limitations of the studies included a lack of standardization in the 
diagnostic criteria used, non-randomization or lack of adequate control groups, insufficient 
treatment (e.g. lifestyle intervention of very short duration or sub-therapeutic medication 
dose), inconsistent or inadequately defined outcomes, and varying approaches to data 
analysis. Conducting treatment trials for NAFLD in children remains challenging because of 
the lack of validated non-invasive biomarkers and insufficient knowledge of the natural 
history of the disease. High quality treatment studies require histologic assessment of liver 
outcomes or, at minimum, a quantitative non-invasive measurement of liver fat and/or 
fibrosis and a biochemical measurement of liver inflammation (ALT). Substantial ALT 
decrease (if elevated at entry) or normalization may also be an acceptable surrogate in 
NAFLD treatment trials, particularly in early phase studies, but is less accurate than 
histology or imaging.
Treatment Population
All children with NAFLD should be offered lifestyle intervention counseling if overweight 
or obese. It is unknown how to prioritize which children with NAFLD should receive more 
intensive treatment. Due to the lack of natural history data, it is also unknown if children 
with NAFL have a lower risk of developing NASH or fibrosis in the future, as is generally 
the case in adults with NAFL. For the same reason, it is unknown whether or to what degree 
Vos et al.
Page 10
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 children with NASH are more likely to have progressive fibrosis or increased risk of CVD. 
NAFLD progression may be linear or wax and wane with environmental changes, growth 
changes or weight loss. Given the uncertainty, most treatment trials for pediatric NAFLD 
have included a wide range of disease severity.
Goals of Treatment
The most commonly accepted goal of treatment is regression of NAFLD, defined as 
decrease in steatosis, inflammation and/or fibrosis. A second accepted goal is resolution of 
NASH. The durability of these histologic changes in children is unknown. Decrease in ALT 
is commonly used as a surrogate marker of improvement in histology of NAFLD, as there is 
some evidence to support its use in pediatric clinical trials (19, 77). While an ALT at a single 
time-point has poor correlation to phenotype, a decrease in ALT of 10 U/L over 96 weeks is 
associated with 1.28 relative odds of improvement in histology and 1.37 relative odds of 
resolution of NASH (77). In studies of NAFLD detected in adulthood, presence of fibrosis 
was more predictive of clinical outcome compared presence of NASH(46, 78). Both NAFL 
and NASH have been shown to progress in stage of fibrosis (79). Until natural history 
studies are completed in children, these data are the best information available and can help 
inform current practice.
Ultrasound is not able to reliably detect changes in steatosis and therefore does not have a 
role in assessing steatosis longitudinally. Likewise, CT and MRI/MRS modalities have not 
been adequately studied in children with NAFLD as surrogate markers for NAFLD or 
NASH improvement. Liver biopsy remains the clinical standard for determining 
improvement in liver histology after treatment, but frequency and timing of a follow-up 
biopsy must be weighed against the risks of the procedure.
An additional and overarching goal of treatment for patients with NAFLD is to decrease 
excess adiposity in order to improve dyslipidemia, insulin resistance, high blood pressure 
and central adiposity, all of which are closely associated with NAFLD, as well as with 
T2DM and CVD risk. In children, the NAFLD comorbidities (diabetes, CVD, and 
hypertension) are important considerations of treatment in order to improve future clinical 
outcomes.
Recommendations
8
Pending the development of more accurate biomarkers to non-invasively assess 
improvement in NAFLD, sustained decrease in ALT from baseline may be used 
as a surrogate marker of response to treatment, particularly for durations of ≤ 1 
year. Strength – 2, Evidence – C
9
Assessment of change in fibrosis over time is reasonable as a treatment outcome 
in children over longer time periods (≥ 2 years) and currently requires a liver 
biopsy for staging. Strength – 2, Evidence – C
Treatment of Pediatric NAFLD with Lifestyle Changes
At this time, dietary improvements and increasing physical activity (lifestyle modifications) 
are the primary treatment for pediatric NAFLD because of its strong association with excess 
Vos et al.
Page 11
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 weight gain and obesity. Seventeen lifestyle intervention studies were identified in the 
literature search but these were very heterogeneous in design, including varying duration (1 
month to 1 year), entry criteria, outcome measures and lifestyle approaches. Nonetheless, 
there were a number of non-randomized, uncontrolled cohorts that together demonstrate a 
trend of improvement in non-invasive markers of NAFLD (ALT and steatosis) with 
combined lifestyle and exercise (80–96). Multidisciplinary clinics designed to treat obesity 
have also reported improved liver enzymes and histology in children with NAFLD (81, 97, 
98). Multidisciplinary lifestyle approaches of moderate to high intensity (>25 contact hours 
over 6 months) have been shown to be most effective in pediatric weight management (99). 
However in these studies, there was not sufficient evidence to determine whether or to what 
degree BMI improvement or weight loss is required for improvement in NAFLD in children; 
however, in adult studies weight loss of ≥ 10% of baseline weight was associated with ≥ 
90% resolution of NASH.
The available data do not support a specific diet over others for the treatment of NAFLD 
(e.g. low glycemic index versus low fat). Two large randomized controlled trials (RCT) have 
demonstrated that reduction of sugar-sweetened beverages decreases adiposity in children 
(100, 101) and may benefit overweight and obese children with NAFLD. A RCT also 
supports both aerobic and resistance exercise as beneficial for reducing hepatic fat in 
children. Aerobic exercise intervention was compared to resistance exercise and no exercise 
in obese boys and the results suggested significant reduction in hepatic fat as measured by 
MRS in both exercise groups (82). Few children had NAFLD at baseline, but among those 
that did, there was a promising response to exercise with both hepatic fat reduction and 
improvement in total and visceral fat. There are clear comprehensive health benefits to a 
healthier diet and increasing physical activity (102) and these remain the first line approach 
to treatment of NAFLD in children (Figure 2).
Recommendation
10
Lifestyle modifications to improve diet and increase physical activity are 
recommended as the first-line treatment for all children with NAFLD. Strength – 
1, Evidence - B
11
Avoidance of sugar-sweetened beverages is recommended as a strategy to 
decrease adiposity. Strength – 1, Evidence – A
12
Increasing moderate to high intensity physical activity and limiting screen time 
activities to < 2 hours per day is recommended for all children including those 
with NAFLD. Strength – 1, Evidence – B
Medications and Supplements
A number of medications and supplements have been considered for use in pediatric 
NAFLD. Multiple clinical trials or cohort studies have focused on metformin (19, 103–106) 
or vitamin E (19, 107–110) as potential treatments for NAFLD. Metformin plus lifestyle 
counseling or vitamin E plus lifestyle counseling were each tested against placebo plus 
lifestyle counseling in a large, multicenter, 3 arm RCT; the TONIC trial (19). Sustained ALT 
reduction was the primary endpoint and change in histology the secondary endpoint in this 
Vos et al.
Page 12
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 study, which included 173 children aged 8–17 years. Although the primary outcome of 
sustained reduction of ALT was not different between either drug and placebo, vitamin E 
treatment was associated with statistically significant improvements in histology, as shown 
by a lower NAFLD activity score (via improvement in ballooning) and greater resolution of 
NASH. The latter was shown in a smaller subset of participants who had biopsy-confirmed 
NASH. Concerns about the safety of high dose vitamin E have been raised in adults, 
following meta-analyses of clinical trials, which have indicated an increased mortality with 
vitamin E, as well as increased adverse cardiovascular events and prostate cancer (111, 112). 
Interestingly, other meta-analyses have not had similar results (113). Although no 
significantly greater risk of adverse events were noted in the children receiving high dose 
vitamin E in the TONIC trial over a two year period, the long term benefits and risks remain 
unknown.
The TONIC study found that metformin administered at 500 mg twice daily dose in 
combination with lifestyle counseling was not different than placebo in terms of NAS score 
or ALT improvement (19). However, there was also no significant decrease in homeostatic 
model assessment-insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) in the metformin group. It remains 
unknown whether improvement in insulin sensitivity in children with NAFLD would lead to 
improvement in NAFLD or whether certain subsets of patients with NAFLD could benefit 
from metformin when given at typical clinical doses.
Vitamin E, as a treatment for biopsy-confirmed NAFLD, has also been tested in a smaller 
RCT in combination with lifestyle counseling and vitamin C; the two antioxidants taken 
together were, however, not superior to lifestyle intervention alone (109). High rates of 
vitamin D insufficiency have been identified in pediatric NAFLD (114–116), but there are 
no trials in children evaluating vitamin D supplementation as a treatment for NAFLD. In a 
small study of ursodeoxycholic acid in children, diet alone compared to ursodeoxycholic 
acid plus diet or ursodeoxycholic acid without diet did not show any benefit of the drug 
(117). This concurs with adult data that do not support its use in NAFLD (118).
Both docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and fish oil have been considered for treatment of 
NAFLD. A small RCT testing 6 month supplementation with either 250mg or 500mg DHA 
versus placebo for pediatric NAFLD found no improvement in ALT (119). An adult study 
suggests that fish oil worsens NASH (120). Probiotics (Lactobacillus GG and VSL #3) have 
been tested in two small studies of short duration (2–4 months); however, both studies were 
limited by the use of sonographic outcome measures (121, 122). ALT improved significantly 
in one study compared to placebo and this could represent an area for future research.
In summary, no medication or supplement has been shown to be of significant value for the 
management of NAFLD in children.
Recommendations
13
No currently available medications or supplements are recommended to treat 
NAFLD because none have been proven to benefit the majority of NAFLD 
patients. Strength - 2, Evidence – C
Vos et al.
Page 13
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Weight Loss Surgery as a treatment for NAFLD or NASH in Children
Bariatric or weight loss surgery (WLS) can lead to clinically meaningful weight loss in 
severely obese adolescents (minimum BMI ≥ 35 kg/m2) with average BMI reductions of 
approximately 30% at 1 year postoperatively after both roux-en-y gastric bypass and vertical 
sleeve gastrectomy in a large multicenter adolescent cohort (123). At three years post-
surgery, an average 28% weight reduction was maintained in the cohort. This reduction in 
BMI is typically associated with substantial improvement and even resolution of many 
obesity-related comorbid conditions, including dyslipidemia, high blood pressure, insulin 
resistance, diabetes and sleep apnea at one to two years post-operatively (124, 125). Because 
these conditions are often associated with the presence of NAFLD and because studies in 
adults undergoing bariatric surgery have suggested a high degree (up to 89%) of NASH 
resolution one to two years post-operatively (126), severe NASH has been proposed as a 
criterion for WLS in several published adolescent bariatric surgery guidelines (127).
There is paucity of data on the natural history of NAFLD and NASH in adolescents 
undergoing WLS. There are only four WLS outcome studies in this population that have 
included an assessment of NAFLD status at baseline (128–132), and among those only one 
included histological evaluation of NAFLD (130). In terms of outcome post WLS, only one 
study provided data on the progression of the liver disease. This study did not include 
histological outcomes but instead followed the change in ALT and AST in 81 adolescents 
undergoing roux-en-y gastric bypass over a 2-year period (132). Mean ALT and AST 
improved significantly at 1 and 2 years (mean decrease of nearly 50%); however, no data on 
ALT/AST change were provided for the adolescent group undergoing conventional care 
(controls), therefore it is unknown if this intervention was superior to lifestyle intervention. 
It should be noted that similar to adult cohorts, the proportion of patients with severe NASH 
among adolescents undergoing WLS tend to be low (130). It is unclear if this is related to 
selection/referral bias or due to potential biological differences among the more severely 
obese. Therefore, the generalizability of the overall positive NAFLD outcomes reported 
among adults undergoing bariatric surgery to children with histologically advanced or 
fibrotic NASH is limited.
Recommendation
14
Bariatric surgery is not recommended as a specific therapy for NAFLD given 
lack of outcome data in adolescents. Bariatric surgery may be considered for 
selected adolescents with BMI ≥ 35 kg/m2, who have non-cirrhotic NAFLD and 
other serious comorbidities (e.g. T2DM, severe sleep apnea, idiopathic 
intracranial hypertension) that are likely to improve with WLS. Strength - 1, 
Evidence - B
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE RISK IN THE SETTING OF NAFLD IN 
CHILDREN
Longitudinal studies in adults demonstrate an independent increase in CVD associated with 
markers of NAFLD (133–136). This risk (ranging from 1.23 to 4.82 increase in odds of 
events or disease) appears to be independent of classical risk factors such as BMI, obesity or 
Vos et al.
Page 14
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 other components of the metabolic syndrome (136). In several adult studies, CVD has been 
found to be the leading cause of mortality in patients with biopsy proven NAFLD (20, 137). 
To date, there are no studies reporting the effect of NAFLD diagnosed in childhood on the 
risk of CVD in adulthood. However, abundant evidence demonstrates that CVD risk factors, 
and specifically dyslipidemia, are commonly associated with NAFLD in children (138, 139). 
The most common pattern of dyslipidemia is high triglycerides and low HDL, typical of the 
insulin resistant state. Studies evaluating surrogate markers of atherosclerosis and autopsy 
findings of atherosclerosis confirm that children with NAFLD frequently have early 
atherosclerosis (140–144).
There are no studies in the pediatric population using lipid-lowering drugs as a treatment for 
NAFLD. The effect of lipid lowering medications on NAFLD histology is also unknown. In 
adults, statins are recommended as safe for treating dyslipidemia in the setting of NAFLD; 
however, they are not used as a treatment for NAFLD (2). A few studies in children have 
evaluated the response of plasma lipids to treatments of NAFLD. In a 2-year trial testing the 
effect of DHA supplementation versus placebo for treating NAFLD in children, triglycerides 
improved in the DHA group compared to placebo (145). In the TONIC trial, resolution of 
NASH was associated with improvement in LDL and non-HDL cholesterol but not with 
improvement in triglycerides (19, 146). Finally a small pilot study of a low-fructose diet 
demonstrated improved levels of oxidized LDL, a marker of CVD risk in children with 
NAFLD (96).
Despite the lack of pediatric data specifically on NAFLD, there is evidence to support the 
approach to CVD risk reduction in children. The ‘Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for 
Cardiovascular Health and Risk Reduction in Children and Adolescents: Summary Report’ 
delineates current practice recommendations for screening and treating children (147). At 
the time of this document, universal screening with a lipid panel is recommended for all 
children age 9–11 years (147). For ages 2–8 years, a lipid panel is recommended if risk 
factors exist or if there is a family history of dyslipidemia or of CVD. Management 
algorithms are detailed in the Summary Report and are useful when evaluating dyslipidemia 
in children with NAFLD.
Children with NAFLD are at increased risk of hypertension compared to obese children 
without NAFLD, a risk that persists over time (23, 139). Guidelines exist on monitoring and 
treating hypertension in overweight children that are applicable to children with NAFLD 
(148).
Recommendations
15
Children with NAFLD should be screened for dyslipidemia at diagnosis and 
periodically as indicated by current lipid guidelines for children. Strength – 1, 
Evidence – B
16
It is recommended to monitor blood pressure in children with NAFLD. Strength 
– 1, Evidence – B
Vos et al.
Page 15
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 PRE-DIABETES AND DIABETES IN THE SETTING OF NAFLD
Limited pediatric data exist on the prevalence of pre-diabetes or T2DM in subjects with 
NAFLD. A retrospective analysis of a pediatric cohort with T2DM revealed the prevalence 
of elevated serum aminotransferases to be 48%, with 60% of these elevations being two or 
more times above the upper limit of normal (149). Recent cross-sectional and longitudinal 
studies have described an association between NAFLD and glucose dysregulation(150). In a 
cohort of 677 children with biopsy confirmed NAFLD, pre-diabetes and diabetes were 
associated with significantly higher odds of having NASH (OR 1.8 and 2.6, respectively)
(151). Assessment of a relatively large multiethnic cohort of obese adolescents revealed that 
the prevalence of pre-diabetes and metabolic syndrome increases significantly with increases 
in hepatic fat content measured with MRI (152).
Studies also indicate that hepatic steatosis is related to metabolic parameters in the 
longitudinal setting. A cohort of 76 obese children showed that both glucose (fasting and 2-h 
blood glucose and AUC 2-h blood glucose) and insulin sensitivity (WBISI) indices at a 
mean follow-up of 1.9 years are significantly correlated with baseline hepatic fat content 
(150). More importantly, during the follow-up, a significant improvement of β-cell function 
in subjects with low compared with high liver fat content occurred. These relevant 
correlations were further confirmed by the multiple, stepwise, linear regression analysis 
showing an independent relationship between baseline hepatic fat and longitudinal metabolic 
parameter (2-h blood glucose and WBISI) even after adjusting for confounding factors (age, 
sex, ethnicity, BMI z-score, change in BMI z-score, and duration of follow-up).
Recommendation
17
It is recommended to screen children with NAFLD for diabetes at diagnosis and 
annually (or sooner if clinical suspicion arises) using either a fasting serum 
glucose level or a glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) level. A glucose tolerance 
test may be useful if the fasting glucose or HbA1c are in the pre-diabetic range 
(Table 3). Strength – 1, Evidence - A
LONG TERM CARE FOR CHILDREN WITH NAFLD
Clinical Care
Clinical care and intensity of follow up may depend on the severity of the disease (more 
advanced NASH vs. NAFL), similar to other chronic liver diseases that occur in the same 
age range (autoimmune hepatitis, hepatitis B and C and primary sclerosing cholangitis). The 
optimal frequency of follow-up or laboratory/biopsy reassessment has not been studied in 
children with NAFLD; however, more frequent visits are known to be beneficial for nutrition 
and physical activity counseling in overweight and obese children (97, 153) and may 
contribute to success of NAFLD treatment as well (97, 153), as shown in adults (154). A 
decrease in ALT is commonly used as a surrogate marker of improvement in histology of 
NAFLD, and there is some evidence to support its use in pediatric clinical trials (19, 77). 
Importantly, in the individual patient, it does not always reliably correlate with improvement 
or worsening of disease. At this time, there are no non-invasive modalities adequately 
Vos et al.
Page 16
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 validated for detecting progression or regression of fibrosis in children. Therefore, at this 
time liver biopsy remains the best available method for assessing change in fibrosis in 
children with NAFLD.
Recommendations
18
It is recommended to follow children with NAFLD on a yearly basis at a 
minimum to monitor for progression of disease and provide treatment. Strength 
1, Evidence – C
19
When providing lifestyle counseling, more frequent visits (more contact hours 
with program staff) are associated with better weight management outcomes in 
overweight and obese children and therefore may also benefit overweight 
children with NAFLD/NASH. Strength 1, Evidence – B.
20
A repeat liver biopsy to assess progression of disease (particularly fibrosis) and 
to guide treatment is reasonable to consider 2–3 years following the first liver 
biopsy, especially in patients with new or ongoing risk factors, such as type 2 
diabetes mellitus, NASH or fibrosis at diagnosis. Strength 2, Evidence – C
Exposures to Liver Toxins
Adolescence is a time of increased participation in high-risk behaviors with concurrent 
opportunities for establishing better health habits. Although emerging epidemiologic 
evidence suggests that light to moderate drinking may have a favorable effect on NAFLD 
(155), underage alcohol consumption is not recommended. A threshold effect may occur, 
with heavy, episodic drinking (e.g. “binge drinking”) in adults associated with an increased 
risk of fibrosis progression (156). Binge drinking is common amongst adolescents, with a 
potential negative impact in those affected by NAFLD. Prolonged cigarette smoking has 
been associated with advanced histologic severity of NAFLD in adults (157). A cross-
sectional study of 355 American children revealed that second hand smoke exposure was 
associated with an increased prevalence of ultrasonographic evidence of hepatic steatosis 
(158).
Recommendations
21
In addition to standard counseling of adolescents, healthcare providers should 
counsel adolescents regarding the potential effects of increased fibrosis 
progression with binge drinking. Strength – 1, Evidence - B
22
Families of children with NAFLD should be counseled about risks of second 
hand smoke exposure and adolescents with NAFLD should be counseled against 
smoking and use of electronic nicotine delivery devices. Strength – 1, Evidence 
– B
Prevention of Hepatitis A and B
Children with chronic liver disease are at increased risk of morbidity and mortality if 
infected with Hepatitis A or B, vaccine-preventable diseases. While data specific to pediatric 
NAFLD are lacking, children with other chronic liver diseases seroconvert after 2 doses of 
Vos et al.
Page 17
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Hepatitis A vaccination (159, 160). The Red Book currently recommends that all children 
with liver diseases should receive Hepatitis A vaccine (161).
Universal vaccination for HB as infants began in 1991, so the vast majority of children and 
adolescents with NAFLD have been vaccinated. Children vaccinated for hepatitis B as 
infants frequently have low levels of hepatitis B surface antibody (anti-HBs) (162). Despite 
this, they usually have persistence of immune memory as demonstrated by Spradling et al 
(163) in which of those with no detectable hepatitis B surface antibody, 82% had immune 
protection. The Red Book recommends against routine postimmunization testing for anti-
HBs unless the child falls into specific risk groups.
Recommendations
23
Children with NAFLD should be vaccinated routinely against hepatitis A. 
Strength – 1, Evidence – B
24
Children with NAFLD should have prior receipt of Hepatitis B vaccine verified 
and be immunized if no prior vaccination was received. Strength – 1, Evidence – 
A
Initiation and Monitoring of Potentially Hepatotoxic Medications
Children with NAFLD occasionally require medications for other conditions such as 
diabetes, infections, ADHD, psychiatric illness or other chronic illnesses. Certain 
medications commonly used for these conditions, are potentially hepatotoxic and require 
increased frequency of monitoring. A common example is the utilization of metformin for 
T2DMin patients who have both NAFLD and diabetes. Current recommendations are to 
evaluate transaminases before starting metformin and to check liver enzymes at the time of 
diagnosis of T2DM. However, evidence is lacking on how often to monitor liver enzymes 
after initiating therapy. Atypical antipsychotic drugs can also cause rapid and severe weight 
gain and emergence of cardiometabolic risk factors, as well as elevated liver enzymes in 
previously normal weight children. Liver enzymes therefore should be checked before 
starting atypical antipsychotics and are typically monitored during the course of therapy.
Recommendations
25
Baseline liver enzyme levels should be obtained in children with NAFLD before 
starting any medication known to be hepatotoxic. There is insufficient evidence 
to guide frequency of monitoring for enzyme elevation after initiation of 
potentially hepatotoxic medications and monitoring should be guided by the 
baseline severity of the liver disease and the relative potential for hepatotoxity of 
the medication. Strength – 1, Evidence – C
26
If potentially hepatotoxic drugs are being considered in patients with NAFLD, a 
baseline liver biopsy may be reasonable to consider for assessing the severity of 
liver disease prior to beginning the medication. Strength – 2, Evidence – C
Vos et al.
Page 18
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Quality of Life
Because NAFLD is a chronic disease, it has the potential to affect more than just physical 
health in children. Quality of life is decreased among obese children with NAFLD compared 
to children obese without NAFLD (164). Indirect effects such as the emotional toll of 
worrying about a chronic liver disease may also be a contributor.
Recommendation
27
Providers should remain alert to psychosocial issues and screen children with 
NAFLD for these when indicated. Strength - 1, Evidence – B
CONCLUSIONS AND RESEARCH NEEDS
The emergence of NAFLD has been an important change in the landscape of pediatric liver 
disease. However, substantial gaps in knowledge remain and are research priorities. These 
gaps include:
•
Delineating the natural history of pediatric NAFLD and identifying risk factors 
in childhood that predict progression versus regression and identify those at 
greater risk of adverse health outcomes.
•
Non-invasive detection of NAFLD and NASH and quantification of steatosis, 
inflammation, hepatocellular injury and fibrosis. Longitudinal studies of imaging 
and biomarkers are needed to better determine their role in clinical care.
•
Well-designed clinical trials to determine optimal treatment approaches, 
including the role of specific dietary interventions, type and duration of exercise, 
validation of pilot studies of promising therapies, as well as identification of 
novel medications, and role of weight loss surgery.
•
Cost-effective strategies for screening, diagnosis and long-term follow-up, 
including frequency of visits, laboratory vs. biopsy reassessment
Acknowledgments
Financial Support: The project was funded by the North American Society of Pediatric Gastroenterology, 
Hepatology and Nutrition (NASPGHAN) and grants MV – DK096157, DK61731, DK107243 and JS - DK088925, 
DK088831, DK61734. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the 
official views of NASPGHAN or the AAP.
This practice guideline was developed as a collaboration of the NASPGHAN NAFLD scientific advisory board, the 
NASPGHAN Hepatology committee, and the NASPGHAN Nutrition committee. In addition, the guideline was 
reviewed by the American Academy of Pediatrics Section on Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition Executive 
Committee, the AAP Committee on Nutrition, the AAP Committee on Medical Liability and Risk Management, the 
AAP Committee on Practice and Ambulatory Medicine, the AAP Committee on Child Health Financing, the 
Committee on Infectious Diseases and the AAP Section on Tobacco Control. The authors are grateful to all these 
individuals for their thoughtful reviews and suggestions.
References
1. Wong RJ, Aguilar M, Cheung R, Perumpail RB, Harrison SA, Younossi ZM, et al. Nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis is the second leading etiology of liver disease among adults awaiting liver 
transplantation in the United States. Gastroenterology. 2015; 148(3):547–55. [PubMed: 25461851] 
Vos et al.
Page 19
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2. Chalasani N, Younossi Z, Lavine JE, Diehl AM, Brunt EM, Cusi K, et al. The diagnosis and 
management of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: practice Guideline by the American Association 
for the Study of Liver Diseases, American College of Gastroenterology, and the American 
Gastroenterological Association. Hepatology. 2012; 55(6):2005–23. [PubMed: 22488764] 
3. Vajro P, Lenta S, Socha P, Dhawan A, McKiernan P, Baumann U, et al. Diagnosis of nonalcoholic 
fatty liver disease in children and adolescents: position paper of the ESPGHAN Hepatology 
Committee. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2012; 54(5):700–13. [PubMed: 22395188] 
4. Louthan MV, Theriot JA, Zimmerman E, Stutts JT, McClain CJ. Decreased prevalence of 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in black obese children. Journal of pediatric gastroenterology and 
nutrition. 2005; 41(4):426–9. [PubMed: 16205510] 
5. Schwimmer JB, Deutsch R, Kahen T, Lavine JE, Stanley C, Behling C. Prevalence of fatty liver in 
children and adolescents. Pediatrics. 2006; 118(4):1388–93. [PubMed: 17015527] 
6. Strauss RS, Barlow SE, Dietz WH. Prevalence of abnormal serum aminotransferase values in 
overweight and obese adolescents. The Journal of pediatrics. 2000; 136(6):727–33. [PubMed: 
10839867] 
7. Welsh JA, Karpen S, Vos MB. Increasing prevalence of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease among 
United States adolescents, 1988–1994 to 2007–2010. The Journal of pediatrics. 2013; 162(3):496–
500. e1. [PubMed: 23084707] 
8. Rehm JL, Connor EL, Wolfgram PM, Eickhoff JC, Reeder SB, Allen DB. Predicting hepatic 
steatosis in a racially and ethnically diverse cohort of adolescent girls. J Pediatr. 2014; 165(2):319–
25. e1. [PubMed: 24857521] 
9. Wiegand S, Keller KM, Robl M, L’Allemand D, Reinehr T, Widhalm K, et al. Obese boys at 
increased risk for nonalcoholic liver disease: evaluation of 16,390 overweight or obese children and 
adolescents. International journal of obesity. 2010; 34(10):1468–74. [PubMed: 20531349] 
10. Malespin M, Sleesman B, Lau A, Wong SS, Cotler SJ. Prevalence and correlates of suspected 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in Chinese American children. Journal of clinical gastroenterology. 
2015; 49(4):345–9. [PubMed: 24667593] 
11. Nobili V, Cutrera R, Liccardo D, Pavone M, Devito R, Giorgio V, et al. Obstructive sleep apnea 
syndrome affects liver histology and inflammatory cell activation in pediatric nonalcoholic fatty 
liver disease, regardless of obesity/insulin resistance. American journal of respiratory and critical 
care medicine. 2014; 189(1):66–76. [PubMed: 24256086] 
12. Sundaram SS, Sokol RJ, Capocelli KE, Pan Z, Sullivan JS, Robbins K, et al. Obstructive sleep 
apnea and hypoxemia are associated with advanced liver histology in pediatric nonalcoholic fatty 
liver disease. J Pediatr. 2014; 164(4):699–706. e1. [PubMed: 24321532] 
13. Hudson OD, Nunez M, Shaibi GQ. Ethnicity and elevated liver transaminases among newly 
diagnosed children with type 2 diabetes. BMC Pediatr. 2012; 12:174. [PubMed: 23134937] 
14. Adams LA, Feldstein A, Lindor KD, Angulo P. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease among patients 
with hypothalamic and pituitary dysfunction. Hepatology. 2004; 39(4):909–14. [PubMed: 
15057893] 
15. Nakajima K, Hashimoto E, Kaneda H, Tokushige K, Shiratori K, Hizuka N, et al. Pediatric 
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis associated with hypopituitarism. Journal of gastroenterology. 2005; 
40(3):312–5. [PubMed: 15830293] 
16. Nishizawa H, Iguchi G, Murawaki A, Fukuoka H, Hayashi Y, Kaji H, et al. Nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease in adult hypopituitary patients with GH deficiency and the impact of GH replacement 
therapy. Eur J Endocrinol. 2012; 167(1):67–74. [PubMed: 22535644] 
17. HHAK, Henderson J, Vanhoesen K, Ghishan F, Bhattacharyya A. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease 
in children: a single center experience. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008; 6(7):799–802. [PubMed: 
18486560] 
18. Feldstein AE, Charatcharoenwitthaya P, Treeprasertsuk S, Benson JT, Enders FB, Angulo P. The 
natural history of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in children: a follow-up study for up to 20 years. 
Gut. 2009; 58(11):1538–44. [PubMed: 19625277] 
19. Lavine JE, Schwimmer JB, Van Natta ML, Molleston JP, Murray KF, Rosenthal P, et al. Effect of 
vitamin E or metformin for treatment of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in children and 
Vos et al.
Page 20
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 adolescents: the TONIC randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2011; 305(16):1659–68. [PubMed: 
21521847] 
20. Ekstedt M, Franzen LE, Mathiesen UL, Thorelius L, Holmqvist M, Bodemar G, et al. Long-term 
follow-up of patients with NAFLD and elevated liver enzymes. Hepatology. 2006; 44(4):865–73. 
[PubMed: 17006923] 
21. Ekstedt M, Hagstrom H, Nasr P, Fredrikson M, Stal P, Kechagias S, et al. Fibrosis stage is the 
strongest predictor for disease-specific mortality in NAFLD after up to 33 years of follow-up. 
Hepatology. 2015; 61(5):1547–54. [PubMed: 25125077] 
22. Holterman AX, Guzman G, Fantuzzi G, Wang H, Aigner K, Browne A, et al. Nonalcoholic fatty 
liver disease in severely obese adolescent and adult patients. Obesity. 2013; 21(3):591–7. 
[PubMed: 23592668] 
23. Schwimmer JB, Zepeda A, Newton KP, Xanthakos SA, Behling C, Hallinan EK, et al. 
Longitudinal assessment of high blood pressure in children with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. 
PLoS One. 2014; 9(11):e112569. [PubMed: 25419656] 
24. Kelly AS, Barlow SE, Rao G, Inge TH, Hayman LL, Steinberger J, et al. Severe obesity in children 
and adolescents: identification, associated health risks, and treatment approaches: a scientific 
statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2013; 128(15):1689–712. [PubMed: 
24016455] 
25. Lavine JE, Schwimmer JB, Molleston JP, Scheimann AO, Murray KF, Abrams SH, et al. Treatment 
of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in children: TONIC trial design. Contemp Clin Trials. 2010; 
31(1):62–70. [PubMed: 19761871] 
26. Colantonio DA, Kyriakopoulou L, Chan MK, Daly CH, Brinc D, Venner AA, et al. Closing the 
gaps in pediatric laboratory reference intervals: a CALIPER database of 40 biochemical markers in 
a healthy and multiethnic population of children. Clinical chemistry. 2012; 58(5):854–68. 
[PubMed: 22371482] 
27. Schwimmer JB, Newton KP, Awai HI, Choi LJ, Garcia MA, Ellis LL, et al. Paediatric 
gastroenterology evaluation of overweight and obese children referred from primary care for 
suspected non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2013; 38(10):1267–77. 
[PubMed: 24117728] 
28. Awai HI, Newton KP, Sirlin CB, Behling C, Schwimmer JB. Evidence and recommendations for 
imaging liver fat in children, based on systematic review. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014; 12(5):
765–73. [PubMed: 24090729] 
29. Lin SC, Heba E, Wolfson T, Ang B, Gamst A, Han A, et al. Noninvasive Diagnosis of 
Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease and Quantification of Liver Fat Using a New Quantitative 
Ultrasound Technique. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015; 13(7):1337–45. e6. [PubMed: 
25478922] 
30. Murphy P, Hooker J, Ang B, Wolfson T, Gamst A, Bydder M, et al. Associations between 
histologic features of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and quantitative diffusion-
weighted MRI measurements in adults. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2015; 41(6):1629–38. [PubMed: 
25256692] 
31. Schwimmer JB, Middleton MS, Behling C, Newton KP, Awai HI, Paiz MN, et al. Magnetic 
resonance imaging and liver histology as biomarkers of hepatic steatosis in children with 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Hepatology. 2015; 61(6):1887–95. [PubMed: 25529941] 
32. Bohte AE, van Werven JR, Bipat S, Stoker J. The diagnostic accuracy of US, CT, MRI and 1H-
MRS for the evaluation of hepatic steatosis compared with liver biopsy: a meta-analysis. European 
radiology. 2011; 21(1):87–97. [PubMed: 20680289] 
33. Schwimmer JB, Celedon MA, Lavine JE, Salem R, Campbell N, Schork NJ, et al. Heritability of 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Gastroenterology. 2009; 136(5):1585–92. [PubMed: 19208353] 
34. Leung DH, Williams K, Fraley JK, Klish WJ. Age- and ethnic-specific elevation of ALT among 
obese children at risk for nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH): implications for screening. Clinical 
pediatrics. 2009; 48(1):50–7. [PubMed: 18832535] 
35. Koot BG, van der Baan-Slootweg OH, Bohte AE, Nederveen AJ, van Werven JR, Tamminga-
Smeulders CL, et al. Accuracy of prediction scores and novel biomarkers for predicting 
Vos et al.
Page 21
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in obese children. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2013; 21(3):583–90. 
[PubMed: 23592667] 
36. Walker RW, Sinatra F, Hartiala J, Weigensberg M, Spruijt-Metz D, Alderete TL, et al. Genetic and 
clinical markers of elevated liver fat content in overweight and obese Hispanic children. Obesity. 
2013; 21(12):E790–7. [PubMed: 23804528] 
37. Maffeis C, Banzato C, Rigotti F, Nobili V, Valandro S, Manfredi R, et al. Biochemical parameters 
and anthropometry predict NAFLD in obese children. Journal of pediatric gastroenterology and 
nutrition. 2011; 53(6):590–3. [PubMed: 21697744] 
38. El-Koofy N, El-Karaksy H, El-Akel W, Helmy H, Anwar G, El-Sayed R, et al. Ultrasonography as 
a non-invasive tool for detection of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in overweight/obese Egyptian 
children. Eur J Radiol. 2012; 81(11):3120–3. [PubMed: 22817846] 
39. Lee MJ, Bagci P, Kong J, Vos MB, Sharma P, Kalb B, et al. Liver steatosis assessment: correlations 
among pathology, radiology, clinical data and automated image analysis software. Pathol Res 
Pract. 2013; 209(6):371–9. [PubMed: 23707550] 
40. Tang A, Desai A, Hamilton G, Wolfson T, Gamst A, Lam J, et al. Accuracy of MR imaging-
estimated proton density fat fraction for classification of dichotomized histologic steatosis grades 
in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Radiology. 2015; 274(2):416–25. [PubMed: 25247408] 
41. Vos MB. Is it time to advance pediatric NAFLD diagnosis to the magnetic resonance imaging era? 
Hepatology. 2015
42. Ralli EP, Paley K, Rubin SH. THE LIVER LIPIDS AND THEIR DISTRIBUTION IN DISEASE. 
AN ANALYSIS OF 60 HUMAN LIVERS. J Clin Invest. 1941; 20(4):413–7. [PubMed: 16694849] 
43. Brunt EM, Neuschwander-Tetri BA, Oliver D, Wehmeier KR, Bacon BR. Nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis: histologic features and clinical correlations with 30 blinded biopsy specimens. 
Human pathology. 2004; 35(9):1070–82. [PubMed: 15343508] 
44. Kleiner DE, Brunt EM, Van Natta M, Behling C, Contos MJ, Cummings OW, et al. Design and 
validation of a histological scoring system for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Hepatology. 2005; 
41(6):1313–21. [PubMed: 15915461] 
45. Kleiner DE, Brunt EM. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: pathologic patterns and biopsy evaluation 
in clinical research. Seminars in liver disease. 2012; 32(1):3–13. [PubMed: 22418883] 
46. Loomba R, Chalasani N. The Hierarchical Model of NAFLD: Prognostic Significance of 
Histologic Features in NASH. Gastroenterology. 2015; 149(2):278–81. [PubMed: 26116800] 
47. Singh DK, Sakhuja P, Malhotra V, Gondal R, Sarin SK. Independent predictors of steatohepatitis 
and fibrosis in Asian Indian patients with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. Digestive diseases and 
sciences. 2008; 53(7):1967–76. [PubMed: 18030620] 
48. Puri K, Nobili V, Melville K, Corte CD, Sartorelli MR, Lopez R, et al. Serum bilirubin level is 
inversely associated with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis in children. Journal of pediatric 
gastroenterology and nutrition. 2013; 57(1):114–8. [PubMed: 23518490] 
49. Feldstein AE, Alkhouri N, De Vito R, Alisi A, Lopez R, Nobili V. Serum cytokeratin-18 fragment 
levels are useful biomarkers for nonalcoholic steatohepatitis in children. Am J Gastroenterol. 2013; 
108(9):1526–31. [PubMed: 23752877] 
50. Fitzpatrick E, Mitry RR, Quaglia A, Hussain MJ, DeBruyne R, Dhawan A. Serum levels of CK18 
M30 and leptin are useful predictors of steatohepatitis and fibrosis in paediatric NAFLD. J Pediatr 
Gastroenterol Nutr. 2010; 51(4):500–6. [PubMed: 20808246] 
51. Miele L, Forgione A, La Torre G, Vero V, Cefalo C, Racco S, et al. Serum levels of hyaluronic acid 
and tissue metalloproteinase inhibitor-1 combined with age predict the presence of nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis in a pilot cohort of subjects with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Translational 
research : the journal of laboratory and clinical medicine. 2009; 154(4):194–201. [PubMed: 
19766963] 
52. Nobili V, Donati B, Panera N, Vongsakulyanon A, Alisi A, Dallapiccola B, et al. A 4-
polymorphism risk score predicts steatohepatitis in children with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. 
Journal of pediatric gastroenterology and nutrition. 2014; 58(5):632–6. [PubMed: 24345846] 
53. Eng K, Lopez R, Liccardo D, Nobili V, Alkhouri N. A non-invasive prediction model for non-
alcoholic steatohepatitis in paediatric patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Digestive and 
Vos et al.
Page 22
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 liver disease : official journal of the Italian Society of Gastroenterology and the Italian Association 
for the Study of the Liver. 2014; 46(11):1008–13.
54. Adams LA, Lindor KD, Angulo P. The prevalence of autoantibodies and autoimmune hepatitis in 
patients with nonalcoholic Fatty liver disease. The American journal of gastroenterology. 2004; 
99(7):1316–20. [PubMed: 15233671] 
55. Niwa H, Sasaki M, Haratake J, Kasai T, Katayanagi K, Kurumaya H, et al. Clinicopathological 
significance of antinuclear antibodies in non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. Hepatology research : the 
official journal of the Japan Society of Hepatology. 2007; 37(11):923–31. [PubMed: 17610500] 
56. Brunt EM, Kleiner DE, Wilson LA, Belt P, Neuschwander-Tetri BA, Network NCR. Nonalcoholic 
fatty liver disease (NAFLD) activity score and the histopathologic diagnosis in NAFLD: distinct 
clinicopathologic meanings. Hepatology. 2011; 53(3):810–20. [PubMed: 21319198] 
57. Govender P, Jonas MM, Alomari AI, Padua HM, Dillon BJ, Landrigan-Ossar MF, et al. 
Sonography-guided percutaneous liver biopsies in children. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2013; 201(3):
645–50. [PubMed: 23971459] 
58. Matos H, Noruegas MJ, Goncalves I, Sanches C. Effectiveness and safety of ultrasound-guided 
percutaneous liver biopsy in children. Pediatr Radiol. 2012; 42(11):1322–5. [PubMed: 22918268] 
59. Scheimann AO, Barrios JM, Al-Tawil YS, Gray KM, Gilger MA. Percutaneous liver biopsy in 
children: impact of ultrasonography and spring-loaded biopsy needles. J Pediatr Gastroenterol 
Nutr. 2000; 31(5):536–9. [PubMed: 11144439] 
60. Westheim BH, Aagenaes I, Ostensen AB, Sanengen T, Almaas R. Effect of operator experience 
and frequency of procedure performance on complication rate after ultrasound-guided 
percutaneous liver biopsies. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2013; 57(5):638–43. [PubMed: 
24177785] 
61. Harwood J, Bishop P, Liu H, Nowicki M. Safety of blind percutaneous liver biopsy in obese 
children: a retrospective analysis. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2010; 44(10):e253–5. [PubMed: 20818235] 
62. Iacobellis A, Marcellini M, Andriulli A, Perri F, Leandro G, Devito R, et al. Non invasive 
evaluation of liver fibrosis in paediatric patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. World journal of 
gastroenterology : WJG. 2006; 12(48):7821–5. [PubMed: 17203527] 
63. Manco M, Bedogni G, Marcellini M, Devito R, Ciampalini P, Sartorelli MR, et al. Waist 
circumference correlates with liver fibrosis in children with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. Gut. 
2008; 57(9):1283–7. [PubMed: 18218674] 
64. Angulo P, Hui JM, Marchesini G, Bugianesi E, George J, Farrell GC, et al. The NAFLD fibrosis 
score: a noninvasive system that identifies liver fibrosis in patients with NAFLD. Hepatology. 
2007; 45(4):846–54. [PubMed: 17393509] 
65. Alkhouri N, Mansoor S, Giammaria P, Liccardo D, Lopez R, Nobili V. The development of the 
pediatric NAFLD fibrosis score (PNFS) to predict the presence of advanced fibrosis in children 
with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. PloS one. 2014; 9(8):e104558. [PubMed: 25121514] 
66. Alkhouri N, Carter-Kent C, Lopez R, Rosenberg WM, Pinzani M, Bedogni G, et al. A combination 
of the pediatric NAFLD fibrosis index and enhanced liver fibrosis test identifies children with 
fibrosis. Clinical gastroenterology and hepatology : the official clinical practice journal of the 
American Gastroenterological Association. 2011; 9(2):150–5. [PubMed: 20888433] 
67. Nobili V, Alisi A, Vania A, Tiribelli C, Pietrobattista A, Bedogni G. The pediatric NAFLD fibrosis 
index: a predictor of liver fibrosis in children with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. BMC Med. 
2009; 7:21. [PubMed: 19409076] 
68. Kim E, Kang Y, Hahn S, Lee MJ, Park YN, Koh H. The efficacy of aspartate aminotransferase-to-
platelet ratio index for assessing hepatic fibrosis in childhood nonalcoholic steatohepatitis for 
medical practice. Korean journal of pediatrics. 2013; 56(1):19–25. [PubMed: 23390441] 
69. Flores-Calderon J, Moran-Villota S, Ramon-Garcia G, Gonzalez-Romano B, del Bojorquez-Ramos 
MC, Cerdan-Silva L, et al. Non-invasive markers of liver fibrosis in chronic liver disease in a 
group of Mexican children. A multicenter study. Annals of hepatology. 2012; 11(3):364–8. 
[PubMed: 22481456] 
70. Kaneda H, Hashimoto E, Yatsuji S, Tokushige K, Shiratori K. Hyaluronic acid levels can predict 
severe fibrosis and platelet counts can predict cirrhosis in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease. Journal of gastroenterology and hepatology. 2006; 21(9):1459–65. [PubMed: 16911693] 
Vos et al.
Page 23
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 71. Nobili V, Alisi A, Torre G, De Vito R, Pietrobattista A, Morino G, et al. Hyaluronic acid predicts 
hepatic fibrosis in children with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Translational research : the 
journal of laboratory and clinical medicine. 2010; 156(4):229–34. [PubMed: 20875899] 
72. Lebensztejn DM, Wierzbicka A, Socha P, Pronicki M, Skiba E, Werpachowska I, et al. 
Cytokeratin-18 and hyaluronic acid levels predict liver fibrosis in children with non-alcoholic fatty 
liver disease. Acta biochimica Polonica. 2011; 58(4):563–6. [PubMed: 22140659] 
73. Alkhouri N, Sedki E, Alisi A, Lopez R, Pinzani M, Feldstein AE, et al. Combined paediatric 
NAFLD fibrosis index and transient elastography to predict clinically significant fibrosis in 
children with fatty liver disease. Liver Int. 2013; 33(1):79–85. [PubMed: 23146095] 
74. Fitzpatrick E, Quaglia A, Vimalesvaran S, Basso MS, Dhawan A. Transient elastography is a 
useful noninvasive tool for the evaluation of fibrosis in paediatric chronic liver disease. Journal of 
pediatric gastroenterology and nutrition. 2013; 56(1):72–6. [PubMed: 22922372] 
75. Nobili V, Vizzutti F, Arena U, Abraldes JG, Marra F, Pietrobattista A, et al. Accuracy and 
reproducibility of transient elastography for the diagnosis of fibrosis in pediatric nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis. Hepatology. 2008; 48(2):442–8. [PubMed: 18563842] 
76. Xanthakos SA, Podberesky DJ, Serai SD, Miles L, King EC, Balistreri WF, et al. Use of magnetic 
resonance elastography to assess hepatic fibrosis in children with chronic liver disease. The 
Journal of pediatrics. 2014; 164(1):186–8. [PubMed: 24064151] 
77. Vuppalanchi R, Jain AK, Deppe R, Yates K, Comerford M, Masuoka HC, et al. Relationship 
between changes in serum levels of keratin 18 and changes in liver histology in children and adults 
with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014; 12(12):2121–30. e1–2. 
[PubMed: 24846279] 
78. Angulo P, Kleiner DE, Dam-Larsen S, Adams LA, Bjornsson ES, Charatcharoenwitthaya P, et al. 
Liver Fibrosis, but No Other Histologic Features, Is Associated With Long-term Outcomes of 
Patients With Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease. Gastroenterology. 2015; 149(2):389–97. e10. 
[PubMed: 25935633] 
79. Singh S, Allen AM, Wang Z, Prokop LJ, Murad MH, Loomba R. Fibrosis progression in 
nonalcoholic fatty liver vs nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 
paired-biopsy studies. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015; 13(4):643–54. e1–9. quiz e39–40. 
[PubMed: 24768810] 
80. Nobili V, Manco M, Devito R, Ciampalini P, Piemonte F, Marcellini M. Effect of vitamin E on 
aminotransferase levels and insulin resistance in children with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. 
Alimentary pharmacology & therapeutics. 2006; 24(11–12):1553–61. [PubMed: 17206944] 
81. Nobili V, Marcellini M, Devito R, Ciampalini P, Piemonte F, Comparcola D, et al. NAFLD in 
children: a prospective clinical-pathological study and effect of lifestyle advice. Hepatology. 2006; 
44(2):458–65. [PubMed: 16871574] 
82. Lee S, Bacha F, Hannon T, Kuk JL, Boesch C, Arslanian S. Effects of aerobic versus resistance 
exercise without caloric restriction on abdominal fat, intrahepatic lipid, and insulin sensitivity in 
obese adolescent boys: a randomized, controlled trial. Diabetes. 2012; 61(11):2787–95. [PubMed: 
22751691] 
83. Gronbaek H, Lange A, Birkebaek NH, Holland-Fischer P, Solvig J, Horlyck A, et al. Effect of a 
10-week weight loss camp on fatty liver disease and insulin sensitivity in obese Danish children. J 
Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2012; 54(2):223–8. [PubMed: 21760546] 
84. Ramon-Krauel M, Salsberg SL, Ebbeling CB, Voss SD, Mulkern RV, Apura MM, et al. A low-
glycemic-load versus low-fat diet in the treatment of fatty liver in obese children. Childhood 
obesity. 2013; 9(3):252–60. [PubMed: 23705885] 
85. Jin R, Welsh JA, Le NA, Holzberg J, Sharma P, Martin DR, et al. Dietary fructose reduction 
improves markers of cardiovascular disease risk in Hispanic-American adolescents with NAFLD. 
Nutrients. 2014; 6(8):3187–201. [PubMed: 25111123] 
86. Wang CL, Liang L, Fu JF, Zou CC, Hong F, Xue JZ, et al. Effect of lifestyle intervention on non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease in Chinese obese children. World J Gastroenterol. 2008; 14(10):1598–
602. [PubMed: 18330955] 
Vos et al.
Page 24
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 87. Van Der Heijden GJ, Wang ZJ, Chu Z, Toffolo G, Manesso E, Sauer PJ, et al. Strength exercise 
improves muscle mass and hepatic insulin sensitivity in obese youth. Medicine and science in 
sports and exercise. 2010; 42(11):1973–80. [PubMed: 20351587] 
88. Tazawa Y, Noguchi H, Nishinomiya F, Takada G. Effect of weight changes on serum transaminase 
activities in obese children. Acta paediatrica Japonica; Overseas edition. 1997; 39(2):210–4. 
[PubMed: 9141256] 
89. Reinehr T, Schmidt C, Toschke AM, Andler W. Lifestyle intervention in obese children with non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease: 2-year follow-up study. Archives of disease in childhood. 2009; 94(6):
437–42. [PubMed: 19224892] 
90. Pozzato C, Verduci E, Scaglioni S, Radaelli G, Salvioni M, Rovere A, et al. Liver fat change in 
obese children after a 1-year nutrition-behavior intervention. Journal of pediatric gastroenterology 
and nutrition. 2010; 51(3):331–5. [PubMed: 20562718] 
91. Vajro P, Fontanella A, Perna C, Orso G, Tedesco M, De Vincenzo A. Persistent 
hyperaminotransferasemia resolving after weight reduction in obese children. J Pediatr. 1994; 
125(2):239–41. [PubMed: 8040771] 
92. Campos RM, de Piano A, da Silva PL, Carnier J, Sanches PL, Corgosinho FC, et al. The role of 
pro/anti-inflammatory adipokines on bone metabolism in NAFLD obese adolescents: effects of 
long-term interdisciplinary therapy. Endocrine. 2012; 42(1):146–56. [PubMed: 22315014] 
93. Koot BG, van der Baan-Slootweg OH, Tamminga-Smeulders CL, Rijcken TH, Korevaar JC, van 
Aalderen WM, et al. Lifestyle intervention for non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: prospective cohort 
study of its efficacy and factors related to improvement. Archives of disease in childhood. 2011; 
96(7):669–74. [PubMed: 21518734] 
94. de Piano A, de Mello MT, de Sanches PL, da Silva PL, Campos RM, Carnier J, et al. Long-term 
effects of aerobic plus resistance training on the adipokines and neuropeptides in nonalcoholic 
fatty liver disease obese adolescents. European journal of gastroenterology & hepatology. 2012; 
24(11):1313–24. [PubMed: 22932160] 
95. Tock L, Prado WL, Caranti DA, Cristofalo DM, Lederman H, Fisberg M, et al. Nonalcoholic fatty 
liver disease decrease in obese adolescents after multidisciplinary therapy. Eur J Gastroenterol 
Hepatol. 2006; 18(12):1241–5. [PubMed: 17099371] 
96. Vos MB, Weber MB, Welsh J, Khatoon F, Jones DP, Whitington PF, et al. Fructose and oxidized 
low-density lipoprotein in pediatric nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: a pilot study. Arch Pediatr 
Adolesc Med. 2009; 163(7):674–5. [PubMed: 19581556] 
97. DeVore S, Kohli R, Lake K, Nicholas L, Dietrich K, Balistreri WF, et al. A multidisciplinary 
clinical program is effective in stabilizing BMI and reducing transaminase levels in pediatric 
patients with NAFLD. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2013; 57(1):119–23. [PubMed: 23518484] 
98. Sylvetsky A. Action-oriented counseling attains weight stabilization and improves liver enzymes 
among overweight and obese children and adolescents. Open Journal of Pediatrics. 2012:8.
99. Barton M. Force USPST. Screening for obesity in children and adolescents: US Preventive 
Services Task Force recommendation statement. Pediatrics. 2010; 125(2):361–7. [PubMed: 
20083515] 
100. de Ruyter JC, Olthof MR, Seidell JC, Katan MB. A trial of sugar-free or sugar-sweetened 
beverages and body weight in children. N Engl J Med. 2012; 367(15):1397–406. [PubMed: 
22998340] 
101. Ebbeling CB, Feldman HA, Chomitz VR, Antonelli TA, Gortmaker SL, Osganian SK, et al. A 
randomized trial of sugar-sweetened beverages and adolescent body weight. N Engl J Med. 2012; 
367(15):1407–16. [PubMed: 22998339] 
102. Waters E, de Silva-Sanigorski A, Hall BJ, Brown T, Campbell KJ, Gao Y, et al. Interventions for 
preventing obesity in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011; (12):Cd001871. [PubMed: 
22161367] 
103. Schwimmer JB, Middleton MS, Deutsch R, Lavine JE. A phase 2 clinical trial of metformin as a 
treatment for non-diabetic paediatric non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 
2005; 21(7):871–9. [PubMed: 15801922] 
Vos et al.
Page 25
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 104. Nadeau KJ, Ehlers LB, Zeitler PS, Love-Osborne K. Treatment of non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease with metformin versus lifestyle intervention in insulin-resistant adolescents. Pediatr 
Diabetes. 2009; 10(1):5–13. [PubMed: 18721166] 
105. Freemark M. Liver dysfunction in paediatric obesity: a randomized, controlled trial of metformin. 
Acta Paediatr. 2007; 96(9):1326–32. [PubMed: 17718786] 
106. Nobili V, Manco M, Ciampalini P, Alisi A, Devito R, Bugianesi E, et al. Metformin use in 
children with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: an open-label, 24-month, observational pilot study. 
Clin Ther. 2008; 30(6):1168–76. [PubMed: 18640473] 
107. Lavine JE. Vitamin E treatment of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis in children: a pilot study. J Pediatr. 
2000; 136(6):734–8. [PubMed: 10839868] 
108. Vajro P, Mandato C, Franzese A, Ciccimarra E, Lucariello S, Savoia M, et al. Vitamin E treatment 
in pediatric obesity-related liver disease: a randomized study. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2004; 
38(1):48–55. [PubMed: 14676594] 
109. Nobili V, Manco M, Devito R, Di Ciommo V, Comparcola D, Sartorelli MR, et al. Lifestyle 
intervention and antioxidant therapy in children with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: a 
randomized, controlled trial. Hepatology. 2008; 48(1):119–28. [PubMed: 18537181] 
110. Akcam M, Boyaci A, Pirgon O, Kaya S, Uysal S, Dundar BN. Therapeutic effect of metformin 
and vitamin E versus prescriptive diet in obese adolescents with fatty liver. International journal 
for vitamin and nutrition research Internationale Zeitschrift fur Vitamin- und 
Ernahrungsforschung Journal international de vitaminologie et de nutrition. 2011; 81(6):398–
406. [PubMed: 22673924] 
111. Bjelakovic G, Nikolova D, Gluud C. Meta-regression analyses, meta-analyses, and trial sequential 
analyses of the effects of supplementation with beta-carotene, vitamin A, and vitamin E singly or 
in different combinations on all-cause mortality: do we have evidence for lack of harm? PLoS 
One. 2013; 8(9):e74558. [PubMed: 24040282] 
112. Bjelakovic G, Nikolova D, Gluud LL, Simonetti RG, Gluud C. Antioxidant supplements for 
prevention of mortality in healthy participants and patients with various diseases. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2012; 3:Cd007176.
113. Gerss J, Kopcke W. The questionable association of vitamin E supplementation and mortality--
inconsistent results of different meta-analytic approaches. Cellular and molecular biology (Noisy-
le-Grand, France). 2009; 55(Suppl):Ol1111–20.
114. Black LJ, Jacoby P, She Ping-Delfos WC, Mori TA, Beilin LJ, Olynyk JK, et al. Low serum 25-
hydroxyvitamin D concentrations associate with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in adolescents 
independent of adiposity. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014; 29(6):1215–22. [PubMed: 24611991] 
115. Hourigan SK, Abrams S, Yates K, Pfeifer K, Torbenson M, Murray K, et al. Relation between 
vitamin D status and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in children. Journal of pediatric 
gastroenterology and nutrition. 2015; 60(3):396–404. [PubMed: 25710716] 
116. Nobili V, Giorgio V, Liccardo D, Bedogni G, Morino G, Alisi A, et al. Vitamin D levels and liver 
histological alterations in children with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Eur J Endocrinol. 2014; 
170(4):547–53. [PubMed: 24412930] 
117. Vajro P, Franzese A, Valerio G, Iannucci MP, Aragione N. Lack of efficacy of ursodeoxycholic 
acid for the treatment of liver abnormalities in obese children. J Pediatr. 2000; 136(6):739–43. 
[PubMed: 10839869] 
118. Lindor KD, Kowdley KV, Heathcote EJ, Harrison ME, Jorgensen R, Angulo P, et al. 
Ursodeoxycholic acid for treatment of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: results of a randomized trial. 
Hepatology. 2004; 39(3):770–8. [PubMed: 14999696] 
119. Nobili V, Bedogni G, Alisi A, Pietrobattista A, Rise P, Galli C, et al. Docosahexaenoic acid 
supplementation decreases liver fat content in children with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: 
double-blind randomised controlled clinical trial. Archives of disease in childhood. 2011; 96(4):
350–3. [PubMed: 21233083] 
120. Dasarathy S, Dasarathy J, Khiyami A, Yerian L, Hawkins C, Sargent R, et al. Double-blind 
randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial of omega 3 fatty acids for the treatment of diabetic 
patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Journal of clinical gastroenterology. 2015; 49(2):137–
44. [PubMed: 24583757] 
Vos et al.
Page 26
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 121. Alisi A, Bedogni G, Baviera G, Giorgio V, Porro E, Paris C, et al. Randomised clinical trial: The 
beneficial effects of VSL#3 in obese children with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. Alimentary 
pharmacology & therapeutics. 2014; 39(11):1276–85. [PubMed: 24738701] 
122. Vajro P, Mandato C, Licenziati MR, Franzese A, Vitale DF, Lenta S, et al. Effects of Lactobacillus 
rhamnosus strain GG in pediatric obesity-related liver disease. Journal of pediatric 
gastroenterology and nutrition. 2011; 52(6):740–3. [PubMed: 21505361] 
123. Inge TH, Courcoulas AP, Jenkins TM, Michalsky MP, Helmrath MA, Brandt ML, et al. Weight 
Loss and Health Status 3 Years after Bariatric Surgery in Adolescents. N Engl J Med. 2015
124. Messiah SE, Lopez-Mitnik G, Winegar D, Sherif B, Arheart KL, Reichard KW, et al. Changes in 
weight and co-morbidities among adolescents undergoing bariatric surgery: 1-year results from 
the Bariatric Outcomes Longitudinal Database. Surgery for obesity and related diseases : official 
journal of the American Society for Bariatric Surgery. 2013; 9(4):503–13. [PubMed: 22542199] 
125. Alqahtani AR, Elahmedi MO, Al Qahtani A. Co-morbidity resolution in morbidly obese children 
and adolescents undergoing sleeve gastrectomy. Surgery for obesity and related diseases : official 
journal of the American Society for Bariatric Surgery. 2014; 10(5):842–50. [PubMed: 25439000] 
126. Barker KB, Palekar NA, Bowers SP, Goldberg JE, Pulcini JP, Harrison SA. Non-alcoholic 
steatohepatitis: effect of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery. The American journal of 
gastroenterology. 2006; 101(2):368–73. [PubMed: 16454845] 
127. Nobili V, Vajro P, Dezsofi A, Fischler B, Hadzic N, Jahnel J, et al. Indications and limitations of 
bariatric intervention in severely obese children and adolescents with and without nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis: ESPGHAN Hepatology Committee Position Statement. Journal of pediatric 
gastroenterology and nutrition. 2015; 60(4):550–61. [PubMed: 25591123] 
128. Boza C, Viscido G, Salinas J, Crovari F, Funke R, Perez G. Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy in 
obese adolescents: results in 51 patients. Surgery for obesity and related diseases : official journal 
of the American Society for Bariatric Surgery. 2012; 8(2):133–7. discussion 7–9. [PubMed: 
22433934] 
129. Holterman AX, Browne A, Tussing L, Gomez S, Phipps A, Browne N, et al. A prospective trial 
for laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding in morbidly obese adolescents: an interim report of 
weight loss, metabolic and quality of life outcomes. J Pediatr Surg. 2010; 45(1):74–8. discussion 
8–9. [PubMed: 20105583] 
130. Holterman AX, Holterman M, Browne A, Henriques S, Guzman G, Fantuzzi G. Patterns of 
surgical weight loss and resolution of metabolic abnormalities in superobese bariatric 
adolescents. J Pediatr Surg. 2012; 47(9):1633–9. [PubMed: 22974598] 
131. Jarvholm K, Olbers T, Marcus C, Marild S, Gronowitz E, Friberg P, et al. Short-term 
psychological outcomes in severely obese adolescents after bariatric surgery. Obesity. 2012; 
20(2):318–23. [PubMed: 21996668] 
132. Olbers T, Gronowitz E, Werling M, Marlid S, Flodmark CE, Peltonen M, et al. Two-year outcome 
of laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass in adolescents with severe obesity: results from a 
Swedish Nationwide Study (AMOS). Int J Obes (Lond). 2012; 36(11):1388–95. [PubMed: 
23007037] 
133. Stepanova M, Younossi ZM. Independent association between nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and 
cardiovascular disease in the US population. Clinical gastroenterology and hepatology : the 
official clinical practice journal of the American Gastroenterological Association. 2012; 10(6):
646–50. [PubMed: 22245962] 
134. Wong VW, Wong GL, Yip GW, Lo AO, Limquiaco J, Chu WC, et al. Coronary artery disease and 
cardiovascular outcomes in patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Gut. 2011; 60(12):
1721–7. [PubMed: 21602530] 
135. Hamaguchi M, Kojima T, Takeda N, Nagata C, Takeda J, Sarui H, et al. Nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease is a novel predictor of cardiovascular disease. World journal of gastroenterology : WJG. 
2007; 13(10):1579–84. [PubMed: 17461452] 
136. Schindhelm RK, Dekker JM, Nijpels G, Bouter LM, Stehouwer CD, Heine RJ, et al. Alanine 
aminotransferase predicts coronary heart disease events: a 10-year follow-up of the Hoorn Study. 
Atherosclerosis. 2007; 191(2):391–6. [PubMed: 16682043] 
Vos et al.
Page 27
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 137. Soderberg C, Stal P, Askling J, Glaumann H, Lindberg G, Marmur J, et al. Decreased survival of 
subjects with elevated liver function tests during a 28-year follow-up. Hepatology. 2010; 51(2):
595–602. [PubMed: 20014114] 
138. Nobili V, Alkhouri N, Bartuli A, Manco M, Lopez R, Alisi A, et al. Severity of liver injury and 
atherogenic lipid profile in children with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Pediatric research. 
2010; 67(6):665–70. [PubMed: 20496475] 
139. Schwimmer JB, Pardee PE, Lavine JE, Blumkin AK, Cook S. Cardiovascular risk factors and the 
metabolic syndrome in pediatric nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Circulation. 2008; 118(3):277–
83. [PubMed: 18591439] 
140. Schwimmer JB, Behling C, Newbury R, Deutsch R, Nievergelt C, Schork NJ, et al. 
Histopathology of pediatric nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Hepatology. 2005; 42(3):641–9. 
[PubMed: 16116629] 
141. Pacifico L, Anania C, Martino F, Cantisani V, Pascone R, Marcantonio A, et al. Functional and 
morphological vascular changes in pediatric nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Hepatology. 2010; 
52(5):1643–51. [PubMed: 20890890] 
142. Pacifico L, Cantisani V, Ricci P, Osborn JF, Schiavo E, Anania C, et al. Nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease and carotid atherosclerosis in children. Pediatr Res. 2008; 63(4):423–7. [PubMed: 
18356751] 
143. Caserta CA, Pendino GM, Amante A, Vacalebre C, Fiorillo MT, Surace P, et al. Cardiovascular 
risk factors, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, and carotid artery intima-media thickness in an 
adolescent population in southern Italy. American journal of epidemiology. 2010; 171(11):1195–
202. [PubMed: 20457571] 
144. Gokce S, Atbinici Z, Aycan Z, Cinar HG, Zorlu P. The relationship between pediatric 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and cardiovascular risk factors and increased risk of 
atherosclerosis in obese children. Pediatric cardiology. 2013; 34(2):308–15. [PubMed: 22875138] 
145. Nobili V, Alisi A, Della Corte C, Rise P, Galli C, Agostoni C, et al. Docosahexaenoic acid for the 
treatment of fatty liver: randomised controlled trial in children. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 
2013; 23(11):1066–70. [PubMed: 23220074] 
146. Corey KE, Vuppalanchi R, Vos M, Kohli R, Molleston JP, Wilson L, et al. Improvement in liver 
histology is associated with reduction in dyslipidemia in children with nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease. Journal of pediatric gastroenterology and nutrition. 2015; 60(3):360–7. [PubMed: 
25714579] 
147. Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular H, Risk Reduction in C, Adolescents, 
National Heart L, Blood I. Expert panel on integrated guidelines for cardiovascular health and 
risk reduction in children and adolescents: summary report. Pediatrics. 2011; 128(Suppl 5):S213–
56. [PubMed: 22084329] 
148. Barlow SE, Expert C. Expert committee recommendations regarding the prevention, assessment, 
and treatment of child and adolescent overweight and obesity: summary report. Pediatrics. 2007; 
120(Suppl 4):S164–92. [PubMed: 18055651] 
149. Nadeau KJ, Klingensmith G, Zeitler P. Type 2 diabetes in children is frequently associated with 
elevated alanine aminotransferase. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2005; 41(1):94–8. [PubMed: 
15990637] 
150. Kim G, Giannini C, Pierpont B, Feldstein AE, Santoro N, Kursawe R, et al. Longitudinal effects 
of MRI-measured hepatic steatosis on biomarkers of glucose homeostasis and hepatic apoptosis 
in obese youth. Diabetes Care. 2013; 36(1):130–6. [PubMed: 22933439] 
151. Newton KP, Hou J, Crimmins NA, Lavine JE, Barlow SE, Xanthakos SA, et al. Prevalence of 
Prediabetes and Type 2 Diabetes in Children With Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease. JAMA 
Pediatr. 2016:e161971. [PubMed: 27478956] 
152. Cali AM, De Oliveira AM, Kim H, Chen S, Reyes-Mugica M, Escalera S, et al. Glucose 
dysregulation and hepatic steatosis in obese adolescents: is there a link? Hepatology. 2009; 49(6):
1896–903. [PubMed: 19434725] 
153. Svetkey LP, Stevens VJ, Brantley PJ, Appel LJ, Hollis JF, Loria CM, et al. Comparison of 
strategies for sustaining weight loss: the weight loss maintenance randomized controlled trial. 
Jama. 2008; 299(10):1139–48. [PubMed: 18334689] 
Vos et al.
Page 28
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 154. Dudekula A, Rachakonda V, Shaik B, Behari J. Weight loss in nonalcoholic Fatty liver disease 
patients in an ambulatory care setting is largely unsuccessful but correlates with frequency of 
clinic visits. PloS one. 2014; 9(11):e111808. [PubMed: 25375228] 
155. Dunn W, Sanyal AJ, Brunt EM, Unalp-Arida A, Donohue M, McCullough AJ, et al. Modest 
alcohol consumption is associated with decreased prevalence of steatohepatitis in patients with 
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). J Hepatol. 2012; 57(2):384–91. [PubMed: 22521357] 
156. Ekstedt M, Franzen LE, Holmqvist M, Bendtsen P, Mathiesen UL, Bodemar G, et al. Alcohol 
consumption is associated with progression of hepatic fibrosis in non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease. Scandinavian journal of gastroenterology. 2009; 44(3):366–74. [PubMed: 19016382] 
157. Zein CO, Unalp A, Colvin R, Liu YC, McCullough AJ. Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis Clinical 
Research N. Smoking and severity of hepatic fibrosis in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Journal 
of hepatology. 2011; 54(4):753–9. [PubMed: 21126792] 
158. Lin C, Rountree CB, Methratta S, LaRusso S, Kunselman AR, Spanier AJ. Secondhand tobacco 
exposure is associated with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in children. Environmental research. 
2014; 132:264–8. [PubMed: 24834820] 
159. El-Karaksy HM, El-Hawary MI, El-Koofy NM, El-Sayed R, El-Raziky MA, Mansour SA, et al. 
Safety and efficacy of hepatitis A vaccine in children with chronic liver disease. World journal of 
gastroenterology : WJG. 2006; 12(45):7337–40. [PubMed: 17143952] 
160. Majda-Stanislawska E, Bednarek M, Kuydowicz J. Immunogenicity of inactivated hepatitis A 
vaccine in children with chronic liver disease. The Pediatric infectious disease journal. 2004; 
23(6):571–4. [PubMed: 15194843] 
161. Diseases AAoPCoI. Red Book®: 2015 Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases. 30. Vol. 
2015. Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2015. 
162. Leuridan E, Van Damme P. Hepatitis B and the need for a booster dose. Clinical infectious 
diseases : an official publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. 2011; 53(1):68–
75. [PubMed: 21653306] 
163. Spradling PR, Kamili S, Xing J, Drobeniuc J, Hu DJ, Middleman AB. Response to challenge dose 
among young adults vaccinated for hepatitis B as infants: importance of detectable residual 
antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen. Infection control and hospital epidemiology. 2015; 36(5):
529–33. [PubMed: 25643863] 
164. Kistler KD, Molleston J, Unalp A, Abrams SH, Behling C, Schwimmer JB, et al. Symptoms and 
quality of life in obese children and adolescents with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Aliment 
Pharmacol Ther. 2010; 31(3):396–406. [PubMed: 19863497] 
Vos et al.
Page 29
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 What is known
•
NAFLD is a highly prevalent liver disease in children.
•
Guidance is needed for clinical care decisions for pediatric NAFLD.
What is new
•
The following recommendations are based on a formal review and analysis of 
the recently published world literature (Pubmed and EMBASE search through 
May 2015), guidelines from other societies when applicable, and the 
experience of the expert committee.
•
Recommendations for clinical practice, including screening, diagnosis, 
treatment and public health considerations are covered in this pediatric 
guideline.
Vos et al.
Page 30
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
An algorithm proposed by the ECON group. Further research is likely to alter the algorithm. 
The steps are suggested courses of action and should be interpreted within the clinical 
scenario of individual patients.
Additional testing for chronic liver diseases to consider:
•
Screening labs: CBC with differential, AST, bilirubin (total, conjugated), 
alkaline phosphatase, GGT, INR, albumin, total protein, hemoglobin A1c
•
Exclude infections (e.g. hepatitis A IgM, hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis C 
antibody, other chronic viral infections)
•
Exclude endocrine disorders (TSH, free T4)
•
Exclude autoimmune causes of ALT elevation (total IgA, total IgG and tissue 
transglutaminase antibody, anti-nuclear antibody, anti-smooth muscle antibody, 
anti-liver kidney microsomal antibody)
Vos et al.
Page 31
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 •
Exclude genetic causes of ALT (ceruloplasmin and/or 24 hour urine copper, 
lysosomal acid lipase, alpha-1 antitrypsin phenotype)
•
Imaging: Abdominal ultrasound to rule out anatomical abnormalities or assess 
features of portal hypertension, magnetic resonance imaging or spectroscopy to 
measure hepatic fat.
•
Liver biopsy (histology, copper measurement, stain for microvesicular fat, assess 
fibrosis)
Red flags for advanced liver disease – chronic fatigue, GI bleeding, jaundice, splenomegaly, 
firm liver on exam, enlarged left lobe of the liver, low platelets, low white blood cell count, 
elevated direct bilirubin, elevated international normalized ratio (INR), long history of 
elevated liver enzymes (> 2 years).
Vos et al.
Page 32
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Treatments for pediatric NAFLD
Vos et al.
Page 33
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 34
Table 1
Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) 4, 176
Criteria
Strength of recommendation
Strong [1]
Factors influencing the strength of the recommendation included the quality of the evidence, presumed 
patient important outcomes and cost
Weak [2]
Variability in preferences and values, or more uncertainty. Recommendation is made with less certainty, 
higher cost or resource consumption
Quality of evidence
High [A]
Further research is unlikely to change confidence in the estimate of the clinical effect
Moderate [B]
Further research may change confidence in the estimate of the clinical effect
Low [C]
Further research is very likely to change confidence in the estimate of the clinical effect
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 35
Table 2
NAFLD Definitions and Phenotypes
Phenotypes
Definitions
NAFLD
•
Inclusive term referring to the full spectrum of disease
•
Indicates fatty infiltration of the liver in the absence of significant alcohol, genetic diseases or 
medications that cause steatosis
•
Fatty infiltration is typically defined as fat > 5% of the liver by imaging, direct quantification or 
histologic estimation
NAFL
•
Steatosis without specific changes to suggest steatohepatitis, with or without fibrosis
Pediatric NASH
•
Hepatic steatosis with inflammation, with or without ballooning injury to hepatocytesand fibrosis
–
Zone 3 (venule) centered injury pattern or confluent pattern typically with ballooning
–
Portal predominant (Zone 1) centered injury pattern often without ballooning
NAFLD with fibrosis
•
NAFL or NASH with periportal, portal or sinusoidal or bridging fibrosis
NAFLD with cirrhosis
•
Cirrhosis in the setting of NAFLD
Note: Other terms such as ‘presumed NAFLD’ (also ‘clinical NAFLD’ or ‘suspected NAFLD’) are terms used in the literature with varying 
meanings.
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 36
Table 3
Differential diagnosis for pediatric hepatic steatosis
Genetic/Metabolic disorders
Medications
Dietary causes
Infections
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
Amiodarone
Protein-energy malnutrition (Kwarshiorkor)
Hepatitis C 
(genotype 3)
Fatty acid oxidation and mitochondrial disorders
Corticosteroids
Alcohol abuse
Citrin deficiency
Methotrexate
Rapid surgical weight loss
Wilson’s disease
Certain antipsychotics
Parenteral nutrition
Uncontrolled diabetes
Certain antidepressants
Lipodystrophies
HAART
Lysosomal acid lipase deficiency
Valproic acid
Familial Combined Hyperlipidemia
Abeta-/ hypobeta-lipoproteinemia
HAART: Highly Active Antiretroviral therapy
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 37
Table 4
Definitions of Prediabetes and Diabetes by the American Diabetes Association
HgbA1c*
Fasting Glucose¥
2hr OGTT #
Random glucose
Prediabetes
5.7%–6.4%
100–125mg/dL (5.6–6.9mmol/L
140–199mg/dL (7.8–11.0 mmol/L)
Diabetes
≥6.5%
≥126mg/dL (7.0 mmol/L)
≥200mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L)
≥200mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L)
*Lab using method that is NGSP certified & standardized to the DCCT assay
¥Fasting is defined as no caloric intake for at least 8 hours
#Test should be performed as described by the World Health Organization
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 38
Table 5
Summary of Recommendations
1
Selected children should be screened for NAFLD. Strength – 1, Evidence – A
a.
Screening should be considered beginning between ages 9–11 years for all obese children (BMI ≥95th percentile) and 
for overweight children (BMI ≥85th and < 94th percentile) with additional risk factors (central adiposity, insulin 
resistance, pre-diabetes or diabetes, dyslipidemia, sleep apnea or family history of NAFLD/NASH). Strength - 1, 
Evidence – B
b.
Earlier screening can be considered in younger patients with risk factors such as severe obesity, family history of 
NAFLD/NASH or hypopituitarism. Strength - 2, Evidence – B
c.
Consider screening of siblings and parents of children with NAFLD if they have known risk factors for NAFLD 
(obesity, Hispanic ethnicity, insulin resistance, pre-diabetes, diabetes, dyslipidemia). Strength - 2 , Evidence - C.
2
Currently, the best screening test for NAFLD in children is ALT, however it has substantial limitations. Strength – 1, Evidence - 
B
a.
Interpretation of ALT should be based upon gender specific upper limits of normal in children (22 U/L for girls and 26 
U/L for boys) and not individual laboratory upper limits of normal. Strength – 1, Evidence - A
b.
Persistently (> 3 months) elevated ALT more than twice the upper limit of normal should be evaluated for NAFLD or 
other causes of chronic hepatitis. Strength 1, Evidence – C
c.
ALT of >80 U/L warrants increased clinical concern and timely evaluation, as the likelihood of significant liver 
disease is higher. Strength - 2, Evidence - C
d.
Clinically available routine ultrasound is not recommended as a screening test for NAFLD in children due to 
inadequate sensitivity and specificity. Strength – 1, Evidence – B
3
Follow-up screening for NAFLD is recommended. Strength - 2, Evidence – C
a.
When the initial screening test is normal, consider repeating ALT every 2–3 years if risk factors remain unchanged. 
Strength – 2, Evidence - C
b.
Consider repeating screening sooner if clinical risk factors of NAFLD increase in number or severity. Examples 
include excessive weight gain or development of other medical problems that increase risk of NAFLD, such as type 2 
diabetes or obstructive sleep apnea. Strength – 2, Evidence - C
4
When evaluating a child suspected to have NAFLD, it is recommended to exclude alternative etiologies for elevated ALT and/or 
hepatic steatosis and investigate the presence of co-existing chronic liver diseases. (Figure 1). Strength – 1, Evidence – A
5
Liver biopsy should be considered for the assessment of NAFLD in children who have increased risk of NASH and/or advanced 
fibrosis. Potential clinical signs of increased risk of fibrosis in children with NASH may include higher ALT (>80 U/L), 
splenomegaly, and AST/ALT >1. Known clinical risk factors for NASH and advanced fibrosis include panhypopituitarism and 
type 2 diabetes. Strength – 1, Evidence – B
6
The use of ultrasound is not recommended for the determination or quantification of steatosis due to poor sensitivity and 
specificity. Ultrasound may be useful for assessing other causes of liver disease such as masses, gallbladder disease, changes 
associated with portal hypertension etc. Strength – 1, Evidence – B
7
The use of CT is not recommended for determination or quantification of steatosis due to radiation risk. Strength -1, Evidence – 
B.
8
Pending the development of more accurate biomarkers to non-invasively assess improvement in NAFLD, sustained decrease in 
ALT from baseline may be used as a surrogate marker of response to treatment, particularly for durations of ≤ 1 year. Strength – 
2, Evidence – C
9
Assessment of change in fibrosis over time is reasonable as a treatment outcome in children over longer time periods (≥ 2 years) 
and currently requires a liver biopsy for assessment. Strength – 2, Evidence – C
10
Lifestyle modifications to improve diet and increase physical activity are recommended as the first-line treatment for all children 
with NAFLD. Strength – 1, Evidence - B
11
Avoidance of sugar-sweetened beverages is recommended as a strategy to decrease adiposity. Strength – 1, Evidence - A
12
Increasing moderate to high intensity physical activity and limiting screen time activities to < 2 hours per day is recommended for 
all children including those with NAFLD. Strength – 1, Evidence - B
13
No currently available medications or supplements are recommended to treat NAFLD because none have been proven to benefit 
the majority of NAFLD patients. Strength - 2, Evidence – C
14
Bariatric surgery is not recommended as a specific therapy for NAFLD given lack of outcome data in adolescents. Bariatric 
surgery may be considered for selected adolescents with BMI ≥ 35 kg/m2, who have non-cirrhotic NAFLD and other serious 
comorbidities (e.g. T2DM, severe sleep apnea, idiopathic intracranial hypertension) that are likely to improve with WLS. 
Strength - 1, Evidence - B
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 39
15
Children with NAFLD should be screened for dyslipidemia at diagnosis and periodically as indicated by current lipid guidelines 
for children. Strength – 1, Evidence - B
16
It is recommended to monitor blood pressure in children with NAFLD. Strength 1, Evidence - B
17
It is recommended to screen children with NAFLD for diabetes at diagnosis and annually (or sooner if clinical suspicion arises) 
using either a fasting serum glucose level or a glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) level. A glucose tolerance test may be useful if 
the fasting glucose or HbA1c are in the pre-diabetic range (Table 3). Strength – 1, Evidence - A
18
It is recommended to follow children with NAFLD on a yearly basis at a minimum to monitor for progression of disease and 
provide treatment. Strength 1, Evidence - C
19
When providing lifestyle counseling, more frequent visits (more contact hours with program staff) are associated with better 
weight management outcomes in overweight and obese children and therefore may also benefit overweight children with 
NAFLD/NASH. Strength 1, Evidence B.
20
A repeat liver biopsy to assess progression of disease (particularly fibrosis) and to guide treatment is reasonable to consider 2–3 
years following the first liver biopsy, especially in patients with new or ongoing risk factors, such as type 2 diabetes mellitus, 
NASH or fibrosis at diagnosis. Strength 2, Evidence C
21
In addition to standard counseling of adolescents, healthcare providers should counsel adolescents regarding the potential effects 
of increased fibrosis progression with binge drinking. Strength – 1, Evidence - B
22
Families of children with NAFLD should be counseled about risks of second hand smoke exposure and adolescents with NAFLD 
should be counseled against smoking and use of electronic nicotine delivery devices. Strength – 1, Evidence - B
23
Children with NAFLD should be vaccinated routinely against hepatitis A. Strength – 1, Evidence - B
24
Children with NAFLD should have prior receipt of Hepatitis B vaccine verified and be immunized if no prior vaccination was 
received. Strength – 1, Evidence – A
25
Baseline liver enzyme levels should be obtained in children with NAFLD before starting any medication known to be 
hepatotoxic. There is insufficient evidence to guide frequency of monitoring for enzyme elevation after initiation of potentially 
hepatotoxic medications and monitoring should be guided by the baseline severity of the liver disease and the relative potential 
for hepatotoxity of the medication. Strength – 1, Evidence – C
26
If potentially hepatotoxic drugs are being considered in patients with NAFLD, a baseline liver biopsy may be reasonable to 
consider for assessing the severity of liver disease prior to beginning the medication. Strength – 2, Evidence – C
27
Providers should remain alert to psychosocial issues and screen children with NAFLD for these when indicated. Strength - 1, 
Evidence – B
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
