 Fitness, but not physical activity, is related to functional integrity 
of brain networks associated with aging
Michelle W. Vossa,*, Timothy B. Wenga, Agnieszka Z. Burzynskac, Chelsea N. Wongb, Gillian 
E. Cookeb, Rachel Clarkd, Jason Fanninge, Elizabeth Awicke, Neha P. Gothee, Erin A. 
Olsone, Edward McAuleye, and Arthur F. Kramerb
aDepartment of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Iowa
bThe Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology at the University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign
cDepartment of Human Development and Family Studies, Colorado State University
dInterdisciplinary Neuroscience Graduate training program, University of Iowa
dDepartment of Kinesiology and Community Health, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Abstract
Greater physical activity and cardiorespiratory fitness are associated with reduced age-related 
cognitive decline and lower risk for dementia. However, significant gaps remain in the 
understanding of how physical activity and fitness protect the brain from adverse effects of brain 
aging. The primary goal of the current study was to empirically evaluate the independent 
relationships between physical activity and fitness with functional brain health among healthy 
older adults, as measured by the functional connectivity of cognitively and clinically relevant 
resting state networks. To build context for fitness and physical activity associations in older 
adults, we first demonstrate that young adults have greater within-network functional connectivity 
across a broad range of cortical association networks. Based on these results and previous 
research, we predicted that individual differences in fitness and physical activity would be most 
strongly associated with functional integrity of the networks most sensitive to aging. Consistent 
with this prediction, and extending on previous research, we showed that cardiorespiratory fitness 
has a positive relationship with functional connectivity of several cortical networks associated with 
age-related decline, and effects were strongest in the Default Mode Network (DMN). Furthermore, 
our results suggest that the positive association of fitness with brain function can occur 
independent of habitual physical activity. Overall, our findings provide further support that 
cardiorespiratory fitness is an important factor in moderating the adverse effects of aging on 
cognitively and clinically relevant functional brain networks.
Corresponding author: Michelle W. Voss, PhD, Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, E231 Seashore Hall, The 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, michelle-voss@uiowa.edu, Tel: (319) 335-2057. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Neuroimage. 2016 May 1; 131: 113–125. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.10.044.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Keywords
cardiorespiratory fitness; physical activity; aging; functional connectivity; resting state fMRI
1. Introduction
Research has demonstrated the protective and restorative potential of physical activity and 
fitness for age-related cognitive decline and neurodegenerative diseases including 
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) (Buchman et al., 2012; Colcombe and Kramer, 2003; Hamer and 
Chida, 2009; Liu et al., 2012; Smith et al., 2010; Sofi et al., 2011). This is important because 
age-related neurodegenerative conditions like AD are associated with enormous costs from 
morbidity, mortality, and loss of independence (Barnes and Yaffe, 2011; Hurd et al., 2013). 
These public health challenges are likely to surge along with growth in the proportion of 
adults over age 65 in the United States and around the world (CDC, 2013; NIA, 2007). 
Physical exercise is a prime candidate for treating the aging brain because in addition to 
being effective, it is also low-cost, it can reduce or eliminate the need for costly drug 
treatments with negative side effects, and it is safe and accessible. However, we still do not 
understand how physical exercise protects the brain from the adverse effects of aging, and 
thus we are unable to maximize the benefits of physical activity for the brain across a broad 
population.
A critical aspect of understanding how physical activity is protective for brain aging is 
identifying the fundamental principles by which physical activity positively affects brain 
health. Physical activity is defined as bodily movement that increases energy expenditure 
relative to seated rest (Casperson et al., 1985), and is often categorized by intensity levels 
such as light, moderate, and vigorous, based on how much energy expenditure increases 
relative to rest. Some studies support that total daily physical activity is protective against 
age-related brain atrophy (Varma et al., 2014) and risk for cognitive decline and AD (Barnes 
et al., 2008; Buchman et al., 2012; Middleton et al., 2011). However, often other studies 
have relied on self-reported physical activity, which best captures moderate intensity 
exercise rather than total daily physical activity (Larson et al., 2006; Yaffe et al., 2001). 
Compared to physical activity, exercise is defined as a subset of physical activity that is 
planned, structured, and repetitive, and has an objective of improving or maintaining 
physical fitness (Casperson et al., 1985).
In the context of aging and AD, studies have also measured cardiorespiratory fitness (e.g., 
Barnes et al., 2003; Boots et al., 2014; Colcombe et al., 2004; Erickson et al., 2009; Hayes et 
al., 2013; Honea et al., 2009; Nyberg et al., 2014; Spirduso, 1980; Voss et al., 2010b), often 
intended as an objective biomarker of moderate intensity physical activity. Cardiorespiratory 
fitness is a physiological attribute defined as the ability for circulatory and respiratory 
systems to deliver oxygen to working muscles and the ability of the muscles to extract and 
use the oxygen to generate energy. The gold standard measurement of cardiorespiratory 
fitness is the highest rate of oxygen consumption during exhaustive exercise and is often 
expressed as oxygen capacity per kilogram of body weight over time (mL/kg/min) (ACSM, 
Voss et al.
Page 2
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2013; Casperson et al., 1985). Thus, while physical activity and cardiorespiratory fitness are 
related, they measure distinct outcomes related to a physically active lifestyle.
The research linking individual differences in cardiorespiratory fitness and training-related 
changes in fitness to brain health has led to a hypothesis that cardiorespiratory fitness is a 
critical mediator of these benefits (Angevaren et al., 2008; Etnier et al., 2006; Smith, 2012; 
Spirduso, 1980). This fitness hypothesis can be differentiated from one about total physical 
activity (i.e., movement) because it implies that training-related improvements in fitness are 
needed to improve brain health (Voss et al., 2014), rather than simply increasing physical 
activity. Supporting the fitness hypothesis, studies have shown a cross-sectional association 
between fitness and brain structure in older adults (Erickson et al., 2009; Gordon et al., 
2008; Weinstein et al., 2012), and also between fitness and brain function (Dupuy et al., 
2015; Dustman et al., 1990; Gauthier et al., 2014; Prakash et al., 2011; Voss et al., 2010b). 
Prospective studies have shown that cardiorespiratory fitness predicts cognitive decline and 
risk of dementia-related death (Barnes et al., 2003; Liu et al., 2012; Wendell et al., 2014). In 
addition, intervention studies have shown that changes in exercise-induced fitness correlates 
with training-related change in brain structure (Erickson et al., 2011; Voss et al., 2013a) and 
hippocampal blood flow and volume (Maass et al., 2014; Pereira et al., 2007).
However, there are also studies that do not show an association between fitness and brain 
health (Angevaren et al., 2008; Brickman et al., 2014; Dustman et al., 1984; Etnier et al., 
2006; Smiley-Oyen et al., 2008; Young et al., 2015). Indeed, as noted in Dustman et al., 
1984, “Since VO2 max is not specific for brain oxygen consumption and since there is no 
reason to expect that exercise related increases in oxygen to the brain would closely parallel 
increases to muscle, a direct relationship between VO2 max and neuropsychological 
measures would not be predicted” (pp. 39–40). Therefore, there is mixed support for the 
fundamental significance of cardiorespiratory fitness in the relationship between physical 
activity and brain health. One step towards clarifying this relationship further is for more 
studies to directly contrast multiple features of a physically active lifestyle (e.g., intensity of 
daily physical activity, cardiorespiratory fitness) to determine their unique contributions to 
health benefits on the aging brain.
For instance, studies have shown that physical activity and fitness are separable at the level 
of individual differences (Jacobs et al., 1993; Laye et al., 2015; Williams, 2001), either 
because it is feasible that the same individual can achieve daily moderate-to-vigorous 
exercise while being sedentary the rest of the day (Craft et al., 2012; Pate et al., 2008), or 
because there are determinants of cardiorespiratory fitness that account for variance beyond 
habitual physical activity such as genetics, which may account for about half of the variance 
in individual differences in fitness (Bouchard et al., 1999; Bouchard et al., 2011). In 
addition, more nuanced approaches for objectively measuring physical activity are now 
available (Chen et al., 2012; Rowlands et al., 2015), and these provide an opportunity to 
more objectively test what features of daily physical activity (Copeland and Esliger, 2009; 
Tudor-Locke et al., 2013) are associated with brain health in aging populations (Makizako et 
al., 2014; Varma et al., 2014). Thus, similar to research on other health outcomes such as 
cardiovascular disease risk or mortality (e.g., Lee et al., 2011), it is important to determine 
Voss et al.
Page 3
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the independent associations of physical activity and cardiorespiratory fitness with brain 
health in older adults.
One approach to measuring functional brain health is assessing the functional connectivity 
of brain networks observed during the resting state with functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (rsfMRI). Resting-state functional connectivity (FC) is a valuable measure of brain 
health because it is suggested to be a correlate for normal age-related decline in brain 
function (Andrews-Hanna et al., 2007; Dennis and Thompson, 2014) and a biomarker of AD 
(Brier et al., 2012; Greicius et al., 2004; He et al., 2014; Seeley et al., 2009; Sorg et al., 
2007). Briefly, resting-state FC measures the correlation between regional fluctuations in the 
fMRI blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) signal while a participant is resting 
quietly in the scanner without exposure to an experimentally controlled task. The motivation 
for this approach is the discovery that many of the brain systems that are evoked by 
experimentally controlled cognitive tasks are also fluctuating in synchrony during rest (e.g., 
Smith et al., 2009), that these resting state networks can be identified across the lifespan 
(Chan et al., 2014; Damoiseaux et al., 2008), and that their functional integration and 
segregation may be predictive of individual differences in cognitive performance and clinical 
status or trajectories (Brier et al., 2012; He et al., 2014; Shaw et al., 2015). Thus, rsfMRI 
networks provide a means to measure the functional integrity of a broad range of brain 
systems without confounds related to task performance, in a relatively shorter period of time 
than most task-based imaging, and without targeting a specific system with an experimental 
manipulation.
The association between age and network integrity tends to be stronger in specific networks 
rather than being a global phenomenon. One of the most replicable findings is an association 
between aging and lower FC in the default mode network (DMN; see Figure 1 and Table 1 
for description of anatomical regions in the DMN) (Agosta et al., 2012; Andrews-Hanna et 
al., 2007; Damoiseaux et al., 2008; Meier et al., 2012; Voss et al., 2010b). Another common 
trend is for older adults to have poorer FC in what are commonly referred to as the 
Executive Control Network (ECN, see Figure 1 and Table 1) and the Salience Network 
(SAL, see Figure 1 and Table 1) (He et al., 2014; Meier et al., 2012; Onoda et al., 2012; Voss 
et al., 2010a), though there have been more mixed findings with respect to this pattern (e.g., 
Agosta et al., 2012; Mowinckel et al., 2012). Networks that tend to show the weakest or no 
differences with aging include sensory systems such as the visual, motor, and auditory 
systems (Andrews-Hanna et al., 2007; Mowinckel et al., 2012), though some studies have 
shown that the functional specificity of these systems is vulnerable to adverse effects of 
aging (Brier et al., 2012; Chan et al., 2014).
Given these findings, it is significant that our previous research has suggested that the 
functional networks most sensitive to age-related decline are also sensitive to individual 
differences in fitness (DMN) (Voss et al., 2010b) and they show improved FC following 1 
year of aerobic exercise training (DMN, SAL) (Voss et al., 2010a). However, these studies 
did not assess functional connectivity during a dedicated rsfMRI scan (since this was not 
acquired) and rather used a simulated resting state following statistical removal of signal 
related to basic sensory stimulation. Therefore, in addition to evaluating the independent 
relationships of fitness and physical activity with brain health, the current study also serves 
Voss et al.
Page 4
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 as an opportunity to replicate and extend previous results describing the relationship 
between cardiorespiratory fitness and FC of the DMN and other rsfMRI networks associated 
with aging. Based on our previous research and the extant literature, we predicted that older 
adults would have the most disruption in the DMN, ECN, and SAL networks compared to 
healthy young adults, and that individual differences in fitness and physical activity would 
be most strongly associated with the functional integrity of the networks most sensitive to 
aging. Additionally, based on the replicable benefits of physical activity on temporal and 
prefrontal cortex brain health (Voss et al., 2013b), we predicted the strongest associations 
with fitness or physical activity would occur within regions including the prefrontal and 
temporal cortices (Voss et al., 2010a; Voss et al., 2010b).
Regarding the distinction between fitness and physical activity, we do not have strong 
predictions about their independent relationships with functional brain networks. Although 
we have previously shown that MVPA was linked to white matter integrity even after 
controlling for fitness (Burzynska et al., 2014), there is still little empirical evidence for a 
strong prediction about their independent relationships with functional brain health.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Participants
MRI, physical activity, and cardiorespiratory fitness data were collected from 247 
community-dwelling healthy older adults (average age of 65 years, 68% female, average of 
15.6 years of education), and MRI data were collected from 59 college-age adults (average 
age of 22 years, 47% female, average of 15.1 years of education). Fitness and physical 
activity data were not collected on the young adults. The young adults are included in the 
current study to examine age effects on network functional connectivity within the same 
sample of older participants in which we examine relationships with fitness and physical 
activity in older adults.
Eligible older adult participants met the following criteria: (1) were between the ages of 60 
and 80 years old, (2) were free from psychiatric and neurological illness and had no history 
of stroke, transient ischemic attack, or head trauma, (3) scored > 23 on the Mini-Mental 
State Exam (MMSE) and >21 on a Telephone Interview of Cognitive Status (TICS-M) 
questionnaire, (4) scored < 10 on the geriatric depression scale (GDS-15), (5) scored > 75% 
right-handedness on the Edinburgh Handedness Questionnaire, (6) demonstrated normal or 
corrected-to-normal vision of at least 20/40 and no color blindness, and (7) were screened 
for safe participation in an MRI environment (e.g., no metallic implants that could interfere 
with the magnetic field or cause injury and no claustrophobia). The older adults are a cross-
sectional subsample from a randomized controlled exercise trial. We further excluded 
participants with MMSE < 27 to exclude those with possible mild cognitive impairment. 
Finally, our participants were screened for good quality MRI data (see below).
Eligible younger adult participants (1) were free from psychiatric and neurological illness 
and had no history of stroke, transient ischemic attack, or head trauma, (2) scored ≥75% 
right-handedness on the Edinburgh Handedness Questionnaire, (3) demonstrated normal or 
corrected-to-normal vision of at least 20/40 and no color blindness, and (4) were screened 
Voss et al.
Page 5
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 for safe participation in an MRI environment (e.g., no metallic implants that could interfere 
with the magnetic field or cause injury and no claustrophobia). The young adult sample was 
further trimmed to a subset based on quality of the MRI data and to achieve a comparable 
proportion of females and years of education between the young and older adult groups. 
This was done to minimize gender and other demographic variables as confounds when 
operationalizing network peaks (described below) and when evaluating age-related 
differences in functional connectivity.
The final sample of older adults included 189 community-dwelling healthy older adults 
(68% female) with an average age of 65 years (SD=4.4) and average education of 16 years 
(SD=2.9). The final sample of young adults included 36 adults (64% female) with an 
average age of 22 years (SD=3) and average education of 15.6 years (SD=2). See Table 2 for 
full descriptive statistics and more demographic and health variables.
2.2. Physical activity and health history assessment
Older participants were instructed to wear the GT3X ActiGraph accelerometer (ActiGraph; 
Pensacola, Florida) for 7 consecutive days on an elastic belt on the left hip during all waking 
hours, except for when bathing or swimming. The participants completed a daily log to 
record the time that the accelerometer was worn, and this log was used to verify the 
accelerometer data for processing with the ActiLife v5.6.0 software. For the purposes of this 
study, a valid day of data consisted of at least 10 hours of valid wear-time (Matthews et al., 
2008; Troiano et al., 2008), where hours flagged as “invalid” were defined as 60 minutes of 
consecutive zeros. In this way, there could only be a couple minutes of registered movement 
within the hour, but as long as they were distributed enough to not allow 60 or more minutes 
of consecutive zeros then the data was considered valid. Only data for individuals with a 
minimum of 3 valid days were included in analyses (Hart et al., 2011).
Each valid measurement epoch (minute) was classified into light physical activity (LIPA) or 
moderate-to-vigorous physical activity (MVPA) based on displacement magnitude and 
frequency. We used activity intensity cut-off ranges appropriate for older adults (Copeland 
and Esliger, 2009) using MeterPlus v4.2 software (Santech, Inc.; San Diego, CA). MVPA 
was defined as > 1040 counts/minute and LIPA was defined as 51–1040 counts/minute. The 
total minutes of each intensity was divided by total valid days to yield average time in 
minutes spent daily in a specific physical activity intensity (see summary descriptive 
statistics of physical activity variables in Table 2). Observed MVPA was positively skewed 
so we used a natural log-transformation to improve normality of the distribution (see 
supplementary figure 2).
2.3. Cardiorespiratory fitness assessment
All older participants obtained physician’s approval to engage in cardiorespiratory fitness 
testing. Cardiorespiratory fitness was defined as maximal oxygen consumption (VO2max in 
mL/kg/min), measured with indirect calorimetry during a modified Balke graded maximal 
exercise test on a motor-driven treadmill test. Oxygen consumption (VO2) was calculated 
from expired air sampled at 30-s intervals until peak VO2 was reached or the test was 
terminated due to volitional exhaustion and/or symptom limitation. VO2max was determined 
Voss et al.
Page 6
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 after two of three criteria were met: (1) a plateau in VO2 after increase in workload; (2) a 
respiratory exchange ratio >1.10, and (3) a maximal heart rate within 10bpm of their age-
predicted maximum.
2.4. MRI acquisition
All images were acquired during a single session on a 3T Siemens Trio Tim system with 45 
mT/m gradients and 200 T/m/sec slew rates (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany). T2*-weighted 
resting state images were acquired with a fast echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence with 
BOLD contrast (6min, TR = 2s, TE = 25ms, flip angle = 80 degrees, 3.4 × 3.4 mm2 in-plane 
resolution, 35 4mm-thick slices acquired in ascending order, Grappa acceleration factor = 2, 
64 × 64 matrix), while the participants were asked to lay still with their eyes closed. 
Additionally, dual-echo gradient field maps were acquired to account for geometric 
distortions caused by magnetic field inhomogeneity (Jezzard and Balaban, 1995). The 
gradient field maps were collected as 35, 4 mm-thick slices, 3.4 × 3.4 mm2 in-plane 
resolution, TR = 700ms, TE = 10/12.46 ms, and flip angle = 35 degrees. Resting state and 
field-map images were obtained parallel to the anterior-posterior commissure plane with no 
inter-slice gap.
High-resolution structural MR scans were acquired using a 3D MPRAGE T1-weighted 
sequence (TR = 1900 ms; TE = 2.32 ms; TI: 900 ms; flip angle = 9°; matrix = 256 × 256; 
FOV = 230 mm; 192 slices; resolution = 0.9 × 0.9 × 0.9 mm; GRAPPA acceleration factor 
2) and used as an intermediate step in registration of functional images to standard MNI 
space.
2.5. Data Processing
Image processing and analyses were carried out with an in-house script library using tools 
from FSL 5.0.4 (Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Brain’s Software Library, 
http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl), AFNI (http://afni.nimh.nih.gov/afni), FreeSurfer (http://
surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu), and MATLAB (The MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA). Raw 
DICOM images were converted to a NIfTI image using FreeSurfer’s mri_convert tool and 
reoriented to RPI orientation with FSL’s fslorient. FSL’s BET (Brain Extraction Technique) 
algorithm was then used to strip voxels containing non-brain tissue from the T1 structural 
images (Smith, 2002). Skull-stripped T1 images were manually inspected and corrected for 
errors. A 6 degree-of-freedom rigid-body head motion correction was applied to rsfMRI EPI 
data using AFNI’s 3dvolreg function, producing six parameters of head motion (root-mean-
squares of translational and rotational movement: X, Y, Z, pitch, roll, and yaw directions) for 
use as regressors to partial out variance in the BOLD signal associated with motion. 
Gradient field map images were skull-stripped with BET and then processed for subsequent 
EPI unwarping using FSL’s fsl_prepare_fieldmap. The processed field maps were applied to 
the motion corrected EPIs using FSL’s epi_reg for simultaneous EPI distortion correction 
and registration to the T1. Finally, non-brain tissue was removed from the corrected rsfMRI 
EPI image using BET, and spatial smoothing was applied using a 6.0 mm three-dimensional 
Gaussian kernel of full-width at half-maximum.
Voss et al.
Page 7
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 AFNI’s 3dBandpass tool was then used to temporally filter the time series data to restrict the 
signal to a frequency band of .008 < f < 0.08 Hz; this was done to reduce sources of noise 
such as high frequency physiological signals (e.g., cardiac pulse) and low frequency scanner 
drift. This frequency band is also reflective of the spontaneous, low frequency fluctuations 
of the BOLD fMRI signal (Leopold et al., 2003; Salvador et al., 2005). Following temporal 
filtering, the mean time series was extracted from a region in deep white matter 
(retrolenticular portion of the left internal capsule), a region in the lateral ventricle, and 
global signal derived from a whole-brain mask. These were considered nuisance signals and 
used as covariates to further control for physiological artifacts that could confound FC 
measures. In addition, the six head motion parameters described above were bandpassed 
with the same temporal filter applied to the fMRI data and included as nuisance regressors 
(Hallquist et al., 2013). Together, the 9 bandpassed nuisance regressors (white matter, CSF, 
global, and 6 motion parameters) were entered into a multiple regression as independent 
variables predicting the preprocessed rsfMRI data (using FSL’s FEAT tool). The residual 
time series data from the nuisance regression was then evaluated for any motion-
contaminated volumes (Power et al., 2012). Briefly, volumes above a frame-wise 
displacement threshold of 0.5 mm that coincided with BOLD signal changes were removed 
from subsequent FC analyses. Overall, motion scrubbing only affected 9 older participants 
with an average of 5.9 volumes (3%) removed from analysis.
2.6. FC analysis of resting state networks
Two FC analyses were performed on the preprocessed rsfMRI data: 1) a targeted pairwise 
region of interest (ROI) analysis based on correlations between pairs of ROIs and 2) a 
whole-brain exploratory analysis based on the correlation of selected network ROIs with all 
other voxels in the brain. For the targeted approach, our ROIs were derived from a group-
level independent components analysis (ICA) that was applied to the pre-processed rsfMRI 
data using FSL’s MELODIC with automatic dimensionality estimation. The rsfMRI data 
were decomposed into 13 independent spatiotemporal components (IC) that were common 
across the young and older adults. Of the 13 ICs, we identified 4 cognitively relevant and 
well-replicated ICs: 1) default-mode network (DMN), 2) dorsal attention network (DAN), 3) 
executive control network (ECN), and 4) salience network (SAL) (see Figure 1). We also 
identified 2 ICs resembling sensory-related networks: visual network (VIS) and a somato-
motor network (MOT) (see Figure 1). For each of these 6 networks we constructed 14-mm 
diameter spheres centered on the peak coordinates within the IC statistical map (listed in 
Table 1; illustrated in Figure 1). These target ROIs served as a set of empirically derived 
nodes for the analysis of pairwise correlations within and between networks of interest.
Target ROIs were each created in standard MNI (2 mm) space and then registered to native 
(functional) space through a multi-stage procedure. First, each participant’s EPI was 
registered to their high-resolution structural T1 image using the boundary-based registration 
(BBR) algorithm (Greve and Fischl, 2009). Registration of the participant’s high-resolution 
structural image to standard MNI space was carried out with FNIRT nonlinear registration 
using a default 10 mm warp resolution (Andersson et al., 2007a, b). The resulting two 
transformations were then concatenated and applied to the participant’s functional image to 
Voss et al.
Page 8
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 register their functional image to standard MNI space; a reverse transform was used to 
register the ROIs from standard MNI space to each participant’s native functional space.
For FC analyses with these target ROIs, the mean (preprocessed) time series was extracted 
from all ROIs and cross-correlated with all other ROIs using MATLAB. Cross-correlations 
of all ROI pairs were estimated as Pearson’s correlation coefficients and then transformed to 
Fisher’s Z estimates Z(r) using Fisher’s r-to-z transformation. Initial exploratory analyses of 
bivariate connectivity patterns as a function of age, fitness, and physical activity, but 
uncorrected for multiple comparisons, are presented in the supplementary materials. To 
address the multiple comparisons issue, we used the network-based statistic (NBS) to 
identify network components that have ROI-ROI pairs with greater or lesser functional 
connectivity as a function of age or fitness and physical activity. The NBS algorithm has 
been well-validated (Zalesky et al., 2012; Zalesky et al., 2010) and widely applied (Bai et 
al., 2012; Cocchi et al., 2012; Thompson and Fransson, 2015; Wang et al., 2013) as a tool to 
provide both statistical power and protection against multiple comparisons when examining 
effects proposed to occur across distributed sub-systems of network nodes. Based on the 
literature, there is evidence that there are important sub-networks or sub-systems within the 
broader cortical systems that are vulnerable to normal aging (e.g., Andrews-Hanna et al., 
2007; Damoiseaux et al., 2008). Our studies and others have also shown that the association 
of fitness and fitness training with brain health is likely at the level of sub-systems rather 
than expressed robustly throughout a network (Voss et al., 2010a; Voss et al., 2010b). 
Therefore, the strengths of this approach map onto our goal of detecting effects at the level 
of sub-systems while still being able to examine inter-regional associations both within and 
between broadly distributed cortical systems.
Briefly, the NBS approach tests whether a set of multiple pairwise connections associated 
with a contrast or effect of interest (e.g., t-test or correlation) form a connected component 
of ROI-ROI pairs that would be highly unlikely to have occurred at random. The statistical 
significance of a connected component is determined through a combination of an initial 
cluster-forming probability threshold on each individual ROI-ROI link and the size of 
connected components. Similar to how typical statistical parametric mapping considers 
whether a cluster is statistically significant based on the number of contiguous voxels, the 
NBS approach evaluates whether a component of ROI-ROI pairs of a certain size is non-
random based on comparison to a null distribution of maximal component size empirically 
derived from permutations of randomized data (Zalesky et al., 2010). Thus similar to how 
we would not interpret a single voxel within a functional cluster on an activation map, NBS 
is not designed for the interpretation of isolated ROI-ROI links within identified network 
components. All NBS statistics reported here were computed using the GraphVar toolbox 
(Version 5.1) (Kruschwitz et al., 2015), which is publicly available on NITRC (http://
www.nitrc.org/projects/graphvar/). For all NBS analyses, we used an initial cluster-forming 
threshold of p<.01, generated randomized data with 1000 permutations, and considered 
network components statistically significant at a FWER corrected threshold of p<.01. NBS 
results are visualized with BrainNet Viewer (https://www.nitrc.org/projects/bnv).
For the whole-brain exploratory analyses, the mean preprocessed time series was extracted 
from a subset of the target ROIs above. Then a cross-correlation of the ROI’s time series 
Voss et al.
Page 9
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with the time series of all other voxels in the brain was computed using MATLAB to 
generate Pearson’s correlation coefficient maps designating a value to each voxel that 
corresponds to the strength of correlation with the seed ROI. This map was then converted 
into Z-score maps with a Fisher’s r-to-z transformation, resulting in individual-subject level 
Fisher’s Z maps representing voxels whose resting BOLD signal have a positive correlation 
with the ROI seed.
For group analysis of these voxel-wise seed maps, individual-subject level seed maps were 
registered to standard MNI (2 mm) space through the multi-stage procedure described 
above. Once in standard space, the seed maps from individual subjects were concatenated to 
form a 4D image file (subject as the fourth dimension) and this 4D image was input to a 
between-subjects ordinary least-squares (OLS) regression using FSL’s flameo (Beckmann et 
al., 2003). Multiple comparisons for the resulting group-level statistical maps were 
controlled by thresholding group contrast maps at Z>2.33, with cluster correction of p < 
0.05 (Worsley et al., 1992). Results for whole-brain exploratory analyses are visualized with 
the MRIcron toolbox (https://www.nitrc.org/projects/mricron).
3. Results
3.1. Descriptive statistics and relationships between physical activity and 
cardiorespiratory fitness variables
Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for the study sample, including demographics, physical 
activity, and cardiorespiratory fitness. Although young and older adults differed in 
chronological age, they did not differ in gender composition of the samples or average self-
reported years of education (all p >.05). Histograms of cardiorespiratory fitness and physical 
activity variables are available in the supplementary materials. Within the older adults, 
chronological age was negatively correlated with cardiorespiratory fitness (r =−.22, p<.01) 
and MVPA (r=−.33, p<.001), but not LIPA (r=−.11, p>.05). Cardiorespiratory fitness was 
positively correlated with LIPA (r=.17, p<.05) and MVPA (r=.46, p<.001), and LIPA was 
correlated with MVPA (r=.48, p<.001). Although cardiorespiratory fitness and physical 
activity were moderately correlated, the modest correlations between fitness and physical 
activity variables support the notion that there is non-overlapping variance between the 
variables, which may be meaningfully related to brain health.
3.2. Determining age-related differences in the FC of resting state networks
In order to evaluate whether fitness or physical activity are positively associated with 
network characteristics that are vulnerable to aging, we first sought to characterize age-
group differences in the FC of resting-state networks. To this end, we compared the target 
ROI-ROI correlation matrices between the younger and older participants in two ways.
First, we compared the cumulative distributions for young and older adults, for both the 
average within-network correlation of all ROI pairs defined as part of the same network and 
the average between-network correlation of all ROI pairs defined as part of different 
networks. As shown in the cumulative distribution graphs in Figure 2, the within-network 
FC is approximately 0.10 Z(r) greater for young adults compared to older adults across a 
Voss et al.
Page 10
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 broad spectrum of the distribution. In contrast, the between-network FC is nearly identical 
for young and older adults across the distribution. This result helps provide a reference for 
meaningful differences in FC as measured by Fisher’s Z(r) correlations, and suggests that 
within-network FC is more vulnerable to age effects than between-network FC.
Next, we applied NBS to describe age group differences in FC within and between networks 
with more regional and network specificity. NBS identified one significant network 
component (p<.01, FWER corrected) that included the 47 target ROIs. As shown in Figure 
3, component links with greater FC for young adults were primarily within networks such as 
the ECN and DMN. In contrast, the component links with greater FC for older adults were 
primarily between networks (illustrated as gray links in Figure 3). Note these results are also 
consistent with the pattern of age-group differences observed in the simple bivariate 
connectivity of ROI pairs shown in the supplemental materials (see supplementary figure 2).
Together, these analyses justified reducing the full ROI-ROI correlation matrix by averaging 
within-network FC to estimate the effect size for age differences in favor of young adults for 
each network. Results showed age effects in favor of young adults in the DMN (t(223)=2.99, 
p=.003, d=.56), the ECN (t(223)=7.83, p<.001, d=1.25), and the SAL network (t(223)=2.76, 
p=.006, d=.56) (see Figure 4). Young adults also had greater FC in the DAN network with a 
p-value that equaled the alpha criterion (t(223)=2.49, p=.01, d=.43.
3.3. Are fitness and physical activity associated with network characteristics vulnerable to 
aging?
To determine the independent associations between fitness and physical activity with 
network FC in the older adults, we used multiple linear regression to create residuals for 
each variable of interest after regressing out (i.e., controlling for) variance associated with 
covariates. For instance, to determine the unique relationship between cardiorespiratory 
fitness and FC, we entered age, sex, MVPA, and LIPA as independent predictors in a linear 
regression predicting the dependent variable of cardiorespiratory fitness. Unstandardized 
residuals from this regression analysis represent individual differences in cardiorespiratory 
fitness after controlling for variance in covariates, and were then used as the variable of 
interest in computing the correlation between cardiorespiratory fitness and FC for each ROI-
ROI pair.
NBS identified one network component (p<.01, FWER corrected) correlated with fitness 
that included 34 regions, including primarily within-network links in the DMN and DAN 
showing a positive correlation with fitness, and primarily between-network links showing a 
negative correlation with fitness (see Figure 5). A full list of the regions identified in this 
component is provided in Table 1 of supplementary materials and a list of component links 
is shown in Figure 5. Results of the NBS analysis are consistent with the exploratory results 
of all bivariate relationships for cardiorespiratory fitness shown in the supplemental 
materials. Briefly, at a more strict link-wise threshold of p<.001 (uncorrected), FC between 
regions of the DMN were positively correlated with cardiorespiratory fitness. In particular, 
the DMN regions from both analyses notably included the theoretically proposed “core” of 
the DMN including the PCC and mPFC (Andrews-Hanna et al., 2010) (see supplementary 
figure 3).
Voss et al.
Page 11
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The same regression approach was used to identify variance in MVPA and LIPA that was 
independent of cardiorespiratory fitness. For each of MVPA and LIPA variables we ran 
independent regressions where the variable of interest for associations with ROI-ROI pair 
FC was the dependent variable with all covariates as predictors. The residuals from each of 
these independent regressions were then used for computing correlations with the FC of 
each ROI pair. However, NBS did not identify any statistically significant network 
components associated with MVPA or LIPA. The simple bivariate (uncorrected) analyses 
shown in supplementary materials also suggest little to no within-network structure for ROI 
pairs positively correlated with MVPA (see supplementary figure 5, supplementary figure 6) 
or LIPA (see supplementary figure 7,supplementary figure 8).
Overall, these results support the conclusion that cardiorespiratory fitness has a positive 
association, independent of physical activity, with FC within networks that exhibit age-
related reductions in FC. To further quantify this association and because results 
emphasizing the DMN Core in part involved uncorrected multiple comparisons of many ROI 
pairs, we performed follow-up analyses with extreme fitness groups based on 
cardiorespiratory fitness that utilized complementary imaging analyses. Fitness groups were 
formed as a “lower fit” (LF) older adult group comprised of the bottom 25% of the 
unstandardized residuals and a “higher fit” (HF) group comprised of the top 25% of the 
unstandardized residuals, following the multiple linear regression approach described above 
to identify variance in cardiorespiratory fitness independent of physical activity. This 
resulted in N=47 older participants in each group, and the groups did not differ in age, 
gender proportion, MVPA, or LIPA (see Table 2, supplemental figure 1E and 1F). We then 
compared the LF and HF groups on average within-network FC of the DMN, DMN Core, 
DAN, ECN, and SAL with a one-directional independent samples t-test, based on our 
hypothesis that the HF group would have greater FC than the LF group. Results showed that 
compared to the LF older adults, HF older adults had greater FC selectively in the DMN 
(t(92)=2.24, p=.01, d=.46) and DMN Core (t(92)=2.85, p=.003, d=.59) (see Figure 6).
Finally, we conducted a whole-brain seed-based analysis of the DMN Core. Again, the 
rationale for this analysis is to add a complementary perspective for evaluating the 
specificity of fitness group differences in FC with the DMN Core. Given our first set of 
approaches utilized defined ROIs and indicated the association with fitness is strongest in 
the DMN Core, a seed-based approach with the DMN Core as a joint seed ROI allowed us to 
evaluate where the effects are strongest with these regions without imposing constraints 
about where in the brain effects could be realized. Results are shown in Figure 7 and are 
consistent and complementary with our results from other approaches. The contrast of HF 
greater than LF identified one cluster of 1176 voxels with a peak Z=3.67 centered in the left 
amygdala and extending into the right amygdala, left and right hippocampus, subcallosal 
cortex, and left and right ventral mPFC; the contrast of LF greater than HF identified one 
cluster of 828 voxels with a peak Z=3.78 centered in left dorsal precentral gyrus, extending 
into right precentral gyrus, left post central gyrus, and left and right supplementary motor 
cortex. Overall, results from the seed-based analysis showed that HF had greater FC with the 
mPFC of the DMN Core and in particular with the medial temporal lobe (MTL) sub-system 
of the DMN as conceptualized by Andrews-Hanna and colleagues (Andrews-Hanna, 2012; 
Voss et al.
Page 12
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Andrews-Hanna et al., 2010). However, LF had greater FC with regions outside of the DMN 
and DMN Core (see Figure 7).
4. Discussion and Conclusions
The current study replicates and extends previous research demonstrating a positive 
relationship between cardiorespiratory fitness and FC of cognitively and clinically relevant 
brain networks observed during the resting state and which are vulnerable to adverse effects 
of aging (Voss et al., 2010b). Overall, there are three important themes from our results. 
First, our results replicate previous studies showing that the DMN, ECN, and SAL networks 
are most disrupted with advanced age (e.g., Figure 4). We also show that young adults had 
greater FC in the DAN compared to the older adults, but that the effect was weaker for this 
network compared to other association networks. Importantly, results suggest that at least 
some of the effects related to age on the DMN are not inevitable and may be moderated by 
cardiorespiratory fitness. Secondly, the positive associations between cardiorespiratory 
fitness and FC were specific rather than global to all FC correlates of aging. Consistent with 
our predictions, FC in the PFC and temporal cortex showed the strongest associations with 
cardiorespiratory fitness (see Figures 5 and 7). A third important theme is that the 
association between cardiorespiratory fitness and functional correlates of brain aging was 
independent of lifestyle MVPA and LIPA. Research in other domains of public health has 
demonstrated a similar effect with respect to cardiovascular disease and mortality (e.g., Lee 
et al., 2011) and our results, especially with replication from follow-up prospective and 
training studies, may extend this finding to brain health.
The significance of the specificity of the relationships between fitness and FC, within the 
context of aging, is that it provides insight into the possible mechanisms through which 
cardiorespiratory fitness has been linked to specific and general aspects of cognition in 
healthy aging and better long-term cognitive outcomes in prospective studies (Barnes et al., 
2003; Colcombe and Kramer, 2003; Hillman et al., 2008; Liu et al., 2012; Wendell et al., 
2014). Note that because NBS resulted in one significant component comprised of multiple 
theorized networks for both the age and fitness analysis, we should interpret the specificity 
of effects on different networks cautiously from the NBS analysis alone. However, follow-up 
analyses of average within-network FC and the whole-brain seed-based analysis also support 
the idea that some networks are more sensitive to aging and individual differences in fitness 
than others. In our results, the DMN and particularly the DMN Core had the strongest 
association with cardiorespiratory fitness while also showing sensitivity to individual 
differences in age. Because the DMN is associated with self-referential thoughts and spatial 
processing and its FC has also been implicated in executive function and selective attention 
(Andrews-Hanna et al., 2014; Andrews-Hanna et al., 2007; Damoiseaux et al., 2008; Kelly 
et al., 2008; Menon and Uddin, 2010), these relationships may represent a systems-level 
mechanism for the association commonly observed between cardiorespiratory fitness and 
performance on tasks that emphasize executive function, selective attention, and cognitive 
control as well as general cognitive functioning (Barnes et al., 2003; Colcombe and Kramer, 
2003; Colcombe et al., 2004; Hillman et al., 2008; Smith et al., 2010).
Voss et al.
Page 13
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The specificity of the relationships between fitness and FC observed in the current study is 
significant from a public health perspective because it provides mechanistic insight into 
understanding the positive relationship between fitness and brain health in exercise training 
studies (Erickson et al., 2011; Maass et al., 2014; Pereira et al., 2007; Voss et al., 2013a). 
Overall, our results are most consistent with the cardiovascular fitness hypothesis, which 
suggests that cardiovascular (i.e., aerobic) fitness is the key physiological mediator that 
explains the positive relationship between physical exercise and cognitive performance, with 
the implication that gains in cardiovascular fitness are necessary for gains in brain health to 
be observed (Barnes et al., 2013; Brickman et al., 2014; Dustman et al., 1984).
One mechanism through which cardiorespiratory fitness may be linked to better brain 
function includes improved oxygen transport and metabolism, not only in muscle but also in 
the brain. This in turn is thought to enable more efficient neurotransmitter function 
supporting neuronal signaling, and less oxidative stress and inflammation-related neuronal 
injury, both resulting in improved cognitive performance (Davenport et al., 2012; Dustman 
et al., 1990; Dustman et al., 1984). Another, not mutually exclusive possibility, is that 
aerobic training directly affects the heart and central vessels, which then affect compliance 
and pressure of flow in end organs such as the kidney and brain; accordingly, greater 
vascular compliance would lower pulsatile pressure-related damage in cerebral micro-
vessels that supply energy for neuronal processing (Gauthier et al., 2014; Mitchell et al., 
2011; Tarumi et al., 2013). Finally, another not mutually exclusive mechanistic pathway 
associated with cardiorespiratory fitness could be training-related improvements in the 
oxidative capacity of large skeletal muscles, through both enhanced mitochondrial function 
and muscle capillarization. These improvements would allow for more exchange of muscle-
derived circulating humoral factors that could up-regulate central expression of neurotrophic 
factors, such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor, in the hippocampus and neocortex (Voss 
et al., 2013b; Wrann et al., 2013).
Given that these mechanisms are proposed to work from adaptations initiated by physical 
activity or training at moderate-to-vigorous intensities, what could account for the specific 
association we observed between cardiorespiratory fitness and brain health independent of 
physical activity? One possibility is the strong genetic influence (up to 50%) over 
cardiorespiratory fitness and over the capacity for training-induced changes in fitness 
(Bouchard et al., 1999; Bouchard et al., 2011). Similarly, there may be overlapping genetic 
predictors of the responsiveness of central and peripheral cellular and vascular systems to 
regular MVPA and training. For example, increased distribution of blood flow to the muscle 
is a very important predictor of cardiorespiratory fitness, and this is influenced by the heart’s 
ability to generate more cardiac output (e.g., via increases in stroke volume) and to recruit 
and form new capillaries (i.e., angiogenesis) in the muscle. Another important training-
related adaptation includes changes in the oxidative capacity of mitochondria in active 
muscle fibers. Angiogenesis and mitochondrial function also increase in the brain in 
response to exercise training (Marques-Aleixo et al., 2012; Voss et al., 2013b), and so it is 
possible that individuals that are genetically predisposed to have relatively higher levels of 
cardiorespiratory fitness or have greater training-induced increases in fitness will experience 
the most protection against adverse effects of aging on the brain from through these vascular 
and cellular pathways.
Voss et al.
Page 14
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Interestingly, the distribution of cardiorespiratory fitness for our sample is similar to other 
studies that have detected significant relationships between fitness and cognitive and brain 
health. For instance, prospective studies evaluating the predictive value of cardiorespiratory 
fitness for cognitive decline and other health outcomes have generally found that the greatest 
benefit is in the difference between the lowest to moderate levels of cardiorespiratory fitness 
(Barnes et al., 2003; Berry et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2012), which is consistent with the relative 
differences between our LF and HF older adult groups. In addition, our sample has a similar 
distribution of fitness as other studies linking variation in fitness to individual differences in 
DMN FC (Voss et al., 2010b) and hippocampal volume in healthy older adults (Erickson et 
al., 2009) and early AD (Honea et al., 2009). This suggests that the mechanism linking 
fitness and brain health may not depend on extremely high levels of fitness, and rather is 
sensitive to individual differences in (or training related improvements in) fitness from even 
low to moderate fitness levels.
Finally, our conclusions should be interpreted within the context of several limitations. First, 
our sample was relatively homogenous in regard to age, health, ethnicity, and education and 
so it will be important for follow-up studies to generalize our findings to more diverse 
samples with a variety of age-related chronic conditions. Second, our cross-sectional design 
precludes making causal statements about the influence of cardiorespiratory fitness on brain 
health, so future research will be needed to test our hypotheses and extend our findings 
within the context of training-induced changes in cardiorespiratory fitness. In addition, we 
generated a number of predictions about the cognitive and clinical relevance of the 
specificity of our results for the DMN, and it will be important to follow these predictions 
with explicit tests of whether these FC measures mediate the relationships between 
cardiorespiratory fitness and cognitive performance and clinical outcomes. A particularly 
good framework for testing these relationships will be an analysis that integrates across 
multiple measures of brain structure and function (Hedden et al., 2014). A final limitation is 
that our measure of physical activity was only a brief sample of physical activity rather than 
a measurement over months or years of behavior. While this is standard practice (e.g., 
Troiano et al., 2008; Varma et al., 2014), this may add noise to the measurement of physical 
activity compared with the measurement of cardiorespiratory fitness, since fitness is a 
physiological attribute that may be affected by years of physical activity and other lifestyle 
choices. Thus it is possible that fitness is a marker for more long-standing physical health 
and activity. In addition, it should be noted that while we used a hip-worn accelerometer, 
accelerometers can also be worn on the wrist or ankle and each site has advantages and 
disadvantages for the types of activities they are sensitive to (e.g., Hildebrand et al., 2014). 
In turn, longitudinal studies that measure both physical activity and cardiorespiratory fitness 
regularly over a long duration of training for inactive adults, and studies with different or 
additional accelerometer sites, could further test the extent to which our results stem from 
matters of measurement or mechanism.
Another important set of limitations relates to factors that could be associated with 
individual differences in resting state network FC that also correlate with fitness, but are not 
reflective of the functional integrity of brain networks. The methodological steps important 
for detecting network measures sensitive to neuronal versus non-neuronal aspects of brain 
networks continue to be carefully evaluated, and there is no clear single optimal processing 
Voss et al.
Page 15
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 or covariate strategy at this time (e.g., Bright and Murphy, 2015; Zeng et al., 2014). Thus, 
although we have used a processing stream that is consistent with much of the published 
literature investigating individual differences in resting state FC in relation to aging and 
cognition, it will be important for future studies to replicate our findings with additional 
consideration for individual differences in resting heart rate and blood pressure during 
scanning and examining training-related changes in FC within the same individuals that are 
likely to have similar movement and signal-to-noise profiles during scanning (e.g., Zeng et 
al., 2014).
In summary, our results suggest that cardiorespiratory fitness is related to greater FC of brain 
networks that are relevant to age-related changes in cognition and risk for neurological 
diseases. Our results suggest that the positive association of fitness with brain function could 
occur independent of habitual physical activity. This highlights the importance of measuring 
both physical activity and cardiorespiratory fitness as results that show relationships with 
physical activity without accounting for individual differences in fitness may actually be 
attributable to fitness among high responders to regular physical activity. As the world’s 
aging population continues to grow, our results may also suggest that cardiorespiratory 
fitness is an important physiological attribute to modify for improved cognitive and brain 
health throughout the lifespan.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Institute on Aging at the National Institutes of Health (R37 AG025667) 
and funding from Abbott Nutrition through the Center for Nutrition, Learning, and Memory at the University of 
Illinois. We would also like to thank Anya Knecht, Susan Houseworth, Nancy Dodge, Holly Tracy, and all of the 
Lifelong Brain and Cognition and Exercise Psychology Laboratory graduate students and staff for their help in 
participant recruitment and data collection. Finally, we would like to thank Merry Mani, Vincent Magnotta, and Joel 
Bruss for their help with development and improvement of image processing scripts.
References
ACSM. ACSM’s Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription. 9th Edition ed.. Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins; 2013. 
Agosta F, Pievani M, Geroldi C, Copetti M, Frisoni G, Filippi M. Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer’s 
disease: beyond the default mode network. Neurobiol Aging. 2012; 33:1564–1578. [PubMed: 
21813210] 
Andersson JLR, Jenkinson M, Smith S. Non-linear optimisation. FMRIB Analysis Group Technical 
Reports. 2007a
Andersson JLR, Jenkinson M, Smith S. Non-linear registration, aka spatial normalisation. FMRIB 
Analysis Group Technical Reports. 2007b
Andrews-Hanna J. The brain’s default network and its adaptive role in internal mentation. 
Neuroscientist. 2012; 18:251–270. [PubMed: 21677128] 
Andrews-Hanna J, Reidler J, Sepulcre J, Poulin R, Buckner R. Functional-anatomic fractionation of 
the brain’s default network. Neuron. 2010; 65:550–562. [PubMed: 20188659] 
Andrews-Hanna J, Smallwood J, Spreng R. The default network and self-generated thought: 
component processes, dynamic control, and clinical relevance. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2014; 1316:29–
52. [PubMed: 24502540] 
Voss et al.
Page 16
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Andrews-Hanna J, Snyder A, Vincent J, Lustig C, Head D, Raichle M, Buckner R. Disruption of large-
scale brain systems in advanced aging. Neuron. 2007; 56:924–935. [PubMed: 18054866] 
Angevaren M, Aufdemkampe G, Verhaar H, Aleman A, Vanhees L. Physical activity and enhanced 
fitness to improve cognitive function in older people without known cognitive impairment. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008:CD005381.
Bai F, Shu N, Yuan Y, Shi Y, Yu H, Wu D, Wang J, Xia M, He Y, Zhang Z. Topologically convergent 
and divergent structural connectivity patterns between patients with remitted geriatric depression 
and amnestic mild cognitive impairment. J Neurosci. 2012; 32:4307–4318. [PubMed: 22442092] 
Barnes D, Blackwell T, Stone K, Goldman S, Hillier T, Yaffe K. Cognition in older women: the 
importance of daytime movement. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2008; 56:1658–1664. [PubMed: 18662201] 
Barnes D, Santos-Modesitt W, Poelke G, Kramer A, Castro C, Middleton L, Yaffe K. The Mental 
Activity and eXercise (MAX) trial: a randomized controlled trial to enhance cognitive function in 
older adults. JAMA Intern Med. 2013; 173:797–804. [PubMed: 23545598] 
Barnes D, Yaffe K. The projected effect of risk factor reduction on Alzheimer’s disease prevalence. 
Lancet Neurol. 2011; 10:819–828. [PubMed: 21775213] 
Barnes D, Yaffe K, Satariano W, Tager I. A longitudinal study of cardiorespiratory fitness and 
cognitive function in healthy older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2003; 51:459–465. [PubMed: 
12657064] 
Beckmann CF, Jenkinson M, Smith SM. General multilevel linear modeling for group analysis in 
FMRI. NeuroImage. 2003; 20:1052–1063. [PubMed: 14568475] 
Berry J, Willis B, Gupta S, Barlow C, Lakoski S, Khera A, Rohatgi A, de Lemos J, Haskell W, Lloyd-
Jones D. Lifetime risks for cardiovascular disease mortality by cardiorespiratory fitness levels 
measured at ages 45, 55, and 65 years in men. The Cooper Center Longitudinal Study. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2011; 57:1604–1610. [PubMed: 21474041] 
Boots, E.; Schultz, S.; Oh, J.; Larson, J.; Edwards, D.; Cook, D.; Koscik, R.; Dowling, M.; Gallagher, 
C.; Carlsson, C.; Rowley, H.; Bendlin, B.; LaRue, A.; Asthana, S.; Hermann, B.; Sager, M.; 
Johnson, S.; Okonkwo, O. Brain Imaging Behav. 2014. Cardiorespiratory fitness is associated with 
brain structure, cognition, and mood in a middle-aged cohort at risk for Alzheimer’s disease. 
Bouchard C, An P, Rice T, Skinner J, Wilmore J, Gagnon J, Pérusse L, Leon A, Rao D. Familial 
aggregation of VO(2max) response to exercise training: results from the HERITAGE Family 
Study. J Appl Physiol (1985). 1999; 87:1003–1008. [PubMed: 10484570] 
Bouchard C, Sarzynski M, Rice T, Kraus W, Church T, Sung Y, Rao D, Rankinen T. Genomic 
predictors of the maximal O2 uptake response to standardized exercise training programs. J Appl 
Physiol (1985). 2011; 110:1160–1170. [PubMed: 21183627] 
Brickman A, Khan U, Provenzano F, Yeung L, Suzuki W, Schroeter H, Wall M, Sloan R, Small S. 
Enhancing dentate gyrus function with dietary flavanols improves cognition in older adults. Nat 
Neurosci. 2014
Brier M, Thomas J, Snyder A, Benzinger T, Zhang D, Raichle M, Holtzman D, Morris J, Ances B. 
Loss of intranetwork and internetwork resting state functional connections with Alzheimer’s 
disease progression. J Neurosci. 2012; 32:8890–8899. [PubMed: 22745490] 
Bright M, Murphy K. Is fMRI “noise” really noise? Resting state nuisance regressors remove variance 
with network structure. NeuroImage. 2015
Buchman A, Boyle P, Yu L, Shah R, Wilson R, Bennett D. Total daily physical activity and the risk of 
AD and cognitive decline in older adults. Neurology. 2012; 78:1323–1329. [PubMed: 22517108] 
Burzynska A, Chaddock-Heyman L, Voss M, Wong C, Gothe N, Olson E, Knecht A, Lewis A, Monti 
J, Cooke G, Wojcicki T, Fanning J, Chung H, Awick E, McAuley E, Kramer A. Physical activity 
and cardiorespiratory fitness are beneficial for white matter in low-fit older adults. PLoS One. 
2014; 9:e107413. [PubMed: 25229455] 
Casperson CJ, Powell KE, Christenson GM. Physical activity, exercise, and physical fitness: 
Definitions and distinctions for health-related research. Public Health Reports. 1985; 1985:126–
131.
Prevention, CfDCa, editor. CDC. The State of Aging and Health in America 2013. Atlanta, GA: US 
Dept of Health and Human Services; 2013. 
Voss et al.
Page 17
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Chan M, Park D, Savalia N, Petersen S, Wig G. Decreased segregation of brain systems across the 
healthy adult lifespan. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014; 111:E4997–E5006. [PubMed: 25368199] 
Chen K, Janz K, Zhu W, Brychta R. Redefining the roles of sensors in objective physical activity 
monitoring. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2012; 44:S13–S23. [PubMed: 22157770] 
Cocchi L, Bramati I, Zalesky A, Furukawa E, Fontenelle L, Moll J, Tripp G, Mattos P. Altered 
functional brain connectivity in a non-clinical sample of young adults with attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder. J Neurosci. 2012; 32:17753–17761. [PubMed: 23223295] 
Colcombe S, Kramer A. Fitness effects on the cognitive function of older adults: a meta-analytic study. 
Psychol Sci. 2003; 14:125–130. [PubMed: 12661673] 
Colcombe S, Kramer A, Erickson K, Scalf P, McAuley E, Cohen N, Webb A, Jerome G, Marquez D, 
Elavsky S. Cardiovascular fitness, cortical plasticity, and aging. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004; 
101:3316–3321. [PubMed: 14978288] 
Copeland J, Esliger D. Accelerometer assessment of physical activity in active, healthy older adults. J 
Aging Phys Act. 2009; 17:17–30. [PubMed: 19299836] 
Craft L, Zderic T, Gapstur SM, Vanlterson EH, Thomas DM, Siddique J, Hamilton MT. Evidence that 
women meeting physical activity guidelines do not sit less: an observational inclinometry study. 
International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity. 2012; 9:1–9. [PubMed: 
22233712] 
Damoiseaux J, Beckmann C, Arigita E, Barkhof F, Scheltens P, Stam C, Smith S, Rombouts S. 
Reduced resting-state brain activity in the “default network” in normal aging. Cereb Cortex. 2008; 
18:1856–1864. [PubMed: 18063564] 
Davenport M, Hogan D, Eskes G, Longman R, Poulin M. Cerebrovascular reserve: the link between 
fitness and cognitive function? Exerc Sport Sci Rev. 2012; 40:153–158. [PubMed: 22504726] 
Dennis E, Thompson P. Functional brain connectivity using fMRI in aging and Alzheimer’s disease. 
Neuropsychol Rev. 2014; 24:49–62. [PubMed: 24562737] 
Dupuy O, Gauthier C, Fraser S, Desjardins-Crepeau L, Desjardins M, Mekary S, Lesage F, Hoge R, 
Pouliot P, Bherer L. Higher levels of cardiovascular fitness are associated with better executive 
function and prefrontal oxygenation in younger and older women. Front Hum Neurosci. 2015; 
9:66. [PubMed: 25741267] 
Dustman R, Emmerson R, Ruhling R, Shearer D, Steinhaus L, Johnson S, Bonekat H, Shigeoka J. Age 
and fitness effects on EEG, ERPs, visual sensitivity, and cognition. Neurobiol Aging. 1990; 
11:193–200. [PubMed: 2362652] 
Dustman R, Ruhling R, Russell E, Shearer D, Bonekat H, Shigeoka J, Wood J, Bradford D. Aerobic 
exercise training and improved neuropsychological function of older individuals. Neurobiol Aging. 
1984; 5:35–42. [PubMed: 6738784] 
Erickson K, Prakash R, Voss M, Chaddock L, Hu L, Morris K, White S, Wojcicki T, McAuley E, 
Kramer A. Aerobic fitness is associated with hippocampal volume in elderly humans. 
Hippocampus. 2009; 19:1030–1039. [PubMed: 19123237] 
Erickson K, Voss M, Prakash R, Basak C, Szabo A, Chaddock L, Kim J, Heo S, Alves H, White S, 
Wojcicki T, Mailey E, Vieira V, Martin S, Pence B, Woods J, McAuley E, Kramer A. Exercise 
training increases size of hippocampus and improves memory. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 
108:3017–3022. [PubMed: 21282661] 
Etnier J, Nowell P, Landers D, Sibley B. A meta-regression to examine the relationship between 
aerobic fitness and cognitive performance. Brain Res Rev. 2006; 52:119–130. [PubMed: 
16490256] 
Gauthier C, Lefort M, Mekary S, Desjardins-Crepeau L, Skimminge A, Iversen P, Madjar C, 
Desjardins M, Lesage F, Garde E, Frouin F, Bherer L, Hoge R. Hearts and minds: linking vascular 
rigidity and aerobic fitness with cognitive aging. Neurobiol Aging. 2014
Gordon B, Rykhlevskaia E, Brumback C, Lee Y, Elavsky S, Konopack J, McAuley E, Kramer A, 
Colcombe S, Gratton G, Fabiani M. Neuroanatomical correlates of aging, cardiopulmonary fitness 
level, and education. Psychophysiology. 2008; 45:825–838. [PubMed: 18627534] 
Greicius M, Srivastava G, Reiss A, Menon V. Default-mode network activity distinguishes 
Alzheimer’s disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A. 2004; 101:4637–4642. [PubMed: 15070770] 
Voss et al.
Page 18
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Greve D, Fischl B. Accurate and robust brain image alignment using boundary-based registration. 
NeuroImage. 2009; 48:63–72. [PubMed: 19573611] 
Hallquist M, Hwang K, Luna B. The nuisance of nuisance regression: spectral misspecification in a 
common approach to resting-state fMRI preprocessing reintroduces noise and obscures functional 
connectivity. NeuroImage. 2013; 82:208–225. [PubMed: 23747457] 
Hamer M, Chida Y. Physical activity and risk of neurodegenerative disease: a systematic review of 
prospective evidence. Psychol Med. 2009; 39:3–11. [PubMed: 18570697] 
Hart T, McClain J, Tudor-Locke C. Controlled and free-living evaluation of objective measures of 
sedentary and active behaviors. J Phys Act Health. 2011; 8:848–857. [PubMed: 21832301] 
Hayes S, Hayes J, Cadden M, Verfaellie M. A review of cardiorespiratory fitness-related 
neuroplasticity in the aging brain. Front Aging Neurosci. 2013; 5:31. [PubMed: 23874299] 
He X, Qin W, Liu Y, Zhang X, Duan Y, Song J, Li K, Jiang T, Yu C. Abnormal salience network in 
normal aging and in amnestic mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. Hum Brain 
Mapp. 2014; 35:3446–3464. [PubMed: 24222384] 
Hedden T, Schultz A, Rieckmann A, Mormino E, Johnson K, Sperling R, Buckner R. Multiple Brain 
Markers are Linked to Age-Related Variation in Cognition. Cereb Cortex. 2014
Hildebrand M, VAN Hees V, Hansen B, Ekelund U. Age group comparability of raw accelerometer 
output from wrist- and hip-worn monitors. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2014; 46:1816–1824. [PubMed: 
24887173] 
Hillman C, Erickson K, Kramer A. Be smart, exercise your heart: exercise effects on brain and 
cognition. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2008; 9:58–65. [PubMed: 18094706] 
Honea R, Thomas G, Harsha A, Anderson H, Donnelly J, Brooks W, Burns J. Cardiorespiratory fitness 
and preserved medial temporal lobe volume in Alzheimer disease. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 
2009; 23:188–197. [PubMed: 19812458] 
Hurd M, Martorell P, Delavande A, Mullen K, Langa K. Monetary costs of dementia in the United 
States. N Engl J Med. 2013; 368:1326–1334. [PubMed: 23550670] 
Jacobs D, Ainsworth B, Hartman T, Leon A. A simultaneous evaluation of 10 commonly used physical 
activity questionnaires. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1993; 25:81–91. [PubMed: 8423759] 
Jezzard P, Balaban R. Correction for geometric distortion in echo planar images from B0 field 
variations. Magn Reson Med. 1995; 34:65–73. [PubMed: 7674900] 
Kelly A, Uddin L, Biswal B, Castellanos F, Milham M. Competition between functional brain 
networks mediates behavioral variability. NeuroImage. 2008; 39:527–537. [PubMed: 17919929] 
Kruschwitz J, List D, Waller L, Rubinov M, Walter H. GraphVar: a user-friendly toolbox for 
comprehensive graph analyses of functional brain connectivity. J Neurosci Methods. 2015; 
245:107–115. [PubMed: 25725332] 
Larson E, Wang L, Bowen J, McCormick W, Teri L, Crane P, Kukull W. Exercise is associated with 
reduced risk for incident dementia among persons 65 years of age and older. Ann Intern Med. 
2006; 144:73–81. [PubMed: 16418406] 
Laye M, Nielsen M, Hansen L, Knudsen T, Pedersen B. Physical activity enhances metabolic fitness 
independently of cardiorespiratory fitness in marathon runners. Dis Markers. 2015; 2015:806418. 
[PubMed: 25821340] 
Lee D, Sui X, Ortega F, Kim Y, Church T, Winett R, Ekelund U, Katzmarzyk P, Blair S. Comparisons 
of leisure-time physical activity and cardiorespiratory fitness as predictors of all-cause mortality in 
men and women. Br J Sports Med. 2011; 45:504–510. [PubMed: 20418526] 
Leopold D, Murayama Y, Logothetis N. Very slow activity fluctuations in monkey visual cortex: 
implications for functional brain imaging. Cereb Cortex. 2003; 13:422–433. [PubMed: 12631571] 
Liu R, Sui X, Laditka J, Church T, Colabianchi N, Hussey J, Blair S. Cardiorespiratory fitness as a 
predictor of dementia mortality in men and women. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2012; 44:253–259. 
[PubMed: 21796048] 
Maass A, Duzel S, Goerke M, Becke A, Sobieray U, Neumann K, Lovden M, Lindenberger U, 
Backman L, Braun-Dullaeus R, Ahrens D, Heinze H, Muller N, Duzel E. Vascular hippocampal 
plasticity after aerobic exercise in older adults. Mol Psychiatry. 2014
Voss et al.
Page 19
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Makizako H, Liu-Ambrose T, Shimada H, Doi T, Park H, Tsutsumimoto K, Uemura K, Suzuki T. 
Moderate-Intensity Physical Activity, Hippocampal Volume, and Memory in Older Adults With 
Mild Cognitive Impairment. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2014
Marques-Aleixo I, Oliveira P, Moreira P, Magalhaes J, Ascensao A. Physical exercise as a possible 
strategy for brain protection: evidence from mitochondrial-mediated mechanisms. Prog Neurobiol. 
2012; 99:149–162. [PubMed: 22940590] 
Matthews C, Chen K, Freedson P, Buchowski M, Beech B, Pate R, Troiano R. Amount of time spent in 
sedentary behaviors in the United States, 2003–2004. Am J Epidemiol. 2008; 167:875–881. 
[PubMed: 18303006] 
Meier T, Desphande A, Vergun S, Nair V, Song J, Biswal B, Meyerand M, Birn R, Prabhakaran V. 
Support vector machine classification and characterization of age-related reorganization of 
functional brain networks. NeuroImage. 2012; 60:601–613. [PubMed: 22227886] 
Menon V, Uddin L. Saliency, switching, attention and control: a network model of insula function. 
Brain Struct Funct. 2010; 214:655–667. [PubMed: 20512370] 
Middleton L, Manini T, Simonsick E, Harris T, Barnes D, Tylavsky F, Brach J, Everhart J, Yaffe K. 
Activity energy expenditure and incident cognitive impairment in older adults. Arch Intern Med. 
2011; 171:1251–1257. [PubMed: 21771893] 
Mitchell G, van Buchem M, Sigurdsson S, Gotal J, Jonsdottir M, Kjartansson O, Garcia M, Aspelund 
T, Harris T, Gudnason V, Launer L. Arterial stiffness, pressure and flow pulsatility and brain 
structure and function: the Age, Gene/Environment Susceptibility--Reykjavik study. Brain. 2011; 
134:3398–3407. [PubMed: 22075523] 
Mowinckel A, Espeseth T, Westlye L. Network-specific effects of age and in-scanner subject motion: a 
resting-state fMRI study of 238 healthy adults. NeuroImage. 2012; 63:1364–1373. [PubMed: 
22992492] 
Services, UDoHaH, editor. NIA. Why population aging matters: A global perspective. 2007. 
Nyberg J, Aberg M, Schioler L, Nilsson M, Wallin A, Toren K, Kuhn H. Cardiovascular and cognitive 
fitness at age 18 and risk of early-onset dementia. Brain. 2014; 137:1514–1523. [PubMed: 
24604561] 
Onoda K, Ishihara M, Yamaguchi S. Decreased functional connectivity by aging is associated with 
cognitive decline. J Cogn Neurosci. 2012; 24:2186–2198. [PubMed: 22784277] 
Pate R, O’Neill J, Lobelo F. The evolving definition of “sedentary”. Exerc Sport Sci Rev. 2008; 
36:173–178. [PubMed: 18815485] 
Pereira A, Huddleston D, Brickman A, Sosunov A, Hen R, McKhann G, Sloan R, Gage F, Brown T, 
Small S. An in vivo correlate of exercise-induced neurogenesis in the adult dentate gyrus. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007; 104:5638–5643. [PubMed: 17374720] 
Power J, Barnes K, Snyder A, Schlaggar B, Petersen S. Spurious but systematic correlations in 
functional connectivity MRI networks arise from subject motion. NeuroImage. 2012; 59:2142–
2154. [PubMed: 22019881] 
Prakash R, Voss M, Erickson K, Lewis J, Chaddock L, Malkowski E, Alves H, Kim J, Szabo A, White 
S, Wojcicki T, Klamm E, McAuley E, Kramer A. Cardiorespiratory fitness and attentional control 
in the aging brain. Front Hum Neurosci. 2011; 4:229. [PubMed: 21267428] 
Rowlands A, Fraysse F, Catt M, Stiles V, Stanley R, Eston R, Olds T. Comparability of measured 
acceleration from accelerometry-based activity monitors. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2015; 47:201–
210. [PubMed: 24870577] 
Salvador R, Suckling J, Coleman M, Pickard J, Menon D, Bullmore E. Neurophysiological 
architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain. Cereb Cortex. 2005; 
15:1332–1342. [PubMed: 15635061] 
Seeley W, Crawford R, Zhou J, Miller B, Greicius M. Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale 
human brain networks. Neuron. 2009; 62:42–52. [PubMed: 19376066] 
Shaw E, Schultz A, Sperling R, Hedden T. Functional connectivity in multiple cortical networks is 
associated with performance across cognitive domains in older adults. Brain Connect. 2015
Smiley-Oyen A, Lowry K, Francois S, Kohut M, Ekkekakis P. Exercise, fitness, and neurocognitive 
function in older adults: the “selective improvement” and “cardiovascular fitness” hypotheses. Ann 
Behav Med. 2008; 36:280–291. [PubMed: 18825471] 
Voss et al.
Page 20
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Smith P. Physical activity, vascular health, and cognitive impairment. Arch Intern Med. 2012; 172:83. 
author reply 84. [PubMed: 22232159] 
Smith P, Blumenthal J, Hoffman B, Cooper H, Strauman T, Welsh-Bohmer K, Browndyke J, Sherwood 
A. Aerobic exercise and neurocognitive performance: a meta-analytic review of randomized 
controlled trials. Psychosom Med. 2010; 72:239–252. [PubMed: 20223924] 
Smith S. Fast robust automated brain extraction. Hum Brain Mapp. 2002; 17:143–155. [PubMed: 
12391568] 
Smith S, Fox P, Miller K, Glahn D, Fox P, Mackay C, Filippini N, Watkins K, Toro R, Laird A, 
Beckmann C. Correspondence of the brain’s functional architecture during activation and rest. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009; 106:13040–13045. [PubMed: 19620724] 
Sofi F, Valecchi D, Bacci D, Abbate R, Gensini G, Casini A, Macchi C. Physical activity and risk of 
cognitive decline: a meta-analysis of prospective studies. J Intern Med. 2011; 269:107–117. 
[PubMed: 20831630] 
Sorg C, Riedl V, Muhlau M, Calhoun V, Eichele T, Laer L, Drzezga A, Forstl H, Kurz A, Zimmer C, 
Wohlschlager A. Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer’s 
disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007; 104:18760–18765. [PubMed: 18003904] 
Spirduso W. Physical fitness, aging, and psychomotor speed: a review. J Gerontol. 1980; 35:850–865. 
[PubMed: 7002994] 
Tarumi T, Gonzales M, Fallow B, Nualnim N, Pyron M, Tanaka H, Haley A. Central artery stiffness, 
neuropsychological function, and cerebral perfusion in sedentary and endurance-trained middle-
aged adults. J Hypertens. 2013; 31:2400–2409. [PubMed: 24220591] 
Thompson WH, Fransson P. The frequency dimension of fMRI dynamic connectivity: network 
connectivity, functional hubs and integration in the resting brain. NeuroImage in press. 2015
Troiano R, Berrigan D, Dodd K, Masse L, Tilert T, McDowell M. Physical activity in the United States 
measured by accelerometer. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2008; 40:181–188. [PubMed: 18091006] 
Tudor-Locke C, Schuna JJ, Barreira T, Mire E, Broyles S, Katzmarzyk P, Johnson W. Normative 
steps/day values for older adults: NHANES 2005–2006. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2013; 
68:1426–1432. [PubMed: 23913932] 
Varma V, Chuang Y, Harris G, Tan E, Carlson M. Low-intensity daily walking activity is associated 
with hippocampal volume in older adults. Hippocampus. 2014
Voss M, Heo S, Prakash R, Erickson K, Alves H, Chaddock L, Szabo A, Mailey E, Wojcicki T, White 
S, Gothe N, McAuley E, Sutton B, Kramer A. The influence of aerobic fitness on cerebral white 
matter integrity and cognitive function in older adults: results of a one-year exercise intervention. 
Hum Brain Mapp. 2013a; 34:2972–2985. [PubMed: 22674729] 
Voss M, Prakash R, Erickson K, Basak C, Chaddock L, Kim J, Alves H, Heo S, Szabo A, White S, 
Wojcicki T, Mailey E, Gothe N, Olson E, McAuley E, Kramer A. Plasticity of brain networks in a 
randomized intervention trial of exercise training in older adults. Front Aging Neurosci 2. 2010a
Voss M, Vivar C, Kramer A, van Praag H. Bridging animal and human models of exercise-induced 
brain plasticity. Trends Cogn Sci. 2013b; 17:525–544. [PubMed: 24029446] 
Voss MW, Carr LJ, Clark R, Weng T. Revenge of the “sit” II: Does lifestyle impact neuronal and 
cognitive health through distinct mechanisms associated with sedentary behavior and physical 
activity? Mental Health and Physical Activity. 2014; 7:9–24.
Voss MW, Erickson KI, Prakash RS, Chaddock L, Malkowski E, Alves H, Kim JS, Morris KS, White 
SM, Wójcicki TR. Functional connectivity: a source of variance in the association between 
cardiorespiratory fitness and cognition? Neuropsychologia. 2010b; 48:1394–1406. [PubMed: 
20079755] 
Wang J, Zuo X, Dai Z, Xia M, Zhao Z, Zhao X, Jia J, Han Y, He Y. Disrupted functional brain 
connectome in individuals at risk for Alzheimer’s disease. Biol Psychiatry. 2013; 73:472–481. 
[PubMed: 22537793] 
Weinstein A, Voss M, Prakash R, Chaddock L, Szabo A, White S, Wojcicki T, Mailey E, McAuley E, 
Kramer A, Erickson K. The association between aerobic fitness and executive function is 
mediated by prefrontal cortex volume. Brain Behav Immun. 2012; 26:811–819. [PubMed: 
22172477] 
Voss et al.
Page 21
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Wendell C, Gunstad J, Waldstein S, Wright J, Ferrucci L, Zonderman A. Cardiorespiratory fitness and 
accelerated cognitive decline with aging. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2014; 69:455–462. 
[PubMed: 24192540] 
Williams P. Physical fitness and activity as separate heart disease risk factors: a meta-analysis. Med Sci 
Sports Exerc. 2001; 33:754–761. [PubMed: 11323544] 
Worsley K, Evans A, Marrett S, Neelin P. A three-dimensional statistical analysis for CBF activation 
studies in human brain. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 1992; 12:900–918. [PubMed: 1400644] 
Wrann C, White J, Salogiannnis J, Laznik-Bogoslavski D, Wu J, Ma D, Lin J, Greenberg M, 
Spiegelman B. Exercise induces hippocampal BDNF through a PGC-1alpha/FNDC5 pathway. 
Cell Metab. 2013; 18:649–659. [PubMed: 24120943] 
Yaffe K, Barnes D, Nevitt M, Lui L, Covinsky K. A prospective study of physical activity and 
cognitive decline in elderly women: women who walk. Arch Intern Med. 2001; 161:1703–1708. 
[PubMed: 11485502] 
Young J, Angevaren M, Rusted… J. Aerobic exercise to improve cognitive function in older people 
without known cognitive impairment. The Cochrane …. 2015; 4:CD005381.
Zalesky A, Cocchi L, Fornito A, Murray M, Bullmore E. Connectivity differences in brain networks. 
NeuroImage. 2012; 60:1055–1062. [PubMed: 22273567] 
Zalesky A, Fornito A, Bullmore E. Network-based statistic: identifying differences in brain networks. 
NeuroImage. 2010; 53:1197–1207. [PubMed: 20600983] 
Zeng L, Wang D, Fox M, Sabuncu M, Hu D, Ge M, Buckner R, Liu H. Neurobiological basis of head 
motion in brain imaging. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014; 111:6058–6062. [PubMed: 24711399] 
Voss et al.
Page 22
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Highlights
•
Normal aging is associated with selective disruption of large-scale brain 
networks
•
Cardiorespiratory fitness is related to the function of networks affected by aging
•
Fitness is related to network function independent of physical activity
Voss et al.
Page 23
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Association networks and their ROI peaks. ROI acronyms correspond to the labels in Table 1 
and are used as so throughout the paper; lateralized ROIs are visualized on the appropriate 
hemisphere (shown as L=L and R=R).
Voss et al.
Page 24
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
The cumulative frequency plot visualizes the average functional connectivity for the set of 
ROI pairs that are either within the same network or in different networks (i.e., between), 
separated by young and older adults.
Voss et al.
Page 25
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Visualization of age differences in FC as identified by NBS, p<.01 FWER corrected. Within-
network links are illustrated with the same color as the network nodes as described in the 
color key in the figure; between-network links are illustrated as gray. Of all possible within-
network ROI pairs for each network, those showing an effect in favor of young adults (Y>O) 
included 60% of ECN pairs, 22% of DMN pairs, 20% of DAN pairs, and 18% of SAL pairs. 
Consistent with Figure 2, young adults have greater FC primarily within networks.
Voss et al.
Page 26
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Summary of age group comparisons for average functional network connectivity. Boxes 
represent the width between the 25th and 75th quartiles (interquartile range) and the whiskers 
represent the 5th to 95th percentiles of the data, and the middle bar represents the median. 
*p<.01, ^p=.01, based on two-tailed t-tests.
Voss et al.
Page 27
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
Visualization of relationship between cardiovascular fitness and FC as identified by NBS, 
p<.01 FWER corrected, after controlling for age, gender, MVPA, and LIPA. For both 
positive (A) and negative (B) correlations, within-network links are illustrated with the same 
color as the network nodes and between-network links are illustrated as gray. The panel on 
the right (C) lists the ROI pair labels shown in panels A and B, where “W” is listed for 
within-network pairs and “B” is listed for between-network pairs; ROI pairs are listed in 
order of strength of their association with fitness as indicated on x-axis. Nodes, links, and 
bar graph elements for within-network pairs are colored with the same labeling scheme as 
previous figures. Of all possible within-network ROI pairs for each network, those showing 
a positive correlation with fitness in the identified component included 0% of ECN pairs, 
15% of DMN pairs, 9% of DAN pairs, and 4% of SAL pairs.
Voss et al.
Page 28
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. 
Summary of extreme fitness groups comparisons for average functional network 
connectivity: OLD-LF=Older adult lower-fit group, OLD-HF=Older adult higher-fit group, 
YOUNG=younger adult group. Boxes represent the width between the 25th and 75th 
quartiles (interquartile range), whiskers represent the 5th to 95th percentiles of the data, and 
the middle bar represents the median. *p<.01, ^p=.01, based on one-tailed t-tests.
Voss et al.
Page 29
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. 
Visualization of results for whole-brain seed-based analysis of the DMN core. Regions in the 
DMN Core (L and R mPFC and L and R PCC) were used as a joint seed and are shown in 
blue. Regions positively correlated with the seed for each contrast (LF mean, HF mean, 
HF>LF, LF>HF) are shown in hot colors. The Z-plane for each axial slice is indicated along 
the bottom in white in MNI coordinate space. For all images L=L/R=R.
Voss et al.
Page 30
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Voss et al.
Page 31
Table 1
Network regions of interest (ROIs) empirically derived from the study sample using independent components 
analysis (ICA) based decomposition of the rsfMRI signal. Networks were identified from ICA with older and 
younger adults, based on knowledge of spatial activation patterns for canonical brain networks of interest. 
Network acronyms refer to: DMN (Default Mode Network), DAN (dorsal attention network), VIS (Visual 
system), MOT (Somato-motor network), SAL (Salience network), and ECN (Executive Control Network). 
Regions were identified based on peak Z-scores for functionally distinct regions within networks.
Network
Region of
Interest
(ROI) label
Description of anatomical region
MNI coordinates (x,y,z)
DMN
PHG
Parahippocampal/hippocampal gyrus
*L(−24,−26,−20), *R(24,−26,−20)
DMN
MTG
Middle temporal gyrus
*L(−52,−18,−18), R(62,−10,−16)
DMN
IPL
Inferior parietal lobule
L(−46,−64,32), R(50,−62,34)
DMN
PCC
Posterior cingulate cortex
L(−6,−54,32), R(6, −60, 32)
DMN
mPFC
Medial prefrontal cortex
L(−6,62,−4), R(6,62,−4)
DMN
dmPFC
Dorsal medial prefrontal cortex
R(6,50,20)
DMN
SFG
Superior frontal gyrus
L(−24,24,42), R(22,28,44)
DAN
pIPS
Posterior intraparietal sulcus
L(−28,−68,48), R(30,−66,48)
DAN
aIPS
Anterior intraparietal sulcus
L(−40,−46,46), R(38,−46,46)
DAN
MT
Middle temporal/visual cortex (V5)
L(−52,−60,−8), R(58,−52,−10)
DAN
MOT
Premotor motor cortex
L(−48,6,30), R(48,10,28)
DAN
FEF
Frontal eye field
L(−26,2,54), R(28,4,54)
DAN
MFG
Middle frontal gyrus
L(−46,34,22), R(46,34,22)
VIS
VIS
Occipital pole
L(−8,−90,16), R(14,−90,16)
MOT
MOT
Primary motor cortex
L(−6,−28,58), R(6,−26,58)
SAL
IPL
Inferior parietal lobule
L(−60,−40,36), R(60,−38,38)
SAL
aINS
Anterior insula/cingulo-operculum
L(−38,16,2), R(42,16,2)
SAL
dACC
Dorsal anterior cingulate cortex
L(6,32,30), R(−6,26,32)
SAL
aPFC
Anterior prefrontal cortex
L(−30,48,26), R(32,48,26)
ECN
SFG
Superior frontal gyrus
L(−6,42,44), R(6,50,38)
ECN
alPFC
Anterior lateral prefrontal cortex
L(−46,42,−6), R(48,36,−10)
ECN
dlPFC
Dorso-lateral prefrontal cortex
L(−44,12,48)
ECN
IFG
Inferior frontal gyrus
L(−52,20,20), R(54,26,18)
ECN
IPL
Inferior parietal lobule
L(−50,−60,32)
ECN
MTG
Middle temporal gyrus
L(−58,−38,0)
ECN
STG
Superior temporal gyrus
R(52,−32,0)
*Regions identified as part of network based on a previous study from our group (Voss et al., 2010a,b) finding age- and fitness-related individual 
differences in network membership. Note other regions identified from rsfMRI in this sample also overlap substantially with regions identified in 
previous study (Voss et al., 2010a,b); note from Voss et al., 2010b, previously referred to “fronto-parietal” network is referred to as DAN in the 
current study, and previously referred to “fronto-executive” network contains primarily regions in the SAL network in the current study.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Voss et al.
Page 32
Table 2
Cells show mean (standard deviation) for demographic, fitness, and physical activity variables broken down by age and fitness groups. MMSE=mini-
mental status exam; BMI=body mass index; SBP=systolic blood pressure; DBP=diastolic blood pressure.
Variable
Young
Adults
Older
Adults
Older
Adults
LF
Older
Adults
HF
Young vs.
Old
(p-value)
LF vs. HF
(p-value)
N
36
189
47
47
Age
22.1 (3.0)
65.1 (4.4)
64.6 (3.7)
64.5 (4.1)
p < .001
NS
Percent
Female
64%
68%
62%
57%
NS
NS
MMSE
-
28.9 (1.0)
28.8 (1.0)
29.0 (1.1)
NS
NS
Education
15.6 (2.0)
16.0 (2.9)
15.7 (2.9)
16.4 (2.7)
NS
NS
BMI
-
30.8 (5.6)
33.9 (5.9)
27.7 (3.8)
-
p < .001
SBP
-
131.6
(13.2)
133.4
(14.6)
131.2
(14.0)
-
NS
DBP
-
79.4 (7.5)
78.9 (7.4)
79.8 (6.7)
-
NS
Fitness
(VO2max)
-
19.8 (4.8)
15.0 (3.2)
25.0 (3.9)
-
p < .001
Fitness males
(VO2max)
-
22.48 (5.3)
16.6 (3.0)
27.8 (3.1)
-
p < .001
Fitness
females
(VO2max)
-
18.59 (3.9)
14.0 (2.9)
22.9 (3.0)
-
p < .001
Avg daily
minutes Light
-
258.0
(66.0)
254.5
(73.7)
250.4 (52.1)
-
NS
Median daily
minutes
MVPA*
-
38.0
(32.9)
38.0
(29.9)
34.8 (36.5)
-
NS
*Median is presented for MVPA (moderate-to-vigorous physical activity) because the variable was skewed, value in parenthesis is the inter-quartile range; p-values for MVPA are based on independent 
samples t-tests on the natural log transformed MVPA variable. LF=lower fit and HF=higher fit, and it should be noted by the group averages that all participants in both groups are still on the bottom half of 
the population for cardiorespiratory fitness compared to their age and gender matched peers (ACSM, 2013). This is not surprising given the sample was screened to be relatively low in self-reported physical 
activity in order to enter an exercise training intervention.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
