 By Marko Vujicic, Thomas Buchmueller, and Rachel Klein
Dental Care Presents The Highest
Level Of Financial Barriers,
Compared To Other Types Of
Health Care Services
ABSTRACT The Affordable Care Act is improving access to and the
affordability of a wide range of health care services. While dental care for
children is part of the law’s essential health benefits and state Medicaid
programs must cover it, coverage of dental care for adults is not
guaranteed. As a result, even with the recent health insurance expansion,
many Americans face financial barriers to receiving dental care that lead
to unmet oral health needs. Using data from the 2014 National Health
Interview Survey, we analyzed financial barriers to a wide range of health
care services. We found that irrespective of age, income level, and type of
insurance, more people reported financial barriers to receiving dental
care, compared to any other type of health care. We discuss policy options
to address financial barriers to dental care, particularly for adults.
T
he Affordable Care Act (ACA) is hav-
ing a significant impact on the US
health care system. Early evidence
shows that the number of Ameri-
cans without health insurance has
declined and access to health care services has
improved.1–3 However, the percentage of Ameri-
cans without dental insurance has always been
higher than the percentage without health insur-
ance, and there are large differences in dental
coverage rates between children and adults. In
2013, 12 percent of children and 33 percent of
nonelderly adults had no dental insurance, com-
pared to 6 percent of children and 20 percent of
nonelderly adults who lacked health insur-
ance.4,5
The higher rate of dental coverage for chil-
dren, compared to nonelderly adults and se-
niors, is partly explained by the fact that dental
servicesarea mandatorybenefitwithin Medicaid
for children. For child Medicaid beneficiaries,
dental services are part of a comprehensive set
of benefits provided through the Early and Peri-
odic Screening, Diagnosis, and Treatment Pro-
gram. Under the program, “dental services for
children must minimally include: relief of pain
and infections, restoration of teeth, [and] main-
tenance of dental health,” and “all services must
be provided if determined medically necessary.”6
In contrast, dental care for adults is not covered
by Medicare and is an optional benefit in Medic-
aid, with no minimum standards. According to
the most recent data available, over eight million
adults are enrolled in Medicaid in the twenty-two
states whose Medicaid programs do not provide
adult dental benefits beyond emergency ser-
vices.7
The ACA’s essential health benefits package
perpetuates the long-standing division between
dental and other health care services by exclud-
ing dental coverage for adults. It requires dental
coverage for children, although implementing
these provisions has posed challenges. For ex-
ample, because dental benefits are offered pri-
marily as stand-alone products, not as part of a
medical plan, the purchase of dental benefits
cannot be enforced, and dental benefits are ex-
cluded from premium tax credit calculations.8
Even though the ACA does not have specific
provisions that address adult dental care, it is
likely that the law has modestly increased dental
coverage through two channels. First, one provi-
doi:
10.1377/hlthaff.2016.0800
HEALTH AFFAIRS 35,
NO. 12 (2016): 2176–2182
©2016 Project HOPE—
The People-to-People Health
Foundation, Inc.
Marko Vujicic (vujicicm@ada
.org) is the chief economist at
and vice president of the
Health Policy Institute,
American Dental Association,
in Chicago, Illinois.
Thomas Buchmueller is the
Waldo O. Hildebrand Professor
of Risk Management and
Insurance in the Ross School
of Business, University of
Michigan, in Ann Arbor.
Rachel Klein was director of
organizational strategy for
Families USA, in Washington,
D.C., at the time of this
writing.
2176
Health Affairs
December 2016
35:12
Oral Health Cost & Use
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 06, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 sion allows young adults to remain on their par-
ents’ private insurance plans until age twenty-
six.9 While dental benefits were not subject to the
provision, which was implemented in Septem-
ber 2010, there is evidence of a “spillover” effect,
and access to dental care has improved among
adults younger than twenty-six.10
Second, twenty-five states chose to both ex-
pand eligibility for Medicaid and provide at least
limited adult benefits in their Medicaid pro-
gram.11 Nationally, just over eight million non-
elderly adults were expected to gain dental ben-
efits via this Medicaid expansion channel.12 To
date, however, there has been no evaluation of
the impact of the Medicaid expansion on access
to dental care.
The differential policy treatment of dental care
for adults and children, both before and after
implementation of the ACA, has important im-
plications for oral health. Emerging evidence
demonstrates that
children and
adults
are
experiencing very different trends when it comes
to access to and use of dental care, and financial
barriers to receiving that care.13–15 Over the past
decade, an increasing number of children, par-
ticularly low-income children, have been visiting
the dentist. In nearly every state, the gap in rates
of use of dental care between low-income and
high-income children is narrowing.13 In con-
trast, use of dental care among nonelderly adults
is declining,and manystates areactuallyseeinga
widening gap between low-income and high-
income nonelderly adults.14 Americans ages six-
ty-five and older—particularly those with low
incomes—also face significant challenges to ac-
cessing dental care.15 Low-income nonelderly
adults are experiencing the most severe chal-
lenges when it comes to accessing dental care.
It is important to understand the implications
of the different policy approaches to dental and
medical coverage in the US health caresystem. In
this study we examined the most current data on
financial barriers to dental care in the United
States.We analyzed differences in these financial
barriers across age groups and types of insur-
ance, and we compared financial barriers to den-
tal care with barriers to a broad range of other
health care services.
Study Data And Methods
Data Sources Our main source of data was the
2014 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS).16
The NHIS is conducted annually and is national-
ly representative of the civilian noninstitutional-
ized US population. The advantages of using the
NHIS instead of other data sources17 to explore
financial barriers to dental care include the sur-
vey’s large sample size, high response rate, de-
tailed information on dental insurance, and in-
clusion of children and both nonelderly and
elderly adults in the sample. The Family Core
component collects information on every mem-
ber of a sample household, including informa-
tion on the members’ demographic and health
characteristics and their insurance.
In 2014, 112,053 individuals were interviewed
for the survey. Up to one adult and one child
(ages 0–17) were randomly selected from each
household to be included in the Sample Adult
Core and Sample Child Core components. These
people (or, in the case of a young child, his or her
parent) were asked to respond to a more detailed
questionnaire
that
included,
among
other
things, questions related to cost barriers for a
range of health care services. The combined size
of the childand adultsampleswas 50,077 people.
We also examined data from the Oral Health
and Well-Being Survey, conducted by the Ameri-
can Dental Association’s Health Policy Institute.
The Health Policy Institute partnered with the
Harris Poll to conduct an online survey of 14,962
adults ages eighteen and older. The survey was
conducted in the period June 23–August 7, 2015.
It included questions regarding oral health sta-
tus, attitudes related to the importance of oral
health, use of dental care, dental care coverage,
and barriers to receiving dental care. In this arti-
cle we focus on the answers to questions regard-
ing barriers to dental care. A full description of
the survey methodology is available elsewhere.18
Study Sample, Variables, And Methodolo-
gy The NHIS includes questions related to cost
barriers for five categories of health care ser-
vices: dental care, medical care, mental health
care, prescription drugs, and eyeglasses. The de-
pendent variable in our analysis was a binary
variable based on the response to the follow-
ing survey question: “During the past twelve
months, was there ever a time when you needed
[health careservice] and didn’t get it because you
could not afford it?”
We analyzed responses to the question about
financial barriers to dental care and other health
care services by age group and type of insurance.
We focused on children (ages 2–18), nonelderly
adults (ages 19–64), and seniors (ages 65 and
older). We divided nonelderly adults into four
categories based on their medical and dental
insurance: those with private health and private
dental insurance, those with private health in-
surance but no private dental benefits, those
covered by Medicaid, and those with no health
insurance or dental benefits. For each of the
three age groups, we report cost barriers to den-
tal care by household income categories as a
percentage of the federal poverty level (less than
100 percent, 100–199 percent, 200–399 percent,
December 2016
35:12
Health Affairs
2177
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 06, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 and 400 percent or more).
Limitations Our study had several limita-
tions. First, dental benefits for adults are an op-
tional benefit within Medicaid, and there is vari-
ation in the level of dental benefits across
states.12 We did not have access to state-level
identifiers within the NHIS data. Thus, we were
not able to determine if adults with Medicaid
coverage had dental benefits under Medicaid.
Second, data on our main outcome variable—
financial barriers to dental and other health
care—were self-reported. As a result, respon-
dents may have differed in how they interpreted
their need for services. This is especially impor-
tant in the case of dental care, where some ser-
vices are discretionary. Ideally, the variable re-
lated to financial barriers would be conditional
on having a need for a particular health care
service, but this is not the case. A low prevalence
of financial barriers for a particular type of care
could be accounted for partly by a lack of need for
that type of care. For example, some seniors may
perceive a lack of need for dental care because
they no longer have their natural teeth.19 If this is
true, our results will underestimate financial
barriers to dental care for seniors. However,
we know of no other data set that avoids this
limitation, and the NHIS data on financial bar-
riers have been widely used in previous health
services research, including dental care re-
search.20–22
Finally, it is important to emphasize that our
analysis is entirely descriptive.We document fac-
tors that are correlated with financial barriers to
care, but we make no claims regarding causality.
Study Results
Across age groups, we found that the percentage
of respondents reporting financial barriers to
receiving dental care was higher than the per-
centage for any other type of care (Exhibit 1).
Compared to children and seniors, nonelderly
adults were more likely to face financial barriers
to all types of care. For example, 12.8 percent of
nonelderly adults reported not receiving needed
dental care because of cost, compared to 7.2 per-
cent of seniors and 4.3 percent of children.
Within each insurance category, more noneld-
erly adults reported financial barriers to dental
care, compared to barriers to other types of
health care (Exhibit 2). Even among nonelderly
adults with both private medical and private den-
tal insurance, 5.3 percent reported forgoing
needed dental care, compared to 3.4 percent
who did not receive needed medical care. As not-
ed above in the “Limitations” section, the results
for the Medicaid subsample were difficult to in-
terpret because this group included both individ-
uals with and those without dental coverage.
When we looked only at dental care, we found
income gradients for all age groups in financial
barriers to care (Exhibit 3). For example, nearly
one-quarter of nonelderly adults with incomes
below 100 percent of poverty reported that in the
previous twelve months, they had not obtained
needed dental care because of cost. In contrast,
fewer than 5 percent of nonelderly adults in the
highest income category reported financial bar-
riers to dental care. In each income group, the
group with the smallest percentages of not re-
ceiving needed dental care because of cost was
children. For seniors, the rates were between
those for children and nonelderly adults, and
the income gradient was less clear: A slightly
higher percentage of seniors whose incomes
were 100–199 percent of poverty reported finan-
cial barriers, compared to those with incomes
below that threshold.
According to the Oral Health and Well-Being
Survey, cost was 2.7 times more likely to be re-
ported as the reason for not going to the dentist
than the next most common reason (Exhibit 4).
Among adults who had not visited the dentist
within the past twelve months, 59 percent cited
cost as the reason. The second most common
reason cited was fear of the dentist, and the third
most common was an inconvenient appoint-
ment time or office location.
Cost was the main reason irrespective of age,
income level, or dental insurance status (data
not shown). It is important to note that cost
was the top barrier to dental care even for adults
with private dental insurance.
Discussion
Our analysis supports two broad conclusions re-
garding financial barriers to receiving dental
care. First, consistent with other research using
alternative data sources and methods,20,23 we
found that cost was the most common reason
cited by nonelderly adults for avoiding dental
care. Second, also consistent with previous re-
search,17,24 we found that more people reported
financial barriers to dental care than to any other
health care, regardless of age, income level, or
type of insurance.
As we noted in the “Limitations” section, our
use of self-reported data means that the exact
nature of the dental care that people reported
not receiving because of cost is unclear. For ex-
ample, to some respondents “needed care” could
mean only urgent, acute oral health conditions
such as infections and decay that cause severe
pain and difficulty chewing and speaking, while
other respondents might consider “needed care”
to include elective procedures such as teeth whit-
Oral Health Cost & Use
2178
Health Affairs
December 2016
35:12
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 06, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 ening and orthodontic services that are not med-
ically necessary.
Even if some of the care that is forgone because
of cost is elective, results from a number of other
studies suggest that adults are suffering serious
consequences from not receiving dental care be-
cause of cost. Hospital emergency department
visits for dental conditions have doubled over
the past decade, with young adults and low-
income adults having the highest visit rates.25
Nonelderly adults have the highest incidence
of untreated cavities of any age group.26 Nearly
one in three young adults reported having oral
health issues so severe that they affected the
respondent’s ability to interview for a job.18
Avoiding needed dental care could also adversely
affect health outcomes beyond the mouth and
contribute to increased health care costs among
older Americans with chronic conditions such as
diabetes.27
Why are financial barriers to dental care so
severe in comparison to barriers to other health
care, particularly for adults? As noted above,
before health insurance expansion under the
ACA, adults were roughly twice as likely to have
lacked dental insurance than medical insur-
ance,4,5 and the design of the ACA reinforced this
coverage gap.
Moreover, the current design of both public
and private dental insurance has important
shortcomings when it comes to protecting con-
sumers from financial burden. In states that pro-
vide dental benefits to adults in their Medicaid
program, there are often annual dollar limits—
ranging from $500 to $2,500 a year—or proce-
dure restrictions.5,11 Many states limit the num-
ber of fillings or crowns that their Medicaid pro-
gram will pay for, the types of crowns that can be
used on certain teeth, and how often root canals
are covered. For example, Connecticut and Illi-
nois limit coverage for Medicaid adults to one
Exhibit 2
Percentages of National Health Interview Survey respondents ages 19–64 who did not get selected health care services
they needed in the past 12 months because of cost, by type of insurance, 2014
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of data for 2014 from the National Health Interview Survey. NOTES The sample consisted of 50,077 respon-
dents. For all types of insurance, the difference between dental care and medical care was significant (p < 0:10 for no insurance;
p < 0:05 for all other types of insurance).
Exhibit 1
Percentages of National Health Interview Survey respondents who did not get selected
health care services they needed in the past 12 months because of cost, by age group, 2014
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of data for 2014 from the National Health Interview Survey. NOTES The
sample consisted of 50,077 respondents. For all age groups, the difference between dental care and
medical care not obtained was significant (p < 0:05).
December 2016
35:12
Health Affairs
2179
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 06, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 filling per year. North Dakota, Rhode Island, and
Washington limit coverage for root canals to
front teeth only.28 It is important to note that
children’s dental coverage within public pro-
grams is much more comprehensive than the
coverage for adults, with little to no cost sharing.
This could partly explain why financial barriers
to dental care are much more prevalent for adults
than for children.
Typical private dental insurance plans also
have many provisions that limit consumers’ fi-
nancial protection. There are significant co-
insurance rates (for example, 20–50 percent
for fillings and crowns) and annual maximum
benefit limits. Average inflation-adjusted annual
maximum benefit levels have decreased signifi-
cantly over time.29,30 In fact, a recent analysis
showed that for the vast majority of nonelderly
adults with private dental insurance, total expen-
ditures on premiums, coinsurance, and copay-
ments significantly exceed the market value of
the dental services they used.31 This could cause
many beneficiaries to question the value of pri-
vate dental insurance from a financial per-
spective.
As a result of these limitations in coverage,
out-of-pocket spending accounts for a much
higher share of total dental spending than it does
for total health spending. In 2014, 40 percent of
total US spending on dental care was out of pock-
et, compared to 11 percent of total health
spending.32
Policy Implications
To reduce financial barriers to dental care in the
United States, particularly for adults, there are
several policy options to consider. These options
can be divided into two broad categories: ex-
panding dental insurance coverage, and rede-
signing the coverage so that it provides en-
hanced financial protection.
Coverage expansion would most likely require
a shift in federal and state policy with respect to
dental care for adults. This could entail defining
dental care for adults as an essential health ben-
efit within the ACA, making dental care a re-
quired benefit in Medicaid, and adding dental
coverage to Medicare. A recent analysis estimat-
ed that implementing a comprehensive dental
benefit for Medicaid adults in the twenty-two
states that lack one would require an additional
$1.4–$1.6 billion per year, with the state portion
amounting to about 1 percent of total Medicaid
spending.7 Expanding Medicaid adult dental
benefits has been shown to increase access to
dental care,33 and evidence suggests that the den-
tal care system has the capacity to absorb such an
expansion.34–36
There is also emerging evidence that there may
be fiscal offsets—in the form of reductions in
medical care costs—associated with increased
use of dental care among patients with chronic
conditions.27 These savings are especially impor-
tant when considering the cost of adding a dental
benefit in Medicaid and especially in Medicare.
Including dental insurance within the individ-
ual mandate under the ACA would require a sig-
nificant change in current law. In addition, im-
plementing the dental insurance mandate for
children has been challenging because dental
insurance is most often sold separately from
Exhibit 4
Top reasons given by 14,962 adults for not having visited
the dentist in the past 12 months, 2015
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of data for 2015 from the Oral Health
and Well-Being Survey of the American Dental Association’s
Health Policy Institute.
Exhibit 3
Percentages of National Health Interview Survey respondents who did not obtain needed
dental care during the past 12 months because of cost, by household income, 2014
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of data for 2014 from the National Health Interview Survey. NOTES The
sample consisted of 50,077 respondents. For all income levels, the difference between dental care
and medical care not obtained was significant (p < 0:05). FPL is federal poverty level.
Oral Health Cost & Use
2180
Health Affairs
December 2016
35:12
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 06, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 medical insurance. Only 28 percent of medical
plans
offered
on
the
Marketplace
website
Healthcare.gov include dental benefits for chil-
dren, and just 1 percent include dental benefits
for adults.37
Beyond coverage expansion, the natureof den-
tal insurance—both public and private—needs to
be reexamined. Ideally, dental benefit plans
should be designed so that they pay for the ben-
eficiary’s oral health and well-being instead of
for checklists of procedures, often with tooth-by-
tooth restrictions and arbitrary dollar limits. Al-
though new tools have recently been developed
to provide a practical way of measuring oral
health and well-being,18 these concepts are still
not well defined, and the move toward outcomes-
based models of care delivery and financing is
only just beginning in the dental arena. For poli-
cy makers seeking alternatives to the status quo
fordental insurance for adults, the dental benefit
design for children in Medicaid provides a good
blueprint on which to draw.
Conclusion
Our analysis showed that cost was the most
significant factor keeping Americans from ac-
cessing needed dental care. We also found that
irrespective of age, income level, and type of
insurance, more people reported financial bar-
riers to receiving dental care than they did for
any other health care. There is compelling evi-
dence that financial barriers to dental care result
in serious consequences to oral health and over-
all health and well-being, especially among low-
income adults.
These patterns are in part a result of the ap-
proach taken toward coverage for dental care by
federal and state health policy in the United
States. Dental care for adults is not considered
an essential health benefit. This is in contrast to
dental care for children, which is compulsory in
Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance
Program and is part of the individual mandate
under the ACA. Policy makers ought to consider
reforms at the federal and state level to ease
financial barriers to dental care and better inte-
grate dental and health coverage. ▪
The authors thank Thomas Wall for
research assistance and Brittany
Harrison for editorial assistance in
completing this article. Both Wall and
Harrison are with the American Dental
Association’s Health Policy Institute.
NOTES
1 Uberoi N, Finegold K, Gee E. Health
insurance coverage and the Afford-
able Care Act, 2010–2016 [Internet].
Washington (DC): Department of
Health and Human Services, Office
of the Assistant Secretary for Plan-
ning and Evaluation; 2016 Mar 3
[cited 2016 Oct 17]. (ASPE Issue
Brief). Available from: https://aspe
.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/
187551/ACA2010-2016.pdf
2 Sommers BD, Gunja MZ, Finegold
K, Musco T. Changes in self-reported
insurance coverage, access to care,
and health under the Affordable Care
Act. JAMA. 2015;314(4):366–74.
3 Wherry LR, Miller S. Early coverage,
access, utilization, and health effects
associated with the Affordable Care
Act Medicaid expansions: a quasi-
experimental study. Ann Intern
Med. 2016;164(12):795–803.
4 Nasseh K, Vujicic M. Dental benefits
coverage rates increased for children
and young adults in 2013 [Internet].
Chicago (IL): American Dental As-
sociation; 2015 Oct [cited 2016
Oct 17]. (Health Policy Institute Re-
search Brief). Available from: http://
www.ada.org/~/media/ADA/
Science%20and%20Research/HPI/
Files/HPIBrief_1015_3.pdf?la=en
5 Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and
the Uninsured. Key facts about the
uninsured population [Internet].
Washington (DC): The Commission;
2015 Oct [cited 2016 Oct 17]. (Fact
Sheet). Available from: http://files
.kff.org/attachment/fact-sheet-key-
facts-about-the-uninsured-
population
6 Medicaid.gov. Dental care: dental
benefits for children in Medicaid
[Internet]. Baltimore (MD): Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services;
[cited 2016 Oct 17]. Available from:
https://www.medicaid.gov/
Medicaid-CHIP-Program-
Information/By-Topics/Benefits/
Dental-Care.html
7 Yarbrough C, Vujicic M, Nasseh K.
Estimating the cost of introducing a
Medicaid adult dental benefit in 22
states [Internet]. Chicago (IL):
American Dental Association; 2016
Mar [cited 2016 Oct 17]. (Health
Policy Institute Research Brief).
Available from: http://www.ada.org/
~/media/ADA/Science%20and%20
Research/HPI/Files/HPIBrief_
0316_1.ashx
8 Reusch C. FAQ: pediatric oral health
services in the Affordable Care Act
[Internet]. Washington (DC): Chil-
dren’s Dental Health Project; 2014
Mar 5 [cited 2016 Oct 17]. Available
from: https://www.cdhp.org/
resources/165-faq-pediatric-oral-
health-services-in-the-affordable-
care-act
9 Sommers BD, Buchmueller T,
Decker SL, Carey C, Kronick R. The
Affordable Care Act has led to sig-
nificant gains in health insurance
and access to care for young adults.
Health Aff (Millwood). 2013;32(1):
165–74.
10 Vujicic M, Yarbrough C, Nasseh K.
The effect of the Affordable Care
Act’s expanded coverage policy on
access to dental care. Med Care.
2014;52(8):715–19.
11 Hinton E, Paradise J. Access to
dental care in Medicaid: spotlight on
nonelderly adults [Internet]. Menlo
Park (CA): Henry J. Kaiser Family
Foundation; 2016 Mar 17 [cited 2016
Oct 17]. (Issue Brief). Available from:
http://kff.org/medicaid/issue-brief/
access-to-dental-care-in-medicaid-
spotlight-on-nonelderly-adults/
12 Yarbrough C, Vujicic M, Nasseh K.
More than 8 million adults could
gain dental benefits through Med-
icaid expansion [Internet]. Chicago
(IL): American Dental Association;
2014 Feb [cited 2016 Oct 17]. (Health
Policy Institute Research Brief).
Available from: http://www.ada.org/
~/media/ADA/Science%20and%20
Research/HPI/Files/HPIBrief_
0214_1.pdf?la=en
13 Vujicic M, Nasseh K. Gap in dental
care utilization between Medicaid
and privately insured children nar-
rows, remains large for adults [In-
ternet]. Chicago (IL): American
Dental Association; 2015 Dec [cited
December 2016
35:12
Health Affairs
2181
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 06, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 2016 Oct 17]. (Health Policy Institute
Research Brief). Available from:
http://www.ada.org/~/media/ADA/
Science%20and%20Research/HPI/
Files/HPIBrief_0915_1.pdf?la=en
14 Nasseh K, Vujicic M. The effect of
growing income disparities on U.S.
adults’ dental care utilization. J Am
Dent Assoc. 2014;145(5):435–42.
15 Tooth Wisdom. A state of decay: vol 3
[Internet]. Chicago (IL): Oral Health
America; 2016 [cited 2016 Oct 17].
Available for download from: http://
www.toothwisdom.org/pages/a-
state-of-decay
16 National Center for Health Statistics.
National Health Interview Survey
[Internet]. Hyattsville (MD): NCHS;
[last updated 2016 Sep 27; cited
2016 Oct 17]. Available from: http://
www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis/index.htm
17 Shartzer A, Kenney GM. QuickTake:
the forgotten health care need: gaps
for dental care for insured adults
remain under ACA [Internet].
Washington (DC): Urban Institute;
2015 Sep 24 [cited 2016 Oct 17].
Available from: http://apps.urba-
n.org/features/hrms/quicktakes/
Gaps-in-Dental-Care-for-Insured-
Adults-Remain-under-ACA.html
18 American Dental Association. Oral
health and well-being in the United
States [Internet]. Chicago (IL): ADA;
c 2016 [cited 2016 Oct 17]. Available
from: http://www.ada.org/en/
science-research/health-policy-
institute/oral-health-and-well-being
19 Vujicic M, Nasseh K. A decade in
dental care utilization among adults
and children (2001–2010). Health
Serv Res. 2013;49(2):460–80.
20 Nasseh K, Wall T, Vujicic M. Cost
barriers to dental care continue to
decline, particularly among young
adults and the poor [Internet]. Chi-
cago (IL): American Dental Associa-
tion; 2015 Oct [cited 2016 Oct 17].
(Health Policy Institute Research
Brief). Available from: http://www
.ada.org/~/media/ADA/Science
%20and%20Research/HPI/Files/
HPIBrief_1015_2.pdf?la=en
21 Mojtabai R. Trends in contacts with
mental health professionals and cost
barriers to mental health care among
adults with significant psychological
distress in the United States: 1997–
2002. Am J Public Health. 2005;
95(11):2009–14.
22 Sabatino SA, Coates RJ, Uhler RJ,
Alley LG, Pollack LA. Health insur-
ance coverage and cost barriers to
needed medical care among U.S.
adult cancer survivors age <65 years.
Cancer. 2006;106(11):2466–75.
23 Wall T, Nasseh K, Vujicic M. Most
important barriers to dental care are
financial, not supply related [Inter-
net]. Chicago (IL): American Dental
Association; 2014 Oct [cited 2016
Oct 17]. (Health Policy Institute Re-
search Brief). Available from: http://
www.ada.org/~/media/ADA/
Science%20and%20Research/HPI/
Files/HPIBrief_1014_2.pdf?la=en
24 Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System. Report on the eco-
nomic well-being of U.S. households
in 2014 [Internet]. Washington
(DC): The Board; 2015 May [cited
2016 Oct 17]. Available from: http://
www.federalreserve.gov/
econresdata/2014-report-economic-
well-being-us-households-201505
.pdf
25 Wall T, Vujicic M. Emergency de-
partment visits for dental conditions
fell in 2013 [Internet]. Chicago (IL):
American Dental Association; 2016
Feb [cited 2016 Oct 17]. (Health
Policy Institute Research Brief).
Available from: http://www.ada.org/
~/media/ADA/Science%20and%20
Research/HPI/Files/HPIBrief_
0216_1.pdf?la=en
26 National Center for Health Statistics.
Health, United States, 2015: with
special feature on racial and ethnic
health disparities [Internet].
Hyattsville (MD): NCHS; 2016 May
[cited 2016 Oct 17]. (DHHS Publi-
cation No. 2016-1232). Available for
download from: https://stacks.cdc
.gov/view/cdc/39108/Print
27 Nasseh K, Vujicic M, Glick M. The
relationship between periodontal
interventions and healthcare costs
and utilization. Evidence from an
integrated dental, medical, and
pharmacy commercial claims data-
base. Health Econ. 2016 Jan 22.
[Epub ahead of print].
28 Medicaid and CHIP Payment Access
Commission. Report to Congress on
Medicaid and CHIP [Internet].
Washington (DC): MACPAC; 2015
Jun [cited 2016 Oct 17]. Chapter 2:
Medicaid coverage of dental benefits
for adults. Available from: https://
www.macpac.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2015/06/Medicaid-
Coverage-of-Dental-Benefits-for-
Adults.pdf
29 Greany TJ, Lambrecht KR. Improv-
ing oral health care delivery in
America [Internet]. 2013 [cited 2016
Oct 17]. Chapter 2: How did we get
here? The history of third (and
fourth) party payment in dental care.
Louisville (CO): Symbyos; 2013.
Available from: http://dentalstudy.-
toothiq.com/history-of-dental-
benefits/default.aspx
30 Health Resources Administration,
Division of Dentistry. Survey of
dental benefit plans, 1973. Wash-
ington (DC): Government Publish-
ing Office; 1979?.
31 Yarbrough C, Vujicic M,
Aravamudhan K, Blatz A. An analysis
of dental spending among adults
with private dental benefits [Inter-
net]. Chicago (IL): American Dental
Association; 2016 May [cited 2016
Oct 17]. (Health Policy Institute Re-
search Brief). Available from: http://
www.ada.org/~/media/ADA/
Science%20and%20Research/HPI/
Files/HPIBrief_0516_1.pdf?la=en
32 Wall T, Guay A. The per-patient cost
of dental care, 2013: a look under the
hood [Internet]. Chicago (IL):
American Dental Association; 2016
Mar [cited 2016 Oct 17]. (Health
Policy Institute Research Brief).
Available from: http://www.ada.org/
~/media/ADA/Science%20and%20
Research/HPI/Files/HPIBrief_
0316_4.pdf?la=en
33 Choi MK. The impact of Medicaid
insurance coverage on dental service
use. J Health Econ. 2011;30(5):
1020–31.
34 Vujicic M. Solving dentistry’s
“busyness” problem. J Am Dent As-
soc. 2015;146(8):641–43.
35 Buchmueller TC, Miller S, Vujicic M.
How do providers respond to public
health insurance expansions? Evi-
dence from adult Medicaid benefits
[Internet]. Cambridge (MA): Na-
tional Bureau of Economic Research;
2014 Apr [cited 2016 Oct 17]. (NBER
Working Paper No. 20053). Avail-
able for download (fee required)
from: http://www.nber.org/papers/
w20053.pdf
36 Buchmueller T, Miller S, Vujicic M.
How do providers respond to
changes in public health insurance
coverage? Evidence from adult
Medicaid dental benefits. Am Econ J
Econ Policy. Forthcoming.
37 American Dental Association. Mil-
lennials struggle to navigate the
dental options on HealthCare.gov
[Internet]. Chicago (IL): ADA; [cited
2016 Oct 17]. Available from: http://
www.ada.org/~/media/ADA/
Science%20and%20Research/HPI/
Files/HPIgraphic_0516_1.pdf?la=en
Oral Health Cost & Use
2182
Health Affairs
December 2016
35:12
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 06, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
