 Cardiac 3D Printing and Its Future Directions
Marija Vukicevica, Bobak Mosadeghb, James K. Minb, and Stephen H. Littlea
aWeill Cornell Medicine, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Department of Cardiology, 
Houston, TX
bWeill Cornell Medicine, New-York Presbyterian, Department of Radiology and Medicine, NY, NY
Abstract
3D printing is at the crossroads of printer and materials engineering; non-invasive diagnostic 
imaging; computer aided design (CAD); and structural heart intervention. Cardiovascular 
applications of this technology development include the use of patient-specific 3D models for 
medical teaching, exploration of valve and vessel function, surgical and catheter-based procedural 
planning, and early work in designing and refining the latest innovations in percutaneous structural 
devices. In this review we discuss the methods and materials being used for 3D printing today. We 
discuss the basic principles of clinical image segmentation including co-registration of multiple 
imaging datasets to create an anatomic model of interest. With applications in congenital heart 
disease, coronary artery disease, and in surgical and catheter-based structural disease – 3D printing 
is a new tool that is challenging how we image, plan, and carry out cardiovascular interventions.
Keywords
3D printed modeling; mitral valve apparatus; aortic valve; congenital heart defects; coronary 
arteries; 3D print materials
Introduction
Three dimensional (3D) printing is a fabrication technique used to transform digital objects 
into physical models. Also known as additive manufacturing, the technique builds structures 
of arbitrary geometry by depositing material in successive layers based on a specific digital 
design. Several different methods exist to accomplish this type of fabrication and many have 
recently been used to create specific cardiac structural pathologies. While the use of 3D 
printing technology in cardiovascular medicine is still a relatively new development, 
advancement within this discipline is occurring at such a rapid rate that a contemporary 
review is warranted. In this review we address the 3D printing technologies with relevance to 
cardiovascular medicine and discuss the principles of clinical image segmentation. We also 
present several recently reported applications of 3D printing, and discuss the unresolved 
issues and future directions of this emerging technology.
Printing Technology
The first 3D printing technology was introduced by Charles Hull in 1986(1) and the industry 
has grown to now encompass many different manufacturing technologies. There are several 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Published in final edited form as:
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2017 February ; 10(2): 171–184. doi:10.1016/j.jcmg.2016.12.001.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 3D printing technologies with promising applications in medicine. Stereolithography 
fabricates a solid object from a photopolymeric resin using digitally guided ultra violet (UV) 
laser light (some new versions use visible light) to harden the surface layer of the polymer 
liquid. Fused deposition modeling creates a 3D structure by extruding melted thermoplastic 
filaments layer by layer along with a physical support material that is later dissolved away. 
Selective laser melting creates strong parts of fused metal or ceramic powder using a high-
power laser beam and is also preferred for building functional prototypes or medical 
implants such as facial bone or sternal bone replacements.(2, 3) PolyJet technology creates 
3D prints through a process of jetting thin layers of liquid photopolymers that are instantly 
hardened using UV light and can incorporate multiple-materials and colors simultaneously. 
PolyJet is capable of producing highly complex models with smooth surfaces and thin walls 
(down to a resolution of 0.016 mm)(4) and is a commonly used technique for the fabrication 
of flexible, patient-specific anatomical models that combine several different materials. For 
the creation of cardiovascular models, the 3D printing method of choice is based upon the 
required complexity, durability, and desired surface quality of the model.
The creation of a patient-specific 3D model begins with clinical imaging. An Imaging 
dataset must be volumetric which limits the modalities to ECG-gated computer tomography 
(CT), volumetric 3D echocardiography, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Volumetric 
3D echocardiography is an attractive data source because it is abundantly available, 
relatively low-cost, and lacks ionizing radiation. For models of clearly imaged cardiac 
structures, such as ventricular chambers and valve leaflets, a 3D transesophageal 
echocardiography (TEE) data source may be sufficient to create a 3D patient-specific model. 
However, ultrasound based imaging is subject to artifact and unique limitations such as 
anatomic data loss within an ultrasound “shadow.” To date, CT has been the principle 
imaging modality for 3D printing, because CT imaging can provide sub-millimeter tissue 
resolution, clearly identify bone and pathologic calcium deposition, and is a commonly 
acquired imaging method before surgical or other structural interventions. In addition to 
excellent spatial resolution, CT is able to image patients with pacemakers, pacemaker wires, 
and metal implants that are not compatible with MRI scanning. In contrast, MRI can acquire 
high-resolution images without ionizing radiation and distinguish tissue composition without 
iodinated contrast media. MRI images have been used for 3D print modeling of congenital 
heart chambers and vasculature and for the reconstructive modeling of intra-cardiac tumors. 
However, the spatial resolution of MRI is generally lower than CT, which limits its use for 
the evaluation of coronary arteries or the small morphological features within heart valve 
complexes.
Image Data Segmentation
Image segmentation is the process of converting the 3D anatomical information obtained by 
CT, MRI or 3D echocardiography volumetric imaging datasets into a 3D patient-specific 
digital model of the target anatomic structures. Increasing interest in anatomical modeling 
and the growing need for personalized structural heart interventions has encouraged the 
evolution of segmentation techniques. Initially, segmentation was based on CT images only,
(5-9) however more recently MRI images have been utilized to replicate congenital heart and 
systemic vasculature disorders.(10-14) The feasibility of reconstructing the mitral leaflets 
Vukicevic et al.
Page 2
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and annulus from 3D TEE images has been demonstrated by multiple investigators,(1, 
15-20) and efforts to combine echocardiographic data acquired from multiple views or 
echocardiographic data combined with CT data have been reported.(19, 21)
Segmentation involves several steps illustrated in Figure 1. Prior to segmentation, the 
acquired imaging dataset is exported into a digital imaging and communication in medicine 
(DICOM) format (3D TEE images are converted into Cartesian DICOM format). From the 
DICOM dataset, the target anatomic geometry is identified and segmented based on the 
threshold intensity of pixels in the grey-scale 2D image projections (axial, sagittal and 
coronal). Segmentation masks are created such that pixels with the same intensity range are 
grouped and assigned to be printed using a single material (Step 2). Segmentation masks are 
converted into 3D digital models (Step 3) using rendering techniques, and these patient-
specific 3D digital models are saved as a stereolithography (STL) file. Frequently, this 3D 
digital model may be further modified within computer-aided design (CAD) software where 
adjustments can be made to reflect the purpose of the 3D printed model (e.g. color coding a 
region of interest; texturing blended-materials; or adding coupling components for 
evaluation of the 3D printed model within a flow loop).(19) In general the spatial resolution 
afforded by TEE is adequate for many 3D modeling purposes, however, the anatomic 
resolution can be further improved by combining ultrasound datasets acquired from different 
imaging perspectives. For example, a deep trans-gastric TEE image window of the mitral 
valve apparatus including the papillary muscles can be digitally combined with data from a 
mid-esophageal view of the mitral leaflets to create a more complete dataset of the entire 
mitral valve complex.(19) In addition, segmentation can be enhanced by the digital co-
registration of DICOM data from complementary imaging modalities (e.g. TEE 
visualization of the chordae tendineae combined with CT delineation of the mitral annular 
calcification). The co-registration is based on discreet anatomy or pathoanatomy that is 
present in both DICOM datasets such as focal calcification or prosthetic material. In short, 
the segmentation step describes the identification of the region of interest and may include 
the addition of anatomic data from more than one imaging source. When segmentation is 
complete, the final digital model is saved as a STL file within the CAD based software and 
exported for 3D printing.
There are several commercial software packages, as well as open-source freeware platforms, 
that can be used for the patient-specific image segmentation.(22-25) The desired features of 
the model and the type of clinical imaging data used will generally dictate the choice of 
segmentation software. The source of the DICOM data (CT, MRI, or echo), desired 
complexity of the patient-specific model, and extent of operator experience with the 
software may greatly influence the time required for image segmentation. For example, a 
relatively simple segmentation of a uniform vascular structure, such as a segment of the 
aorta, might be completed within 20 minutes. However, the complex segmentation of 
multiple anatomic elements to be printed with a combination of different colors and 
materials might take up to 12 hours, even by an experienced operator.
Vukicevic et al.
Page 3
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cardiovascular Applications
3D printed patient-specific models can be created for a number of different applications, 
including: creation of anatomic teaching tools, development of functional models to 
investigate intracardiac flow; creation of deformable blended material models for complex 
procedural planning, and increasingly, patient-specific models are being deployed to assist 
efforts to create or refine intra-cardiac devices.
i) Teaching tools
An early application of 3D print modeling was to create models for anatomic teaching or 
demonstration. Like the plastic heart models familiar to most health care professionals, a 3D 
printed model can rapidly convey a complex anatomic arrangement, but has the added value 
of also depicting patient-specific anatomic pathology. Such models can be instructional for 
the teaching of medical professionals about normal and abnormal structural relationships; 
and even to help the lay public better understand certain structural heart conditions. Patient-
specific models of congenital heart defects have been used for critical-care training of 
residents, and nurses, and have shown the potential to enhance the communication between 
cardiologist and patients.(26, 27) Examples include instructional models depicting 
congenital heart defects, valve stenosis, and catheter-based valve implantation or repair 
procedures. Increasingly, these 3D models can be constructed with particular colors, variable 
material hardness, and even layered texturing if needed to convey sophisticated or unusual 
cardiovascular pathology (Figure 2).
ii) Functional flow models
Patient-specific 3D models of aortic valve dysfunction can be readily created by combining 
the technologies of high-spatial resolution CT, CAD software, and multi-material 3D 
printing. Aortic valve dysfunction is a spectrum of conditions that have recently been 
replicated using 3D printing and coupled to a flow phantom. Since severe aortic valve 
stenosis (AS) represents a relatively static valve configuration, a CT dataset can acquire the 
patient-specific anatomic detail of the aortic root including the valve orifice area and 
regional calcium deposition. A recent report described the creation of eight patient-specific 
multi-material 3D models of severe AS and the performance of a functional assessment of 
each model under different in vitro flow conditions. Each model replicated well the specific 
anatomic geometry of degenerative severe AS, with a faithful reproduction of calcium 
deposition, cusp thickening, and valve orifice shape. The functional evaluation of each 
model by Doppler and catheter-based methods also replicated the patient-specific AS 
severity (Figure 3, supplemental Video 1) and suggested that the calculated aortic valve area 
may not always be a fixed value. For some patients, the valve orifice area of the functional 
model varied with increasing flow volume. Such patient-specific functional models may 
provide a controlled and reproducible testing environment with quantitation of flow under 
pre-specified conditions, with potential applications including the examination of low flow, 
low gradient AS conditions; or the validation of 4D cardiac MRI methods to quantify trans-
valvular flow volume.
Vukicevic et al.
Page 4
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Patient-specific modeling of the aortic valve in diastole has also been used to replicate aortic 
valve regurgitation and compared to clinical Doppler measures of aortic regurgitation 
severity replicated in vitro.(28) More recently, patient-specific models of the aortic valve and 
aortic root complex have been utilized effectively for the performance of in vitro or bench-
top trans-catheter aortic valve implantation (TAVR). These constructs allow exploration of 
the patient-specific features that influence the performance of a trans-catheter deployed 
prosthetic heart valves. Such models may be especially useful for evaluating clinically 
challenging situations such as the non-invasive quantification of paravalvular regurgitation 
severity under controlled flow conditions or for the planned deployment of endovascular 
stents. (Figure 4).(9)
In addition to functional valve replication, the modeling of the coronary artery bed for 
several different applications has been recently reported. Javan et al. demonstrated that a 
variety of 3D print models were ideal for coronary visualization (Figure 5).(29) 3D printing 
of coronary structures can enable visualization of stenotic regions, which may serve as a 
bench top tool to prepare and/or practice interventional procedures within a pulsatile flow 
loop environment. The coronary artery tree can be clearly defined by gated-CT methods and 
when 3D printed in the diastolic phase, these models can be coupled to a flow loop to 
replicate epicardial coronary perfusion.(30) Such models can provide a reference standard 
for testing of novel diagnostic measures (e.g. CT-derived fractional flow reserve, FFR) 
against a controlled in vitro forward flow gold standard.(31) Using 3D printed coronary-like 
vessels, which were fabricated using a clear rigid material (Veroclear, Stratasys), Kolli et al. 
showed that FFR decreased as a function of aortic pressure. This relationship was 
established using a set of idealized 3D printed vessels with systematically placed stenotic 
regions that varied from 30% to 70%, resulting in absolute decreases in FFR of 0.03 to 0.2, 
respectively. This work demonstrates how 3D printing can recapitulate aspects of coronary 
flow in a quantitative and systematic manner, allowing standard diagnostic measures to be 
evaluated.
Furthermore, when models are printed from optically transparent materials, techniques such 
as particle image velocimetry (PIV) allow for direct visualization of complex flow dynamics 
(Figure 5). In addition to flow studies, these functional models can be used to simulate 
interventional procedures.(32) Figure 5 shows a simulation angiogram. Beyond this, these 
models also have the potential to simulate devices such as coronary stents, (e.g. drug-eluting 
or bioresorbable), which can be readily evaluated within this patient-specific coronary bed. 
(Figure 5)
iii) Procedural planning
Congenital cardiovascular diseases are often associated with complex and unique geometry 
that can be very difficult to fully appreciate from 2D CT, MRI or echochardiographic 
images.(1) As such, 3D printed modeling may play a key role to provide a more 
comprehensive understanding and functional evaluation of various congenital heart 
conditions. Recent applications of 3D printed congenital heart models have included; 
interventional preoperative planning and simulations;(33-38) use of sterilized models during 
surgical procedures for enhanced structural orientation;(11, 34, 39, 40) functional, patient-
Vukicevic et al.
Page 5
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 specific hemodynamic evaluations; and testing of novel procedural pathways.(10, 41) A 
broad range of complex congenital heart anatomies have been reconstructed and 3D printed 
to enhance surgical planning including: double-outlet right ventricle; (26, 42) atrial septal 
defect (ASD) and ventricular septal defect (VSD);(18, 38, 43, 44) Tetralogy of Fallot(35, 45) 
as well as hypolastic left heart syndrome.(12, 27, 36) Moreover it has been shown that 3D 
printed models may assist with the accuracy of ventricular assist device (VAD) cannula 
placement in patients with congenital heart disease.(42) Detailed reviews of cardiac 
congenital 3D printed modeling have recently been published. (1, 37, 46) A patient-specific 
3D printed model used for pre-procedural planning of a catheter-based ASD closure is 
shown in figure 6. In this instance, cone-beam CT images were acquired to assist in pre-
procedural planning (supplemental Video 2). In this instance such extensive pre-procedural 
planning was required to ensure that an ASD occluder device would not interfere with the 
function of previously implanted bioprosthetic aortic and mitral valves. In another example, 
a previously stented aortic coarctation with an abnormal subclavian artery originating from 
the stent site was 3D printed prior to a repeat intervention. (figure 4) (36).
In addition to the advanced imaging used for characterization of intracardiac neoplasm (e.g. 
Echo, MRI and CT), it has been shown that patient-specific 3D printed models are beneficial 
in the preoperative and intraoperative surgical management of cardiac tumor excisions.
(47-49) Since cardiac tumors may extent into myocardial walls or valve structures, their 
radical and complete resection is rarely possible. Several reports have shown that knowledge 
gained by 3D printed modeling positively influenced the surgical strategy for intracardiac 
tumor management.(48, 49) This added value of 3D printed models was based upon the 
ability to clearly depict tumor interaction with surrounding tissue, while multi-color and 
multi-material models established clear tissue boundaries in ways that were difficult (or 
impossible) to appreciate using 2D or 3D imaging displays alone.(34, 47) 3D models that 
replicate specific static anatomy have been developed to replicate both the form and function 
of select cardiovascular conditions. Valverde et al showed that most surgeons found the use 
of 3D models helpful in surgical planning (4 out of 5) and would recommend the use of the 
technology to others (5 out of 5).(50)
Patient-specific mitral valve models with leaflets have generally been 3D printed from only 
rigid materials, for the purpose of replicating static leaflet and annular geometry. However, 
some groups have developed patient-specific functional models of the mitral valve with 
deformable leaflets. These models have recently been used to plan first-in-man structural 
heart procedures to repair mitral valve function deploying both a MitraClip (Abbott 
Vascular, Abbott Park, IL) device, as well as an occluder device to treat severe mitral valve 
regurgitation.(51) (Figure 7). The percutaneous MitraClip procedure is a well-established 
method to achieve an edge-to-edge mitral valve repair, but as percutaneous MV replacement 
devices become available, the best treatment option for a specific patient may not be clear. 
Clinically, our ability to predict intra-procedural challenges (i.e. difficulty in grasping mitral 
leaflets) has been hampered by a lack of patient-specific MV models. 3D anatomic modeling 
may provide a solution to determine the “best-fit” amongst the possible catheter-based 
therapies available. In addition, such modeling may be valuable for predicting, and 
potentially avoiding, significant complications such as paravalvular regurgitation, device 
failure due to local calcification, or even the potentially devastating complication of LV 
Vukicevic et al.
Page 6
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 outflow tract obstruction by the device or displaced native valve tissue. Our recent clinical 
experience has taught us that fused-material 3D modeling can be invaluable for pre-
procedural device selection when there are patient-specific concerns about valvular 
calcification and its impact on the device-landing zone on either surface of mitral valve 
leaflets.(51) As catheter-based structural heart interventions become increasingly complex, 
the ability to effectively model patient-specific geometry, as well as the interaction of an 
implanted device within that geometry, will become even more valuable. Such 3D models 
are a cheap arena to prevent mistakes and promote innovation, and in some centers a 3D 
modeling program is already changing how the cardiovascular health professionals practice 
and prepare for specific structural heart interventions.(8, 34, 36, 37, 51)
iv) Device innovation
The ability to test new or revised structural heart repair devices within a range of cardiac 
pathologies is particularly appealing. Although other modeling options have been relied 
upon for many years, device development using cadaveric models cannot be used for 
specific-patient procedure planning. Likewise, animal models invariably lack either the 
correct size or the pathologic element (e.g. calcification) of human cardiovascular 
conditions. The ability to review a clinical cohort of patients with a specific treatment target 
(e.g. severe degenerative MR with prohibitive surgical risk), perform volumetric clinical 
imaging, and convert that digital data into a focused 3D model of blended material 
properties is currently available. An example of this application is the delivery of trans-
catheter mitral valve (TMVR) replacement devices.
Unlike TAVR or MitraClip technologies, the development of TMVR devices and delivery 
techniques has been slower and more challenging.(52) Specific anatomic considerations are 
fundamental for the successful implementation of such devices, yet the principle anatomic 
features can vary significantly between prospective patients. The mitral annular area, 
anterior mitral leaflet length, aortic-mitral angle, LVOT area, and specific sub-valvular and 
annular calcium depositions are just some of the considerations. Although many of these 
anatomic features can now be clearly delineated and evaluated with increasingly 
sophisticated 3D visualization software (e.g. 3mensio [PMI, Netherlands]), in general, such 
tools fail to provide insight about how the device will deform or alter the native anatomy in a 
physical model (or within the patient). Therefore, the creation of an anatomically accurate, 
yet deformable patient-specific 3D model has all the attributes of a detailed digital model, 
but also provides for bench-top evaluation of the deformation of the critical anatomic 
relations influenced by the implanted TMVR device (e.g. the magnitude of anterior leaflet 
displacement into the LVOT) (Central Illustration). In fact, if 3D patient-specific models are 
created with material properties representing diseased human tissue, then two central 
features of a structural intervention may be assessed a priori, namely: 1) the effect of the 
device on anatomic configuration of native structures, and 2) the effect of native structures 
(especially calcium) on the deployed configuration of the implanted device (e.g. failed 
expansion of a TAVR device within a heavily calcified aortic root).
Vukicevic et al.
Page 7
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Development of printing materials
The first 3D printed models were fabricated from only a limited selection of rigid materials,
(5, 15, 53) but currently the choice of available 3D print materials is considerably more 
varied. A relatively simple model can still be constructed using a single rigid material. Such 
models are generally more cost effective when the purpose is to simply visualize the 
anatomic relationship of specific structures,(16, 17, 54) as shown in figure 2. Commonly 
used rigid 3D print materials are from the Vero family of polymers, which are available in a 
large variety of colors, color blends, opaque, or transparent print formulations. However, an 
accurate replication of cardiac tissue mechanics requires that patient-specific models be 
fabricated from more flexible materials. Fortunately, there have been remarkable advances in 
material engineering that have created increasingly complex material blends that can 
approximate the mechanical properties of some cardiac tissues. For example, the elastomeric 
properties of the TangoPlus family of materials are used to create deformable cardiac models 
within a broad range of stiffness and compliance specifications.(9, 33, 41, 51, 55)
Among the available 3D printing technologies, the PolyJet technology is commonly used to 
fabricate patient-specific models because they allow for the replication of very complex 
anatomical structures by combining multiple colors and materials simultaneously. PolyJet 
machines (Objet 500 Connex 3, Stratasys) print 3D objects by adding high resolution layers 
(down to 16 microns resolution) and the selection of materials to approximate specific tissue 
properties, ranging from very soft (TangoPlus) to hard (VeroPlus) materials.
The use of material blends are often necessary for an accurate representation of abnormal 
features within heart valves, such as the calcific structures within the aortic and mitral valve 
(figure 7),(8) or to replicate a complex of anatomical elements with different tissue 
characteristics (central illustration).(19, 51) The choice of materials is particularly important 
for fabrication of functional models for experiments in pressurized flow loops with tailored 
hemodynamic conditions.(8, 9, 33, 41) For instance, Maragiannis et al. were able to 
fabricate a series of fully functional aortic stenosis models implantable in flow loop, 
replicating the entire aortic valve complex using flexible TangoPlus material, while the 
calcified aggregates within the valve cusps were 3D printed using a hard VeroPlus material.
(9) They also demonstrated the compatibility of TangoPlus materials for echocardiographic 
imaging acquisition. Recent advancements in multi-material 3D printed modeling was 
extended to the complex MV apparatus with hard mitral annulus, deformable leaflets and 
chordae tendineae, and semi-rigid papillary muscles (supplemental Video 3).(19)
Despite the almost infinite possibilities of creating digital material blends, current 3D print 
materials can only replicate the mechanical properties of cardiovascular tissue to a certain 
extent.(12, 19, 56) Mechanical testing of a range of TangoPlus materials and comparison to 
cardiac tissue samples (mitral valve leaflet) showed that TangoPlus materials mimic the 
cardiac tissue mechanics only under a small range of leaflet deformations. As such, the 
accurate comparative analysis of human cardiac tissue and 3D print materials is problematic 
due to several issues, including: i) significant variation in some tissue properties that occurs 
with aging; ii) substantial difference in mechanical properties of cardiac structures during 
Vukicevic et al.
Page 8
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 their functional and static states; and iii) the paucity of published data regarding the 
mechanical properties of the anatomy being targeted for 3D print replication.
This area of material exploration is new and rapidly progressing. Recent investigations have 
demonstrated that creating a patterned mixture of materials,(56, 57) or layered material 
composites within valve leaflets,(19) could approximate the physiological behavior of those 
anatomical elements. Biglino et al examined a distensible phantoms fabricated of TangoPlus 
materials and showed that this print material is suitable for manufacturing arterial vessels, 
while its mechanical characteristic may not be appropriate for modeling more compliant 
systemic vessels.(12) Accordingly, the ability to model the physiological behavior of certain 
cardiovascular elements largely depends upon the local flow dynamics as well as the specific 
anatomic complexity being modeled. For example, coronary artery flow evaluation would 
require that the coronary vessel wall be fabricated with a compliant 3D print material (or 
material blend if focal atherosclerotic plaque were also being modeled), whereas the 
visualization of a ventricular septal defect for catheter-based repair may not necessitate 
replication of the septal wall compliance.
Future Directions
By combining the technologies of high-spatial resolution cardiac imaging, image processing 
software, and fused dual-material 3D printing, several hospital centers have recently 
demonstrated that patient-specific models of various cardiovascular pathologies may offer an 
important additional perspective on the condition.(34, 36, 37, 42, 51) Patient-specific 3D 
MV models may directly impact our ability to select appropriate patients for structural heart 
therapy, anticipate procedural complications, and potentially revise and improve the flood of 
intra-cardiac devices that are rapidly becoming available for therapeutic use.
Before these technologies can have an even broader impact, there are several issues that still 
need to be resolved. The accuracy of replication of the cardiac structural geometry must be 
validated across a wide range of source imaging modalities, 3D print methods, and 
cardiovascular modeling scenarios. The negative consequence of any modeling error may be 
very different if the model is created to teach or convey anatomy, as compared to if the 
model is created for the detailed planning and device sizing of a catheter-based repair 
procedure. For example, the potential impact of variable loading conditions has yet to be 
determined. Efforts to replicate cardiac material properties with 3D print materials must 
show continued progress. Within a limited range of physiologic performance, the native 
cardiac elements (e.g. vessel wall, chamber wall, valve leaflet) can be modeled from a wide 
spectrum of 3D print material blends. The material properties of both normal and pathologic 
native cardiac structures must be considered (if known) before 3D printing can even begin to 
approximate a similar static performance. Progress must continue towards the development 
of implantable 3D printed patient-specific cardiac prostheses. Like the 3D printed titanium 
devices now used for maxillofacial and other orthopedic repair procedures,(58-61) the near-
term future for cardiac 3D printing may include custom manufacturing of repair devices, 
conduits, or occluders. This notion of a personalized 3D printed cardiovascular prosthesis is 
not here today, but is now clearly visible on the horizon.
Vukicevic et al.
Page 9
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 With applications in congenital heart disease, coronary artery disease, and in surgical and 
catheter-based structural disease – 3D printing is a new tool that is challenging how we 
image, plan, and carry out cardiovascular interventions.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Reference List
1. Farooqi KM, Sengupta PP. Echocardiography and three-dimensional printing: sound ideas to touch a 
heart. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2015; 28:398–403. [PubMed: 25839152] 
2. Sumida T, Otawa N, Kamata YU, et al. Custom-made titanium devices as membranes for bone 
augmentation in implant treatment: Clinical application and the comparison with conventional 
titanium mesh. J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2015; 43:2183–8. [PubMed: 26603108] 
3. Aranda JL, Jimenez MF, Rodriguez M, Varela G. Tridimensional titanium-printed custom-made 
prosthesis for sternocostal reconstruction. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2015; 48:e92–e94. [PubMed: 
26242897] 
4. Ibrahim D, Broilo TL, Heitz C, et al. Dimensional error of selective laser sintering, three-
dimensional printing and PolyJet models in the reproduction of mandibular anatomy. J 
Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2009; 37:167–73. [PubMed: 19056288] 
5. Kato K, Ishiguchi T, Maruyama K, Naganawa S, Ishigaki T. Accuracy of plastic replica of aortic 
aneurysm using 3D-CT data for transluminal stent-grafting: experimental and clinical evaluation. J 
Comput Assist Tomogr. 2001; 25:300–4. [PubMed: 11242232] 
6. Knox K, Kerber CW, Singel SA, Bailey MJ, Imbesi SG. Rapid prototyping to create vascular 
replicas from CT scan data: making tools to teach, rehearse, and choose treatment strategies. 
Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2005; 65:47–53. [PubMed: 15800891] 
7. Kim MS, Hansgen AR, Wink O, Quaife RA, Carroll JD. Rapid prototyping: a new tool in 
understanding and treating structural heart disease. Circulation. 2008; 117:2388–94. [PubMed: 
18458180] 
8. Maragiannis D, Jackson MS, Igo SR, Chang SM, Zoghbi WA, Little SH. Functional 3D printed 
patient-specific modeling of severe aortic stenosis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014; 64:1066–8. [PubMed: 
25190245] 
9. Maragiannis D, Jackson MS, Igo SR, et al. Replicating Patient-Specific Severe Aortic Valve 
Stenosis With Functional 3D Modeling. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2015; 8:e003626. [PubMed: 
26450122] 
10. Schievano S, Migliavacca F, Coats L, et al. Percutaneous pulmonary valve implantation based on 
rapid prototyping of right ventricular outflow tract and pulmonary trunk from MR data. Radiology. 
2007; 242:490–7. [PubMed: 17255420] 
11. Sodian R, Weber S, Markert M, et al. Stereolithographic models for surgical planning in congenital 
heart surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007; 83:1854–7. [PubMed: 17462413] 
12. Biglino G, Verschueren P, Zegels R, Taylor AM, Schievano S. Rapid prototyping compliant arterial 
phantoms for in-vitro studies and device testing. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson. 2013; 15:2. [PubMed: 
23324211] 
13. Greil GF, Wolf I, Kuettner A, et al. Stereolithographic reproduction of complex cardiac 
morphology based on high spatial resolution imaging. Clin Res Cardiol. 2007; 96:176–85. 
[PubMed: 17225916] 
14. Markl M, Schumacher R, Kuffer J, Bley TA, Hennig J. Rapid vessel prototyping: vascular 
modeling using 3t magnetic resonance angiography and rapid prototyping technology. MAGMA. 
2005; 18:288–92. [PubMed: 16369802] 
15. Binder TM, Moertl D, Mundigler G, et al. Stereolithographic biomodeling to create tangible hard 
copies of cardiac structures from echocardiographic data: in vitro and in vivo validation. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2000; 35:230–7. [PubMed: 10636285] 
Vukicevic et al.
Page 10
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 16. Mahmood F, Owais K, Taylor C, et al. Three-dimensional printing of mitral valve using 
echocardiographic data. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2015; 8:227–9. [PubMed: 25457770] 
17. Witschey WR, Pouch AM, McGarvey JR, et al. Three-dimensional ultrasound-derived physical 
mitral valve modeling. Ann Thorac Surg. 2014; 98:691–4. [PubMed: 25087790] 
18. Olivieri LJ, Krieger A, Loke YH, Nath DS, Kim PC, Sable CA. Three-dimensional printing of 
intracardiac defects from three-dimensional echocardiographic images: feasibility and relative 
accuracy. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2015; 28:392–7. [PubMed: 25660668] 
19. Vukicevic M, Puperi DS, Jane Grande-Allen K, Little SH. 3D Printed Modeling of the Mitral Valve 
for Catheter-Based Structural Interventions. Ann Biomed Eng. 2016
20. Kapur KK, Garg N. Echocardiography derived three- dimensional printing of normal and abnormal 
mitral annuli. Ann Card Anaesth. 2014; 17:283–4. [PubMed: 25281625] 
21. Gosnell J, Pietila T, Samuel BP, Kurup HK, Haw MP, Vettukattil JJ. Integration of Computed 
Tomography and Three-Dimensional Echocardiography for Hybrid Three-Dimensional Printing in 
Congenital Heart Disease. J Digit Imaging. 2016
22. Oyama R, Jakab M, Kikuchi A, Sugiyama T, Kikinis R, Pujol S. Towards improved ultrasound-
based analysis and 3D visualization of the fetal brain using the 3D Slicer. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol. 2013; 42:609–10. [PubMed: 23576282] 
23. Bauch T, Vijayaraman P, Dandamudi G, Ellenbogen K. Three-Dimensional Printing for In Vivo 
Visualization of His Bundle Pacing Leads. Am J Cardiol. 2015; 116:485–6. [PubMed: 26071991] 
24. Firouzian A, Manniesging R, Flach ZH, Risselada R, Kooten F, Sturkenboom M. Intracranial 
aneurysm segmentation in 3D CT angiography: method and quantitative validation with and 
without prior noise filtering. European Journal of Radiology. 2016; 79:299–304.
25. Byrne N, Velasco FM, Tandon A, Valverde I, Hussain T. A systematic review of image 
segmentation methodology, used in the additive manufacture of patient-specific 3D printed models 
of the cardiovascular system. JRSM Cardiovasc Dis. 2016; 5 2048004016645467. 
26. Garekar S, Bharati A, Chokhandre M, et al. Clinical Application and Multidisciplinary Assessment 
of Three Dimensional Printing in Double Outlet Right Ventricle With Remote Ventricular Septal 
Defect. World J Pediatr Congenit Heart Surg. 2016; 7:344–50. [PubMed: 27142402] 
27. Kiraly L, Tofeig M, Jha NK, Talo H. Three-dimensional printed prototypes refine the anatomy of 
post-modified Norwood-1 complex aortic arch obstruction and allow presurgical simulation of the 
repair. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2016; 22:238–40. [PubMed: 26590304] 
28. Vukicevic M, Maragiannis D, Jackson M, Little SH. Functional Evaluation of a Patient-Specific 3D 
Printed Model of Aortic Regurgitation (abstr). Circulation. 2015; 132
29. Javan R, Herrin D, Tangestanipoor A. Understanding Spatially Complex Segmental and Branch 
Anatomy Using 3D Printing: Liver, Lung, Prostate, Coronary Arteries, and Circle of Willis. Acad 
Radiol. 2016; 23:1183–9. [PubMed: 27283072] 
30. Xiong G, Kolli K, Soohoo HA, Min JK. In-Vitro Assessment of Coronary Hemodynamics in 3D 
Printed Patient-Specific Geometry (abstr). Circulation. 2015; 132
31. Kolli KK, Min JK, Ha S, Soohoo H, Xiong G. Effect of Varying Hemodynamic and Vascular 
Conditions on Fractional Flow Reserve: An In Vitro Study. J Am Heart Assoc. 2016; 5
32. Russ M, O'Hara R, Setlur Nagesh SV, et al. Treatment Planning for Image-Guided Neuro-Vascular 
Interventions Using Patient-Specific 3D Printed Phantoms. Proc SPIE Int Soc Opt Eng. 2015; 
9417
33. Biglino G, Capelli C, Binazzi A, et al. Virtual and real bench testing of a new percutaneous valve 
device: a case study. EuroIntervention. 2012; 8:120–8. [PubMed: 22580256] 
34. Schmauss D, Haeberle S, Hagl C, Sodian R. Three-dimensional printing in cardiac surgery and 
interventional cardiology: a single-centre experience. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2015; 47:1044–52. 
[PubMed: 25161184] 
35. Ryan JR, Moe TG, Richardson R, Frakes DH, Nigro JJ, Pophal S. A novel approach to neonatal 
management of tetralogy of Fallot, with pulmonary atresia, and multiple aortopulmonary 
collaterals. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2015; 8:103–4. [PubMed: 25457761] 
36. Biglino G, Capelli C, Taylor AM, Schivano S. 3D printing cardiovascular anatomy: a single-center 
experience. New Trends in 3D Printing. 2016
Vukicevic et al.
Page 11
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 37. Farooqi KM, Saeed O, Zaidi A, et al. 3D Printing to Guide Ventricular Assist Device Placement in 
Adults With Congenital Heart Disease and Heart Failure. JACC Heart Fail. 2016; 4:301–11. 
[PubMed: 27033018] 
38. Chaowu Y, Hua L, Xin S. Three-Dimensional Printing as an Aid in Transcatheter Closure of 
Secundum Atrial Septal Defect With Rim Deficiency: In Vitro Trial Occlusion Based on a 
Personalized Heart Model. Circulation. 2016; 133:e608–e610. [PubMed: 27143157] 
39. Noecker AM, Chen JF, Zhou Q, et al. Development of patient-specific three-dimensional pediatric 
cardiac models. ASAIO J. 2006; 52:349–53. [PubMed: 16760727] 
40. Vranicar M, Gregory W, Douglas WI, Di SP, Di Sessa TG. The use of stereolithographic hand held 
models for evaluation of congenital anomalies of the great arteries. Stud Health Technol Inform. 
2008; 132:538–43. [PubMed: 18391364] 
41. Vukicevic M, Conover T, Jaeggli M, et al. Control of respiration-driven retrograde flow in the 
subdiaphragmatic venous return of the Fontan circulation. ASAIO J. 2014; 60:391–9. [PubMed: 
24814833] 
42. Farooqi KM, Nielsen JC, Uppu SC, et al. Use of 3-dimensional printing to demonstrate complex 
intracardiac relationships in double-outlet right ventricle for surgical planning. Circ Cardiovasc 
Imaging. 2015; 8
43. Costello JP, Olivieri LJ, Su L, et al. Incorporating three-dimensional printing into a simulation-
based congenital heart disease and critical care training curriculum for resident physicians. 
Congenit Heart Dis. 2015; 10:185–90. [PubMed: 25385353] 
44. Anwar S, Singh GK, Varughese J, et al. 3D Printing in Complex Congenital Heart Disease: Across 
a Spectrum of Age, Pathology, and Imaging Techniques. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2016
45. Deferm S, Meyns B, Vlasselaers D, Budts W. 3D-Printing in Congenital Cardiology: From 
Flatland to Spaceland. J Clin Imaging Sci. 2016; 6:8. [PubMed: 27195174] 
46. Cantinotti M, Giordano R, Volpicelli G, et al. Lung ultrasound in adult and paediatric cardiac 
surgery: is it time for routine use? Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2016; 22:208–15. [PubMed: 
26586677] 
47. Jacobs S, Grunert R, Mohr FW, Falk V. 3D-Imaging of cardiac structures using 3D heart models 
for planning in heart surgery: a preliminary study. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2008; 7:6–9. 
[PubMed: 17925319] 
48. Schmauss D, Gerber N, Sodian R. Three-dimensional printing of models for surgical planning in 
patients with primary cardiac tumors. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013; 145:1407–8. [PubMed: 
23312105] 
49. Al Jabbari O, Abu Saleh WK, Patel AP, Igo SR, Reardon MJ. Use of three-dimensional models to 
assist in the resection of malignant cardiac tumors. J Card Surg. 2016; 31:581–3. [PubMed: 
27455392] 
50. Valverde I, Gomez G, Suarez-Mejias C, et al. 3D printed cardiovascular models for surgical 
planning in complex congenital heart diseases. Journal of Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance. 
2015; 17:196.
51. Little SH, Vukicevic M, Avenatti E, Ramchandani M, Barker CM. 3D Printed Modeling for 
Patient-Specific Mitral Valve Intervention: Repair With a Clip and a Plug. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 
2016; 9:973–5. [PubMed: 27151611] 
52. Kheradvar A, Groves EM, Simmons CA, et al. Emerging trends in heart valve engineering: Part III. 
Novel technologies for mitral valve repair and replacement. Ann Biomed Eng. 2015; 43:858–70. 
[PubMed: 25287646] 
53. Kim H, Lu J, Sacks MS, Chandran KB. Dynamic simulation of bioprosthetic heart valves using a 
stress resultant shell model. Ann Biomed Eng. 2008; 36:262–75. [PubMed: 18046648] 
54. Mahmood F, Owais K, Montealegre-Gallegos M, et al. Echocardiography derived three-
dimensional printing of normal and abnormal mitral annuli. Ann Card Anaesth. 2014; 17:279–83. 
[PubMed: 25281624] 
55. Yang DH, Kang JW, Kim N, Song JK, Lee JW, Lim TH. Myocardial 3-Dimensional Printing for 
Septal Myectomy Guidance in a Patient With Obstructive Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy. 
Circulation. 2015; 132:300–1. [PubMed: 26216088] 
Vukicevic et al.
Page 12
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 56. Wang K, Zhao Y, Chang Y, et al. Controlling the mechancial behavior of dual-material 3D printed 
meta-materials for patient-specific tissue-mimicking phantoms. Materials & Design. 2016; 
90:704–12.
57. Wang K, Wu C, Qian Z, Zhang C, Wang B. Dual-material 3D printed metamaterials with turnable 
mechancial properties for patient-specific tissue-mimicking phantoms. Additive Manufacturing 16 
AD. 12:31–7.
58. Shah FA, Snis A, Matic A, Thomsen P, Palmquist A. 3D printed Ti6Al4V implant surface 
promotes bone maturation and retains a higher density of less aged osteocytes at the bone-implant 
interface. Acta Biomater. 2016; 30:357–67. [PubMed: 26577985] 
59. Xu N, Wei F, Liu X, et al. Reconstruction of the Upper Cervical Spine Using a Personalized 3D-
Printed Vertebral Body in an Adolescent With Ewing Sarcoma. Spine (Phila Pa 1976 ). 2016; 
41:E50–E54. [PubMed: 26335676] 
60. Chen J, Zhang Z, Chen X, Zhang C, Zhang G, Xu Z. Design and manufacture of customized dental 
implants by using reverse engineering and selective laser melting technology. The Journal of 
Prosthetic Dentistry. 2014; 112:1088–95 e1. [PubMed: 24939253] 
61. Sodian R, Schmauss D, Schmitz C, et al. 3-dimensional printing of models to create custom-made 
devices for coil embolization of an anastomotic leak after aortic arch replacement. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2009; 88:974–8. [PubMed: 19699931] 
62. Blanke P, Naoum C, Webb J, et al. Multimodality Imaging in the Context of Transcatheter Mitral 
Valve Replacement: Establishing Consensus Among Modalities and Disciplines. JACC Cardiovasc 
Imaging. 2015; 8:1191–208. [PubMed: 26481845] 
Abbreviations
AS
aortic stenosis
AV
aortic valve
CAD
computer aided design
DICOM
digital Image and Communication in Medicine
LVOT
left ventricle outflow tract
MR
mitral regurgitation
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
MV
mitral valve
TAVR
transcatheter aortic valve replacement
TMVR
transcatheter mitral valve replacement
Vukicevic et al.
Page 13
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
3D printed modeling of patient-specific anatomy. Step 1: CT imaging dataset used for image 
processing. Step 2: Segmentation process and creation of segmentation mask. Step 3: 
Converting segmentation mask into 3D digital patient-specific model. Step 4: Adjusted 
digital 3D patient-specific model suitable for implantation in flow loop and medical imaging 
acquisition. Step 5: 3D printed multi-material patient-specific model.
Vukicevic et al.
Page 14
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Multi-material and multi-colored patient-specific 3D printed heart for educational purposes 
and communication with patients. Yellow arrows indicate regions 3D printed (in pink) to 
replicate calcium depositions within both the aortic valve (center panel) and mitral valve 
(right panel).
Vukicevic et al.
Page 15
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Functional modeling of patient-specific aortic stenosis. When coupled to a flow loop the 
echocardiographic image and hemodynamic profile of severe stenosis are replicated. Focal 
calcification within the echocardiographic image of the patient (yellow arrow) and the 
patient's model (blue arrow) are indicated. Adapted from Maragiannis et al (9) with 
permission.
Vukicevic et al.
Page 16
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Transcatheter valve and stent implantations within patient-specific models. Bench-top TAVR 
performed within a model of aortic valve stenosis (upper panel). Endovascular stenting 
within models of aortic coarctation and a pulmonary artery (lower panel – images courtesy 
of Dr. Giovanni Biglino).
Vukicevic et al.
Page 17
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
3D printed coronary models. Visualization models - Rigid and solid structures segmented 
from clinical data used to visualize paths and geometry of epicardial coronary arteries (top 
panel (adapted from Jovan et al with permission).(29) Flow models - Hollow structures are 
used to allow flow of liquids and fluorescent particles to quantitatively asses hemodynamics 
of coronary vessels (mid panel). Interventional models - Hollow structures facilitating 
interventional procedures (e.g. angiography), (bottom pane, adapted from Russ et al with 
permission).(32)
Vukicevic et al.
Page 18
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. 
Pre-procedural planning of catheter-based closure of an atrial septal defect (ASD). 3D 
printed model of an ASD imaged by computer tomorgraphy (CT)(top left); 3D printed 
model with bench-top implanted septal occluder device (top right); CT scan of septal 
occluder implantation within the 3D printed model (lower left and right).
Vukicevic et al.
Page 19
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. 
3D printed modeling for patient-specific mitral valve repair with a clip and a plug. CT 
images (A) are used to create a digital model (B) of the mitral valve with a perforation (C). 
A multi-material patient-specific 3D model (D) was printed to replicate the mitral valve 
geometry, regional calcium deposition and pathology (E). Images adapted from Little el al 
(52) with permission.
Vukicevic et al.
Page 20
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Central Illustration. 
Vukicevic et al.
Page 21
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vukicevic et al.
Page 22
Table 1
Applications of 3D printed modeling in cardiovascular diseases.
Study
Clinical condition
Printing method
Findings
Computed tomography
Sodian et al. (11)
Aortic arch pseudoaneurysm
Stereolithography; rigid models
Creation of 
custom-made 
occluder for 
aortic pseudo-
aneurysm
Jacobs et al.(47)
LV with aneurysm; RV tumor
Binder jetting; multi-color 
plaster based material
3D model 
facilitated 
surgical 
resection
Schmauss et al.(48)
RV tumor
Stereolithography; multi-color 
rigid material
3D model 
facilitated 
surgical 
resection
Maragiannis et al.(8,9)
Severe AS
PolyJet; rigid and flexible 
materials
Evaluation of AS 
models under 
patient-specific 
flow conditions
Yang et al.(55)
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
PloyJet; multiple materials
Septal 
myomectomy 
guidance and 
procedural 
planning
Russ et al.(32)
Circle of Willis, cardiac arteries 
and femoral artery
PolyJet; TangoPlus flexible 
material
Pre- 
interventional 
procedural 
practice in flow 
loop
Little et al.(51)
Severe MR
PolyJet; multiple materials
MV model used 
for selection of 
repair devices in 
catheter-based 
clip and plug 
repair procedure
Chawu et al.(38)
ASD
Not specified; Rigid model
Pre-procedural 
planning of 
trans-catheter 
occlusion of 
ASD
Al Jabbari et al.(49)
LA and RA tumor
PolyJet; multiple materials
3D model 
facilitated 
surgical 
resection
Echocardiography
Binder et al.(15)
Normal and dysfunctional MV
Stereolithography; rigid models
Demonstrated 
feasibility of MV 
models based on 
3D TEE
Kapur et al.(20)
MV annulus
Fused deposition molding; rigid 
plastic
Generated MV 
annulus models 
to facilitate MV 
repair
Olivieri et al.(18)
VSD; paravalvular regurgitation
PolyJet; rigid material
Demonstrated 
feasibility and 
accuracy of 3D 
TEE based 
models
Mahmood et al.(16)
Normal and dysfunctional MV
PolyJet; rigid annulus, flexible 
leaflets
Demonstrated 
feasibility of 3D 
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vukicevic et al.
Page 23
Study
Clinical condition
Printing method
Findings
TEE based MV 
models creation
Vukicevic et al.(19)
LV and calcified MV apparatus
PolyJet; multiple-materials, 
differentiated tissue stiffness
3D TEE and CT 
datasets 
combined to 
model for pre-
procedural 
planning
Witschey et al.(17)
Normal and dysfunctional MV
Fused deposition molding; 
plastic
MV models 
created using 
automated image 
segmentation
Cardiac MRI
Markl et al.(14)
Thoracic aortic vasculature
PolyJet; TangoPlus material
Conversion of 
patients MRI 
data into 
physical vessels 
replica
Schivano et al.(10)
Dysfunctional PV
PolyJet; rigid material
Demonstrated 
accuracy of MRI 
based models for 
percutaneous 
valve 
implantation
Greil et al.(12)
Normal and congenital heart
Laser sintering; rigid material
Demonstrated 
accuracy of MRI 
based models
Biglino et al.(13)
Hypoplastic aortic arch and 
RVOT
PolyJet; flexible, TangoPlus
Evaluation of 
TangoPlus 
materials for 
arterial vessels 
replication
Valverde et al.(50)
Aortic coarctation
Fused polymer filament; rigid 
and flexible
Demonstrated 
utility of models 
for interventional 
planning
Costello et al.(43)
VSD
PolyJet; rigid materials
Demonstrated 
utility of heart 
models for 
medical student 
teaching
AS = Aortic stenosis; ASD= atrial septal defect, LV = left ventricle; AV, aortic valve; CT = computed tomography; MR = mitral regurgitation; MRI 
= magnetic resonance imaging; MV = Mitral valve; PV = pulmonary valve; RA = right atrium; RV = right ventricle, LA = left atrium; RVOT = 
right ventricle outflow tract; TEE = transesophageal echocardiography; VSD = ventricular septal defect.
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
