 Perspectives on Psychological Science
2016, Vol. 11(6) 917 
–928
© The Author(s) 2016
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1745691616674458
pps.sagepub.com
Could smiling make us happier? Does frowning make us 
sad? In their seminal article, Strack, Martin, and Stepper 
(1988; henceforth SMS) tested this facial feedback hypothesis: 
Are our affective responses guided, in part, by our own facial 
expressions? In two studies, they induced different groups of 
participants to produce a facial expression (i.e., smiling or 
pouting) usually associated with a particular emotional state 
(i.e., happiness or discontent). They then measured whether 
that induced facial expression changed judgments in ways 
consistent with the associated emotional states.
674458 PPSXXX10.1177/1745691616674458Wagenmakers et al.RRR Facial Feedback Hypothesis
research-article2016
Corresponding Author:
E.-J. Wagenmakers, Department of Psychological Methods, Room G 
0.29, University of Amsterdam, Nieuwe Achtergracht 129B, 1018 VZ 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
E-mail: EJ.Wagenmakers@gmail.com
Registered Replication Report: Strack, 
Martin, & Stepper (1988)
E.-J. Wagenmakers*, T. Beek*, L. Dijkhoff 
*, Q. F. Gronau,*  
A. Acosta, R. B. Adams, Jr., D. N. Albohn, E. S. Allard, S. D. Benning,  
E.-M. Blouin-Hudon, L. C. Bulnes, T. L. Caldwell, R. J. Calin-Jageman,  
C. A. Capaldi, N. S. Carfagno, K. T. Chasten, A. Cleeremans, L. Connell,  
J. M. DeCicco, K. Dijkstra, A. H. Fischer, F. Foroni, U. Hess, K. J. Holmes,  
J. L. H. Jones, O. Klein, C. Koch, S. Korb, P. Lewinski, J. D. Liao, S. Lund,  
J. Lupianez, D. Lynott, C. N. Nance, S. Oosterwijk, A. A. Ozdog
˘ru,  
A. P. Pacheco-Unguetti, B. Pearson, C. Powis, S. Riding, T.-A. Roberts,  
R. I. Rumiati, M. Senden, N. B. Shea-Shumsky, K. Sobocko, J. A. Soto,  
T. G. Steiner, J. M. Talarico, Z. M. van Allen, M. Vandekerckhove,  
B. Wainwright, J. F. Wayand, R. Zeelenberg, E. E. Zetzer, and R. A. Zwaan
*Proposing authors 
Protocol vetted by: Ursula Hess
Protocol edited by: Daniel J. Simons
Multilab direct replication of: Study 1 from Strack, F., Martin, L. L., & Stepper, S. (1988). Inhibiting and facilitating 
conditions of the human smile: A nonobtrusive test of the facial feedback hypothesis. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 54, 768-777.
Data and registered protocols: https://osf.io/pkd65/
Citation: Wagenmakers, E.-J., Beek, T., Dijkhoff, L., Gronau, Q. F., Acosta, A., Adams, R. B., Jr., . . . Zwaan, R. A. (2016). 
Registered Replication Report: Strack, Martin, & Stepper (1988). Perspectives on Psychological Science, 11, 917–928.
Abstract
According to the facial feedback hypothesis, people’s affective responses can be influenced by their own facial expression 
(e.g., smiling, pouting), even when their expression did not result from their emotional experiences. For example, 
Strack, Martin, and Stepper (1988) instructed participants to rate the funniness of cartoons using a pen that they held 
in their mouth. In line with the facial feedback hypothesis, when participants held the pen with their teeth (inducing a 
“smile”), they rated the cartoons as funnier than when they held the pen with their lips (inducing a “pout”). This seminal 
study of the facial feedback hypothesis has not been replicated directly. This Registered Replication Report describes the 
results of 17 independent direct replications of Study 1 from Strack et al. (1988), all of which followed the same vetted 
protocol. A meta-analysis of these studies examined the difference in funniness ratings between the “smile” and “pout” 
conditions. The original Strack et al. (1988) study reported a rating difference of 0.82 units on a 10-point Likert scale. 
Our meta-analysis revealed a rating difference of 0.03 units with a 95% confidence interval ranging from −0.11 to 0.16.
Keywords
facial feedback hypothesis, replication, many-labs, preregistration
 918 
Wagenmakers et al.
Specifically, Strack and colleagues had participants 
rate the funniness of cartoons using a pen that they held 
in their mouth, purportedly to investigate “people’s abil-
ity to perform different tasks with parts of their body not 
normally used for those tasks, as injured or handicapped 
persons often have to do. Participants were then asked to 
perform a variety of tasks by holding a pen with their lips 
only, with their teeth only, or with their nondominant 
hand” (Strack et al., 1988, p. 770). As depicted in Figure 
1, holding the pen with one’s teeth induces a smile and 
holding it with one’s lips induces a pout. In SMS Study 1, 
participants rated the cartoons as funnier in the teeth 
condition (5.14) than in the lips condition (4.32) on a 
10-point Likert scale ranging from 0 (not at all funny) to 
9 (very funny). These results were taken to support the 
facial feedback hypothesis.
SMS has been cited 1,370 times (according to Google 
Scholar as of May 26, 2016) and is commonly discussed 
in introductory psychology courses and textbooks. More-
over, the facial feedback hypothesis is supported by a 
number of related studies (e.g., Kraft & Pressman, 2012; 
Larsen, Kasimatis, & Frey, 1992; Soussignan, 2002). How-
ever, this seminal experiment has not been replicated 
directly using the same design and the same dependent 
variable. The enduring impact of SMS and the lack of 
direct replications together motivated this Registered 
Replication Report (RRR), in which 17 laboratories each 
conducted a direct replication study of Study 1 from SMS 
using a vetted protocol. By combining the results of these 
direct replications meta-analytically, we can provide a 
more precise estimate of the size of this important effect.
The RRR format provides an unbiased, objective, and 
transparent way to measure the reliability and size of an 
effect. Preregistration ensures the validity of statistical 
hypothesis tests (e.g., Chambers, 2013; De Groot, 
1956/2014; Goldacre, 2009; Peirce, 1883; Wagenmakers, 
Wetzels, Borsboom, van der Maas, & Kievit, 2012). By 
including the results of all studies regardless of their out-
come, the RRR format eliminates publication bias. By com-
piling the results of many labs, the RRR process allows a 
measure of the reliability and consistency of the effect 
across different contexts and cultures. Moreover, the com-
bined results from many labs provide a large sample that 
allows for an unprecedented degree of precision in esti-
mating the effect. Finally, by seeking expert evaluation of 
the protocol prior to data collection, the RRR approach 
ensures that the studies are conducted accurately. During 
the protocol development phase, the editor solicited the 
input of the original author; Fritz Strack provided the origi-
nal materials as well as valuable feedback and constructive 
suggestions during the early stages of protocol develop-
ment by the lead lab. Although he declined to review the 
final protocol, he graciously suggested several expert 
reviewers who could review it in his place, and Ursula 
Hess provided meticulous and insightful feedback through-
out the protocol vetting process.
The procedure followed in this RRR was specific, 
unbiased, and transparent. We created a detailed replica-
tion protocol—complete with instructional videos and 
experimental materials—describing exactly how partici-
pating laboratories should conduct the experiment. We 
designed a detailed analysis protocol and R scripts before 
Fig. 1. Illustration of the two ways in which participants were instructed to position the pen for rating the funniness of cartoons. 
Left panel: the pen is held with the teeth, inducing a facial expression similar to smiling. Right panel: the pen is held with the 
lips, inducing a facial expression similar to pouting. Figure available at http://tinyurl.com/zm7p9l7 under CC license https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/.
 RRR Facial Feedback Hypothesis 
919
viewing the data. Finally, the Introduction and Method 
sections of this article were written prior to analyzing the 
data. All of the materials, the protocol, and the analysis 
scripts are publicly available on the Open Science Frame-
work (OSF).
The experiment itself deviated from the original SMS 
study in four notable ways. First, we selected and normed a 
new set of cartoons to ensure that those used in the study 
would be moderately funny, thereby avoiding ceiling or 
floor effects. Twenty-one cartoons from Gary Larson’s The 
Far Side were rated by 120 psychology students at the Uni-
versity of Amsterdam on a scale from 0 (not at all funny) to 
9 (very funny). We selected four cartoons that were judged 
to be “moderately funny.” Ratings for the complete set of 
cartoons are available on the OSF. Note that the original 
SMS Study 1 also featured cartoons from The Far Side.
Second, we minimized the interaction between experi-
menter and participants in order to eliminate experimenter-
expectancy effects (Barber, 1976). Instructions were 
provided by a video displayed on the computer monitor.
Third, a video camera recorded participants while they 
performed the task, and these recordings were reviewed to 
ensure that participants held the pen as instructed.
Fourth, for the ratings, we used the phrasing from SMS 
Study 2 rather than Study 1. In SMS Study 1, participants 
rated each cartoon on a 10-point scale ranging from 0 
(not at all funny) to 9 (very funny). However, in SMS 
Study 2, the predicted effect held only for the emotional 
component of the humor response. We decided to maxi-
mize the probability of observing a facial feedback effect 
by targeting this emotional component. Consequently, 
we used the SMS Study 2 phrasing: “What feeling was 
elicited in you by looking at the cartoons?” As in SMS 
Study 2, the 10-point response scale ranged from 0 (I felt 
not at all amused) to 9 (I felt very much amused).
Finally, we omitted the neutral “nondominant hand con-
dition” from the design (as was done for Study 2 in SMS) in 
order to focus all statistical power on the comparison 
between the smile condition and the pout condition. Omit-
ting this between-participants condition does not affect the 
primary prediction of the facial feedback hypothesis: Peo-
ple in the smile condition should be more amused by the 
cartoons than people in the pout condition.
Method
The OSF page for this project contains all of the materi-
als, protocols, and specifications for the study. We sum-
marize the implementation below.
Design
The design has two between-subject conditions. In one 
condition, participants were instructed to hold the pen with 
their teeth; in the other, participants were instructed to hold 
the pen with their lips (see Fig. 1 and https://osf.io/pkd65/). 
Participants were tested individually or in up to four sepa-
rate cubicles (from which they could not see or hear each 
other). Participants were assigned to conditions in alternat-
ing order. Given the prominence of the SMS study, we were 
careful to recruit participants who were relatively unlikely to 
be familiar with the facial feedback hypothesis (as outlined 
below, participants who guessed the goal of the study were 
excluded from the analysis). Participants were compensated 
with course credit or a small monetary reward.
Sample size
Participating laboratories committed to testing a mini-
mum of 50 participants in each condition (after replacing 
participants who met the exclusion criteria outlined 
below). Each laboratory specified their recruiting meth-
ods, target sample sizes, and stopping rules in advance of 
data collection on their OSF project page (links for each 
lab’s OSF page are provided in the appendix).
Materials
Participating laboratories were required to have access to 
(a) an individual testing station such as a cubicle; (b) a com-
puter for presenting instruction videos; (c) printed informa-
tion brochures describing the cover story; (d) a task booklet 
used to conduct the experiment (see below); (e) practice 
task sheets; (f) suitable pens such as the Stabilo Pen68 or 
the Sharpie; (g) boxes of paper tissues for the participant to 
remove excess saliva; (h) alcohol swabs for participants to 
clean the pen before use, should they wish to do so; and (i) 
a video camera recording system to verify that participants 
held the pen correctly throughout the study. Most written 
materials were made available on the OSF site in both Eng-
lish and Dutch. Laboratories that conducted the study in 
languages other than English or Dutch first translated the 
materials to their language and then had a separate bilin-
gual speaker independently translate them back to the orig-
inal language to ensure the accuracy of the translations. 
Those labs posted the translated and back-translated materi-
als on their OSF pages (listed in the Appendix). The three 
panels from Figure 2 show the setup used in the laboratory 
at the University of Amsterdam.
Procedure
A video of the complete 24-step procedure is available 
on the OSF site (https://osf.io/spf95/). Participants were 
given a new pen and shown to their cubicle. After read-
ing the information brochure and completing the 
informed consent procedure, participants received task 
instructions presented as a video on a computer screen 
 920 
Wagenmakers et al.
(without the experimenter present). Next, participants 
were given the task booklet. Before beginning the main 
tasks in the booklet, participants practiced the correct 
way to hold the pen, under direct supervision of the 
experimenter. As soon as participants successfully com-
pleted the practice task (i.e., drawing a straight line 
between two points), the experimenter started the cam-
era recording and left the cubicle.
Participants worked through the tasks in the task 
booklet while holding the pen in their mouth. The first 
task was to draw lines between a series of successive 
numbers and the second task was to underline vowels. 
The third and crucial task was to rate how amused they 
were by four cartoons. For each cartoon, participants 
answered the question “What feeling was elicited in you 
by looking at the cartoon?” by using a 10-point Likert 
scale ranging from 0 (I felt not at all amused) to 9 (I felt 
very much amused).
After these tasks, participants removed the pen from 
their mouths and completed an exit questionnaire that 
asked three questions: (a) “How successful were you 
in holding the pen in the correct position during the 
entire experimental session?” (the answer was indi-
cated on a 10-point Likert scale, as in SMS Study 2); 
 
(b) “Did you understand the cartoons?” (yes/no); and 
(c) “What do you think the purpose of this experiment 
is?” (open-ended).
Finally, participants provided their age, gender (male/
female), status as a student (yes/no), and occupation or 
field of study.
Exclusion criteria
Exclusion criteria were deliberately strict. Data were 
excluded from participants whose average cartoon rating 
exceeded 2.5 standard deviations from the group mean 
in their condition. Data were excluded if, based on the 
exit questionnaire, participants correctly guessed the goal 
of the study (i.e., the position of the pen influences the 
funniness ratings for the cartoons). Data were also 
excluded if a participant answered “No” to the question 
“Did you understand the cartoons?”. Finally, data were 
excluded from participants who held the pen incorrectly 
for two or more of the cartoons (based on the video 
Fig. 2. Setup of the facial feedback replication experiment at the University of Amsterdam. Left panel: state of the individual booth at the 
start of the experiment. Right top panel: Instructions are displayed on the computer monitor; alcohol swabs and tissues are provided. Right 
bottom panel: setup during the critical experimental stage, where the task booklet presents cartoons to be rated for funniness. Figure avail-
able at http://tinyurl.com/h9e86pu under CC license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/.
 RRR Facial Feedback Hypothesis 
921
recordings). If participants held the pen incorrectly for 
just one cartoon, data from that cartoon rating were 
excluded from analyses.
Preregistered analysis plan
We preregistered our intended analyses and tested them 
on simulated studies (based on the original SMS results) 
before inspecting the data. The detailed preregistered 
analysis plan and associated R code are available on the 
OSF project webpage at https://osf.io/h2f98/. The pri-
mary analysis focuses on the meta-analytic estimate of 
the raw difference between conditions across labs. For 
completeness, the materials on the OSF page include the 
same analysis for standardized effect sizes.
In addition to this primary analysis, we report two Bayes 
factor analyses for each study. The first compares the pre-
dictive adequacy of the null hypothesis H0 and an alterna-
tive that the effect size is positive (i.e., the cartoons are 
expected to be rated as more amusing in the smile condi-
tion than in the pout condition). The specified alternative 
hypothesis assumes that the true effect is most likely to be 
small, although higher effect sizes are not excluded from 
consideration (defined statistically, under H1 the prior distri-
bution on effect size is a folded Cauchy with a default scale 
parameter of r = 0.707; e.g., Ly, Verhagen, & Wagenmakers, 
in press; Morey & Rouder, 2015).
The second Bayes factor analysis compares the belief 
of a skeptic (i.e., the null hypothesis H0) to the idealized 
belief of a rational proponent (i.e., the proponent’s 
hypothesis Hr; Verhagen & Wagenmakers, 2014). The 
rational proponent assumes that the null hypothesis is 
false and bases all knowledge on the posterior distribu-
tion obtained from the original SMS experiment. The 
resulting Bayes factor contrasts the predictive adequacy 
of H0 to an alternative hypothesis with a prior distribu-
tion on effect size that equals the posterior distribution 
from the SMS experiment.
Both Bayes factors provide a graded scale that quanti-
fies the support that the data provide for and against the 
absence of an effect. The difference is that the first analy-
sis specifies the alternative hypothesis by default, and the 
second analysis specifies it by using the information from 
the original SMS experiment.
Results: Confirmatory Analyses
Data analysis was carried out in accordance with the pre-
registered analysis plan outlined above and available at 
https://osf.io/h2f98/.
Descriptives
Descriptive statistics for each contributed replication are 
provided in Table 1.
In addition, the left panel of Figure 3 shows the 
observed rating difference between the means in the 
smile and the pout condition for each of the replication 
studies as a pirate plot (http://www.r-bloggers.com/ 
the-pirate-plot-2-0-the-rdi-plotting-choice-of-r-pirates/). 
Table 1. Descriptive Results and General Information for Each of the 17 Participating Labs
Replication lab
Country of 
participants
Test  
language
Total  
tested
Total  
included
Smile condition 
 
M (SD)
Pout condition  
M (SD)
Albohn
U.S.
English
163
139
4.20 (1.30)
4.06 (1.84)
Allard
U.S.
English
167
125
5.05 (1.56)
4.89 (1.76)
Benning
U.S.
English
143
115
4.69 (1.34)
4.70 (1.43)
Bulnes
Belgium
Dutch
132
101
4.61 (1.52)
4.49 (1.29)
Capaldi
Canada
English
150
117
4.91 (1.54)
5.02 (1.64)
Chasten
U.S.
English
108
94
5.01 (1.54)
5.06 (1.41)
Holmes
U.S.
English
187
99
4.91 (1.49)
4.71 (1.31)
Koch
U.S.
English
116
100
4.93 (1.32)
5.12 (1.43)
Korb
Italy
Italian
116
101
4.14 (1.72)
4.12 (1.71)
Lynott
United Kingdom
English
158
126
4.54 (1.42)
4.18 (1.73)
Oosterwijk
The Netherlands
Dutch
150
110
4.63 (1.48)
4.87 (1.32)
Özdog
˘
 ru
Turkey
Turkish
157
87
3.77 (1.95)
4.34 (1.94)
Pacheco-Unguetti
Spain
Spanish
150
120
3.78 (1.65)
3.91 (1.84)
Talarico
U.S.
English
160
112
4.36 (1.30)
4.34 (1.60)
Wagenmakers
The Netherlands
Dutch
181
130
4.94 (1.14)
4.79 (1.30)
Wayand
U.S.
English
150
110
4.75 (1.39)
4.95 (1.49)
Zeelenberg
The Netherlands
Dutch
145
108
4.93 (1.40)
4.58 (1.41)
 922 
Wagenmakers et al.
The right panel of Figure 3 shows a scatterplot of the 
mean ratings in the pout condition versus those in the 
smile condition. The main diagonal indicates exact equiv-
alence between the two conditions, and points above the 
diagonal indicate support in favor of the facial feedback 
hypothesis. As can be seen from Figure 3, 9 out of 17 
outcomes (53%) were consistent with the facial feedback 
hypothesis. In the original SMS experiments, the mean 
Likert scores were higher in the smile condition than they 
were in the pout condition: The difference was 0.82 in 
SMS Study 1 and 1.03 in SMS Study 2. In this replication 
study, 0 out of 17 outcomes (0%) showed a difference in 
mean Likert scores (smile minus pout) that was at least as 
high as 0.82.
Primary result: Random-effects  
meta-analysis
Our primary analysis of interest takes the form of a forest 
plot of the raw effect sizes across labs and a meta- 
analytic effect size estimate. The forest plot is shown in 
Figure 4. For ease of comparison, Figure 4 also displays 
the results from SMS Study 1 (effect size of 0.82), but the 
original result does not contribute to the meta-analytic 
estimate for the RRR.
Figure 4 shows that the point-estimate for the meta-
analytic effect, 0.03, was smaller than that of SMS Study 
1. The 95% meta-analytic confidence interval ranges from 
−0.11 to 0.16, overlapping with zero.
In 17 out of 17 replication attempts, the 95% confi-
dence interval was narrower than the one estimated for 
Study 1 from SMS. In 2 out of 17 replication attempts, the 
95% confidence interval overlapped the mean effect size 
from SMS Study 1 (0.82); of the 15 out of 17 intervals that 
did not overlap the original effect size, 15 were smaller 
than the one reported in SMS Study 1. Finally, 0 out of 17 
intervals were qualitatively consistent with the facial 
feedback hypothesis in that they were strictly positive.
Secondary result: Bayesian analyses 
for individual studies
In addition to the classical random-effects meta-analysis, we 
now report two Bayesian analyses that are applied to each 
replication attempt in isolation. References and statistical 
details are available in the OSF preregistered analysis plan. 
The results of both analyses are summarized in Table 2.
Analysis 1: One-sided default Bayes 
factor hypothesis tests
The one-sided default Bayes factor hypothesis test quanti-
fies the relative predictive adequacy of two competing 
hypotheses: the null hypothesis H0, which states that the 
effect is absent, versus an order-constrained alternative 
hypothesis H1, which assigns effect size a positive-only prior 
distribution (i.e., a Cauchy distribution folded on zero with 
scale r = 0.707). The second column presents the results. 
Fig. 3. Descriptive results. In the left panel, a pirate plot shows the rating difference between the smile and the pout condition for each separate 
study; the facial feedback hypothesis predicts the differences to be higher than zero. In the right panel, the rating for the pout condition is plotted 
against that of the smile condition; the facial feedback hypothesis predicts the values to lie above the main diagonal. Note that in Study 1 by SMS, 
the mean difference was 0.82. Figure available at http://tinyurl.com/zbh3z9v under CC license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/.
 RRR Facial Feedback Hypothesis 
923
Out of a total of 17 Bayes factors, 0 provide support against 
the null hypothesis, and 0 do this in a nonanecdotal manner 
(i.e., BF10 > 3). In contrast, 17 Bayes factors provide evi-
dence in favor of the null hypothesis, and 13 do this in a 
nonanecdotal manner (i.e., BF10 < 1/3). Note that these 
Bayes factors may not be multiplied across studies, as they 
are not independent (i.e., they all provide information about 
a similar underlying effect size).
Analysis 2: Replication Bayes  
factor tests
The replication Bayes factor hypothesis test quantifies the 
relative predictive adequacy of two competing hypothe-
ses: the skeptics’ null hypothesis H0, which states that the 
effect is absent, versus the proponents’ alternative 
hypothesis Hr, which assigns effect size a prior distribu-
tion that equals the posterior distribution obtained from 
the original SMS Study 1.
The third column presents the results. Out of a total of 
17 replication Bayes factors, 1 provides support against 
the skeptics’ null hypothesis, and 0 do this in a nonanec-
dotal manner (i.e., BFr0 > 3). In contrast, 16 replication 
Bayes factors provide evidence in favor of the null 
hypothesis, and 12 do this in a nonanecdotal manner 
(i.e., BFr0 < 1/3). As before, these Bayes factors are not 
independent and hence may not be multiplied.
Results: Exploratory Analyses
What people find amusing could differ across languages 
and cultures. If so, some studies might show a reduced dif-
ference between the smile and pout conditions due to floor 
or ceiling effects in the ratings provided by participants. To 
explore the possible contribution of such effects, Figure 5 
shows—separately for each study—the average rating 
against the raw effect size (i.e., the average difference 
between the ratings in the two conditions). If the obtained 
results were sensitive to floor and ceiling effects, Figure 5 
should show the largest effect size for intermediate ratings, 
with reduced effects for labs with low (floor effect) or high 
(ceiling effect) average ratings.
As can be seen from Figure 5, the average ratings are 
relatively homogeneous across the 17 labs. No effects of 
floor or ceiling effects are apparent, and hence we 
decided to forego additional exploratory meta-analyses 
in which “average rating” is added as a covariate (i.e., 
meta-regression; Knapp & Hartung, 2003; Thompson & 
Fig. 4. Forest plot of a random-effects meta-analysis of 17 replications of SMS. The plot is based on raw effect sizes (i.e., mean rating differences 
between the smile and the pout condition). The result of Study 1 by SMS is included on top. The confidence interval for the SMS study was obtained 
from the summary statistics under the assumption of homogeneous variance and homogeneous sample size across the experimental conditions. A 
forest plot based on standardized effect sizes is available on the project OSF page. Figure available at http://tinyurl.com/jluyjwh under CC license 
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/.
 924 
Wagenmakers et al.
Higgins, 2002). Results from additional exploratory analy-
ses, including an examination of the effect for individual 
cartoons, are available on the OSF site at https://osf.io/
h2f98/wiki/home/.
General Discussion
This RRR featured data from 17 laboratories with a com-
bined total of 1,894 participants included in the analyses. 
The data were obtained according to a vetted design and 
analyzed according to a preregistered analysis plan. In 
order to ensure objective reporting of the results, the 
Introduction, Method, and Results sections (specifying 
wording for different possible outcomes) of this article 
were written without knowledge of the actual data. For 
that pre-data manuscript, we used simulated data to cre-
ate mock-ups of the figures. The pre-data manuscript was 
reviewed by the contributing laboratories as well as the 
original reviewer of the protocol. We conducted the anal-
yses of the actual data after finalizing this data-blind ver-
sion of the analysis scripts and manuscript content.
Overall, the results were inconsistent with the original 
result reported in SMS. Whereas SMS reported a difference 
between conditions of 0.82 units on a 10-point rating scale, 
the random effects meta-analysis of the RRR results esti-
mated that difference to be 0.03 with a 95% confidence 
interval ranging from −0.11 to 0.16. All of the individual 
laboratories reported confidence intervals that overlapped 
with zero. Furthermore, out of 34 preregistered Bayes fac-
tor analyses (i.e., two per laboratory), all but one provided 
evidence in favor of the null hypothesis.
This RRR did not replicate the SMS result and failed to 
do so in a statistically compelling fashion. Nevertheless, 
it should be stressed that the RRR results do not invali-
date the more general facial feedback hypothesis. It is 
possible that the original SMS paradigm that we employed 
does not provide a strong test of the facial feedback 
hypothesis and that other procedures would provide 
more compelling evidence. It is also possible that some 
uncontrolled differences between the original study and 
the RRR studies explain the discrepancy in results, despite 
our efforts to ensure that the protocol accurately and pre-
cisely tested the same hypothesis as the original study. 
Although it is always possible that some unexplained fac-
tor accounts for the difference from the original study, 
given the compelling evidence from this RRR and the 
lack of heterogeneity across the 17 included studies, 
researchers should provide empirical evidence (ideally 
from a preregistered procedure like that used in the 
 
RRR) for the ability of any proposed moderator to change 
the observed effect before assuming that the difference 
 
is due to moderation. We also encourage researchers 
studying the facial feedback hypothesis using other tasks 
to adopt the same sorts of strict control used in this 
protocol: pretesting the stimulus materials, excluding 
Table 2. Bayes Factors for Each of the 17 Replication Studies
Replication lab
Default BF10
Replication BFr0
Albohn
0.281
0.297
Allard
0.300
0.329
Benning
0.189
0.190
Bulnes
0.300
0.343
Capaldi
0.150
0.149
Chasten
0.191
0.199
Holmes
0.401
0.499
Koch
0.134
0.139
Korb
0.219
0.232
Lynott
0.713
0.993
Oosterwijk
0.115
0.121
Özdog
˘
 ru
0.106
0.124
Pacheco-Unguetti
0.146
0.144
Talarico
0.215
0.222
Wagenmakers
0.356
0.406
Wayand
0.126
0.129
Zeelenberg
0.773
1.136
Note: The second column shows the one-sided default Bayes factors 
(BF10), and the third column shows the replication Bayes factors 
(BFr0). Numbers lower than 1 indicate support in favor of the null 
hypothesis; for instance, a Bayes factor of 0.20 indicates that the data 
are 1/0.20 = 5 times more likely under the null hypothesis than under 
the alternative hypothesis. Numbers higher than 1 indicate support 
in favor of the alternative hypothesis; for instance, a Bayes factor of 
9 indicates that the data are 9 times more likely under the alternative 
hypothesis than under the null hypothesis.
Fig. 5. Relation between average rating and raw effect size (i.e., the 
average difference between the ratings in the two conditions) across 
the 17 replications of SMS. If the results were sensitive to floor and ceil-
ing effects, the largest effect size should be observed for average ratings 
in the intermediate range. Figure available at http://tinyurl.com/zyz 
ksg6 under CC license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/.
 RRR Facial Feedback Hypothesis 
925
interaction with the experimenter as much as possible, 
specifying and adopting strict exclusion criteria, and pre-
registering an analysis plan.
Appendix A: Individual Lab Details
Lead Lab
E.-J. Wagenmakers, University of Amsterdam
Titia Beek, University of Amsterdam
Laura Dijkhoff, University of Amsterdam
Quentin F. Gronau, University of Amsterdam
https://osf.io/pkd65/
A total of 130 participants were recruited at the University of 
Amsterdam (smile/teeth n = 65; pout/lips n = 65). All partici-
pants received a €10 monetary reward. Psychology students 
were excluded from participation. We followed the official pro-
tocol in all respects.
Contributing Labs
Daniel N. Albohn, The Pennsylvania State University
Troy G. Steiner, The Pennsylvania State University
Reginald B. Adams, Jr., The Pennsylvania State University
Ursula Hess, Humboldt-Universität
Jose A. Soto, The Pennsylvania State University
https://osf.io/2sz38/
A total of 139 students (smile/teeth n = 67; pout/lips n = 72) 
were recruited from the psychology subject pool at The Penn-
sylvania State University. Participants were tested individually 
using the provided materials. Our study materials were pre-
sented on a slightly raised desk so that a camera could record 
participants’ faces during the task, but we followed the official 
protocol in all other respects. Although our preregistered plan 
specified that we would collect physiological data from our 
participants, we were unable to collect this data due to time 
constraints. All other aspects of our preregistered plan were 
carried out as specified.
Eric S. Allard, Cleveland State University
Emily E. Zetzer, Cleveland State University
https://osf.io/sutwj/
A total of 167 students (smile/teeth n = 84; pout/lips n = 83) 
were recruited from the psychology subject pool at Cleveland 
State University. Participants were tested individually using the 
provided materials. In all respects, we followed the official pro-
tocol. All participants were compensated with course credit.
Stephen D. Benning, University of Nevada, Las Vegas
Christin N. Nance, University of Nevada, Las Vegas
Nicholas S. Carfagno, University of Nevada, Las Vegas
https://osf.io/6wh4a/
A total of 143 students (smile/teeth n = 72; pout/lips n = 71) 
were recruited from the psychology subject pool at the Univer-
sity of Nevada, Las Vegas. Participants were tested using the 
provided materials, and minimal changes were made to the 
Informed Consent, as per the request of our local Institutional 
Review Board, to reduce the emphasis on the cover story. Any 
changes made to the Informed Consent are highlighted on our 
Implementation OSF page. Because we ran two participants on 
separate computers facing opposite walls of the lab (located 
4.88 m across from each other), we required them to wear 
headphones to ensure that they would neither see the other 
participant's mouth pose nor overhear instructions given to the 
participant in the opposite condition. Other than this addition, 
the original protocol was followed in all other respects. We 
compensated participants with .5 Sona credit per half-hour. 
With our additional surveys (given only after the original proto-
col was completed in its entirety), most students completed the 
study in under an hour.
Luis Carlo Bulnes, Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Morgane Senden, Université Libre de Bruxelles
Marie Vandekerckhove, Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Olivier Klein, Université Libre de Bruxelles
Axel Cleeremans, Université Libre de Bruxelles
https://osf.io/gaj8c/
A total of 132 students (smile/teeth n = 66; pout/lips n = 66) 
were recruited from the psychology subject pool at the Vrije 
Universiteit Brussel. Participants were tested individually using 
the provided materials in Dutch. As in our preregistered plan, 
100 participants were initially scheduled, and 20 students were 
added after checking for exclusions. However, as we were still 
unable to meet our target sample size of a minimum of 50 par-
ticipants per cell with that method, 12 extra participants took 
part in exchange for €5.
Colin A. Capaldi, Carleton University
Karin Sobocko, Carleton University
Eve-Marie Blouin-Hudon, Carleton University
Zack M. van Allen, Carleton University
https://osf.io/5g2p4/
A total of 150 students (smile/teeth n = 75; pout/lips n = 75) 
were recruited from the psychology subject pool at Carleton 
University. Participants were tested individually using the pro-
vided materials. There were a few minor differences in how 
we ran the study from the main protocol. We had to modify 
the informed consent and debriefing forms to obtain approval 
from the research ethics board at our university. Moreover, the 
information brochure and informed consent form were merged 
into one document following recommendations from our ethics 
board. Our ethics board also required us to ask for participants’ 
consent to use their data after they were debriefed. Only 1 
participant did not give us their consent to use their data. We 
also made two changes to the exit interview form at the end 
of the booklet: The 20 dollar/euro voucher line was deleted 
and a question asking participants whether they had previ-
ously learned about the facial feedback hypothesis was added. 
 926 
Wagenmakers et al.
All of these deviations from the main protocol were approved 
by the editor and preregistered before data was collected. Our 
revised materials can be viewed at https://osf.io/sar8j/. Applying 
the standardized exclusion rules reduced our sample size to 117 
participants (smile/teeth n = 59; pout/lips n = 58). As part of our 
preregistration, our laboratory included an additional exclusion 
rule where participants would be excluded if they indicated that 
they had previously learned about the facial feedback hypoth-
esis. Applying this additional exclusion rule reduced our sample 
size further to 106 participants, with an equal number of par-
ticipants remaining in each condition. The overall meta-analysis 
used the data from the 117 participant sample.
Kelsie T. Chasten, Dominican University
Robert J. Calin-Jageman, Dominican University
Tracy L. Caldwell, Dominican University
https://osf.io/g4vw7/
A total of 108 students (smile/teeth n = 54; pout/lips n = 54) 
were recruited from the psychology subject pool at Dominican 
University. After exclusions, a total of 94 students were included 
in data analysis (smile/teeth n = 47; pout/lips n = 47). Partici-
pants were tested individually using the provided materials. We 
followed the official protocol. All participants were compen-
sated with $5 in order to encourage students to participate in 
the study and to reach the target sample size.
Kevin J. Holmes, Colorado College
Tomi-Ann Roberts, Colorado College
Julia D. Liao, Colorado College
Jacob L. H. Jones, Colorado College
Noah B. Shea-Shumsky, Colorado College
https://osf.io/6vmyn/
A total of 187 undergraduate students (smile/teeth n = 93; 
pout/lips n = 94) were recruited at Colorado College, none of 
whom had taken a psychology class at the college level. Par-
ticipants were tested individually using the provided materials 
and received $5 in compensation. We used the English versions 
of the study materials. In line with the requirements of our IRB, 
we made slight modifications to the Information Brochure to 
provide participants with more information regarding the risks, 
benefits, and voluntary nature of participation, as well as the 
confidentiality of their data (modified version: https://osf.io/
mvd6n/?view_only=3e679a36686840338361dd54da30441d). We 
also added several items to the exit questionnaire to assess pos-
sible moderators and confounds (modified version: https://osf 
.io/ks5cr/?view_only=3e679a36686840338361dd54da30441d). 
Our participants used the Pentel Sign Pen, an odorless fiber-
tipped pen very similar to the Stabilo 68, to perform the tasks. 
In all other respects, we followed the official protocol. A total 
of 88 participants were excluded: 57 due to a video recording 
failure that left us unable to verify that they had held the pen 
correctly while completing the tasks, and 31 due to one or more 
of the standardized exclusion criteria. The final sample included 
in the meta-analysis consisted of 99 participants (smile/teeth 
 
n = 49; pout/lips n = 50).
Christopher Koch, George Fox University
https://osf.io/vzcwu/
A total of 116 students (smile/teeth n = 56; pout/lips n = 60) 
were recruited from the psychology subject pool at George Fox 
University. Participants were tested individually according to 
the official protocol using the provided materials. Course credit 
was awarded for participation.
Sebastian Korb, International School for Advanced Studies 
(SISSA)
Francesco Foroni, International School for Advanced Studies 
(SISSA)
Raffaella I. Rumiati, International School for Advanced Studies 
(SISSA)
https://osf.io/tmqbk/
A total of 116 students (smile/teeth n = 62; pout/lips n = 54) 
were recruited from the student subject pool at the International 
School for Advanced Studies (SISSA) in Trieste, Italy. Only four 
participants were psychology students. Participants were tested 
individually using the provided materials. Our study materials 
were translated into Italian, but in all other respects, we followed 
the official protocol. Participants participated in exchange for €5.
Dermot Lynott, Lancaster University
Louise Connell, Lancaster University
Sophie Lund, Lancaster University
Bethany Pearson, Lancaster University
Christina Powis, Lancaster University
Sarah Riding, Lancaster University
Bethany Wainwright, Lancaster University
https://osf.io/56d2z/
A total of 158 students (smile/teeth n = 79; pout/lips n = 79) 
were recruited from Lancaster University and environs. Par-
ticipants were tested individually using the provided materi-
als. In all respects, we followed the official protocol, with the 
exception that participants also completed supplementary tasks 
following the completion of the replication component of the 
study. Although our preregistered plan specified that we would 
recruit a minimum of 200 participants, we were unable to reach 
this target due to the closure of the university in December 2015 
because of flooding and loss of electricity in the region.
Suzanne Oosterwijk, University of Amsterdam
Agneta H. Fischer, University of Amsterdam
Peter Lewinski, Kozminski University
https://osf.io/d9xeu
A total of 150 students (smile/teeth n = 68; pout/lips n = 82) 
were recruited from the communication science and psychol-
ogy subject pool at the University of Amsterdam. Participants 
were tested individually using the provided materials. Our study 
 RRR Facial Feedback Hypothesis 
927
materials were translated into Dutch, but in all other respects, 
we followed the official protocol. Although our preregistered 
plan specified that participants would come only from com-
munication science, we were unable to recruit enough people 
to meet our target sample size with that method, so we also 
allowed students from any program other than psychology to 
sign up for the study. Participants participated in exchange for 
€5 or a course credit.
Asil Ali Özdog
˘
 ru, Üsküdar University
https://osf.io/iuka6/
A total of 157 students (smile/teeth n = 76; pout/lips n = 81) 
were recruited from the undergraduate programs in psychology 
and sociology at Üsküdar University. Participants were tested 
individually using the provided materials. Our study materials 
were translated into Turkish then back-translated into English 
for accuracy. Twenty-one of the translated cartoons were rated 
by 122 psychology students who did not participate in the main 
study. Based on the ratings, four cartoons were identified as 
moderately funny, of which only one cartoon differed from the 
four cartoons identified by the lead lab. We also administered 
a self-report sense of humor scale in the last step of the pro-
cedure. In all other respects, we followed the official protocol. 
Participants were compensated with course credit.
Antonia Pilar Pacheco-Unguetti, Universidad de Granada
Alberto Acosta, Universidad de Granada
Juan Lupiáñez, Universidad de Granada
https://osf.io/ch3zd/
A total of 120 students (smile/teeth n = 61; pout/lips n = 59) 
were recruited from the psychology subject pool at University of 
Granada. Participants were tested individually using the provided 
materials. Our study materials were translated into Spanish, but 
we followed the official protocol in all other respects. Our pre-
registered plan specified that participants would be compensated 
either with course credits or money for their participation. Only 
three participants participated in exchange of €5. All the material 
was translated from English into Spanish by one of the experi-
menters, and the three experimenters checked and edited each 
document for accuracy. All materials were then back-translated 
from Spanish into English by a native bilingual speaker, and we 
found no discrepancy in the meanings of the original version and 
the English back-translation. After completing all of the required 
tasks in experimental session, participants moved to a different 
cubicle, and another experimenter administered two additional 
questionnaires: the State-Trait Cheerfulness Inventory (STCI-T; 
Carretero-Dios, Benítez, Delgado Rico, Ruch & López-Benítez, 
2014) and the GELOPH <15> questionnaire of gelotophobia 
(Carretero-Dios, Proyer, Ruch & Rubio, 2010).
Jennifer M. Talarico, Lafayette College
Jennifer M. DeCicco, Holy Family University
https://osf.io/6yuxk/
A total of 160 students (smile/teeth n = 69; pout/lips n = 91) 
were recruited from the psychology subject pool at Lafayette 
College (M age = 19.49 years old (SD = 1.12)). They were com-
pensated with extra credit in psychology courses. To meet the 
requirements of our local Institutional Review Board, minor 
changes to both consent and debriefing forms were required. 
Final versions of each can be found at our OSF site. Our pro-
cedures followed the approved protocol as described and did 
not deviate from our preregistered plan. Of the 160 participants 
who completed the task, 48 were excluded (see the Lab Log 
for more information regarding exclusion criteria; https://osf.io/
kdv36/). Of the remaining 112 participants, 57 were included in 
the smile condition and 55 in the pout condition.
Joseph F. Wayand, Walsh University
https://osf.io/98hr3/
A total of 154 students (smile/teeth n = 77; pout/lips n = 77) 
were recruited from the psychology participant pool at Walsh 
University in North Canton, OH. We followed our stopping 
rule (run 120 participants, check for 50 in each group after 
exclusions, then run 10 additional participants and check 
again, repeat as necessary) but ran 4 extra participants due to 
a miscommunication between research assistants. In all other 
respects, we followed the official protocol.
Rene Zeelenberg, Erasmus University
Rolf A. Zwaan, Erasmus University
Katinka Dijkstra, Erasmus University
https://osf.io/bw8fv
A total of 105 students (smile/teeth n = 52; pout/lips n = 53) were 
recruited from the psychology subject pool at Erasmus University 
Rotterdam. Twenty-nine students (smile/teeth n = 18; pout/lips 
 
n = 11) were excluded, leaving 76 students (smile/teeth n = 34; 
pout/lips n = 42) in the sample. Participants were tested indi-
vidually using the provided materials. Our study materials were 
based on the available materials in Dutch, and we followed the 
official protocol in all respects. Although our preregistered plan 
specified that participants would be compensated with course 
credit, we were unable to recruit enough people to meet our 
target sample size with that method. To meet this target, 40 par-
ticipants (smile/teeth n = 21; pout/lips n = 19) participated in 
exchange for €3. Of these students, 8 (smile/teeth n = 5; pout/
lips n = 3) were excluded, leaving 32 students (smile/teeth n = 
16; pout/lips n = 16). Thus, the final sample consisted of 108 
participants (smile/teeth n = 50; pout/lips n = 58).
Acknowledgments
The second and third author contributed equally and are listed 
in alphabetical order. We thank Ravi Selker for piloting the 
cartoons, Eva Specker and Gusta Marcus for acting in the 
instructional videos, and Gusta Marcus (again) for giving per-
mission to use her image in Figure 1. We are also grateful to 
Ursula Hess for her extensive guidance during the review and 
 928 
Wagenmakers et al.
vetting process and to Fritz Strack for providing materials. We 
thank Courtney Soderberg and the Center for Open Science for 
reviewing the R code and the Arnold Foundation and APS for 
providing funding support to participating laboratories. All of 
the participating researchers had the opportunity to review and 
suggest changes to a draft of the manuscript and analysis plan 
before the data analyses were conducted.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The authors declared that they had no conflicts of interest with 
respect to their authorship or the publication of this article.
Funding
This work was supported by ERC Grant #283876 from the Euro-
pean Research Council.
References
Barber, T. X. (1976). Pitfalls in human research: Ten pivotal 
points. New York, NY: Pergamon Press.
Carretero-Dios, H., Benítez, I., Delgado-Rico, E., Ruch, W., & 
López-Benítez, R. (2014). Temperamental basis of sense 
of humor: The Spanish long form of the trait version of 
the State-Trait-Cheerfulness-Inventory. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 68, 77–82.
Carretero-Dios, H., Proyer, R. T., Ruch, W., & Rubio, V. J. (2010). 
The Spanish version of the GELOPH <15>: Properties of 
a questionnaire for the assessment of the fear of being 
laughed at. International Journal of Clinical and Health 
Psychology, 10, 345–357.
Chambers, C. D. (2013). Registered reports: A new publishing 
initiative at Cortex. Cortex, 49, 609–610.
De Groot, A. D. (2014). The meaning of “significance” for dif-
ferent types of research [translated and annotated by Eric-
Jan Wagenmakers, Denny Borsboom, Josine Verhagen, 
Rogier Kievit, Marjan Bakker, Angelique Cramer, Dora 
Matzke, Don Mellenbergh, and Han L. J. van der 
Maas]. Acta Psychologica, 148, 188–194. doi:10.1016/ 
j.actpsy.2014.02.001 (Original work published 1956)
Goldacre, B. (2009). Bad science. London, England: Fourth 
Estate.
Knapp, G., & Hartung, J. (2003). Improved tests for a random 
effects meta-regression with a single covariate. Statistics in 
Medicine, 22, 2693–2710.
Kraft, T. L., & Pressman, S. D. (2012). Grin and bear it: The 
influence of manipulated facial expression on the stress 
response. Psychological Science, 23, 1372–1378.
Larsen, R. J., Kasimatis, M., & Frey, K. (1992). Facilitating the 
furrowed brow: An unobtrusive test of the facial feed-
back hypothesis applied to unpleasant affect. Cognition & 
Emotion, 6, 321–338.
Ly, A., Verhagen, A. J., & Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2016). Harold 
Jeffreys’s default Bayes factor hypothesis tests: Explanation, 
extension, and application in psychology. Journal of 
Mathematical Psychology, 72, 19–32.
Morey, R. D., & Rouder, J. N. (2015). BayesFactor 0.9.11-1 (with 
contributions from Tahira Jamil). Comprehensive R Archive 
Network. Retrieved from http://cran.r-project.org/web/
packages/BayesFactor/index.html
Peirce, C. S. (1883). A theory of probable inference. In C. S. 
Peirce (Ed.), Studies in logic (pp. 126–181). Boston, MA: 
Little & Brown.
Soussignan, R. (2002). Duchenne smile, emotional experience, 
and autonomic reactivity: A test of the facial feedback 
hypothesis. Emotion, 2, 52–74.
Strack, F., Martin, L. L., & Stepper, S. (1988). Inhibiting and 
facilitating conditions of the human smile: A nonobtrusive 
test of the facial feedback hypothesis. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 54, 768–777.
Thompson, S. G., & Higgins, J. P. T. (2002). How should 
meta-regression analyses be undertaken and interpreted? 
Statistics in Medicine, 21, 1559–1573.
Verhagen, A. J., & Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2014). Bayesian tests 
to quantify the result of a replication attempt. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General, 143, 1457–1475.
Wagenmakers, E.-J., Wetzels, R., Borsboom, D., van der Maas, 
H. L. J., & Kievit, R. A. (2012). An agenda for purely con-
firmatory research. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 
7, 627–633.
