 Research Paper
Histidine-Rich Glycoprotein Prevents Septic Lethality through Regulation
of Immunothrombosis and Inflammation
Hidenori Wake a, Shuji Mori f, Keyue Liu a, Yuta Morioka a, Kiyoshi Teshigawara a, Masakiyo Sakaguchi b,
Kosuke Kuroda c, Yuan Gao a, Hideo Takahashi g, Aiji Ohtsuka d, Tadashi Yoshino e,
Hiroshi Morimatsu c, Masahiro Nishibori a,⁎
a Department of Pharmacology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 700-8558, Japan
b Department of Cell Biology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 700-8558, Japan
c Department of Anesthesiology and Resuscitology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 700-8558, Japan
d Department of Human Morphology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 700-8558, Japan
e Department of Pathology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 700-8558, Japan
f Department of Pharmacology, Shujitsu University, School of Pharmacy, Okayama 703-8516, Japan
g Department of Pharmacology, Kinki University, Faculty of Medicine, Osakasayama 589-8511, Japan
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 4 April 2016
Received in revised form 2 June 2016
Accepted 2 June 2016
Available online 4 June 2016
Sepsis is a major cause of death worldwide. We show that a plasma protein histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG)
was decreased significantly in septic mice with cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) and supplementary treatment
of septic mice with exogenous HRG improved survival, with strong inhibition of tight attachment of neutrophils
to pulmonary vasculatures, subsequent immunothrombosis, DIC state, lung inflammation, hypercytokinemia,
and activation of vascular endothelial cells (VECs). In contrast, knockdown of HRG by siRNA exacerbated lethality.
Purified human HRG reversibly induced morphological changes in human neutrophils in vitro; induction of
spherical shape with reduced microvilli and adhesiveness to VECs. HRG maintained the passage of neutrophils
through microcapillaries and abolished production of reactive oxygen species. These results suggested that the
supplementary therapy with HRG may provide a novel strategy for the treatment of sepsis through suppression
of excessive systemic inflammation and immunothrombosis by keeping circulating neutrophils quiescent and
preventing uncontrolled activation of VECs.
© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Keywords:
Histidine-rich glycoprotein
Sepsis
ARDS
Immunothrombosis
Neutrophil
1. Introduction
Sepsis is a systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) associ-
ated with infection. The pathogenesis of sepsis includes the disturbance
of blood-vascular homeostasis, which may cause multiple organ failure,
circulatory shock, and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC),
leading to high mortality (Aziz et al., 2013; Dellinger et al., 2012;
Hotchkiss et al., 2013; Semeraro et al., 2012). The proinflammatory cy-
tokine response in the acute phase may be triggered by the constituents
of invading pathogens and tissue damage-associated molecular patterns
(Piccinini and Midwood, 2010; Ward, 2012), accompanied by the acti-
vation of vascular endothelial cells (VECs), a pivotal step for inducing
the migration of leukocytes into inflammatory sites with pathogen inva-
sion (Salomão et al., 2008; Williams et al., 2011). A recent study sug-
gested that neutrophil adhesion on VECs may trigger platelet
aggregation and immunothrombus formation in septic acute respirato-
ry distress syndrome (ARDS) (Grommes and Soehnlein, 2011; Matthay
and Zemans, 2011; Moreland et al., 2004; Engelmann and Massberg,
2013; Brinkmann et al., 2004; Yipp and Kubes, 2013). Thus, circulating
neutrophils may play important roles in the pathogenesis of septic con-
ditions in addition to infiltrating neutrophils. However, the uncon-
trolled activation of neutrophils has not been examined in detail due
to methodological limitations (Alves-Filho et al., 2008). Neutrophils
are easily activated by in vitro handling or even by withdrawing from
blood vessels. Therefore, it might be rather difficult to know and specu-
late about the precise features of the circulating neutrophils by an in
vitro analysis. Also, if any are present, a controlling factor of neutrophils
in plasma, one that might regulate a fundamental state of circulating
neutrophils in both healthy and disease conditions, remains to be
determined.
Histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG) is a 75 kDa plasma glycoprotein
produced in and secreted from the liver (Koide et al., 1986). The plasma
levels of HRG in healthy human were reported to be constant around
1 μM (Poon et al., 2011). HRG's primary amino acid sequence has an
extraordinary number of histidine residues and typical GHHPH repeats
(Borza et al., 1996). Since HRG binds to a diverse range of ligands includ-
ing
heparin,
heparan
sulfate,
fibrin,
fibrinogen,
plasminogen,
EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 180–194
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: mbori@md.okayama-u.ac.jp (M. Nishibori).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.06.003
2352-3964/© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
EBioMedicine
journal homepage: www.ebiomedicine.com
 thrombospondin, divalent metal cations, heme, and complement C1q, it
is suggested to be involved in the regulation of coagulation/fibrinolysis
(Lijnen et al., 1983; Leung, 1986; Peterson et al., 1987; Silverstein et
al., 1985), immune response (Gorgani et al., 1997; Morgan, 1985;
Poon et al., 2010), and angiogenesis (Doñate et al., 2004; Juarez et al.,
2002; Wake et al., 2009). Moreover, HRG is reported to have the anti-
bacterial and antifungal activities in acidic pH and high Zn condition
(Rydengård et al., 2007; Kacprzyk et al., 2007; Rydengård et al., 2008)
as well as the neutralizing effect on lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (Bosshart
and Heinzelmann, 2003). Actually, Shannon et al. demonstrated that
HRG decreases mortality of septic mice model with S. pyogenes-induced
abscess by killing and trapping of bacteria in abscess site (Shannon et al.,
2010). However, the effects of HRG on the circulating leukocytes, espe-
cially neutrophils in systemic septic condition, are poorly understood.
In the present study, we identified and characterized HRG as a
unique plasma factor that maintains a neutrophil's spherical shape
with minimal microvilli on the surface independent of the extravascular
action. These morphological features render neutrophils quiescent with
respect to the cell adhesion to VECs, the passage of microvasculatures,
and the spontaneous release of reactive oxygen species (ROS). In cecal
ligation and puncture (CLP) sepsis mice, plasma levels of HRG decreased
significantly, and supplementary treatment with human HRG dramati-
cally improved the survival rate of CLP mice associated with the inhibi-
tion of immunothrombosis in pulmonary vasculatures, DIC state,
hypercytokinemia, and inflammatory responses in the lung, without in-
terfering with the infiltration of neutrophils into the peritoneal cavity.
The present study has shed light on our understanding of septic condi-
tions by clarifying a crucial role of HRG in neutrophils.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Reagents
Thrombin (from human plasma), isoluminol, and horseradish per-
oxidase type IV were obtained from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). DAPI,
SYTOX Blue, SYTOX Green, Hoechst33342, Calcein-AM, Fluo-4, CM-
H2DCFDA, Phalloidin-Alexa584, DNaseI-Alexa488, BAPTA-AM, and
Invivofectamine were obtained from Life Technologies (Carlsbad, CA).
Anti-phosphatidylserine antibody (Ab) (clone: 1H6) were obtained
from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). N-formyl-L-methionyl-L-leucyl-
phenylalanine (fMLP) was obtained from Peptide Institute, Inc.
(Minoh, Japan). Toxin B from Clostridium difficile was obtained from
List Biological Laboratories (Campbell, CA). Imipenem (TIENAM for in-
tramuscular injection) was obtained from MSD (Tokyo, Japan). C5a, IL-
8, anti-mouse myeloperoxidase (MPO) Ab, and anti-mouse CD42d Ab
were obtained from R&D systems (Minneapolis, MN). Anti-mouse fi-
brinogen/fibrin Ab, anti-Histone H3 Ab (citrulline R2 + R8 + R17)
(cit-histone H3), DyLight488-labeled anti-human CD54 Ab (clone:
EPR4776), Alexa Fluor 647-labeled anti-rabbit IgG Ab, Alexa Fluor
647-labeled anti-sheep IgG Ab, Alexa Fluor 568-labeled anti-rabbit IgG
Ab, Alexa Fluor 568-labeled anti-sheep IgG Ab, Alexa Fluor 568-labeled
anti-goat IgG Ab, Alexa Fluor 488-labeled anti-goat IgG Ab, and Alexa
Fluor 405-labeled anti-rabbit IgG Ab were obtained from abcam (Cam-
bridge, UK). FITC-labeled anti-human activated CD11b Ab (clone:
CBRM1/5) were obtained from eBioscience (San Diego, CA). Alexa
Fluor
488-labeled
anti-human
CD62P
Ab
was
obtained
from
BiossAntibodies (Woburn, MA). Anti-mouse Gr-1 (clone: RB6-8C5)-
Alexa Fluor 594 was obtained from BioLegend (San Diego, CA). FITC-la-
beled anti-human CD11b Ab (clone: Bear1) and FITC-labeled anti-
human CD62L Ab (clone: DREG56) were obtained from Beckman Coul-
ter (Brea, CA). PE-labeled anti-human CD162 Ab (clone: TC2) was ob-
tained from Novus Biologicals (Littleton, CO). DyLight488-labeled anti-
mouse CD42c Ab was obtained from emfret ANALYTICS (Eibelstadt, Ger-
many). Anti-human HRG monoclonal antibody (Rat) (#75–14) and
anti-human HRG polyclonal antibody (Rabbit) were made in our
laboratory.
2.2. Cell Preparation
In accordance with the ethics approval and guidelines of Okayama
University, written informed consent was obtained from healthy volun-
teers (n = 5), and blood was drawn from the cubital vein. The blood
was layered onto Polymorphprep (Axis-Shield, Oslo, Norway) prior to
density-gradient
centrifugation.
The
purified
neutrophils
were
suspended in Hank's Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS) buffer. The
EA.hy926 cells (ATCC CRL-2922), a hybridoma of Human Umbilical
Vein Endothelial Cells (HUVEC) and human epithelial cell line A549,
were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium (ATCC) containing
10% fetal bovine serum (Life Technologies). These cells were grown in a
humidified atmosphere and passaged every 3–4 days.
2.3. Purification of HRG from Human Plasma
HRG was purified from human plasma (supplied by the Japanese
Red Cross Society) as previously described (Mori et al., 2003). In brief,
human plasma was incubated with nickel–nitrilotriacetic acid (Ni-
NTA) agarose (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) for 2 h at 4 °C with gentle
shaking. The gel was packed into a column and washed successively
with 10 mM Tris-buffered saline (TBS) (pH 8.0) containing 10 mM im-
idazole and then 10 mM Tris-buffer (TB) (pH 8.0) containing 1 M NaCl.
Human HRG was eluted by 0.5 M imidazole in 10 mM TBS (pH 8.0). The
protein extract was further purified by a Mono Q column (GE
Healthcare, Little Chalfont, UK) with NaCl gradient. Purified human
HRG was identified by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel elec-
trophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and Western blotting with a human HRG-spe-
cific antibody.
2.4. Cecal Ligation Puncture Model
All animal experiments were approved by the university's commit-
tee on animal experimentation and performed according to the guide-
lines of Okayama University on animal experiments. Male C57BL/6N
mice (22–25 g, 7–8 wk) were obtained from Japan SLC (Shizuoka,
Japan). Sepsis was induced in mice by CLP. Animals were anesthetized
and a ligature was placed below the ileocecal valve. The cecum was
punctured once (mild sepsis) or twice (severe sepsis) with an 18-
gauge needle and then returned to the peritoneal cavity. Animals
were treated with vehicle (phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)) or with 4
or 20 mg/kg of human HRG or protein control (human serum albumin
(HSA); 20 mg/kg) immediately or 6 h and at 24 h and 48 h after CLP in-
duction. Sham mice underwent the same surgical procedures without
ligation and puncture.
2.5. Sickness Behavior
Sickness behaviors were evaluated at 24 h after CLP. Details of the as-
sessments used and the scoring are as follows: 1 = normal (locomotion,
appearance); 2 = slight signs of illness (lethargy, ptosis, or
piloerection); 3 = obvious illness (very little movement, ptosis and
piloerection, curled body posture); 4 = very sick animal (virtually no
movement, impaired breathing, unresponsiveness, plus the above
symptoms) (Sudom et al., 2004).
2.6. CLP Mice Model with the Imipenem-pretreatment
Sepsis was induced in mice by CLP. Animals were anesthetized and a
ligature was placed below the ileocecal valve. The cecum was punctured
twice with an 18-gauge needle and then returned to the peritoneal cav-
ity. When the effects of imipenem were examined, imipenem was ad-
ministered i.m. at 6 h or 12 h and HRG was administered at 12 h, 24 h,
and 48 h after CLP induction.
181
H. Wake et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 180–194
 2.7. Experiments with CLP Mice Samples
Whole blood from mouse heart at 24 h after CLP was plated on LB
agar dishes and incubated at 37 °C; colony-forming units (CFUs) were
counted after 24 h. The results were expressed as CFU/mL. The number
of red blood cells (RBC), white blood cells (WBC), and platelet were
counted in whole blood from mouse at 24 h after CLP (subcontract ani-
mal clinical examination: Oriental east, Tokyo, Japan). The blood was
mixed with 3.2% sodium citrate solution (blood: sodium citrate solu-
tion = 9:1) and separated the plasma from the blood. The plasma sam-
ples were used for coagulation and fibrinolysis tests (subcontract
animal clinical examination: Monoris, Tokyo, Japan) and albumin, as-
partate transaminase (AST), and alanine transaminase (ALT) levels
(subcontract animal clinical examination: Oriental east) (Table S2).
The cells present in the peritoneal cavity were collected by injecting
5 mL of saline. The cells were counted using a Burker–Turk counting
chamber.
2.8. Lung Wet-to-Dry Weight Ratio
The whole lung from mouse at 24 h after CLP treated with PBS, HSA,
or HRG was weighed, dried in an oven at 65 °C for 48 h, and weighed
again. The lung wet/dry weight ratio was then calculated.
2.9. Western Blot Analysis of HRG Levels in Plasma
Mouse plasma was electrophoresed on polyacrylamide gel (12.5%)
and transferred onto a polyvinylidene diflouride (PVDF) membrane
(Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). After the membrane was stained with SYPRO
Ruby (Life Technologies), it was blocked with 10% skim milk for 1 h
and incubated overnight at 4 °C with rabbit anti-hHRG polyclonal Ab
followed by anti-rabbit IgG goat polyclonal IgG-horseradish peroxidase
(HRP) (MBL, Nagoya, Japan) for 2 h at room temperature (RT). The sig-
nals were finally visualized using an enhanced chemiluminescence sys-
tem (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL).
2.10. In Vivo RNAi Experiments
Invivofectamine 2.0 reagent and HRG siRNA or negative control
siRNA (Life Technologies) were mixed and incubated for 30 min at
50 °C. The mixtures were dialyzed by PBS and injected via tail veins of
male C57BL/6 N mice (7 weeks old). Two, three, and seven days after in-
jection, mouse blood was obtained by cutting the tail, and the plasma
levels of HRG were determined using Western blotting. Then, a mild
CLP sepsis (with one puncture) was induced in the RNAi-treated mice.
2.11. Ezyme-linked Immunosorbant Assay (ELISA)
In accordance with the ethics approval and guidelines of Okayama
University, written informed consent was obtained from ten healthy
subjects and eight septic patients. The septic patients were evaluated
by clinical criteria of infections with SIRS according to 2001 guidelines
(Levy et al., 2003). The plasma sample of septic patients was obtained
on the first day of admission in intensive care unit. Human plasma
HRG levels were assessed by ELISA using solid-phase-immobilized
anti-HRG monoclonal antibodies (#75-14) and Ni-NTA labeled with
HRP (Qiagen).
2.12. High-speed Scan Spinning-disk Confocal Microscopy System
Images were acquired with an inverted microscope IX 73 (Olympus,
Tokyo, Japan) using a ×20/0.75 objective lens. The microscope was
equipped with a CSU-X1 confocal scanner (Yokokawa, Tokyo, Japan)
and an iXON3 EMCCD camera (Andor Technology, Belfast, Northern Ire-
land). Image acquisition software iQ2 (Andor Technology) was used to
drive the confocal microscope.
2.13. In vivo Neutrophil Imaging
Neutrophils and platelets were stained with Alexa Fluor 594-labeled
anti-Gr-1 antibody (10 μg/mouse) and DyLight488-labeled anti-CD42c
antibody (2 μg/mouse), respectively, via i.v. injection before the in vivo
imaging experiments. Sham-operated or CLP-treated mice were anes-
thetized with isoflurane, the abdomen was opened, and the exposed
mesentery vessels were observed by a high-speed scan spinning-disk
confocal microscopy system. Heating pads were used to keep the body
temperature at 37 °C.
2.14. Micro Channel Array Flow Analyzer (MC-FAN)
The blood or neutrophil samples were prepared as follows. Mice
were sacrificed 24 h after CLP. Blood was obtained from the heart and
mixed with heparin for the hematocrit test or with acid–citrate–dex-
trose (ACD) solution for the microcapillary passage test. Human whole
blood was withdrawn from the cubital vein and mixed with ACD solu-
tion. The blood was incubated with rat anti-human HRG monoclonal an-
tibody (clone #75- 14) or rat IgG for 30 min at 37 °C. The human
neutrophils isolated were treated with one of the reagents (bovine
serum albumin (BSA), HSA, HRG, fMLP) for 1 h at 37 °C. The whole
blood or neutrophil samples were forced to flow through artificial
microchannels made of silicon (width 7 μm, depth 4.5 μm, length
30 μm) under a constant suction of −20 cm H2O (Micro Channel
Array Flow Analyzer; MC-FAN, MC Lab, Tokyo, Japan). The passage
time of the 100 μl samples through microcapillaries was determined.
2.15. Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemical staining of nuclei, MPO, CD42d, and fibrino-
gen/fibrin was performed on 5 μm lung sections with DAPI, anti-
mouse MPO Ab at 5 μg/ml followed by Alexa Fluor 488-labeled anti-
goat IgG, anti-mouse CD42d Ab at 5 μg/ml followed by Alexa Fluor
568-labeled anti-sheep IgG, and anti-mouse fibrinogen/fibrin Ab at
5 μg/ml followed by Alexa Fluor 647-labeled anti-rabbit IgG after anti-
gen retrieval; incubation of the lung section with Target Retrieval Solu-
tion, pH 9 (DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark) for 10 min at 120 °C. In other set
of experiments, the nuclei, MPO, and cit-histone H3 were stained on
5 μm lung sections with SYTOX Green, anti-mouse MPO Ab at 5 μg/ml
followed by Alexa Fluor 568-labeled anti-goat IgG and anti-cit-histone
H3 Ab at 5 μg/ml followed by Alexa Fluor 405-labeled anti-rabbit IgG
after antigen retrieval; incubation of the lung section with Target Re-
trieval Solution, pH 9 (DAKO) for 10 min at 120 °C. Immunohistochem-
ical staining of nuclei, MPO, HRG, and fibrinogen/fibrin was performed
on 5 μm lung sections with DAPI, anti-mouse MPO Ab at 5 μg/ml follow-
ed by Alexa Fluor 488-labeled anti-goat IgG, anti-HRG Ab at 5 μg/ml
followed by Alexa Fluor 568-labeled anti-rabbit IgG, and anti-mouse fi-
brinogen/fibrin Ab at 5 μg/ml followed by Alexa Fluor 647-labeled anti-
sheep IgG after antigen retrieval; incubation of the lung section with
Target Retrieval Solution, pH 6.1 (DAKO) for 10 min at 120 °C. Immuno-
histochemical staining of nuclei and Gr-1 was performed on 5 μm lung
sections with SYTOX Blue and Alexa Fluor 594-labeled rat anti-mouse
Gr-1 Ab at 5 μg/ml after antigen retrieval; incubation of the lung section
with 0.3% pepsin (Sigma) for 30 min at 37 °C. MPO-positive neutrophils
and neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) (cit-histone H3 positive site)
were counted in three fields of a lung section at ×200 magnification
under a confocal laser scanning microscopy. The number of MPO,
CD42d, and fibrin/fibrinogen triple positive sites was counted in three
fields of a lung section at ×400 magnification under a confocal laser
scanning microscopy. The results were expressed as the number of
MPO-positive neutrophils, MPO, CD42d, and fibrin/fibrinogen triple
positive sites and NETs per square millimeter. The number of CD42d-
and fibrin/fibrinogen-positive sites among MPO-positive neutrophils
in each group were also determined.
182
H. Wake et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 180–194
 2.16. Primer Sequence for Real-time Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
(GAPDH)
(NM_008084) F-5′ TGA CGT GCC GCC TGG AGA AA 3′, R-5′ AGT GTA
GCC CAA GAT GCC CTT CAG 3′; tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α
(NM_013693) F-5′ GAC CCT CAC ACT CAG ATC ATC CTT CT 3′, R-5′
GCG CTG GCT CAG CCA CTC 3′; inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS)
(NM_010927) F-5′ GAT TTT GCA TGA CAC TCT TCA 3′, R-5′ GGA GCC
ATA ATA CTG GTT GAT 3′; IL-6 (NM_031168) F-5′ GAC CTG TCT ATA
CCA CTT CAC A 3′, R-5′ CTC TGG AAG TTT CAG ATT GTT 3′; plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) (NM_008871) F-5′ CTA TGG CGT GTC CTC
GGT GCT 3′, R-5′ CAT TCT TGT TCC ACG GCC CCA T 3′; neutrophil elas-
tase (NM_015779) F-5′ CTA CTG GCA TTG TTC CTG GGT G 3′, R-5′ GCT
GAC ATG ACG AAG TTC CTG G 3′; receptor for advanced glycation end
products (RAGE) (NM_007425) F-5’CTA GAG CCT GGG TGC TGG TTC
3′; R-5′ GTT TCC ATT CTA GCT GCT GGG GC 3′; HRG (NM_053176) F-
5′ TGC TCA CCA CAG CAT TGC TT 3′; R-5′ CAC TCC TCC GCC CTT TAT
TGA 3′.
2.17. Real-time Quantitative PCR
Total RNA was isolated from the mouse lung or liver using an RNeasy
mini kit (Qiagen). Complementary DNA was synthesized with a Takara
RNA PCR kit Ver. 3.0 (Takara Bio, Nagahama, Japan) according to the
manufacturer's instructions. Real-time PCR was performed with a
Light Cycler (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) according to the manufacturer's
instructions. Reaction mixtures contained cDNA template, SYBR premix
Ex Taq (Takara Bio), and sequence-specific primers. GAPDH expression
was used to normalize cDNA levels. The PCR products were analyzed by
a melting curve to ascertain the specificity of amplification.
2.18. HRG Digestion Assay
HSA (4 μg) or HRG (4 μg) was mixed with or without thrombin
(30 U/ml) and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C. The reaction mixtures were an-
alyzed by SDS-PAGE with Coomassie brilliant blue staining.
2.19. Cytometric Bead Array (CBA)
IL-6, TNF-α, and IL-10 concentration in the serum from mouse at
24 h after CLP treated with PBS, HSA, and HRG were measured by CBA
kits according to the manufacturer's instructions (BD Biosciences,
Franklin Lakes, NJ).
2.20. Neutrophil Shape and Adhesion Assay
Purified human neutrophils pre-stained with Hoechst33342 (Nu-
clei) and Calcein-AM (Cytosol) were aliquoted in a volume of 100 μl
(5 × 104 cells/well) to polystyrene wells or confluent wells of
EA.hy926 cells (ATCC CRL-2922), a hybridoma of HUVEC and the
human epithelial cell line A549. The incubation started with one of the
reagents (BSA, HSA, HRG, fMLP: each at a final concentration 1 μM)
and continued for indicated periods at 37 °C. The cell shape and fluores-
cence intensity were analyzed by using an In Cell Analyzer 2000 (GE
Healthcare) and In Cell Analyzer Workstation software (GE Healthcare).
Neutrophil adhesion was evaluated by measuring the fluorescence in-
tensity of the wells by a Flexstation 3 (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale,
CA) before and after the wells were gently washed twice to remove
any nonadherent cells. When HRG's effects on intracellular calcium
were examined, BAPTA or Fluo-4-AM was preloaded for 20 min.
2.21. F-actin Distribution and Cell Surface Structure in Neutrophils
Neutrophils (5 × 106 cells/ml) were seeded onto poly L-lysine-coat-
ed cover glass (Matsunami, Tokyo, Japan) and incubated with one of the
reagents (BSA, HSA, HRG, or fMLP: each at a final concentration of 1 μM)
at 37 °C for 1 h. For actin staining, the neutrophils were fixed with 4%
PFA and treated with 0.1% TritonX-100 followed by staining with
Phalloidin-Alexa568 (F-actin), DNaseI-Alexa488 (G-actin), and DAPI
(Nuclei). The samples were observed using a confocal microscope
(LSM 510, Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany). For electron microscopy,
the samples were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and 2.5% glutaralde-
hyde for 24 h at 4 °C, then post-fixed using 1% osmium tetroxide for
1 h at 4 °C. OsO4 coating with an osmium coater HPC-1S (Vacuum De-
vice, Mito, Japan) was used. Each sample was examined using an s-
4800 scanning laser microscope (Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan).
2.22. Determination of ROS Production
The neutrophil suspension with isoluminol (final concentration,
50 µM) and horse radish peroxidase type IV (final concentration 4 U/
ml) were aliquoted to a 96-well plate (BD Biosciences) in a volume of
100 μl (5 × 104 cells) with one of the reagents (BSA, HSA, HRG, each at
a final concentration of 1 μM). Neutrophil extracellular ROS production
was evaluated at 15 min after the start of incubation at 37 °C by the
measurement of chemiluminescence intensity using Flexstation 3. In-
tracellular ROS was determined by pre-loading of CM-H2DCFDA into
neutrophils for 20 min.
2.23. Detection of Intercellular Adhesion Molecule-1 (ICAM-1), P-selectin
and Phosphatidylserine on EA.hy926 Cell
EA.hy926 cell monolayer was gently washed twice by PBS to remove
culture medium and was stimulated by the mixture of HBSS, BSA, HSA
or HRG (1 μM each), and LPS (10 ng/ml) or TNF-α (10 ng/ml) for
30 min at 37 °C in 5% CO2 atmosphere. The cells were fixed by 10% for-
malin after PBS washing twice and were incubated with 0.1% Triton-
X100 TBS buffer for 10 min. These fixed cells were stained by Alexa
Fluor 488-labeled anti-human CD54 Ab or DyLight 488-labeled anti-
human CD62P Ab for 2 h at RT, or anti-phosphatidylserine Ab followed
by Alexa Fluor 488-labeled anti-rabbit IgG for 1 h at RT. The number of
phosphatidylserine-positive cells was counted in six fields at ×100
magnification under a confocal laser scanning microscopy. The number
of CD54- or CD62P-positive cells was counted in four fields at ×200
magnification under a confocal laser scanning microscopy.
2.24. Chemotaxis Assay
The transfer of neutrophils to the vertical direction was examined
using a 24-well Chemotaxicell chamber (Kurabo, Kurashiki, Japan).
Neutrophils (5 × 105 cells in 100 μl) were added to the upper wells of
the chamber and were separated by a polycarbonate membrane 5 μm
in diameter pores from lower wells containing one of the reagents
(BSA, HSA, HRG, or fMLP). Following 1 h incubation, the cells that had
migrated to lower wells were counted under a light microscope. For
the horizontal chemotaxis assay, neutrophils (5 × 105 cells/ 10 μl)
with or without HRG (1 μM) were added to one well in agarose gel
(5 mm thick) and were allowed to migrate toward the other well
(2 mm from the former) containing a possible chemoattractant
(1 μM). Two hours after the start of migration, the neutrophils were
fixed and stained with Wright's stain, and the distance from the origin
to the leading edge was measured.
2.25. FACS Analysis
C5a, IL-8, or fMLP was preincubated with HSA or HRG for 1 h at 37 °C.
Purified human neutrophils were stimulated with the mixture for 1 h at
37 °C in 5% CO2 atmosphere. The stimulation was stopped by ice-cold
cooling for 10 min. The neutrophils were stained by FITC-labeled anti-
human CD11b Ab, FITC-labeled anti-human-activated CD11b Ab, FITC-
labeled anti-human CD62L Ab, or PE-labeled anti-human CD162 Ab
for 25 min at 4 °C. The fluorescence intensity of the cells was detected
183
H. Wake et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 180–194
 184
H. Wake et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 180–194
 by FACS calibur (BD Biosciences). These data were analyzed by Flow Jo
software (TOMY Digital Biology, Tokyo, Japan).
2.26. Statistical Analysis
The statistical analysis across multiple treatment groups was deter-
mined with ANOVA, followed by Dunnett test. The statistical difference
between paired groups were determined using Mann–Whitney test. All
data are presented as the means ± standard error (SEM). P values b0.05
were considered statistically significant. The Kaplan–Meier method was
used for the survival experiments, and the differences were analyzed
using the log-rank test.
3. Results
3.1. Effects of HRG on Lethality of CLP Septic Mice
In CLP, a mouse model of sepsis, plasma HRG levels decreased signif-
icantly, by 77%, compared with the sham control levels 24 h after CLP
(Fig. 1A). The survival rate of mice treated with PBS for 3 days after
CLP was 0% at day 7. The administration of purified human HRG (4
and 20 mg/kg, i.v.) for 3 days significantly improved lethality in CLP
mice, whereas the same dose of HSA (20 mg/kg, i.v.) had no effect on
the survival rate, indicating the clear survival effects of i.v. injection of
HRG (Fig. 1B). In addition to survival rate, locomotor activity of mice
treated with HRG was improved clearly (Fig. S1A). The therapeutic
time window of i.v. HRG appeared to be 6 h of the CLP induction in
which only 30% survival rate was obtained (Fig. S1B). However, when
imipenem (25 mg/kg) was administered i.m. 6 h or 12 h after CLP, the
therapeutic time window of i.v. HRG was prolonged to 12 h after CLP
(Figs. S1C and S1D). The CFU of the blood from three groups of mice
treated with PBS, HSA, and HRG showed similar values (Fig. S1E). Also,
the total number of infiltrating cells in the peritoneal cavity did not dif-
fer among the groups (Fig. S1F). These results suggested that the bene-
ficial effects of HRG were not ascribable to the increase in bacteriocidal
activity (Shannon et al., 2010) in the peritoneal cavity.
Pretreatment of mice with siRNA for mouse HRG reduced plasma
levels of HRG by 90% at 5 days after i.v. injection as compared with
those in nonrelevant siRNA-treated mice (Fig. 1C). The half-life of HRG
in mouse blood was estimated to be 15 h after siRNA injection, based
on the decline curve of plasma HRG (Fig. S1G). The survival rate of
HRG-knockdown mice after mild CLP (one cecum penetration by nee-
dle) was compared with that in control mice to see whether the deple-
tion of HRG from plasma could exacerbate septic inflammation and
lethality. The results clearly indicated that depletion of HRG reduced
the survival rate significantly (Fig. 1D). HRG mRNA levels decreased
time-dependently after CLP or LPS injection, leading to less than 15%
of sham control at 24 h (Fig. 1E). The resultant plasma levels of HRG
in CLP mice were less than that in LPS-injected mice (Fig. 1F). Moreover,
plasma HRG levels in septic patients decreased significantly, by 77%,
compared with those in healthy volunteers (Fig. 1G; Table S1),
indicating a similar dynamics of plasma HRG in septic patients to
those in septic mice. Taken together, the results of our experiments on
supplementary treatment with HRG and the acute depletion of HRG
strongly suggested that HRG may be an important plasma factor con-
trolling the lethality of mice in septic conditions.
3.2. Effects of HRG on Microcapillary Passage of Blood in CLP Mice
In vivo imaging of circulating neutrophils labeled with anti-Gr-1 Ab
and platelets labeled with anti-CD42c Ab showed that the spherical
shape of neutrophils and platelets circulated with different velocities
in both mesenteric arterioles and venules in sham-operated mice.
Rolling, spherical neutrophils on the VECs were sometimes observed
along the marginal flow of the blood-stream in venules in sham mice
(Fig. 1H; Movie S1). Transient oval or teardrop shape changes were ob-
served in the arterioles of sham mice. In contrast, deformed neutrophils
with a multiangular and rigid appearance were observed in the circula-
tion in CLP mice. Extremely deformed neutrophils were attached to
VECs in venules and were arrested there without migration during the
observation periods (Fig. 1I; Movie S1). Moreover, the accumulation of
platelets occurred on those deformed neutrophils (Fig. 1J; Movie S1).
Thus, the extreme morphological changes of circulating neutrophils
and the enhanced interaction with VECs demonstrated by in vivo imag-
ing appear to represent pathological features in the septic mouse model.
In contrast, HRG-treated mice showed the spherical neutrophils in the
circulation and had markedly fewer neutrophils and aggregated plate-
lets attached to endothelial cells in venules compared with control
CLP mice (Fig. 1H–J; Movie S1), strongly suggesting the less interaction
of circulating neutrophils with VECs in these mice.
The microcapillary passage of peripheral blood from CLP mice was
examined using a MC-FAN ex vivo (Fig. 1K; Movie S2). In mice treated
with PBS or HSA, deformed leukocytes were attached to the
microcapillary entrance very often indicated by red arrowheads, where-
as there were few such leukocytes in HRG-treated mice (Fig. 1 K; Movie
S2). The time required for the passage of 100 μl blood through the
microcapillary reflected the adhesion of leukocytes (Fig. 1L). On the
other hand, there were no significant differences in hematocrit levels
among the treated groups (Fig. S1H).
3.3. Analysis of HRG Effects on Septic ARDS
Hematoxylin–eosin staining of lung tissue revealed lung inflamma-
tion 24 h after CLP in mice treated with PBS and HSA; this inflammation
included increased thickness of the interstitial space of alveoli, infiltra-
tion of neutrophils, and congestion/hemorrhage (Fig. 2A). However,
HRG treatment (20 mg/kg, i.v.) ameliorated pathological findings in
the lung remarkably (Fig. 2A). Measurement of wet/dry weight ratio
showed that HRG treatment inhibited lung edema significantly (Fig.
2B). Also, the number of neutrophils in the lung detected by anti-MPO
Ab increased significantly in CLP mice treated with PBS and HSA, and
HRG treatment inhibited the number of neutrophils by 55% (Fig. 2C
Fig. 1. HRG's effects on the mortality of CLP mice and the passage of neutrophils through microcapillaries. (A) CLP was performed in mice, and plasma levels of HRG were determined 24 h after
CLP by Western blotting. Quantification of the results of Western blotting. ⁎⁎⁎P b 0.001 vs. sham. (B) Kaplan–Meier survival curve of mice with CLP. PBS, HSA (20 mg/kg), or human-purified
HRG (4 or 20 mg/kg) was administered i.v. 10 min, 24 h, and 48 h after CLP. (C) Effects of knockdown of liver HRG by siRNA on the plasma levels of HRG. The plasma levels were determined
immediately before CLP by Western blotting. Quantification of the results of Western blotting. ⁎⁎⁎P b 0.001 vs. Control RNAi. (D) Effects of knockdown of liver HRG by siRNA on the survival
of mild-CLP mice. (E) Determination of HRG mRNAs in the liver of CLP or LPS (10 mg/kg i.v.) -injected mice. The tissue samples for real-time PCR were collected 6 or 24 h after CLP or LPS
injection. The relative expression levels of HRG mRNA in the liver were calculated as % of sham control. ⁎⁎⁎P b 0.001 vs. sham. (F) Plasma levels of HRG were determined 6 or 24 h after CLP
or LPS injection by Western blotting. The relative expression levels were calculated as % of sham control. ⁎P b 0.05, ⁎⁎P b 0.01, and ⁎⁎⁎P b 0.001 vs. sham. (G) Decreased plasma HRG levels in
human sepsis. HRG levels were determined by ELISA. Individual symbols represent individual donors and horizontal lines indicate mean. ⁎⁎⁎P b 0.001 vs. normal. (H) In vivo imaging of
circulating neutrophils and platelets in CLP mice. The neutrophils (red) and platelets (green) were labeled by i.v. injection of anti-Gr-1 and anti-CD42c antibodies 12 h after CLP, and
the circulating neutrophils and platelets were observed under an in vivo imaging system. Blue arrowheads indicate the circulating neutrophil. Red arrowheads indicate the neutrophil
attached to the vascular wall. Yellow arrowhead indicates the sites where neutrophils and platelets were attached to the vascular wall together (see Movie S1). Scale bar, 20 μm. (I)
The attachment sites of neutrophils or (J) neutrophils-platelets clots attached to the mesentery vessel wall were counted in each group. ⁎⁎⁎P b 0.001 and †††P b 0.001 vs. PBS and HSA,
respectively. (K) Whole blood of CLP mice was withdrawn 24 h after CLP and applied to a MC-FAN. The red arrowheads indicate the leukocytes attached to the tops of microcapillaries.
(L) The time required for the passage of 100 μl of whole blood was determined using a MC-FAN in four groups. ⁎P b 0.05 and †P b 0.05 vs. PBS and HSA, respectively. The results shown
are the means ± SEM of five mice (A, C, E, F, I, J, and L) or ten healthy volunteers and eight septic patients (G). Ten mice were used in each group (B and D).
185
H. Wake et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 180–194
 186
H. Wake et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 180–194
 Fig. 3. Effects of HRG treatment on the number of blood cells, coagulation, and hypercytokinemia in CLP mice. (A) The whole blood samples were collected 24 h after CLP. The results shown are
the means ± SEM of five mice. ⁎⁎P b 0.01 vs. PBS. †P b 0.05 and ††P b 0.01 vs. HSA. (B) The plasma samples for coagulation test were collected 24 h after CLP. The results shown are the
means ± SEM of six mice. ⁎⁎P b 0.01, ⁎⁎⁎P b 0.001 vs. PBS. †P b 0.05 and †††P b 0.001 vs. HSA. (C) The serum samples for the determination of cytokines were collected 24 h after CLP.
The results shown are the means ± SEM of five mice. ⁎⁎P b 0.01 vs. PBS. †P b 0.05 and ††P b 0.01 vs. HSA.
Fig. 2. Effects of HRG treatment on inflammation in lungs and kidneys of CLP mice. (A) CLP mice treated with PBS, HSA, or HRG were fixed at 24 h after CLP. Paraffin-embedded sections of the
lungs (upper) and kidneys (lower) were stained with HE. (B) Edema of the lung was evaluated in each group as a ratio of wet to dry lung tissue weight. ⁎P b 0.05, †††P b 0.001 vs. PBS and
HSA, respectively. (C) The lungs of CLP mice were stained by DAPI (nuclei: blue), anti-MPO antibody (neutrophil: green), anti-CD42d antibody (platelet: orange), and anti-fibrinogen/fibrin
antibody (fibrin: red) followed by fluorescence detection. Yellow arrowheads indicate MPO, CD42d, and fibrin triple-positive sites. (D) Neutrophils in the lungs were counted in each
group. ⁎⁎⁎P b 0.001, †††P b 0.001 vs. PBS and HSA, respectively. (E) The number of MPO-positive, CD42d-postive or negative, and fibrin-positive or negative sites in the lungs was
counted in each group. ⁎⁎⁎P b 0.001, †††P b 0.001 vs. PBS and HSA, respectively. (F) The lungs of CLP mice were stained by SYTOX Green (nuclei: green), anti-MPO antibody (neutrophil:
red) and anti-cit-histone H3 antibody (NET: blue) followed by fluorescence detection. Yellow arrowheads indicate NETs. (G) NETs (cit-histone H3 positive sites) in the lungs were
counted in each group. ⁎⁎⁎P b 0.001, †††P b 0.001 vs. PBS and HSA, respectively. (H) Determination of mRNAs of TNF-α, IL-6, PAI-1, iNOS, neutrophil elastase, and RAGE in lungs of CLP
mice. The tissue samples for real-time PCR were collected 24 h after CLP. The relative expression levels were calculated treating sham control as one unit. ⁎⁎P b 0.01 vs. PBS. †P b 0.05
and ††P b 0.01 vs. HSA. The results shown are the means ± SEM of five mice (B, D, E, G, and H). Scale bars, 50 μm (A). Scale bars, 10 μm (C and F).
187
H. Wake et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 180–194
 and D). Triple immunohistochemical staining of neutrophil, platelet and
fibrin clearly revealed the existence of immunothrombi composed of
neutrophil adhesion to vascular wall, platelet aggregation, and fibrin de-
posits in CLP mice treated with PBS or HSA (Fig. 2C and E), whereas the
total number of overlapping spots in mice treated with HRG was much
lower (Fig. 2C and E). HRG inhibited the deposition of fibrin on neutro-
phils and platelets (Fig. 2E). HRG immunoreactivities were observed on
neutrophils from sham and CLP mice (on immunothrombus) (Fig. S2A).
Extracellular localization of DNA associated with citrullinated histone
H3 specific for NETosis (yellow arrowheads) was evident on
Fig. 4. HRG's spherical-shape-inducing and adhesion-increasing effects on purified human neutrophils. (A, H, and I) Purified human neutrophils were labeled with calcein-AM (green) and
Hoechst33342 (blue) for 20 min. The neutrophils were incubated with reagents (1 μM) on polystyrene surface (A) or a monolayer of EA.hy926 (H and I) for 60 min and the neutrophil
shape was observed under a fluorescent microscope (A and I) or a differential interference contrast microscope (H). (B and J). The rounding of neutrophils was analyzed by the In Cell
Analyzer. Form factor (max diameter/ min diameter) was determined. One unit represents an ideal spherical shape. ⁎P b 0.05, ⁎⁎⁎P b 0.001 vs. HBSS. †P b 0.05, †††P b 0.001 vs. BSA.
‡‡P b 0.01, ‡‡‡P b 0.001 vs. HSA. §§§P b 0.001 vs. fMLP. (C and K) After gentle washing of the microtiter plate with HBSS twice, the residual cell numbers were counted and expressed as
percentages of the initial cell numbers. ⁎⁎P b 0.01, ††P b 0.01, ‡‡P b 0.01, and §§P b 0.01 vs. HBSS, BSA, HSA, and fMLP, respectively. (D) The concentration-effect curve was drawn by the
plot of a spherical shape at different concentrations of HRG. The maximal roundness at 1 μM of HRG was expressed as 100%. (E) Effects of polyclonal antibody against HRG on HRG-
induced induction of spherical shape in neutrophils. Anti-HRG Ab (300 μg/ml) or control IgG was added simultaneously with HRG and the incubation continued for 1 h. (F)
Quantitative analysis of the effects of specific antibodies against HRG on neutrophil shape. ⁎⁎⁎P b 0.001 and †††P b 0.001 vs. HBSS and HRG + IgG groups, respectively. (G) Effects of
specific antibody against HRG on adhesion of neutrophils. ⁎⁎⁎P b 0.001 and †P b 0.05 vs. HBSS and HRG + IgG, respectively. The results shown are the means ± SEM of three
experiments (B, C, D, F, G, J, and K). Scale bars, 20 μm.
188
H. Wake et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 180–194
 189
H. Wake et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 180–194
 immunothrombosis (Figs. 2F and S3). The NETs in CLP mice treated with
PBS or HSA were significantly higher than that in sham mice and the
treatment with HRG inhibited the number of NETs (Fig. 2G). In consis-
tency with these histological findings, the results of mRNA expression
of TNF-α, IL-6, PAI-1, iNOS, and neutrophil elastase in the lung using
real-time PCR at 24 h clearly showed the significant upregulation of
these mRNAs in CLP mice treated with PBS or HSA, whereas HRG treat-
ment strongly suppressed the mRNAs of all of these, especially in the
cases of IL-6 and PAI-1 (a marker of VEC damage) (Fig. 2H). Thus, it is
likely that HRG suppressed the inflammatory responses in septic ARDS
efficiently. The expression of RAGE mRNA in the lung was inversely reg-
ulated by CLP and HRG. HRG treatment inhibited glomerular leukocyte
infiltration, increase in mesangeal matrix and renal tubular swelling in
CLP mice observed at 24 h (Fig. 2A).
3.4. Effects of HRG on Coagulation and Hypercytokinemia in CLP Septic Mice
The platelet counts in CLP mice treated with PBS or HSA were signif-
icantly lower than that in sham mice, and the treatment with HRG re-
stored the platelet counts (Fig. 3A). Consistent with the consumption
of platelets in CLP mice treated with PBS or HSA, disorder markers of in-
trinsic and extrinsic coagulation pathways, such as activated partial
thromboplastin time (APTT) and prothrombin time (PT) values, were
prolonged in these mice compared with sham control value (Fig. 3B).
HRG treatment significantly reduced APTT and PT values. HRG did not
affect the changes in plasma levels of fibrinogen and antithrombin III
(ATIII) levels in CLP mice (Fig. 3B).
Determination of blood cytokines 24 h after CLP revealed the
marked increase in IL-6, TNF-α, and IL-10 levels in the CLP mice treated
with PBS or HSA (Fig. 3C). HRG treatment almost completely inhibited
the cytokine responses.
3.5. Effects of HRG on Morphology, Adhesion and Microcapillary Passage of
Purified Human Neutrophils
To examine the effects of HRG on neutrophils in detail, we used
human neutrophils purified from peripheral blood and labeled with
calcein-AM and Hoechst33342. HRG (1 μM)-induced morphological
changes were observed under a fluorescent microscope 60 min after in-
cubation without a fixation procedure (Fig. 4A). The main features in-
duced by HRG were the following: spherical shape change, loss of
irregularity of shape, and shortening of the diameter. When compared
with other media containing the same concentration of BSA, HSA, or
fMLP, the spherical shape-inducing effects of HRG were evident (Fig.
4A and B). The adhesion of neutrophils to the plastic well was deter-
mined by counting the residual neutrophils after the wells were washed
twice. The results clearly showed that the HRG-induced spherical shape
were less adhesive to the plastic material (Fig. 4C). Quantification of
HRG's spherical shape-inducing effects revealed HRG's concentration-
dependent effects with the maximal response at 0.8 μM or above and
EC50 around 0.1 μM (Fig. 4D). It took 15–30 min for HRG to induce a sta-
ble spherical shape from a freshly prepared cell suspension (Fig. S4 A).
Moreover, the roundness of the completely flattened neutrophils was
restored by the addition of HRG (1 μM) time-dependently, suggesting
the reversibility of the shape-change response (Fig. S4B). The spherical
structure-inducing effects of HRG were inhibited by the addition of rab-
bit polyclonal Ab against HRG but not by control IgG (Fig. 4E and F),
confirming the specificity of HRG's effects. In addition to the inhibition
of spherical shape, anti-HRG Ab antagonized HRG's inhibitory effect on
neutrophil adhesion (Fig. 4G). The adhesion property of HRG-treated
neutrophils on VECs (EA.hy926) was then examined (Fig. 4H–K). As
shown in Fig. 4K, HRG significantly inhibited the adhesion of neutro-
phils on the EA.hy926 surface.
HRG's effects on the vertical transfer of neutrophils through micro-
pores (5 μm diameter) were examined in a Boyden chamber. The results
indicated that increasing concentrations of HRG as well as fMLP (1 μM)
stimulated the transfer of neutrophils to the lower chamber (Fig. S5A).
However, the chemotaxis-inducing activity to the horizontal direction
was detected solely in fMLP and not in HRG. HRG did not only inhibit
but also stimulated the chemotaxis induced by fMLP (Fig. S5B). Thus,
the apparent transfer of neutrophils to the vertical direction may be as-
cribed to the decrease in diameter, the loss of microvilli, and gravity.
Scanning electron microscopic observation confirmed the loss of
surface microvilli structures from neutrophils treated with HRG at
least 15 min after the start of incubation (Fig. 5A and B). The microvilli
on neutrophils were observed after incubation with buffer alone, BSA,
HSA, and fMLP, as was the case with the washed neutrophils immedi-
ately after isolation (Fig. 5A and B). The cytochemical staining of G-
and F-actin in neutrophils demonstrated that F-actin was dominant in
HRG-treated neutrophils and that the HRG-induced spherical shape
was accompanied by the F-actin ring formation beneath the plasma
membrane of neutrophils (Fig. 5C). On the other hand, cytosolic G-
actin was dominant in neutrophils treated with HBSS, BSA, and HSA
(Fig. 5C). Few neutrophils had an F-actin ring under these conditions.
The passage of purified neutrophils through microcapillary slits
(7.0 μm width, 4.5 μm depth) was evaluated by a MC-FAN under differ-
ent conditions. Fig. 5D, E and Movie S3 show that neutrophils treated
with HRG (1 μM) can pass microcapillaries more easily than can other
treatment groups, in which the trapping of neutrophils with irregular
shapes sometimes occurred before (red arrowheads) or on (white ar-
rowheads) the microcapillary slits. HRG-treated neutrophils flowed
through the slits much more smoothly in a teardrop shape (Fig. 5D
and E; Movie S3). In contrast, the addition of anti-HRG mAb to whole
blood retarded the passage of whole blood significantly, probably due
to the trapping of leukocytes on the slits (Fig. 5F and G; Movie S4).
3.6. Pharmacological Analysis of HRG-inducing Signal Transduction in
Neutrophils
Pretreatment with BAPTA for 30 min (50 μM) prevented HRG from
inducing spherical shape formation (Fig. 6A). Determination of
[Ca2+]i after the prolonged incubation with HRG revealed that HRG in-
duced time-dependent and very slow increases in [Ca2+]i levels in
neutrophils (Fig. 6B, C and S4C). Toxin B (100 ng/ml), a nonselective in-
hibitor of three small G proteins, Cdc42, Rac, and Rho, partially inhibits
HRG's spherical-shape-inducing effects (Fig. 6D).
The production of ROS outside the neutrophils was determined at
15 min after the start of incubation by the detection of isoluminol
chemiluminescence under different conditions (Fig. 6E). The ROS pro-
duction levels in HRG (1 μM)-treated neutrophils were less than 5%
the levels in the HBSS-, BSA-, and HSA-treated groups (Fig. 6E). The
ROS production inside the neutrophils was determined by DCF fluores-
cence after incubation in the presence of HRG (1 μM) or other factors
(Fig. 6F). Consistent with the extracellular ROS, ROS production inside
Fig. 5. Relationship between neutrophil surface structure and passage through microcapillaries. (A and B) The purified human neutrophils were incubated with reagents at 1 μM on a cover
grass for 1 h at 37 °C. Scanning electron microscopic pictures of neutrophils were obtained. Time-dependent changes in the shapes (B). (C) The purified human neutrophils were
incubated as in (A). The neutrophils were stained with Alexa Fluor 594-labeled phalloidin (red) for F-actin and Alexa Fluor 488-labeled DNase I (green) for G-actin. Cell nuclei were
stained with DAPI (blue). Scale bars, 5 μm (A and C), 10 μm (B). (D) The purified human neutrophils were incubated with reagents at 1 μM for 60 min and then applied to a MC-FAN.
Red arrowheads indicate the leukocytes attached to the upper chamber. White arrowheads indicate the leukocytes attached to the microcapillary entrance. (E and G) The time
required for the passage of 100 μl neutrophil suspension through the MC-FAN was determined. ⁎P b 0.05, ††P b 0.01, ‡P b 0.05, and §§§P b 0.001 vs. HBSS, BSA, HSA, and fMLP,
respectively (E). ⁎P b 0.05 vs. IgG control (G). (F) The anti-coagulated whole blood treated with anti-HRG Ab or control IgG was applied to the MC-FAN. White arrowhead indicates the
leukocyte attached on the microcapillary entrance. The results shown are the means ± SEM of five experiments (E and G).
190
H. Wake et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 180–194
 191
H. Wake et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 180–194
 the cells was lower in HRG-treated neutrophils than in any of the other
groups (Fig. 6F). Although HRG did not affect the expression of CD11b,
CD62L, CD162 on neutrophils in resting as well as agonist (C5a, IL-8,
and fMLP)-stimulated condition, HRG slightly inhibited the expression
of activated form of CD11b, irrespective of the presence of agonists
(Fig. S6). These results as a whole indicated that HRG-induced spherical
shape changes were accompanied by functional alterations of the neu-
trophils, including changes in ROS production, adhesion to VECs, and
passage through microcapillaries.
3.7. Effects of HRG on LPS- or TNF-α-induced Expression of Adhesion Mole-
cules and Cell Death in VECs
VECs must be activated or lesioned under septic condition. There-
fore, we determined the effects of HRG on VECs (EA.hy926), and espe-
cially focused on adhesion molecule expression and cell death. As
shown in Figs. 6G–J and S7, HRG (1 μM) inhibited LPS (10 ng/ml)- or
TNF-α (10 ng/ml)-induced expression of ICAM-1 and P-selectin. Also,
HRG (1 μM) strongly inhibited the endothelial cell death induced by
both LPS and TNF-α (Figs. 6K, L and S7), suggesting a protective role
of HRG against endothelial injury.
4. Discussion
In the present study, we clearly showed a novel and important role
of HRG in controlling the shape, adhesiveness, passage, and basal ROS-
producing activity of neutrophils. No plasma protein has ever been re-
ported to have such activity. Judging from the plasma HRG levels
(around 1 μM) in healthy human (Poon et al., 2011; Saigo et al., 1990),
the effects of HRG on neutrophil shape in the circulation under normal
condition are speculated to be maximal. A marked decrease in plasma
levels of HRG in septic conditions due to rapid reduction in HRG gene
expression, deposition of HRG on immunothrombi and degradation of
HRG by thrombin (Fig 1E and F; Figs. S1G, S2 A and S2B) may lead to in-
creased adhesion of neutrophils to VECs and retardation of neutrophil
passage in the microvasculature demonstrated by in vivo imaging and
in vitro experiments; the changes are associated with the enhancement
of ROS production. Thus, the neutrophil shape maintained by HRG
should be suitable for their passage through the capillary vessels, sus-
taining rheological stability, and preventing unnecessary activaton of
VECs. The spherical shape probably minimizes the surface attachment
area of neutrophils to VECs and reduces physical contact between neu-
trophils and endothelial cells in the microvasculature, easing the pas-
sage of neutrophils through capillary vessels as observed by in vivo
imaging of circulating neutrophils in CLP mice treated with HRG. In ad-
dition, it was revealed that HRG slightly inhibited the expression of ac-
tivated but not inactivated form of CD11b, irrespective of the presence
of neutrophil activation agonists. This effect of HRG may also limit the
unnecessary tight interaction between circulating neutrophils and
VECs. In contrast, the deformed neutrophils in septic condition some-
times occupy the flow of microcirculation by forming a cell cluster, im-
plying enhanced interaction between deformed neutrophils and VECs
or deformed cells themselves. This attachment pattern seems quite dif-
ferent from that observed during the migration of neutrophils
infiltrating inflamed sites (Amulic et al., 2012; DiStasi and Ley, 2009;
Phillipson and Kubes, 2011).
Immunohistochemical analysis of septic ARDS in CLP mice clearly
showed the existence of immunothrombi in lung vasculatures. The
marked inhibitory effects of HRG on immunothrombosis in pulmonary
vasculatures (Fig. 2C and E) were presumably due to suppression of ini-
tial neutrophil attachment by keeping morphological and functional
quiescence of circulating neutrophils and inhibition of the formation
of fibrin clot on neutrophil and platelets. In addition, almost complete
inhibition of the increase in plasma IL-6 and TNF-α by HRG administra-
tion could contribute to cancellation of activation of VECs that facilitates
immunothrombosis. The finding that HRG antagonized the pro-DIC
state together with the anti-immunothrombotic effects as well as strong
inhibition of lung inflammation implies that HRG administration sup-
pressed the major and fatal responses in sepsis; DIC, multiple organ fail-
ure due to microthrombus formation, and severe inflammatory injuries
in plural organs. It was reported that NET formation (Brinkmann et al.,
2004; Yipp and Kubes, 2013) was involved in different types of
immunothrombosis. In the present model, we confirmed NETosis occur-
ring in the lung vasculatures leading to immunothrombosis (Fig. 2F and
G).
The HRG-induced shape change of neutrophils associated with poly-
merization of actin beneath the plasma membrane may be accompa-
nied by the activation of Rho family signaling pathway(s) sensitive to
Toxin B and the regulation of cytosolic calcium judging from the antag-
onizing effects of BAPTA and the time-dependent increase in intracellu-
lar calcium by HRG. Further works are necessary to clarify upstream
signaling mechanisms of HRG action including identification of receptor
molecule involved.
C5a, IL-8, and fMLP induced the expression of CD11b and CD162 on
the neutrophil surface and shed off CD62L, as detected by FACS (Fig. S6).
HRG did not influence the basal and agonist-induced changes in adhe-
sion molecules on the neutrophil surface except for activated form of
CD11b (Fig. S6). Since HRG did not influence the expression of PSGL-1
and Mac-1 induced by IL-8, C5a, and fMLP, HRG was speculated not to
inhibit the agonists-induced facilitation of neutrophil migration to the
destination. This speculation was supported by the present finding
that there were no differences in the total number of infiltrating neutro-
phils in the peritoneal cavity between HRG-treated and control CLP
mice (Fig. S1F) and HRG neither stimulated nor inhibited migration to
horizontal direction in chemotaxis assay (Fig. S5). Therefore, it is possi-
ble that HRG does not interfere with neutrophil activation and migra-
tion of neutrophils which are responsible for the recruitment of
neutrophils into inflamed sites while playing a role in maintaining the
basal state of circulating neutrophils. In contrast, HRG concentration de-
pendently antagonized agonist-induced morphological changes and
vice versa (Fig. S8).
Excess activation and even lesion of VECs represent the disorder of
septic condition (Opal and van der Poll, 2015). The inhibition of expres-
sion of ICAM-1 and P-selectin on VECs induced by LPS or TNF-α in vitro
by the addition of HRG (1 μM) strongly suggested that physiological
concentration of HRG in the circulation constantly suppresses the acti-
vation of VECs. Furthermore, HRG appeared to play a protective role
against endothelial cell death induced by LPS and TNF-α. Thus, it was
Fig. 6. Analysis of signal transduction pathways for HRG's effects on neutrophils and effects of HRG on VECs. (A) The neutrophils were loaded with BAPTA-AM (50 μM) or DMSO for 20 min and
incubated with HRG (1 μM) for 1 h. (B) The neutrophils were loaded with Fluo-4-AM for 20 min and incubated with reagents at 1 μM for 1 h. Intracellular calcium was monitored by Fluo-4
fluorescence. (C) The average of Fluo-4 fluorescence intensity was calculated by In Cell Analyzer. ⁎⁎⁎P b 0.001, †††P b 0.001, ‡‡‡P b 0.001, and §§§P b 0.001 vs. HBSS, BSA, HSA, and fMLP,
respectively. (D) The neutrophils were preincubated with Toxin B (100 ng/ml) or PBS for 1.5 h and then incubated with HRG (1 μM) for 1 h. (E) The neutrophils were incubated with
reagents at 1 μM for 15 min, and the ROS produced extracellularly was determined using isoluminol as a substrate. The chemiluminescence in the medium was determined by a plate
reader. ⁎⁎⁎P b 0.001, †††P b 0.001, and ‡‡‡P b 0.001 vs. HBSS, BSA, and HSA, respectively. (F) The neutrophils were loaded with CM-H2DCFDA for 20 min and incubated with reagents at
1 μM for 1 h. The fluorescence of DCF was detected by the In Cell Analyzer. ⁎⁎⁎P b 0.001, ††P b 0.01, and ‡‡‡P b 0.001 vs. HBSS, BSA, and HSA, respectively. (G–K) Monolayer of EA.hy926
cells were stimulated with LPS (10 ng/ml) or TNF-α (10 ng/ml) in the presence of HBSS, HSA, or HRG for 30 min at 37 °C. The cells were stained by anti-human ICAM-1 Ab (G and H),
anti-human P-selectin Ab (I and J) or anti-phosphatidylserine Ab (K and L), for 25 min at 4 °C. (G–J) (−) is no stimulated-sample. (H, J, and L) ICAM-1 (H), P-selectin (I) or
phosphatidylserine (J) -positive cells were counted in each group. ⁎P b 0.05, ⁎⁎⁎P b 0.001 vs. LPS + HBSS. †P b 0.05, †††P b 0.001 vs. LPS + HSA. ‡P b 0.05, ‡‡P b 0.01, ‡‡‡P b 0.001 vs. TNF-
α + HBSS. §P b 0.05, §§P b 0.01, §§§P b 0.001 vs. TNF-α + HSA. The results shown are the means ± SEM of three experiments (C, E, and F), four fields (H and J) or six fields (L). Scale
bars, 20 μm (A, B, and D), 50 μm (G, I, and K).
192
H. Wake et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 180–194
 concluded that HRG is a crucial regulatory factor of VEC function. We
should mention that HRG may exert its effects on mononuclear phago-
cytes in septic condition in addition to neutrophils and VECs because the
binding of HRG to mononuclear phagocytes was reported (Tugues et al.,
2014) and phenotype change of macrophages by HRG was observed in
cancer (Rolny et al., 2011).
Taken together, the results in the present study strongly suggested
that the decrease in plasma HRG constitutes the fundamental pathway
for septic pathogenesis. The supplementary treatment of CLP mice
with HRG may simultaneously improve complex and multiple aspects
of the serious disorders found in septic conditions: the uncontrolled ac-
tivation of circulating neutrophils, the activation and lesion of VECs, the
immunothrombosis, cytokine overproduction, and the disorder of coag-
ulation and fibrinolysis cascades. Supplementary therapy with HRG
may provide a novel strategy for the treatment of septic patients
(Ward, 2012; Opal et al., 2013; Ranieri et al., 2012; Rice et al., 2010;
Russell, 2006) although there might be a therapeutic time window for
the treatment.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.06.003.
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.
Author Contributions
H.W., S.M., H.T., and M.N. planned the study; H.W., S.M., Y.M., and
M.S. performed the experiments using purified human neutrophils;
Y.G. performed the experiments using vascular endothelial cells; H.W.,
K.L., H.T., and K.T. performed the sepsis mice experiments; A.O. and
T.Y. analyzed neutrophil shape and histological features, respectively;
K.K. and H.M determined the plasma HRG in septic patients; H.W.,
S.M., and M.N. wrote the manuscript.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from Scientific Research from the
Ministry of Health, Labour, and Welfare of Japan (WA2F2547,
WA2F2601), the Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development,
AMED (15lk0201014h0003), the Japan Society for the Promotion of Sci-
ence (JSPS No. 2567046405, 15H0468617), and Secom Science and
Technology Foundation to M.N. and from the Hokuto Foundation for
Bioscience to H.W. We thank M. Sato, M. Narasaki, and H. Nakamura
for their technical assistance. Human fresh frozen plasma was kindly
provided by the Japanese Red Cross Society.
References
Alves-Filho, J.C., de Freitas, A., Spiller, F., Souto, F.O., Cunha, F.Q., 2008. The role of neutro-
phils in severe sepsis. Shock 1, 3–9.
Amulic, B., Cazalet, C., Hayes, G.L., Metzler, K.D., Zychlinsky, A., 2012. Neutrophil function:
from mechanisms to disease. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 30, 459–489.
Aziz, M., Jacob, A., Yang, W.L., Matsuda, A., Wang, P., 2013. Current trends in inflammatory
and immunomodulatory mediators in sepsis. J. Leukoc. Biol. 93, 329–342.
Borza, D.B., Tatum, F.M., Morgan, W.T., 1996. Domain structure and conformation of his-
tidine-proline-rich glycoprotein. Biochemistry 35, 1925–1934.
Bosshart, H., Heinzelmann, M., 2003. Endotoxin-neutralizing effects of histidine-rich pep-
tides. FEBS Lett. 553, 135–140.
Brinkmann, V., Reichard, U., Goosmann, C., Fauler, B., Uhlemann, Y., Weiss, D.S.,
Weinrauch, Y., Zychlinsky, A., 2004. Neutrophil extracellular traps kill bacteria. Sci-
ence 303, 1532–1535.
Dellinger, R.P., Levy, M.M., Rhodes, A., Annane, D., Gerlach, H., Opal, S.M., Sevransky, J.E.,
Sprung, C.L., Douglas, I.S., Jaeschke, R., et al., 2012. Surviving sepsis campaign: interna-
tional guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septic shock: 2012. Crit. Care
Med. 41, 580–637.
DiStasi, M.R., Ley, K., 2009. Opening the flood-gates: how neutrophil-endothelial interac-
tions regulate permeability. Trends Immunol. 30, 547–556.
Doñate, F., Juarez, J.C., Guan, X., Shipulina, N.V., Plunkett, M.L., Tel-Tsur, Z., Shaw, D.E.,
Morgan, W.T., Mazar, A.P., 2004. Peptides derived from the histidine-proline domain
of the histidine-proline-rich glycoprotein bind to tropomyosin and have
antiangiogenic and antitumor activities. Cancer Res. 64, 5812–5817.
Engelmann, B., Massberg, S., 2013. Thrombosis as an intravascular effector of innate im-
munity. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13, 34–45.
Gorgani, N.N., Parish, C.R., Easterbrook, Smith, S.B., Altin, J.G., 1997. Histidine-rich glyco-
protein binds to human IgG and C1q and inhibits the formation of insoluble immune
complexes. Biochemistry 36, 6653–6662.
Grommes, J., Soehnlein, O., 2011. Contribution of neutrophils to acute lung injury. Mol.
Med. 17, 293–307.
Hotchkiss, R.S., Monneret, G., Payen, D., 2013. Immunosuppression in sepsis: a novel un-
derstanding of the disorder and a new therapeutic approach. Lancet Infect. Dis. 13,
260–268.
Juarez, J.C., Guan, X., Shipulina, N.V., Plunkett, M.L., Parry, G.C., Shaw, D.E., Zhang, J.C.,
Rabbani, S.A., McCrae, K.R., Mazar, A.P., et al., 2002. Histidine-proline-rich glycopro-
tein has potent antiangiogenic activity mediated through the histidine-proline-rich
domain. Cancer Res. 62, 5344–5350.
Kacprzyk, L., Rydengård, V., Mörgelin, M., Davoudi, M., Pasupuleti, M., Malmsten, M.,
Schmidtchen, A., 2007. Antimicrobial activity of histidine-rich peptides is dependent
on acidic conditions. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1768, 2667–2680.
Koide, T., Foster, D., Yoshitake, S., Davie, E.W., 1986. Amino acid sequence of human his-
tidine-rich glycoprotein derived from the nucleotide sequence of its cDNA. Biochem-
istry 25, 2220–2225.
Leung, L.L., 1986. Interaction of histidine-rich glycoprotein with fibrinogen and fibrin.
J. Clin. Invest. 77, 1305–1311.
Levy, M.M., Fink, M.P., Marshall, J.C., Abraham, E., Angus, D., Cook, D., Cohen, J., Opal, S.M.,
Vincent, J.L., Ramsay, G., 2003. 2001 SCCM/ESICM/ACCP/ATS/SIS International Sepsis
Definitions Conference. Crit. Care Med. 31, 1250–1256.
Lijnen, H.R., Hoylaerts, M., Collen, D., 1983. Heparin binding properties of human histi-
dine-rich glycoprotein. Mechanism and role in the neutralization of heparin in plas-
ma. J. Biol. Chem. 258, 3803–3808.
Matthay, M.A., Zemans, R.L., 2011. The acute respiratory distress syndrome: pathogenesis
and treatment. Annu. Rev. Pathol. 6, 147–163.
Moreland, J.G., Bailey, G., Nauseef, W.M., Weiss, J.P., 2004. Organism-specific neutrophil-
endothelial cell interactions in response to Escherichia coli, Streptococcus pneumoniae,
and Staphylococcus aureus. J. Immunol. 172, 426–432.
Morgan, W.T., 1985. The histidine-rich glycoprotein of serum has a domain rich in histi-
dine, proline, and glycine that binds heme and metals. Biochemistry 24, 1496–1501.
Mori, S., Takahashi, H.K., Yamaoka, K., Okamoto, M., Nishibori, M., 2003. High affinity
binding of serum histidine-rich glycoprotein to nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid: the appli-
cation to microquantification. Life Sci. 73, 93–102.
Opal, S.M., van der Poll, T., 2015. Endothelial barrier dysfunction in septic shock. J. Intern.
Med. 277, 277–293.
Opal, S.M., Laterre, P.F., Francois, B., LaRosa, S.P., Angus, D.C., Mira, J.P., Wittebole, X.,
Dugernier, T., Perrotin, D., Tidswell, M., et al., 2013. Effect of Eritoran, an antagonist
of MD2-TLR4, on mortality in patients with severe sepsis. JAMA 309, 1154–1162.
Peterson, C.B., Morgan, W.T., Blackburn, M.N., 1987. Histidine-rich glycoprotein modula-
tion of the anticoagulant activity of heparin. Evidence for a mechanism involving
competition with both antithrombin and thrombin for heparin binding. J. Biol.
Chem. 262, 7567–7574.
Phillipson, M., Kubes, P., 2011. The neutrophil in vascular inflammation. Nat. Med. 17,
1381–1390.
Piccinini, A.M., Midwood, K.S., 2010. DAMPening inflammation by modulating TLR signal-
ling. Mediat. Inflamm. 2010, 1–21.
Poon, I.K., Hulett, M.D., Parish, C.R., 2010. Histidine-rich glycoprotein is a novel plasma
pattern recognition molecule that recruits IgG to facilitate necrotic cell clearance
via FcgammaRI on phagocytes. Blood 115, 2473–2482.
Poon, I.K., Patel, K.K., Davis, D.S., Parish, C.R., Hulett, M.D., 2011. Histidine-rich glycopro-
tein: the Swiss Army knife of mammalian plasma. Blood 117, 2093–2101.
Ranieri, V.M., Thompson, B.T., Barie, P.S., Dhainaut, J.F., Douglas, I.S., Finfer, S., Gårdlund, B.,
Marshall, J.C., Rhodes, A., Artigas, A., et al., 2012. Drotrecogin alfa (activated) in adults
with septic shock. N. Engl. J. Med. 366, 2055–2064.
Rice, T.W., Wheeler, A.P., Bernard, G.R., Vincent, J.L., Angus, D.C., Aikawa, N., Demeyer, I.,
Sainati, S., Amlot, N., Cao, C., et al., 2010. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled trial of TAK-242 for the treatment of severe sepsis. Crit. Care Med. 38,
1685–1694.
Rolny, C., Mazzone, M., Tugues, S., Laoui, D., Johansson, I., Coulon, C., Squadrito, M.L.,
Segura, I., Li, X., Knevels, E., et al., 2011. HRG inhibits tumor growth and metastasis
by inducing macrophage polarization and vessel normalization through downregula-
tion of PlGF. Cancer Cell 19, 31–44.
Russell, J.A., 2006. Management of sepsis. N. Engl. J. Med. 355, 1699–1713.
Rydengård, V., Olsson, A.K., Mörgelin, M., Schmidtchen, A., 2007. Histidine-rich glycopro-
tein exerts antibacterial activity. FEBS J. 274, 377–389.
Rydengård, V., Shannon, O., Lundqvist, K., Kacprzyk, L., Chalupka, A., Olsson, A.K.,
Mörgelin, M., Jahnen-Dechent, W., Malmsten, M., Schmidtchen, A., 2008. Histidine-
rich glycoprotein protects from systemic Candida infection. PLoS Pathog. 4,
e1000116.
Saigo, K., Yoshida, A., Ryo, R., Yamaguchi, N., Leung, L.L., 1990. Histidine-rich glycoprotein
as a negative acute phase reactant. Am. J. Hematol. 34, 149–150.
Salomão, R., Martins, P.S., Brunialti, M.K., Fernandes, Mda, L., Martos, L.S., Mendes, M.E.,
Gomes, N.E., Rigato, O., 2008. TLR signaling pathway in patients with sepsis. Shock
30, 73–77.
Semeraro, N., Ammollo, C.T., Semeraro, F., Colucci, M., 2012. Sepsis, thrombosis and organ
dysfunction. Thromb. Res. 129, 290–295.
Shannon, O., Rydengård, V., Schmidtchen, A., Mörgelin, M., Alm, P., Sørensen, O.E., Björck,
L., 2010. Histidine-rich glycoprotein promotes bacterial entrapment in clots and de-
creases mortality in a mouse model of sepsis. Blood 116, 2365–2372.
193
H. Wake et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 180–194
 Silverstein, R.L., Leung, L.L., Harpel, P.C., Nachman, R.L., 1985. Platelet thrombospondin
forms a trimolecular complex with plasminogen and histidine-rich glycoprotein.
J. Clin. Invest. 75, 2065–2073.
Sudom, K., Turrin, N.P., Hayley, S., Anisman, H., 2004. Influence of chronic interleukin-2
infusion and stressors on sickness behaviors and neurochemical change in mice.
Neuroimmunomodulation 11, 341–350.
Tugues, S., Roche, F., Noguer, O., Orlova, A., Bhoi, S., Padhan, N., Akerud, P., Honjo, S.,
Selvaraju, R.K., Mazzone, M., et al., 2014. Histidine-rich glycoprotein uptake and turn-
over is mediated by mononuclear phagocytes. PLoS One 9, e107483.
Wake, H., Mori, S., Liu, K., Takahashi, H.K., Nishibori, M., 2009. Histidine-rich glycoprotein
inhibited high mobility group box 1 in complex with heparin-induced angiogenesis
in matrigel plug assay. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 623, 89–95.
Ward, P.A., 2012. New approaches to the study of sepsis. EMBO Mol. Med. 4, 1234–1243.
Williams, M.R., Azcutia, V., Newton, G., Alcaide, P., Luscinskas, F.W., 2011. Emerging mech-
anisms of neutrophil recruitment across endothelium. Trends Immunol. 32, 461–469.
Yipp, B.G., Kubes, P., 2013. NETosis: how vital is it? Blood 122, 2784–2794.
194
H. Wake et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 180–194
