 Clinical Infectious Diseases
1470 • CID 2018:66 (1 May) • REVIEWS OF ANTI-INFECTIVE AGENTS
Busting the Myth of “Static vs Cidal”: A Systemic 
Literature Review
Noah Wald-Dickler,1,2 Paul Holtom,1,2 and Brad Spellberg1,2
1Los Angeles County + University of Southern California Medical Center and 2Division of Infectious Diseases, Keck School of Medicine at the University of Southern California, Los Angeles
We sought to determine if clinical data validate the dogma that bactericidal antibiotics are more clinically effective than bacterio-
static agents. We performed a systematic literature review of published, randomized, controlled trials (RCTs) that compared a bac-
teriostatic agent to a bactericidal agent in the treatment of clinical, bacterial infections. Of 56 identified trials published since 1985, 
49 found no significant difference in efficacy between bacteriostatic and bactericidal agents. In 6 trials it was found that the bacterio-
static agent was superior to the bactericidal agent in efficacy. Only 1 trial found that the bactericidal agent was superior; in that case, 
the inferiority of the static agent was explainable by underdosing of the drug based on pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic analysis. 
Thus, virtually all available data from high-quality, RCTs demonstrate no intrinsic superiority of bactericidal compared to bacterio-
static agents. Other drug characteristics such as optimal dosing, pharmacokinetics, and tissue penetration may be more important 
efficacy drivers.
Keywords. antibiotic; static; cidal; systematic literature review; efficacy.
Despite 80 years of experience, we are still learning how to opti-
mally use antibiotics clinically. A common dogma in medicine 
is the belief that bactericidal agents are more effective than bac-
teriostatic agents. Common etymologic intuition might lead 
one to believe that a bacteriostatic antibiotic simply halts bac-
terial growth and that a bactericidal agent kills or eliminates 
bacteria. Conceptually, it might seem logical that we should 
preferentially prescribe the latter because they are believed to 
be better at killing bacteria.
Unfortunately, these pervasive beliefs about the meaning 
of bacteriostatic and bactericidal are misunderstood [1]. 
Bacteriostatic antibiotics do kill bacteria; they just require 
a higher concentration than bactericidal agents to achieve 
specific thresholds of bacterial reduction. Given that the 
definitions of bactericidal and bacteriostatic are based on 
convention rather than clinical principles, we sought to 
determine if clinical evidence exists to confirm or refute the 
concept that bactericidal antibiotics are more effective than 
bacteriostatic agents. To test this hypothesis, we performed 
a systematic review of published, randomized, controlled 
trials (RCTs) that compared clinical outcomes of bacterio-
static and bactericidal agents when treating invasive bacter-
ial infections.
METHODS
We performed a comprehensive search of the medical literature 
to review the available data that compared bactericidal agents 
to bacteriostatic antibiotics in the treatment of clinical infec-
tions. The PubMed database was searched using the following 
terms for commonly used bacteriostatic agents: “azithromycin” 
OR “chloramphenicol” OR “clarithromycin” OR “clindamycin” 
OR “doxycycline” OR “linezolid” OR “erythromycin” OR “tet-
racycline” OR “tigecycline” OR “eravacycline.” The terms were 
used in search combination with publication type: “randomized 
controlled trial.” English language papers published between 
January 1985 and September 2017 were reviewed. RCTs that 
compared bacteriostatic agents to bactericidal agents were 
included in the review. Observational/retrospective studies 
were excluded. Trials were also excluded if they compared bac-
teriostatic to bacteriostatic or bactericidal to bactericidal agents.
RESULTS
Overall Findings
In our systematic literature review, we identified 56 RCTs that 
compared the clinical efficacy of bacteriostatic agents to that of 
bactericidal antibiotics head-to-head for patients with serious 
or life-threatening, invasive bacterial infections (Supplementary 
Table 1). Most (n = 49, 81%) of the trials found no significant 
difference in efficacy between bacteriostatic and bactericidal 
antibiotics, including for potentially highly lethal infections 
such as typhoid fever, bacteremia, plague, and pneumonia.
Six trials that did find a significant efficacy difference 
between bacteriostatic and bactericidal agents actually found 
that the bacteriostatic agent was more effective than the bac-
tericidal agent (Supplementary Table 1). Only 1 trial found 
I N V I T E D  A R T I C L E
© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society 
of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.
DOI: 10.1093/cid/cix1127
Received 8 October 2017; editorial decision 2 December 2017; accepted 22 December 2017; 
published online December 26, 2017.
Correspondence: B. Spellberg, LAC + USC Medical Center, 2051 Marengo Street, Los 
Angeles, CA 90033 (bspellberg@dhs.lacounty.gov).
Clinical Infectious Diseases®  2018;66(9):1470–4
REVIEWS OF ANTI-INFECTIVE AGENTS: Louis Saravolatz, Section Editor
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/9/1470/4774989 by guest on 02 June 2019
 REVIEWS OF ANTI-INFECTIVE AGENTS • CID 2018:66 (1 May) • 1471
a bactericidal antibiotic to be superior in efficacy to a static 
agent; that trial compared tigecycline to imipenem for the 
treatment of ventilator-associated pneumonia and found that 
tigecycline was inferior [2]. However, pharmacologic ana-
lysis determined that the tigecycline dose used in the trial was 
too low, resulting in inadequate drug levels compared to the 
susceptibility of the bacteria that caused the infections [3]. 
When a subsequent trial was done with double the dose of 
tigecycline, tigecycline was similar in efficacy to imipenem for 
the same disease [4]. Subsequent trials in skin and soft tis-
sue infections (SSTIs) [5–8], community-acquired pneumo-
nia [9–12], and intraabdominal infections [13–16] showed 
equivalent clinical efficacy for tigecycline and several bac-
tericidal comparators (Supplementary Table 1). A metaanaly-
sis suggested worse outcomes with tigecycline compared to 
competitors [17]. However, the efficacy difference was driven 
largely by the trial for ventilator-associated pneumonia; the 
other trials that were included did not individually find a dif-
ference in efficacy between tigecycline and the comparator. 
Other authors have suggested that the metaanalysis must be 
interpreted with caution given its statistical methods [18] and 
dosing heterogeneity [19].
Skin and Soft Tissue Infections 
We also evaluated the studies based on the site of the infection. 
We identified 19 trials that compared clinical outcomes of bac-
teriostatic agents to a bactericidal agent for the treatment of 
SSTIs. Three trials found statistically superior clinical outcomes 
with linezolid (bacteriostatic) compared to vancomycin (bac-
tericidal) in the treatment of complicated SSTIs (Supplementary 
Table 1). Several additional trials found linezolid to be not sig-
nificantly different in clinical efficacy compared to vancomy-
cin across a range of nonendocarditis gram-positive infections 
(Supplementary Table 1). Linezolid was also shown in several 
of the same SSTI studies to have superior or noninferior micro-
biologic eradication rates compared to bacteriostatic agents 
(Supplementary Table 1). Even when treating methicillin-re-
sistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), the use of a bactericidal 
regimen (trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole plus rifampicin) was 
shown to have outcomes equivalent to those for bacteriostatic 
linezolid across a variety of MRSA infections (Supplementary 
Table 1).
A particularly interesting study [20] was linezolid vs van-
comycin in febrile neutropenic patients; it remains one of the 
only studies on this subject to include neutropenic hosts, a 
group of patients for which bactericidal therapy has tradition-
ally been thought to be superior (Supplementary Table 1). The 
trial concluded that linezolid and vancomycin had similar effi-
cacy in febrile neutropenic patients with cancer. Caution must 
be taken in the widespread application of this conclusion to all 
infections in immunocompromised hosts as no prospective 
studies that compared a bactericidal to a bacteriostatic agent 
active for gram-negative bacteria in the neutropenic population 
were identified. Furthermore, vancomycin dosing may not have 
been optimal, and add-on bactericidal therapy was permitted 
in this study. Nevertheless, this RCT did find that a bacterio-
static agent was not inherently inferior to a bactericidal one in 
infected neutropenic hosts.
Clinical outcomes for SSTIs have also been shown to be 
equivalent when linezolid was compared to newer bactericidal 
agents including dalbavancin and teicoplanin (Supplementary 
Table 1). Although the study that compared linezolid to teico-
planin showed no difference in clinical outcomes between 
teicoplanin for SSTIs or pneumonia, it did show statistically 
significant clinical superiority of linezolid over teicoplanin in 
the all-infections (P = .005) and bacteremia (P = .009) subgroup 
analyses (Supplementary Table 1).
Pneumonia
A total of 19 trials were identified that compared a bacterio-
static agent to a bactericidal agent for the treatment of pneu-
monia, and additional trials included pneumonia in specific 
subgroup analyses (Supplementary Table 1). Linezolid was 
studied for pneumonia in a variety of settings and found to 
have superior or similar clinical efficacy compared to vanco-
mycin for both nosocomial and community-acquired pneu-
monia (Supplementary Table 1). These outcome differences 
may be due in part to the poor penetration of vancomycin 
in alveolar tissues, whereas linezolid penetrates these tis-
sues very well [21–25]. Nevertheless, the finding of similar 
to superior efficacy of linezolid reinforces that static vs cidal 
in vitro killing does not intrinsically make the static agent 
inferior clinically; other drug characteristics are as or more 
important to clinical effect.
Similarly, clinically equivalent results were seen in a com-
parison of linezolid and teicoplanin (bactericidal) for nosoco-
mial and critically ill patients with pneumonia (Supplementary 
Table 1). In the distinct setting of community-acquired pneu-
monia, including atypical pneumonia, the bacteriostatic agent 
doxycycline was shown to be clinically equivalent to β-lactam–
based or fluoroquinolone-based (bactericidal) regimens 
(Supplementary Table 1). Clindamycin, which is bacteriostatic 
against culpable anaerobes, was shown in 2 trials of aspiration 
pneumonia to result in no difference in clinical outcomes com-
pared to the bactericidal agents penicillin and ampicillin–sul-
bactam, as well as the carbapenem–β-lactamase inhibitor 
combination panipenem–betamipron (Supplementary Table 1).
As mentioned, the only trial in which a cidal agent (imi-
penem) was found to be superior in efficacy to a static agent 
(tigecycline) was a trial of ventilator-associated pneumonia [2]. 
However, a follow-up study of double-dose tigecycline found 
the 2 drugs to be similarly effective for the same disease [4]. 
Four other studies [9–12] found no difference in pneumonia 
outcomes of tigecycline vs levofloxacin.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/9/1470/4774989 by guest on 02 June 2019
 1472 • CID 2018:66 (1 May) • REVIEWS OF ANTI-INFECTIVE AGENTS
Typhoid Fever/Salmonellosis
Enteric fever due to Salmonella typhi has served as a unique 
bacterial entity for the clinical comparison of bacteriostatic 
and bactericidal agents. Five studies compared the bacterio-
static agent chloramphenicol to bactericidal β-lactams or fluo-
roquinolones for typhoid fever, and none showed statistically 
significant differences in clinical outcomes (Supplementary 
Table 1). Although chloramphenicol was associated with higher 
rates of hematologic toxicities, it was shown to have unique ben-
efits including decreased levels of the proinflammatory cytokine 
interleukin-1β [26] compared to these other agents. Similar to 
chloramphenicol, the bacteriostatic macrolide azithromycin 
was compared to bactericidal β-lactams and fluoroquinolones 
with no statistically significant difference seen in clinical out-
comes in patients with typhoid fever (Supplementary Table 1).
Other Infections
Other studies have shown equivalent clinical outcomes with 
the use of bacteriostatic and bactericidal agents in genital 
infections including chlamydia in women (azithromycin vs 
the bactericidal rifamycin, rifalazil) and bacterial vaginosis 
(clindamycin vs bactericidal metronidazole; Supplementary 
Table 1). In complicated intraabdominal infections, tigecycline 
and the novel fluorocycline eravacycline (bacteriostatic) were 
shown to be clinically equivalent to bactericidal comparators 
(Supplementary Table 1). Even in the treatment of plague, bac-
teriostatic doxycycline was found to be equivalent to the bac-
tericidal aminoglycoside, gentamicin (Supplementary Table 1).
DISCUSSION
While it seems intuitive that antibiotics that more rapidly kill 
bacteria should be more clinically effective, a systematic review 
of RCTs does not support this assertion. Furthermore, there 
are a variety of misunderstandings around the meaning of the 
terms “bactericidal” and “bacteriostatic.” When asked what bac-
teriostatic means, many providers will respond that bacterio-
static agents slow or inhibit the growth of bacteria but do not 
kill them, as compared to bactericidal antibiotics that actively 
kill. Although that interpretation is what the names seem to 
imply, the interpretation is wrong.
Two definitions are important to clarify. First, the minimum 
inhibitory concentration (MIC) is defined as the concentration 
that inhibits visible bacterial growth at 24 hours of growth in 
specific media, at a specific temperature, and at a specific carbon 
dioxide concentration. Second, the minimum bactericidal con-
centration (MBC) is the concentration of a drug that results in a 
1000-fold reduction in bacterial density at 24 hours of growth in 
the same specific conditions. The formal definition of a bacteri-
cidal antibiotic is one for which the ratio of MBC-to-MIC is ≤4, 
while a bacteriostatic agent has an MBC-to-MIC ratio of >4 [1].
Thus, an antibiotic that achieves a >1000-fold reduction in 
bacterial density but does so at a concentration that is 8-fold 
above the MIC of the drug is considered to be bacteriostatic, 
despite the fact that it clearly kills the bacteria. Similarly, an 
antibiotic that achieves a 10-fold, or even a 500-fold, reduction 
in bacterial density at a concentration of 2- to 4-fold above the 
MIC is characterized as bacteriostatic, even though it demon-
strates impressive killing ability. All antibiotics that are consid-
ered bacteriostatic do kill bacteria in vitro, just at concentrations 
that are farther above their MICs than bactericidal agents.
Furthermore, these purely laboratory definitions are some-
what arbitrary. Why should it be that the MBC requires a 
1000-fold reduction in bacterial density as opposed to 100-, 
500-, 5000-, or even a 10 000-fold reduction? Why 24 hours? 
Why must the MBC not be more than 4-fold above the MIC 
as opposed to only 2-fold or for that matter 16-fold or 24-fold? 
Ultimately, it is reasonable to standardize in vitro comparisons 
of rapidity of kill by antimicrobial agents if there is believed 
to be some value in knowing this characteristic of an agent. 
However, that does not mean that this current standardized 
method is predictive of what happens during a clinical infec-
tion. Bacteriostatic and bactericidal are relative in vitro terms 
not based on linkage to any predictive ability of the outcome of 
infections in vivo.
Our analysis of published RCTs demonstrates that bacteri-
cidal agents are not intrinsically superior in efficacy to bacterio-
static agents. The majority of trials across a variety of infections 
found no difference in efficacy between bacteriostatic and bac-
tericidal agents. Of 7 trials that did find a statistically significant 
difference in clinical outcomes, 6 found that the bacteriostatic 
agent was superior in efficacy. The only trial that found the bac-
tericidal agent to be superior in efficacy used a pharmacologic-
ally suboptimal dose of the static agent, such that a repeat trial 
using double the dose of the static agent found no difference in 
efficacy between the static and cidal agents. Thus, RCTs do not 
support the superiority of bactericidal agents. Rather, the avail-
able data suggest that other drug characteristics such as optimal 
dosing, pharmacokinetics, and tissue penetration may be more 
important drivers of clinical efficacy than intrinsic rate of bac-
terial killing in vitro.
The origin of the bacteriostatic vs bactericidal debate appears 
to derive from older case series that evaluated patients with 
bacterial endocarditis. In the 1950s, Finland found that bac-
teriostatic agents, including a variety of tetracyclines and 
macrolides, resulted in poor outcomes when used to treat 
endocarditis [27, 28]. These studies led to the belief that bac-
teriostatic agents generally are inferior as therapeutic agents 
for endocarditis. Indeed, it is widely accepted that the cardiac 
valves are relatively immunosuppressed regions given poor 
accessibility to phagocytic cells. Therefore, from a pathophysio-
logic standpoint, phagocyte-independent killing by bactericidal 
antibiotics is considered preferable for endocarditis. However, 
as mentioned, bacteriostatic antibiotics do kill bacteria, but the 
bacteriostatic agents in these older series (tetracyclines and 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/9/1470/4774989 by guest on 02 June 2019
 REVIEWS OF ANTI-INFECTIVE AGENTS • CID 2018:66 (1 May) • 1473
macrolides) achieve very low blood concentrations. Thus, based 
only on pharmacological principles unrelated to their rapidity 
of microbial killing, such agents would not be anticipated to be 
desirable for the treatment of bloodstream infections.
In contrast to the older bacteriostatic agents, the bacterio-
static agent linezolid has more favorable bloodstream pharma-
cokinetics. Linezolid has been found in a few published case 
series to result in relatively good outcomes when used for bac-
terial endocarditis [29–31]. Although not inclusive of bacter-
ial endocarditis, several of the trials included in this review 
included bacteremia in either primary or subgroup analyses 
of linezolid vs a comparator bactericidal agent. In direct com-
parison to the bactericidal drugs vancomycin and teicoplanin, 
linezolid was also shown to have superior or no relevant dif-
ference in clinical outcomes for gram-positive bloodstream 
infections (Supplemental Table 1). In one trial [32] (included 
in this review with equivalent clinical outcomes for SSTIs), line-
zolid-attributed mortality was higher only among patients with 
gram-negative bacteremia. Since linezolid is not normally used 
to treat gram-negative bacteria, it is not entirely clear how to 
interpret this finding. One possible interpretation, based on a 
single in vitro pharmacodynamic model [33], is that linezolid 
may attenuate the activity of agents active against gram-nega-
tive organisms.
Clinical support for bactericidal therapy in meningitis, 
another immune privileged site of infection, comes from older, 
nonrandomized, observational studies of pneumococcal men-
ingitis in the 1950s in which penicillin monotherapy showed 
lower mortality than penicillin combined with a bacteriostatic 
tetracycline [34, 35]. However, other more recent experimen-
tal animal models of infections, including post-viral bacterial 
pneumonia [36, 37] and sinusitis [38], have shown a survival 
advantage of a protein synthesis–inhibiting bacteriostatic agent 
compared to comparator bactericidal agents. These beneficial 
effects may be due to reduction in inflammatory immunopa-
thology that occurs during treatment, but again, these studies 
do not include the generally accepted bactericidal-warranting 
conditions of endocarditis or meningitis.
Our study has a number of limitations. Although RCTs are 
the “gold-standard” for clinical research because they are sub-
stantially less likely to be affected by numerous types of bias, 
they often exclude patients with more severe or life-threatening 
infections or hosts with impaired immunity from enrollment. 
Retrospective comparative trials permit analysis of patients with 
more severe outcomes. However, as such studies are subject to 
numerous types of bias, they are typically viewed as hypothesis 
generating, with findings that require confirmation in a RCT. 
Thus, we did not analyze observational or retrospective studies.
Additionally, the quality of the trials we included was mixed. 
The majority (32 of 56) were nonblinded, leading to risk of per-
formance bias. However, the studies that were blinded reached 
the same conclusions as the nonblinded studies; indeed, only 
1 of 56 studies found a cidal agent to be superior in efficacy 
to a static agent. Hence, there was concordance of conclusions 
across virtually all the studies. Our findings are similar to those 
from a previous metaanalysis on this topic [39]. That analysis of 
partially overlapping trials identified possible selection, perfor-
mance, attrition, and reporting biases in a number of the studies 
that were analyzed in both their study and in ours. However, 
given the robustness of the findings, the authors of that 
metaanalysis still concluded that the categorization of antibi-
otics into bacteriostatic and bactericidal likely has little clinical 
relevance. Finally, we were not able to identify trials that com-
pared static agents to cidal agents for the treatment of bacter-
ial endocarditis or bacterial meningitis. For these diseases, no 
conclusions can be definitively drawn from an analysis of RCTs.
In summary, there is extensive evidence that bactericidal and 
bacteriostatic agents are similar in efficacy when used to treat 
clinical infections, including SSTIs, pneumonia, nonendocar-
ditis bloodstream infections, intraabdominal infections, and 
genital infections. The large majority of studies that compared 
bacteriostatic and bactericidal agents head-to-head for the 
treatment of invasive bacterial infections found no differences 
in clinical outcomes or mortality. When differences were found 
in such studies, the bacteriostatic agent was usually found to 
be superior and more cost-effective than the bactericidal agent. 
When bacteriostatic agents were found to be inferior, the ex-
planation appears to be more likely inadequate dosing and/or 
achievable levels at the site of infection, not rapidity of kill of 
the microbe. It is time to abandon the notion that bactericidal 
antibiotic agents are intrinsically more effective than bacterio-
static agents.
Supplementary Data
Supplementary materials are available at Clinical Infectious Diseases online. 
Consisting of data provided by the authors to benefit the reader, the posted 
materials are not copyedited and are the sole responsibility of the authors, 
so questions or comments should be addressed to the corresponding author.
Notes
Financial support. This work was supported by the National Institute 
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases at the National Institutes of Health (grants 
R01 AI130060, R01 HSO25690, R01 AI1081719, and R21 AI127954).
Potential conflict of interest. B. S. has consulted for Cempra, the 
Medicines Company, Medimmune, Tetraphase, AstraZeneca, Merck, 
Genentech, Forge, and Pfizer and owns equity in BioAIM, Synthetic 
Biologics, and Mycomed. The remaining authors: No reported conflicts 
of interest. All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of 
Potential Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to 
the content of the manuscript have been disclosed.
References
1. Pankey GA, Sabath LD. Clinical relevance of bacteriostatic versus bactericidal 
mechanisms of action in the treatment of gram-positive bacterial infections. Clin 
Infect Dis 2004; 38:864–70.
2. Freire AT, Melnyk V, Kim MJ, et al; 311 Study Group. Comparison of tigecycline 
with imipenem/cilastatin for the treatment of hospital-acquired pneumonia. 
Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2010; 68:140–51.
3. Bhavnani SM, Rubino CM, Hammel JP, et al. Pharmacological and patient-spe-
cific response determinants in patients with hospital-acquired pneumonia treated 
with tigecycline. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2012; 56:1065–72.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/9/1470/4774989 by guest on 02 June 2019
 1474 • CID 2018:66 (1 May) • REVIEWS OF ANTI-INFECTIVE AGENTS
4. Ramirez J, Dartois N, Gandjini H, Yan JL, Korth-Bradley J, McGovern PC. 
Randomized phase 2 trial to evaluate the clinical efficacy of two high-dosage tige-
cycline regimens versus imipenem-cilastatin for treatment of hospital-acquired 
pneumonia. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2013; 57:1756–62.
5. Breedt J, Teras J, Gardovskis J, et al; Tigecycline 305 cSSSI Study Group. Safety 
and efficacy of tigecycline in treatment of skin and skin structure infections: 
results of a double-blind phase 3 comparison study with vancomycin-aztreonam. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2005; 49:4658–66.
6. Chuang YC, Chang CM, Aradhya S, et al. Efficacy and safety of tigecycline mon-
otherapy compared with vancomycin-aztreonam in the treatment of complicated 
skin and skin structure infections in patients from India and Taiwan. J Microbiol 
Immunol Infect 2011; 44:116–24.
7. Ellis-Grosse EJ, Babinchak T, Dartois N, Rose G, Loh E; Tigecycline 300 cSSSI 
Study Group; Tigecycline 305 cSSSI Study Group. The efficacy and safety of tige-
cycline in the treatment of skin and skin-structure infections: results of 2 dou-
ble-blind phase 3 comparison studies with vancomycin-aztreonam. Clin Infect 
Dis 2005; 41 Suppl 5:S341–53.
8. Sacchidanand S, Penn RL, Embil JM, et al. Efficacy and safety of tigecycline 
monotherapy compared with vancomycin plus aztreonam in patients with com-
plicated skin and skin structure infections: results from a phase 3, randomized, 
double-blind trial. Int J Infect Dis 2005; 9:251–61.
9. Bergallo C, Jasovich A, Teglia O, et al; 308 Study Group. Safety and efficacy of 
intravenous tigecycline in treatment of community-acquired pneumonia: results 
from a double-blind randomized phase 3 comparison study with levofloxacin. 
Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2009; 63:52–61.
10. Dartois N, Castaing N, Gandjini H, Cooper A; Tigecycline 313 Study Group. 
Tigecycline versus levofloxacin for the treatment of community-acquired pneu-
monia: European experience. J Chemother 2008; 20(Suppl 1):28–35.
11. Tanaseanu C, Bergallo C, Teglia O, et al; 308 Study Group; 313 Study Group. 
Integrated results of 2 phase 3 studies comparing tigecycline and levofloxacin in 
community-acquired pneumonia. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2008; 61:329–38.
12. Tanaseanu C, Milutinovic S, Calistru PI, et al; 313 Study Group. Efficacy and 
safety of tigecycline versus levofloxacin for community-acquired pneumonia. 
BMC Pulm Med 2009; 9:44.
13. Chen Z, Wu J, Zhang Y, et al. Efficacy and safety of tigecycline monotherapy vs. 
imipenem/cilastatin in Chinese patients with complicated intra-abdominal infec-
tions: a randomized controlled trial. BMC Infect Dis 2010; 10:217.
14. Oliva ME, Rekha A, Yellin A, et al. A multicenter trial of the efficacy and safety 
of tigecycline versus imipenem/cilastatin in patients with complicated intra-ab-
dominal infections [Study ID Numbers: 3074A1-301-WW; ClinicalTrials.gov 
Identifier: NCT00081744]. BMC Infect Dis 2005; 5:88.
15. Qvist N, Warren B, Leister-Tebbe H, et al. Efficacy of tigecycline versus ceftriaxone 
plus metronidazole for the treatment of complicated intra-abdominal infections: 
results from a randomized, controlled trial. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 2012; 13:102–9.
16. Towfigh S, Pasternak J, Poirier A, Leister H, Babinchak T. A multicentre, open-la-
bel, randomized comparative study of tigecycline versus ceftriaxone sodium 
plus metronidazole for the treatment of hospitalized subjects with complicated 
intra-abdominal infections. Clin Microbiol Infect 2010; 16:1274–81.
17. Yahav D, Lador A, Paul M, Leibovici L. Efficacy and safety of tigecycline: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. J Antimicrob Chemother 2011; 66:1963–71.
18. Curcio D, Verde PE. Comment on: efficacy and safety of tigecycline: a system-
atic review and meta-analysis. J Antimicrob Chemother 2011; 66:2893–5; author 
reply 5–6.
19. Scaglione F. Comment on: efficacy and safety of tigecycline: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. J Antimicrob Chemother 2011; 66:2892–3; author reply 5–6.
20. Jaksic B, Martinelli G, Perez-Oteyza J, Hartman CS, Leonard LB, Tack KJ. Efficacy 
and safety of linezolid compared with vancomycin in a randomized, double-blind 
study of febrile neutropenic patients with cancer. Clin Infect Dis 2006; 42:597–607.
21. Conte JE Jr, Golden JA, Kipps J, Zurlinden E. Intrapulmonary pharmacokinetics 
of linezolid. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2002; 46:1475–80.
22. Boselli E, Breilh D, Rimmelé T, et al. Pharmacokinetics and intrapulmonary con-
centrations of linezolid administered to critically ill patients with ventilator-asso-
ciated pneumonia. Crit Care Med 2005; 33:1529–33.
23. Boselli E, Breilh D, Caillault-Sergent A, et al. Alveolar diffusion and phar-
macokinetics of linezolid administered in continuous infusion to critically ill 
patients with ventilator-associated pneumonia. J Antimicrob Chemother 2012; 
67:1207–10.
24. Lamer C, de Beco V, Soler P, et al. Analysis of vancomycin entry into pulmonary 
lining fluid by bronchoalveolar lavage in critically ill patients. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother 1993; 37:281–6.
25. Lodise TP, Drusano GL, Butterfield JM, Scoville J, Gotfried M, Rodvold KA. 
Penetration of vancomycin into epithelial lining fluid in healthy volunteers. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2011; 55:5507–11.
26. Gasem MH, Keuter M, Dolmans WM, Van Der Ven-Jongekrijg J, Djokomoeljanto 
R, Van Der Meer JW. Persistence of Salmonellae in blood and bone marrow: rand-
omized controlled trial comparing ciprofloxacin and chloramphenicol treatments 
against enteric fever. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2003; 47:1727–31.
27. Finland M. Current status of therapy in bacterial endocarditis. J Am Med Assoc 
1958; 166:364–73.
28. Finland M. Treatment of bacterial endocarditis. N Engl J Med 1954; 250:372–83; 
contd.
29. Mancino P, Ucciferri C, Falasca K, Pizzigallo E, Vecchiet J. Methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus epidermidis (MRSE) endocarditis treated with linezolid. Scand J 
Infect Dis 2008; 40:67–73.
30. Tascini C, Bongiorni MG, Doria R, et al. Linezolid for endocarditis: a case series 
of 14 patients. J Antimicrob Chemother 2011; 66:679–82.
31. Lauridsen TK, Bruun LE, Rasmussen RV, et al. Linezolid as rescue treatment 
for left-sided infective endocarditis: an observational, retrospective, multicenter 
study. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2012; 31:2567–74.
32. Wilcox MH, Tack KJ, Bouza E, et al. Complicated skin and skin-structure infec-
tions and catheter-related bloodstream infections: noninferiority of linezolid in a 
phase 3 study. Clin Infect Dis 2009; 48:203–12.
33. LaPlante KL, Sakoulas G. Evaluating aztreonam and ceftazidime pharmacody-
namics with Escherichia coli in combination with daptomycin, linezolid, or van-
comycin in an in vitro pharmacodynamic model. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
2009; 53:4549–55.
34. Lepper MH, Dowling HF. Treatment of pneumococcic meningitis with penicillin 
compared with penicillin plus aureomycin; studies including observations on an 
apparent antagonism between penicillin and aureomycin. AMA Arch Intern Med 
1951; 88:489–94.
35. Olsson RA, Kirby JC, Romansky MJ. Pneumococcal meningitis in the adult. 
Clinical, therapeutic, and prognostic aspects in forty-three patients. Ann Intern 
Med 1961; 55:545–9.
36. Karlström A, Boyd KL, English BK, McCullers JA. Treatment with protein synthe-
sis inhibitors improves outcomes of secondary bacterial pneumonia after influ-
enza. J Infect Dis 2009; 199:311–9.
37. Karlström A, Heston SM, Boyd KL, Tuomanen EI, McCullers JA. Toll-like 
receptor 2 mediates fatal immunopathology in mice during treatment of 
secondary pneumococcal pneumonia following influenza. J Infect Dis 2011; 
204:1358–66.
38. Luxameechanporn T, Blair C, Kirtsreesakul V, Thompson K, Naclerio RM. The 
effect of treatment with moxifloxacin or azithromycin on acute bacterial rhinosi-
nusitis in mice. Int J Infect Dis 2006; 10:401–6.
39. Nemeth J, Oesch G, Kuster SP. Bacteriostatic versus bactericidal antibiotics for 
patients with serious bacterial infections: systematic review and meta-analysis.  
J Antimicrob Chemother 2015; 70:382–95.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/9/1470/4774989 by guest on 02 June 2019
