 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 1 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
Introduction
Epileptogenesis is a dynamic process of molecular, cellular, and 
functional reorganization following precipitating events that leads 
to brain pathology capable of generating spontaneous seizures (1). 
Currently used antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) merely provide symp-
tomatic control of seizures, and around 30% of patients have epi-
lepsy that is refractory to AEDs (2). The development of effective 
therapies to treat or prevent epileptogenesis and drug resistance 
remains an urgent unmet clinical need. Clinical trial designs for 
novel therapeutics against epileptogenesis are likely to hinge on 
discovering noninvasive biomarkers that allow early identification 
of patients at high risk of developing the disease as well as patients 
who might preferentially respond to novel treatments.
Neuroinflammation in seizure-prone brain regions is a com-
mon feature of various forms of drug-resistant, focal-onset symp-
tomatic epilepsies in humans and contributes to mechanisms of 
seizure generation in animal models (3). Sterile neuroinflamma-
tion is a complex phenomenon involving the activation of the 
innate immune system by damage-associated molecular patterns 
(DAMPs). DAMPs are released by cells undergoing stressful or 
deadly events to alert the microenvironment to activate homeo-
static mechanisms of tissue repair, but if DAMPs persist in tissue, 
they may induce cell dysfunction or damage (4). High-mobility 
group box 1 (HMGB1), a prototypical member of the DAMP fam-
ily, is a known mediator of sterile neuroinflammation evoked by 
epileptogenic injuries (4, 5). HMGB1 is a highly conserved non-
histone nuclear protein expressed by most eukaryotic cells, where 
it binds to chromatin (6) and regulates gene transcription (7). 
HMGB1 has several isoforms, each of which has distinct physi-
ological and pathological functions. Nonacetylated HMGB1 is 
released passively from necrotic cells (7), while acetylation of key 
lysine residues in HMGB1 indicates active release during inflam-
mation, a step that requires nucleus-to-cytoplasm translocation 
(6, 8). Furthermore, the redox state of the protein determines its 
receptor interactions: under basal conditions, HMGB1 is predom-
inantly fully reduced inside the cell, but can be oxidized by reac-
tive oxygen species upon translocation to the cytoplasm or after 
its extracellular release. Redox modification of 3 key cysteine res-
idues, C23, C45, and C106, determines the functional activity of 
HMGB1. In particular, disulfide HMGB1, containing an intramo-
lecular disulfide bond between C23 and C45 and a reduced C106 
(9), specifically binds and signals via the TLR4/MD-2 complex 
to induce cytokine release in macrophages (10), microglia, and 
astrocytes (5, 11, 12). Reduced HMGB1, in which all 3 cysteines 
Approximately 30% of epilepsy patients do not respond to antiepileptic drugs, representing an unmet medical need. There 
is evidence that neuroinflammation plays a pathogenic role in drug-resistant epilepsy. The high-mobility group box 1 
(HMGB1)/TLR4 axis is a key initiator of neuroinflammation following epileptogenic injuries, and its activation contributes 
to seizure generation in animal models. However, further work is required to understand the role of HMGB1 and its isoforms 
in epileptogenesis and drug resistance. Using a combination of animal models and sera from clinically well-characterized 
patients, we have demonstrated that there are dynamic changes in HMGB1 isoforms in the brain and blood of animals 
undergoing epileptogenesis. The pathologic disulfide HMGB1 isoform progressively increased in blood before epilepsy onset 
and prospectively identified animals that developed the disease. Consistent with animal data, we observed early expression 
of disulfide HMGB1 in patients with newly diagnosed epilepsy, and its persistence was associated with subsequent seizures. In 
contrast with patients with well-controlled epilepsy, patients with chronic, drug-refractory epilepsy persistently expressed the 
acetylated, disulfide HMGB1 isoforms. Moreover, treatment of animals with antiinflammatory drugs during epileptogenesis 
prevented both disease progression and blood increase in HMGB1 isoforms. Our data suggest that HMGB1 isoforms are 
mechanistic biomarkers for epileptogenesis and drug-resistant epilepsy in humans, necessitating evaluation in larger-scale 
prospective studies.
Molecular isoforms of high-mobility group box 1  
are mechanistic biomarkers for epilepsy
Lauren Elizabeth Walker,1 Federica Frigerio,2 Teresa Ravizza,2 Emanuele Ricci,1 Karen Tse,1 Rosalind E. Jenkins,1  
Graeme John Sills,1 Andrea Jorgensen,1 Luca Porcu,3 Thimmasettappa Thippeswamy,4 Tiina Alapirtti,5 Jukka Peltola,5  
Martin J. Brodie,6 Brian Kevin Park,1 Anthony Guy Marson,1 Daniel James Antoine,1 Annamaria Vezzani,2 and Munir Pirmohamed1
1Department of Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom. 2Department of Neuroscience and 3Department of Oncology, IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche 
Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Milano, Italy. 4Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA. 5Department of Neurology and Rehabilitation, 
Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland. 6Epilepsy Unit, Western Infirmary, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
Authorship note: L.E. Walker and F. Frigerio are co–first authors.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
License: This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Submitted: November 29, 2016; Accepted: March 16, 2017.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2017;127(6):2118–2132. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI92001.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 1 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
cytoplasm before the onset of spontaneous seizures, therefore 
demonstrating that brain changes of HMGB1 are not solely a 
consequence of ongoing seizure activity.
Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC/
MS-MS) analysis of HMGB1 isoforms was subsequently per-
formed in both hippocampus and blood in a different cohort of 
rats that were sacrificed at representative time points after SE, as 
informed by the immunohistochemical analysis. The proteolytic 
digestions of HMGB1 required for LC/MS-MS analysis generates 
peptide fragments that either contain the acetylation sites or the 
redox sensitive sequence (Supplemental Figure 3). HMGB1 iso-
forms in serum have been determined by a patented absolute 
quantification method (22, 23), which has been extensively vali-
dated to bioanalytical guidelines set out by the biomarker con-
sortium funded by the Safer and Faster Evidence-Based Transla-
tion Innovative Medicines Initiative (SAFE-T IMI) (http:/
/www. 
imi-safe-t.eu/). Since a method for absolute quantification of 
HMGB1 isoforms has not been validated for brain tissue as yet, 
HMGB1 isoforms in brain are expressed as fold change of respec-
tive basal values. The results depict acetylated HMGB1 separate-
ly from the reduced and disulfide isoforms. Since reduced and 
disulfide HMGB1 are mutually exclusive isoforms, their amounts 
account for total HMGB1 levels.
We determined whether an association exists between brain 
and blood HMGB1 isoforms (Figure 1B and dot plots in Supple-
mental Figure 4). In brain lysate from hippocampal tissue, the 
acetylated isoform (indicator of active release) progressively 
increased between 3 hours and 4 days after SE, i.e., during a time 
frame preceding the onset of spontaneous seizures. The redox 
state of HMGB1 also changed during epileptogenesis: at 3 hours 
after SE, only reduced HMGB1 was formed (3-fold increase over 
sham value, not statistically significant). However, between 6 
hours and 4 days, disulfide HMGB1 was also generated togeth-
er with reduced HMGB1. In the blood of the same animals, the 
acetylated and disulfide isoforms increased with a delay of at least 
6 hours when compared with brain and before spontaneous seizure 
onset. The reduced isoform increased in blood concomitantly with 
brain changes and, as in brain, anticipated the generation of disul-
fide HMGB1, which appeared in blood at 4 days. Within the first 6 
hours from SE induction, circulating HMGB1 was nonacetylated, 
reflecting its passive release from damaged cells, while at 4 days, 
the majority of HMGB1 was acetylated, indicating active cellular 
release. It has previously been shown that the active cellular release 
of HMGB1 is through a Ca2+-dependent secretory lysosome mech-
anism that, in turn, depends on HMGB1 acetylation (24, 25).
These blood changes may reflect cerebrospinal fluid–to–blood 
(CSF-to-blood) transport of HMGB1, which is initially (within the 
first 3 hours) passively released from damaged neurons (5, 26) and 
possibly also from BBB endothelium (27, 28). In particular, at 3 
hours after SE, nonacetylated and reduced HMGB1 in blood over-
shot the brain changes by about 2-fold, suggesting an additional 
cellular source of HMGB1 other than the brain parenchyma, such 
as the brain endothelium. In accordance, endothelial cells showed 
increased expression of HMGB1 during epileptogenesis (Figure 
1A). Further, it has previously been demonstrated that endothelial 
cells can be damaged by SE (29), suggesting that these cells may 
serve as a source of HMGB1.
are reduced, forms a heterocomplex with the C-X-C motif chemo-
kine 12 (CXCL12) and binds CXCR4 to initiate chemotaxis (13). 
HMGB1 that is terminally oxidized to contain sulfonyl groups on 
all cysteines (sulfonyl HMGB1) does not affect cell migration or 
cytokine induction (14). The disulfide and reduced isoforms have 
mutually exclusive functions. HMGB1 also activates receptor for 
advanced glycation end products (RAGE), but the binding effi-
ciency of each isoform for RAGE is still unresolved.
We have shown that total HMGB1 and its nucleus-to- 
cytoplasm translocation increase in neurons and glia in human 
drug-resistant epileptic foci (5, 12) and the corresponding animal 
models (5) and that disulfide HMGB1 is the isoform that pro-
motes seizures and cell loss (5, 15, 16). Furthermore, mice lacking 
TLR4 or RAGE are intrinsically less susceptible to seizures and 
less prone to developing epilepsy (5, 15), suggesting that HMGB1 
is implicated in epileptogenesis and that therefore, its targeting 
may have therapeutic utility. However, the role of HMGB1 and 
its different isoforms in both epileptogenesis and drug resistance, 
including whether they can be used as noninvasive, mechanistic 
biomarkers of epileptogenesis and treatment response, is unclear. 
In order to address this, we have measured total HMGB1 and its 
acetylated, reduced, and disulfide isoforms before epilepsy onset 
and during disease development in animal models of acquired 
epilepsy, correlating brain changes to those in blood, and have 
undertaken bridging studies in well-defined patients with drug- 
refractory epilepsy and in newly diagnosed patients.
Results
Brain expression and blood levels of HMGB1 in rodent models of 
epilepsy. Our first objective was to establish whether a relation-
ship exists between brain and blood levels of HMGB1 during the 
acute injury and early epileptogenesis following status epilepti-
cus (SE), a brain insult leading to epilepsy in animal models and 
humans (17, 18). We investigated whether HMGB1 translocates 
from the nucleus to the cytoplasm during epileptogenesis (Fig-
ure 1A), since this step is required for its cellular release, the con-
sequent biological effects (19), and its potential brain-to-blood 
transfer. Cellular localization of HMGB1 was assessed immu-
nohistochemically in the hippocampus of rats exposed to elec-
trically induced SE, a well-characterized model of epilepsy (20, 
21), and these hippocampi were compared with sham controls 
(see Supplemental Methods; supplemental material available 
online with this article; https:/
/doi.org/10.1172/JCI92001DS1). 
In control tissue, HMGB1 was expressed in nuclei of neurons and 
glia (Figure 1A and Supplemental Figure 1). From 3 hours until 
4 days after SE, a time window preceding the onset of epilepsy 
in this model, as shown by the lack of EEG and motor seizures 
in rats under continuous video-EEG recording (spontaneous sei-
zures arise at 8.4 ± 1.8 days, see below), HMGB1 staining showed 
a progressive increase in GFAP-positive astrocytes (Figure 1A 
and Supplemental Figure 2). Notably, in all SE-exposed rats, 
HMGB1 staining was observed in the cytoplasm of glial cells, 
including activated OX-42–positive microglia, and in endotheli-
al barrier antigen–positive (EBA-positive) endothelial cells of the 
blood brain barrier (BBB) (Figure 1A) and was detectable in the 
cytoplasm of neurons in 30% of animals (Supplemental Figure 
1). These data show that HMGB1 translocates from nucleus to 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 2 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 2 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
ifenprodil (a blocker of the NR2B-containing NMDA receptor 
[NMDAR], ref. 34; 20 mg/kg, i.p.) (treatment protocol in Meth-
ods). This treatment combination was designed to efficiently 
block the activation of the IL-1R1/TLR4 pathway, a known con-
tributor to seizure mechanisms (4), as well as a key molecular tar-
get (the NR2B-NMDAR) that mediates increased neuronal excit-
ability induced by pathway activation (16, 35). In fact, our previous 
evidence showed that the single blockade of the IL-1R1 axis was 
not sufficient to prevent TLR4 signaling activation during epilep-
togenesis (20) and that TLR4 signaling itself contributes to epi-
leptogenesis (15). A group of vehicle-injected rats implanted with 
electrodes but not exposed to SE was used as a sham control for 
time-matched blood HMGB1 measurements (n = 9).
We found a progressive increase of both total HMGB1 and its 
acetylated and disulfide isoforms (the latter being undetectable in 
sham rats) in blood during disease development in vehicle-inject-
ed rats; notably, these changes were detected before the onset of 
the spontaneous seizures (i.e., disease onset), as assessed in rats 
continuously monitored by video-EEG, and persisted until the 
chronic phase of spontaneous seizures (Figure 2 and dot plots in 
Supplemental Figure 7). Before disease onset, acetylated HMGB1 
was the predominant isoform (7 days, mean 70% of total HMGB1) 
reflecting active release. This isoform plateaued early after dis-
ease onset (14 days, mean 50%) and increased again in the chronic 
disease phase (4.5 months, mean 80%). Reduced HMGB1 stably 
increased around 4-fold throughout the observation period (Fig-
ure 2; dot plots in Supplemental Figure 7). The inactive sulfonyl 
HMGB1 was not detected at any time point.
The antiinflammatory drug combination significantly attenu-
ated the increase in total HMGB1 and its isoforms during the pro-
dromal phase and abrogated blood HMGB1 changes after disease 
onset (Figure 2; dot plots in Supplemental Figure 7). Notably, the 
drug combination also prevented the increase in seizure frequency 
determined by EEG analysis between 2.0 and 4.5 months after SE in 
vehicle-injected rats (Figure 3; Supplemental Table 1), thus indicat-
ing that the antiinflammatory drugs prevented disease progression. 
An additional salutary effect of treatment was prevention of body 
weight loss occurring in SE-exposed rats (Supplemental Figure 5B).
The drug combination did not modify the duration or severity 
of SE (Supplemental Figure 6, A and B) and the consequent neuro-
degeneration (Supplemental Figure 8 and Supplemental Methods) 
or the time of spontaneous seizure onset (SE+vehicle, 8.4 ± 1.8 
days; SE+drug, 11.6 ± 1.7 days, n = 9 each group). Receiver operat-
ing characteristic (ROC) analysis (Table 1) showed that both total 
HMGB1 and its isoforms reliably differentiated between sham 
control and epileptic rats (AUC = 1) in the chronic phase of spon-
taneous seizures, supporting their value as diagnostic biomarkers 
The progressive active release of acetylated HMGB1 may orig-
inate mainly from astrocytes, as suggested by both the prominent 
astrocytic HMGB1 expression and its cytoplasmic translocation by 
immunohistochemistry (Figure 1A and Supplemental Figure 2).
Notably, the brain changes in both acetylated and disulfide 
isoforms preceded the respective blood increases, supporting a 
CSF-to-blood transport. We cannot exclude, however, that leuko-
cytes contribute to blood HMGB1 changes. Both the hypothalam-
ic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and the vagal nerve can mediate 
signaling of the inflammatory state in the brain to the blood, and 
this phenomenon could promote the release of HMGB1 from cir-
culating leukocytes. It should be noted, however, that these brain-
to-blood signals usually result in peripheral antiinflammatory 
(rather than proinflammatory) responses (30).
To exclude model-specific changes, we also measured 
HMGB1 in blood of adult male C57BL/6J mice exposed to SE 
induced by systemic kainate (31). As in rats, we found on average 
a 3-fold increase in reduced HMGB1 between 3 hours and 6 hours 
after SE, while both the acetylated and disulfide isoforms were 
unchanged (not shown).
HMGB1 as a biomarker in animal models. To investigate the val-
ue of blood HMGB1 in predicting epilepsy development (Figure 
2 and Supplemental Figure 5A), we used the electrically induced 
SE model (also used in Figure 1) in which all rats develop epilepsy 
to test whether blood HMGB1 levels change before the onset of 
the spontaneous seizures independently of ongoing seizure activ-
ity. We measured blood HMGB1 longitudinally at 3 times after SE 
that are representative of disease development: 7 days (preceding 
spontaneous seizure onset), 14 days (early after disease onset), and 
4.5 months (chronic epilepsy phase). Using the same model, we 
also tested the utility of blood HMGB1 for predicting a therapeutic 
response to antiinflammatory drugs. Rats exposed to electrical SE 
were randomized in 1 treatment group (n = 9) injected with a com-
bination of antiinflammatory drugs during epileptogenesis and 1 
placebo group (n = 9), which received the corresponding vehicles. 
Drugs or their vehicles were injected into rats for 1 week starting 
1 hour after SE induction (Supplemental Figure 5A and Supple-
mental Figure 6, A and B) to encompass the epileptogenesis phase 
preceding disease onset; then treatment was stopped. Rats were 
video-EEG monitored continuously from the induction of SE until 
the first spontaneous seizures (i.e., epilepsy onset). Spontaneous 
seizures were counted for 2 weeks at 2.0 and 4.0 months as the pri-
mary outcome measure. Based on our background evidence (5, 15, 
20), we used a rational combination of antiinflammatory drugs, 
anakinra, (the human recombinant IL-1 receptor antagonist, ref. 
32; 10 mg/200 μl/rat, i.v.) and BoxA (a fragment of HMGB1 with 
antagonist activity, ref. 33; 100 μg/200 μl/rat, i.v.) together with 
Figure 1. Brain and blood HMGB1 measurements during epileptogenesis evoked by electrical SE in adult rats. (A) Representative photomicrographs 
of hippocampi from control rats (sham) or rats at 3 hours, 6 hours, and 4 days after SE (n = 5 each group). Top row shows HMGB1 immunoreactivity in 
cell nuclei (arrows) or in cytoplasm of glial cells (arrowheads). Immunofluorescence panels show localization of HMGB1 signal (green) in OX-42–positive 
microglia (red), GFAP-positive astrocytes (red), and EBA-positive endothelial cells (red); colocalization signal is depicted in yellow (merge). White arrows 
depict cytoplasmic staining. Hoechst-positive nuclei are shown in blue. Rad, stratum radiatum; LMol, stratum lacunosum moleculare. Scale bars: 25 μm 
(top row); 20 μm (bottom row; immunofluorescence panels). (B) Levels of HMGB1 isoforms in brain tissue (hippocampus) and corresponding blood of rats 
during epileptogenesis. Data are shown as mean ± SEM (n = 5 each group). Dot plots are shown in Supplemental Figure 4. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01, Kruskal- 
Wallis test (referred to both isoforms in each bar). Blood acetylated and disulfide HMGB1 levels at 4 days are significantly different from corresponding 
3-hour and 6-hour levels (P < 0.01).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 2 2
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
similar severity (Supplemental Figure 6C) and duration (26.3 ± 0.5 
hours). Blood was drawn longitudinally after SE at 23 days (pro-
dromal phase), 73 days (encompassing the time of disease onset 
in 70% of rats), and 7.5 months (chronic epilepsy phase) (Sup-
plemental Figure 5C). In the chronic epilepsy phase, we counted 
spontaneous seizures during 2 weeks of continuous video-EEG 
monitoring: epileptic rats experienced 3.7 ± 0.5 clinical seizures, 
while no seizures were observed in nonepileptic rats. Epileptic rats 
also displayed a significant reduction in the threshold to afterdis-
charge (ADT) induction (116 ± 38 μA, n = 12; P < 0.05) as compared 
with sham controls (220 ± 40 μA, n = 7); nonepileptic rats with-
out spontaneous seizures were similar to controls (190 ± 40 μA, 
n = 5). For HMGB1 blood measurement, we randomly selected 
5 epileptic rats (4.0 ± 1.3 seizures/2 weeks) and compared them 
with 5 nonepileptic rats and 7 vehicle-treated sham controls. 
Only rats who developed epilepsy had increased blood levels 
of active epilepsy. Additionally, total HMGB1 and its isoforms also 
predicted with high fidelity (AUC = 0.8–1 range) the therapeutic 
response to antiinflammatory drugs before disease onset and at 
epilepsy diagnosis.
There was no correlation between the number of chronic sei-
zures in the 2-week recording period preceding blood withdrawal 
(4.5 months after SE) and the corresponding level of total blood 
HMGB1 (Supplemental Figure 9A).
Since the changes in blood HMGB1 were detected in rats 
before the onset of the disease, we continued our investigations 
to validate the potential role of HMGB1 for predicting epilepsy 
development. In a subsequent study, we evoked SE by systemic 
lithium+pilocarpine in preadolescent (P21) rats (Supplemental 
Figure 5C), since only around 70% of rats develop epilepsy after 
an average time of 70 days (36–40). In this model, 12 out of 17 
rats developed spontaneous seizures after being exposed to SE of 
Figure 2. Blood HMGB1 levels increase before epilepsy onset in electrical SE–exposed rats and predict therapeutic response to antiinflammatory drugs. 
Longitudinal analysis of total HMGB1 and levels of acetylated, reduced, and disulfide isoforms in blood plasma at representative time points of disease devel-
opment in SE-exposed rats receiving treatment (drug) or corresponding vehicle (see key). Treatment included anakinra+BoxA+ifenprodil (SE+drug) (detailed 
protocol in Methods; Supplemental Figure 5A). Data are shown as mean ± SEM (n = 9 rats each group; dot plots are shown in Supplemental Figure 7). Rats are 
the same as reported in Figure 3. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01, 1-way ANOVA (referred to both isoforms in each bar, except for prodromal phase, where  
P < 0.01 in SE+drug versus SE+vehicle refers only to reduced HMGB1). The acetylated isoform level in the chronic epilepsy phase (SE+vehicle) was significantly 
different from corresponding levels at disease onset and prodromal phases (P < 0.01, repeated measures 1-way ANOVA). The disulfide isoform (SE+vehicle) 
level at disease onset and in the chronic epilepsy phase was significantly different from the corresponding level in the prodromal phase (P < 0.05 and P < 0.01, 
respectively); the disulfide isoform level in the chronic phase was significantly different from the corresponding level at disease onset (P < 0.05, repeated 
measures 1-way ANOVA).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 2 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
of both total HMGB1 and its isoforms; these changes occurred 
before the onset of the disease and were maintained during dis-
ease development (Figure 4A; dot plots in Supplemental Figure 
10). Nonepileptic rats were similar to controls at all time points 
after SE (Figure 4A; dot plots in Supplemental Figure 10). The 
inactive sulfonyl HMGB1 isoform was not detected under any 
experimental conditions. Moreover, postmortem brain analy-
sis showed that only epileptic rats displayed increased HMGB1 
expression in the hippocampus at 7.5 months with concurrent 
nucleus-to-cytoplasm translocation in glial cells, while none-
pileptic rats were similar to controls (Figure 4B). ROC analysis 
showed perfect discrimination between epileptic and nonep-
ileptic rats (AUC = 1; Table 2), with both total HMGB1 and its 
isoforms measured either before the onset of spontaneous sei-
zures (Supplemental Figure 11), at the onset of disease, or in the 
chronic epilepsy phase (Table 2). The blood changes in HMGB1 
did not merely reflect reactive gliosis, since the hippocampal 
level of myo-inositol, a metabolite reflecting astrocyte activa-
tion, was similarly augmented (P < 0.05) in all rats either with or 
without HMGB1 blood increase, as assessed by proton magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy (1H-MRS) 23 days after SE at the time 
of blood withdrawal (Supplemental Figure 12A). Moreover, the 
level of gliosis assessed in these rats 7.5 months after SE by post-
mortem glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) immunostaining 
was similar in the hippocampus of rats with epilepsy (showing 
elevated blood HMGB1) or without epilepsy (with no elevation of 
blood HMGB1) (Supplemental Figure 12B).
Hippocampal cell loss in CA3 pyramidal cell layer and hilus 
was detected in epileptic rats (n = 5) versus sham controls (not 
exposed to SE, n = 7): number of cells, CA3, sham, 546 ± 54; epi-
leptic, 454.5 ± 13 (P < 0.05); hilus, sham, 93.9 ± 7.1; epileptic, 38.9 
± 2.9 (P < 0.01). Nonepileptic rats had a pattern and extent of cell 
loss similar to those in epileptic rats (not shown).
HMGB1 allows stratification of patients with pharmacoresistant 
epilepsy. Because HMGB1 was increased in both brain and blood 
in rats with active epilepsy and its levels were modulated by ther-
apeutic interventions that reduced seizures, we hypothesized that 
total HMGB1 and its isoforms may be used as biomarkers for drug 
resistance in human epilepsy. We examined HMGB1 levels in sera 
from 65 patients with drug-resistant epilepsy undergoing con-
tinuous inpatient video-EEG monitoring, 20 patients with well- 
controlled epilepsy (diagnosed more than 12 months previously, 
seizure-free for more than 6 months on AED therapy) includ-
ed as drug-responsive epilepsy controls, and 74 healthy controls 
(Supplemental Tables 2–4). Patients with drug-resistant epilepsy 
expressed significantly higher levels of total HMGB1 (8.70 ± 0.47 
ng/ml) than both healthy controls (1.11 ± 0.07 ng/ml, P < 0.01) and 
those with well-controlled epilepsy (1.25 ± 0.15 ng/ml, P < 0.01; 
Figure 5A). Patients with abnormal brain MRI showed significant-
ly higher HMGB1 levels (mean ± SEM, 9.8 ± 0.7 ng/ml, n = 35) 
Table 1. Receiver operating characteristic analysis related to Figure 2
Vehicle versus treatment                                
Prodromal phase
Vehicle versus treatment                                     
Disease onset
Sham versus epileptic                                            
Chronic phase
HMGB1
AUC
P value
Sensibility 
at 95% 
specificity
Cut-off   
(ng/ml)
AUC
P value
Sensibility 
at 95% 
specificity
Cut-off   
(ng/ml)
AUC
P value
Sensibility 
at 95% 
specificity
Cut-off   
(ng/ml)
Total
0.9
0.0052
0.5 (0.2–0.8)
1.1
1
0.0005
1 (0.6–1)
10.5
1
0.0002
1 (0.7–1)
3
Acetylated
0.9
0.0028
0.9 (0.5–1)
3.9
1
0.0005
1 (0.6–1)
5.6
1
0.0002
1 (0.7–1)
1.5
Reduced
0.9
0.0028
0.9 (0.5–1)
3.9
1
0.0005
1 (0.6–1)
3.7
1
0.0002
1 (0.7–1)
2.2
Disulfide
0.8
0.0833
0.5 (0.2–0.8)
1.1
1
0.0005
1 (0.6–1)
3.7
1
0.0002
1 (0.7–1)
3
Blood HMGB1 level discriminates between control and epileptic rats in the chronic epilepsy phase and between vehicle- and drug-treated rats during 
epileptogenesis (prodromal phase) and at disease onset. The cut-off value of total HMGB1 and corresponding isoform concentration (sensitivity at 95% 
specificity) is reported for each experimental condition.
Table 2. Receiver operating characteristic analysis related to Figure 4A
Epileptic versus nonepileptic                      
Prodromal phase
Epileptic versus nonepileptic                              
Disease onset
Epileptic versus nonepileptic                                
Chronic phase
HMGB1
AUC
P value
Sensibility 
at 95% 
specificity
Cut-off   
(ng/ml)
AUC
P value
Sensibility 
at 95% 
specificity
Cut-off    
(ng/ml)
AUC
P value
Sensibility 
at 95% 
specificity
Cut-off   
(ng/ml)
Total
1
0.0143
1 (0.4–1)
4.5
1
0.009
1 (0.5–1)
5.8
1
0.009
1 (0.5–1)
9.4
Acetylated
1
0.0143
1 (0.4–1)
0.8
1
0.009
1 (0.5–1)
1.4
1
0.009
1 (0.5–1)
6.2
Reduced
1
0.0143
1 (0.4–1)
3.1
1
0.009
1 (0.5–1)
3.4
1
0.009
1 (0.5–1)
3.5
Disulfide
1
0.0143
1 (0.4–1)
0.7
1
0.009
1 (0.5–1)
2.2
1
0.009
1 (0.5–1)
4.8
Blood HMGB1 level discriminates between epileptic and nonepileptic rats during disease development. The cut-off value of total HMGB1 and corresponding 
isoform concentration (sensitivity at 95% specificity) is reported for each experimental condition.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 2 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
than those without imaging abnormalities (7.4 ± 0.5 ng/ml, n = 30, 
 
P < 0.01; Supplemental Figure 13). Notably, acetylated HMGB1 
was observed in drug-resistant epilepsy patients, but not in con-
trols or drug-responsive patients. Patients with drug-resistant epi-
lepsy could be further stratified on the basis of the presence of the 
disulfide isoform (Figure 5A). There was no significant association 
between the presence of disulfide HMGB1 and any of the clinical 
variables (Supplemental Table 2). Furthermore, there was no cor-
relation between the number of seizures in the preceding month 
and the level of total HMGB1 in blood (Supplemental Figure 9B).
For the comparison between control values and those obtained 
from patients that were drug resistant, a total ROC-AUC of 0.99 
 
(P = 0.0001) was recorded (Figure 5B). The sensitivity at 95% 
specificity gave an ROC-AUC of 0.94 (95% CI 0.85–0.98) with 
a cut-off HMGB1 concentration of 2.3 ng/ml. For the compari-
son between values from patients with well-controlled epilepsy 
and those obtained from patients that are drug resistant, a total 
ROC-AUC of 0.99 (P = 0.0001) was recorded (Figure 5B). The 
sensitivity at 95% specificity gave an ROC-AUC of 0.93 (95% CI 
0.85–0.99), which also had a cut-off of HMGB1 concentration of 
2.3 ng/ml (for values used to determine ROC).
HMGB1 in newly diagnosed epilepsy. In a pilot study, we exam-
ined HMGB1 isoforms in the peripheral blood of 27 patients with 
newly diagnosed epilepsy. The acetylated and disulfide isoforms 
of HMGB1 (DS-A) were detectable at diagnosis (i.e., baseline visit) 
in 25 of 27 patients (median, 2.00 ng/ml; range, 0.0-8.10), with 2 
patients falling below the quantifiable limit. There was no signif-
icant correlation between the total pretreatment seizure count at 
diagnosis and the corresponding amount of HMGB1 present in 
blood (Supplemental Figure 14). Nor was there any significant rela-
tionship between the number of days since the last seizure and the 
total amount of blood HMGB1 present (Supplemental Figure 15).
At the 6-week follow-up visit, 13 of 27 patients were seizure 
free (median DS-A, 0.8 ng/ml; range, 0.0–7.40). The remaining 
14 patients who had experienced subsequent seizures had sig-
nificantly higher DS-A levels (median DS-A, 3.25 ng/ml; range, 
0.0–10.60, P = 0.04), with no patients having undetectable levels. 
Five of the seizure-free patients had undetectable DS-A levels at 
6 weeks; 4 of these patients remained seizure free at 6 months, 
while a further patient was also seizure free, but no sample was 
available for analysis.
By 6 months, 5 patients were lost to follow-up. Eleven patients 
were seizure free (median DS-A, 0.0 ng/ml; range, 0.0–8.70); in 7 
of the patients, DS-A levels were undetectable. The remaining 11 
patients had subsequent seizures, and they had significantly higher 
DS-A levels (median DS-A, 8.30 ng/ml; range, 0.0–8.90, P = 0.02).
An additional 2 patients recruited to the study had their epilep-
sy diagnosis revised to nonepileptic attack disorder (NEAD). DS-A 
HMGB1 isoform was absent in these 2 patients. It was not detect-
able in the sera of healthy human subjects (41) or patients with 
well-controlled chronic epilepsy who were seizure free (Figure 5A).
Discussion
Our comprehensive assessment shows that circulating isoforms 
of HMGB1 may serve as mechanistic biomarkers of epileptogene-
sis in animal models as well as drug-resistant epilepsy in humans. 
Electrically induced SE in adult rodents increased nonacetylated 
and reduced HMGB1 isoforms in blood within hours. This is con-
sistent with passive release of HMGB1 from injured neuronal and 
endothelial cells (5, 9), which is known to occur in the hippocam-
pus after SE (26, 27). Following a different pilocarpine-induced 
epileptogenic insult, we also identified an early increase in nonac-
etylated and reduced HMGB1 in the blood of rats that developed 
epilepsy, but not in those who did not, despite similar neuronal 
cell loss. Thus, this evidence suggests that the passive release of 
HMGB1 following SE not only reflects cell death, but may also be 
a marker of the overall state of cell stress in neurons, glia, and BBB 
endothelium induced by the epileptogenic insult.
Figure 3. Antiinflammatory drugs administered during epileptogenesis prevent disease progression in electrical SE–exposed rats. (A) Progression index 
(the ratio between the number of seizures at 4.5 months and at 2.5 months after SE) in vehicle- and drug-treated rats. Value equivalent to 1 defines lack 
of progression. Data are shown as mean ± SEM (n = 9 rats each group). *P < 0.05 versus vehicle, Mann-Whitney U test. Raw data are shown in Supplemen-
tal Table 1. (B) Odds ratio (0.24; P = 0.008) indicates that drug-treated rats evaluated at 2.5 months have a 76% reduced risk of developing seizures at 4.5 
months versus vehicle-treated rats. Treatment included anakinra+BoxA+ifenprodil (SE+drug) (see Methods; Supplemental Figure 5A). OR, odds ratio.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 2 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
blood leakage due to BBB damage (27) or CSF-to-blood diffusion 
(42), although we cannot exclude a contribution of peripheral leu-
kocytes to HMGB1 blood changes (43). Total HMGB1 and all its 
isoforms increased in blood before the onset of spontaneous sei-
zures, and these changes persisted only in animals with active epi-
lepsy. Importantly, blood HMGB1 predicted which animal would 
develop the disease with high fidelity (AUC = 1). On that basis, it is 
At later time points of epileptogenesis, notably before the onset 
of spontaneous seizures and during disease development in the 2 
animal models, both acetylated and disulfide isoforms progres-
sively increased and accounted for the majority of total HMGB1 
blood levels. This phenomenon is consistent with active release 
of HMGB1 from activated glial cells, as supported by immunohis-
tochemistry, and it may therefore reflect either HMGB1 brain-to-
Figure 4. Early prediction of epilepsy development by monitoring blood HMGB1 level in lithium+pilocarpine SE rats. (A) Longitudinal analysis of total 
HMGB1 and acetylated, reduced, and disulfide isoform levels in blood at representative time points of disease development (see key in A). Blood was drawn 
at 23 days (epileptogenic phase prodromal to epilepsy onset), 73 days (encompassing the time of disease onset in 70% of rats), and 7.5 months (chronic 
epilepsy). Data represent mean ± SEM; n = 7 sham; n = 5 epileptic (Epi); n = 5 nonepileptic (Nonepi) rats. Dot plots are shown in Supplemental Figure 10.  
**P < 0.01 (refers to both isoforms in each bar); P < 0.05, acetylated HMGB1 in epileptic versus sham, Kruskal-Wallis test. Total HMGB1, acetylated and disul-
fide isoform levels in the chronic phase (Epi) are significantly different versus corresponding levels in prodromal phase (P < 0.01, repeated measures 1-way 
ANOVA). (B) Representative immunohistochemical pictures of CA1 stratum radiatum depicting HMGB1 staining in control (sham, n = 7) and in SE rats with 
(Epi, n = 5 out of 12) or without (Nonepi, n = 5) spontaneous seizures. Rats are the same as reported in A. Brains were harvested 7.5 months after SE. Arrows, 
nuclear staining of HMGB1 in sham and nonepileptic rats; arrowheads, cytoplasmic HMGB1 staining in glia in epileptic rats. Scale bar: 15 μm.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 2 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
matory cytokine release from immune cells by activating TLR4 
(6, 9) and contributes to hyperexcitability and seizures in animal 
models by modulating Ca2+ permeability of NR2B-NMDAR (5, 15, 
16). Additionally, TLR4 has been implicated in epileptogenesis 
(15). Therefore, the release of disulfide HMGB1 in the brain fol-
lowing SE may contribute to epileptogenesis and the consequent 
onset of spontaneous seizures (personal communications, Vezza-
ni). Accordingly, disulfide HMGB1 was generated in the rat brain 
possible that blood HMGB1 might identify patients with the high-
est risk of developing spontaneous seizures early after a potential-
ly epileptogenic injury. This hypothesis can be tested in prospec-
tive human clinical studies, such as in poststroke or posttraumatic 
epilepsy, by examining the prognostic value of total HMGB1 and 
its isoforms before the first presentation of seizures.
While reduced HMGB1 has chemoattractant properties for 
macrophage/microglia (6, 9), disulfide HMGB1 induces proinflam-
Figure 5. HMGB1 levels in blood of drug-resistant and drug-sensitive epilepsy patients and healthy controls. (A) Total HMGB1 levels in healthy controls 
(1.1 ± 0.07 ng/ml, n = 74) and patients with well-controlled epilepsy (1.2 ± 0.15 ng/ml, n = 20) or drug-resistant epilepsy (8.7 ± 0.47 ng/ml, n = 65; P < 0.01). 
Acetylated HMGB1 was detectable only in patients with drug-resistant epilepsy, and these individuals could be further stratified on the basis of the pres-
ence of disulfide HMGB1 (drug-resistant, reduced HMGB1 7.1 ± 0.4 ng/ml, n = 41; reduced+disulfide, 11.0 ± 0.9 ng/ml, n = 24; P < 0.01). Data are presented in 
each group as individual values as well as the mean ± SEM. **P < 0.01, 1-way ANOVA. (B) ROC analysis shows that total HMGB1 discriminates (AUC = 0.99) 
between patients with drug-resistant seizures and both healthy controls and those with well-controlled seizures.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 2 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
plemental Figure 12A). Moreover, the level of gliosis assessed in 
the same rats 7.5 months after SE by postmortem GFAP immu-
nostaining was similar in the hippocampus of rats with epilepsy 
(showing elevated blood HMGB1) or without epilepsy (with no 
elevation of blood HMGB1) (Supplemental Figure 12B).
In order to assess potential therapeutic interventions, our 
pharmacological study in the electrical SE epilepsy model showed 
that antiinflammatory drugs targeting the IL1-R1/TLR4 axis sig-
nificantly (P < 0.05) improved the natural history of the disease 
and prevented elevation of the pathological disulfide isoform in 
peripheral blood from disease onset. This evidence suggests that 
blood HMGB1 isoforms may predict therapeutic response to anti-
inflammatory drugs. Furthermore, since the disulfide HMGB1 
seems to be the isoform promoting seizure generation (16), it 
would seem opportune to develop isoform-specific antagonists 
that are still lacking (46, 47).
In summary, our results show that the acetylated and 
reduced isoforms of HMGB1 likely indicate the extent of cell 
dysfunction/injury early after epileptogenic injuries, while the 
disulfide HMGB1 isoform may identify patients with a patholog-
ic neuroinflammatory milieu. The current prognostic models for 
seizure recurrence following a first seizure and for seizure remis-
sion following a diagnosis of epilepsy are based on clinical fac-
tors including age, seizure type, EEG, and MRI (MESS [ref. 48] 
and SANAD [ref. 49] models), but lack precision. These models 
could be much improved by the addition of circulating biomark-
ers such as HMGB1 and its isoforms.
The data presented in this study strongly support further 
investigations into the utility of total HMGB1 and its isoforms 
to act as biomarkers for epileptogenesis and predictors of ther-
apeutic effects of new antiinflammatory agents. Indeed, clin-
ical trial designs for novel therapeutics would greatly benefit 
from noninvasive biomarkers such as HMGB1 that allow ear-
ly identification of patients at high risk of developing the dis-
order and those patients who might preferentially respond to 
 
disease-modifying treatments.
Methods
Experimental animals. Experiments in adult rats and P21 (with P1 
defined as the day of birth) rats were carried out at the Mario Negri 
Institute. Adult (250–300 g) and P21 male Sprague-Dawley rats 
(Charles River Laboratories) were used. Male pups from 4 indepen-
dent litters were used and were housed with their dams at constant 
temperature (23°C) and relative humidity (60%) with a fixed 12-hour 
light/12-hour dark cycle and free access to food and water until wean-
ing at P21. Older animals were housed 1 per cage.
Pilocarpine-induced SE in P21 rats. Lithium chloride (3 meq/kg; 
Merck Sharp & Dohme) was injected i.p. in P20 rats, 18 hours before 
the s.c. injection of pilocarpine (60 mg/kg; Sigma-Aldrich) (36–38). 
Controls were age-matched rats injected with lithium chloride and 
with an equivalent volume of vehicle (PBS, pH 7.4) instead of pilo-
carpine. All animals received an injection of 10% sucrose in PBS 2 
hours after the onset of SE to improve hydration. SE was not inter-
rupted by any drug administration. SE was visually observed, and 
its onset time and severity were measured in each rat for 6 hours 
after pilocarpine injection by 2 independent investigators. The fol-
lowing score was used in each animal: score 1 (general automatisms 
before the onset of spontaneous seizures. Moreover, only rats who 
developed epilepsy, but not those without disease or controls, 
expressed this isoform in blood. The persistence of the patholog-
ical disulfide isoform in animals who developed epilepsy probably 
reflects inefficient resolution of neuroinflammation (36, 44).
In order to determine the relevance of our findings in animals, 
we undertook bridging studies in patients with drug-resistant 
and newly diagnosed epilepsy. Patients with longstanding, drug- 
resistant epilepsy had significantly (P < 0.01) higher total HMGB1 
levels in blood compared with patients with well-controlled epilep-
sy or healthy controls. Only patients with drug resistance expressed 
the acetylated, actively secreted form of HMGB1. This is consistent 
with our previous study that showed cytoplasmic translocation of 
HMGB1 in neurons and glia in human brain tissue taken at epilepsy 
surgery from drug-resistant patients (5, 12). Notably, blood HMGB1 
levels were higher in patients with MRI abnormalities known to be 
associated with a greater risk of developing drug resistance (45), 
possibly reflecting more extensive reactive gliosis due to structural 
damage. Furthermore, a subset of drug-resistant patients expressed 
disulfide HMGB1, but there was no association between disulfide 
HMGB1 and any clinical parameter in our patients. It is possible 
that this particular isoform may allow identification of patients with 
pathological neuroinflammation analogous to that seen in the P21 
rat model (36) and that these patients may be the most amenable to 
immunomodulatory/antiinflammatory therapies.
Consistent with our findings in animal models, a pilot study 
in newly diagnosed patients revealed the presence of patholog-
ical HMGB1 isoforms not normally seen in the sera of healthy 
individuals or patients with longstanding, well-controlled epi-
lepsy. Persistent elevation of these pathological isoforms 6 
weeks following diagnosis was associated with subsequent sei-
zures, whereas disappearance of this isoform, despite elevated 
total HMGB1 levels, appeared to indicate a reduced likelihood of 
subsequent seizures. Our data suggest that certain HMGB1 iso-
forms that are elevated early in the disease course may be useful 
prognostic and predictive biomarkers of ongoing seizure activity 
despite AED therapy. A limitation of our findings was the small 
number of patients studied. Thus, a prospective, longitudinal 
study in newly diagnosed patients with epilepsy is required to 
further investigate this aspect.
Our data in animals and humans indicate that the changes in 
blood HMGB1 are not solely reflecting ongoing seizure activity 
or reactive gliosis. In both of the animal models of epilepsy, such 
changes occurred before the onset of spontaneous seizures. Sec-
ondly, HMGB1 blood levels did not correlate with the number of 
seizures experienced by the animals or by patients with epilepsy 
(Supplemental Figures 9 and 14). Finally, should HMGB1 pure-
ly reflect seizure activity, then one would expect those patients 
with the most recent seizures to express higher levels of the 
biomarker. We did not find this to be case in our studies (Sup-
plemental Figure 15). Taken together, these data support a role 
for HMGB1 in disease pathogenesis and not purely ongoing sei-
zures. With regard to the issue of gliosis, animal data show that 
the blood changes in HMGB1 did not solely reflect reactive astro-
gliosis, since the hippocampal level of myo-inositol, a metabolite 
that mirrors astrocyte activation, was similarly augmented in 
rats either with or without an increase in blood HMGB1 (Sup-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 2 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
No pharmacological intervention was done to stop SE, since no 
mortality is observed in this model. SE was evaluated by EEG analysis 
measuring its total duration and the number of spikes during the first 
24 hours using the Clampfit 9.0 program (Axon Instruments). Power 
spectral density (PSD) distribution of 5 frequency bands (δ, 1–4 Hz; τ, 
4–8 Hz; α, 8–13 Hz; β, 13–30 Hz; γ, 30–40 Hz) was calculated during 20 
hours segmented in temporal windows of 4 hours each. Fast Fourier 
transforms (FFTs) were computed by 50% overlapping sliding win-
dows (1,024 data points each) with Hanning windowing function. EEG 
data were normalized by dividing the EEG power density at each fre-
quency by the EEG power density averaged across all frequencies (54).
Spontaneous seizure detection following electrical SE. Rats exposed 
to electrical SE were continuously video-EEG recorded for detection 
of spontaneous seizures (24 h/d) from SE induction until 2 sponta-
neous seizures occurred at least 48 hours apart from SE induction 
(disease onset; Figure 2). In cross-sectional studies (Figure 1), rats 
were continuously video-EEG monitored from SE induction until time 
of sacrifice. All EEG seizures were associated with generalized motor 
seizures (forelimb clonus with or without rearing and/or falling) (21, 
55). After spontaneous seizure onset, video-EEG monitoring was dis-
continued and resumed at 2 and 4 months after SE to determine spon-
taneous seizure frequency by continuous EEG monitoring for 2 weeks 
(24/7) (Figure 3). Spontaneous seizures were discrete EEG ictal epi-
sodes lasting on average 60 seconds characterized by high-frequency 
and high-voltage synchronous spike activity and/or multi-spike com-
plexes (21). EEG was recorded using the TWin EEG Recording System 
connected with a Comet AS-40 32/8 Amplifier (sampling rate, 400 
Hz; high-pass filter, 0.3 Hz; low-pass filter, 70 Hz; sensitivity, 2000 
mV/cm; Grass-Telefactor). Digitized EEG data were processed using 
the TWin record and review software. EEG was visually inspected and 
quantified by 2 independent operators blinded to the treatments.
Experimental groups in the electrical SE model. Three distinct 
cohorts of rats underwent different procedures for sample collec-
tion depending on the analysis to be performed. The first set of rats 
was transcardially perfused at 3 hours, 6 hours, 24 hours, and 4 days 
 
(n = 5 rats in each group) after electrical SE onset and used for HMGB1 
immunohistochemical analysis (Figure 1A and Supplemental Meth-
ods). The second set of rats was killed by decapitation at 3 hours, 6 
hours, and 4 days (n = 5 rats in each group) after electrical SE, and 
after rapid transcardial PBS perfusion, was used for measurement of 
HMGB1 and its isoforms in the hippocampi and in the venous blood 
collected from the heart atrium (Figure 1B). The third set of rats was 
used for longitudinal blood withdrawal and for the pharmacological 
experiment (Figures 2 and 3): electrical SE animals were randomly 
divided into 2 experimental groups (n = 9/each group) treated with 
vehicle (SE+vehicle) or a combination of antiinflammatory drugs 
(SE+drug) (Supplemental Figure 5A). In these rats, blood was drawn 
longitudinally using a chronically implanted jugular catheter at rep-
resentative times of disease development (Supplemental Figure 5A).
The procedures for animal anesthesia are reported in the respec-
tive methodological sections.
Drug treatment. The day before electrode implantation, rats were 
anesthetized with 1.5% isoflurane and surgically prepared with jugu-
lar catheters (56) for i.v. injection of drugs. This procedure lasted for 
about 30 minutes.
We used a combination of 2 different antiinflammatory drugs 
targeting the IL-1R1/TLR4 pathway, a known contributor to seizure 
and exploratory behavior); score 2 (stage 5 seizures, bilateral fore-
limb clonus with rearing and falling). For each score, we measured 
the time of appearance of the first symptoms. The onset of SE was 
determined by time of appearance of at least 2 consecutive stage 5 
seizures (<5 minutes apart) that subsequently recurred for the dura-
tion of the observation period. Behavioral SE was characterized by 
continuous bilateral forelimb clonus with rearing and falling (stage 
5 of Racine’s scale) (50). These rats were electrode implanted with 
a depth electrode in the hippocampus and a contralateral surface 
cortical screw electrode (38) under 1.5% isoflurane anesthesia at 
day 75 after SE for subsequent video-EEG monitoring at 7 months 
after SE for 2 weeks (24/7) for identifying animals developing or 
not developing epilepsy (Figure 4). At the end of monitoring, rats 
were tested for their hippocampal ADT. Animals were electrically 
stimulated via the recording hippocampal electrode using constant 
current stimulus (1 msec monopolar square waves, 50 Hz for 2 sec-
onds). Determination of the ADT was done using an ascending 
stepwise procedure (38, 51, 52). The initial stimulus intensity was 
50 μA and was increased by 10 μA up to 100 μA, then by 100 μA up 
to a maximal value of 400 μA by intervals of 1 minute until 1 AD of 
at least 10 seconds duration was elicited. Twenty-four hours after 
AD induction, rats were killed for immunohistochemical analysis 
of HMGB1 and cell loss. Sham-treated animals (n = 7) were vehicle 
injected (not exposed to SE) and used as controls for blood HMGB1 
measurements and histological brain analysis.
Electrical SE in adult rats. Rats were implanted under 1.5% 
isoflurane anesthesia with 2 bipolar Teflon-insulated stainless-steel 
depth electrodes placed bilaterally into the temporal pole of the 
hippocampus (from bregma: anterioposterior [AP] −4.7 mm; medi-
olateral [ML] ± 5.0 mm; −5.0 mm below dura) (53). Two screw elec-
trodes were positioned over the nasal sinus and the cerebellum and 
used as ground and reference electrodes, respectively. Electrodes 
were connected to a multipin socket and secured to the skull by 
acrylic dental cement. After surgical procedures, rats were treated 
locally with Cicatrene powder (neomycin and bacitracin supple-
mented with glycine, l-cysteine, DL-threonine) and injected with 
ampicillin (100 mg/kg, s.c.) for 4 days to prevent infections. Rats 
were allowed to recover from surgery in their home cages for 10 
days. Before electrical stimulation, EEG baseline hippocampal 
activity was recorded in freely moving rats for 24 hours. Then rats 
were unilaterally stimulated (50 Hz, 400 μA peak-to-peak, 1 ms 
biphasic square waves in 10-second trains delivered every 11 sec-
onds) in the CA3 region of the ventral hippocampus for 60–90 min-
utes to induce SE according to a well-established protocol (21, 44). 
EEG was recorded in each rat every 10-minute epoch for 1 minute 
in the absence of electrical stimulation, i.e., the stimulus-off peri-
od. All rats used for subsequent analysis showed an EEG pattern of 
uninterrupted bilateral spikes in the hippocampi during the stim-
ulus-off period, starting between the first and the fourth epoch of 
stimulation onwards. These criteria selected rats developing SE 
that remitted spontaneously within 24 hours from the initial stim-
ulation, then led to subsequent epilepsy development (21, 44). SE 
was defined by the appearance of continuous spikes in the γ band 
with amplitude greater than 2× baseline SD and frequency greater 
than 5 Hz. Use of the γ band reduces the number of movement arte-
facts in the EEG recording. The end of SE was set as the time the 
interspike interval became consistently more than 2 seconds.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 2 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
Brain preparation for immunohistochemistry and analysis of cell 
loss is reported in Supplemental Methods.
Drug-resistant epilepsy patient study. A total of 65 patients (37 
women and 28 men; mean age, 34.8 years; range, 17–65 years) with 
drug-resistant epilepsy were admitted to the video-EEG monitoring 
units of the Walton Centre National Health Service (NHS) Founda-
tion Trust (Liverpool, United Kingdom) (n = 15, prospective collection 
2010–2013) and Tampere University Hospital (n = 50, prospective col-
lection 2004–2007), respectively.
All the patients underwent continuous video-EEG monitoring for 
electroclinical characterization of their seizures as part of the routine 
clinical evaluation for possible epilepsy surgery. Ictal scalp recordings 
were obtained using synchronous digital video and 24-channel stan-
dard bipolar EEG. Electrodes were placed according to the Interna-
tional 10–20 system (58) with additional mastoid and anterior cheek 
electrodes. All patients underwent a diagnostic brain MRI examina-
tion on a 1.5 Tesla machine (General Electric Signa HD). Seizures and 
epileptic syndromes were classified according to the International 
League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) diagnostic criteria (59).
AEDs were discontinued during monitoring, and photostimula-
tion/sleep deprivation were utilized under direction of the consulting 
epileptologist. Seizures were categorized as simple partial seizures 
(SPSs), complex partial seizures (CPSs), or secondarily generalized 
tonic-clonic seizures (SGTCSs). The first unequivocally verified local-
ized onset seizure during the video-EEG monitoring was considered 
as the index seizure. Baseline characteristics of the patients are pre-
sented in Supplemental Tables 2 and 4. Healthy volunteers (n = 74) 
without history of seizures served as controls (39 women and 35 men; 
mean age, 34.1 years; range, 19–66 years). Twenty patients with estab-
lished (diagnosis more than 12 months prior) well-controlled epilepsy 
(9:11 symptomatic/idiopathic, 12:8 monotherapy/dual therapy) who 
had been seizure free for longer than 6 months on AED therapy served 
as epilepsy controls (12 women and 8 men; mean age, 33 years; range, 
18–59 years) (Supplemental Tables 3 and 4).
Blood samples were collected at the beginning of the recording. 
Blood serum was collected and aliquoted, then stored at –80°C until 
assayed. This procedure was carried out within 4 hours of blood with-
drawal. It has been noted that total HMGB1 levels do not change when 
blood samples are processed and stored within 4 hours (D.J. Antoine, 
unpublished observations). Moreover, our laboratory has conducted 
studies that support this observation, which confirms that HMGB1 
redox modifications remain consistent when samples are also pro-
cessed within 4 hours (D.J. Antoine, unpublished observations). Serum 
samples were assigned random, linked numerical identifiers by the 
investigator aliquoting the samples.
Newly diagnosed epilepsy patient study. Serum samples were 
obtained from a randomized trial of AED monotherapy in newly 
diagnosed epilepsy conducted at the Western Infirmary (60). Par-
ticipants received monotherapy with levetiracetam, lamotrigine, or 
topiramate irrespective of epilepsy/seizure type and were followed 
up prospectively until medication failure (substitution or add-on) 
or for 3 years, whichever was sooner. The trial primarily focused 
on drug efficacy and tolerability, collecting information on sei-
zures, adverse effects, and comorbidities. Serum samples were also 
obtained at random and regular intervals thereafter for the purpose 
of biomarker analyses. For HMGB1 analysis, only those samples that 
had been stored continuously at –80°C were used and only from trial 
mechanisms (4). Specifically, 1 hour after electrical SE onset, rats 
were injected with an i.v. bolus of anakinra (10 mg/200 μl sterile 
saline; Biovitrum AB), which is the human recombinant form of the 
IL-1R1 antagonist (32), and with BoxA (100 μg/200 μl sterile saline, 
HMGBiotech), a competitive HMGB1 antagonist (33). A second i.v. 
injection of both drugs was done 5 hours later, then once daily for a 
total of 7 days. Rats were also injected i.p. with ifenprodil (20 mg/kg 
tartrate salt, Sanofi-Aventis), the antagonist of the NR2B-NMDAR 
(34), once daily for 7 days. The dose of each drug and the treatment 
schedule were rationally designed based on previous evidence of 
the drug’s therapeutic effects on neurological deficits, cell loss, and 
seizures in animal models of acute and chronic degeneration and 
epilepsy (5, 57). This drug combination was designed, since we know 
that the mere blockade of the IL-1β/IL-1R1 axis in rats during epilep-
togenesis is not sufficient to modify disease development (20). We 
also showed that the IL-1β/IL-1R1 axis blockade does not prevent 
the TLR4 signaling activation in forebrain (20), which itself con-
tributes to epileptogenesis (15). This set of evidence, therefore, indi-
cates that a combination of drugs targeting both IL-1R1 and TLR4 
is required for optimizing the therapeutic response. Ifenprodil was 
used to block the NR2B-NMDAR, which represents 1 key molecular 
target mediating the increased excitability and seizures induced by 
IL-1R1/TLR4 pathway activation (5, 16, 35). This pharmacological 
experiment was designed to determine whether blood HMGB1 pre-
dicts the therapeutic response to antiinflammatory drugs or drugs 
with different mechanisms of action.
We studied the effect of the combined drugs on the following: (a) 
levels of total HMGB1 and its isoforms in blood (Figure 2), and (b) the 
development of spontaneous seizures (Figure 3). In this electrical SE 
model, around 80% of rats showed an average 5-fold increase in the 
frequency of spontaneous seizures over 4.5 months from the onset of 
SE, denoting disease progression (i.e., ratio between the number of 
seizures at 4.5 months and 2.5 months; Figure 3). Sham-operated ani-
mals were implanted with electrodes, but not electrically stimulated 
(sham, n = 9), and were used as vehicle-injected controls for blood 
HMGB1 analysis.
Blood collection in rat epilepsy models. In the cross-sectional studies 
done in electrical SE rats (Figure 1B), blood was collected by the heart 
atrium (before transcardial perfusion) at 3 hours, 6 hours, and 4 days 
after SE onset; in longitudinal studies (Figure 2 and Figure 4), blood 
was drawn at representative times of disease development in each 
model. In electrical SE rats, we collected blood by the jugular cathe-
ter in lightly restrained animals (Supplemental Figure 5A); in P21 rats, 
blood was collected longitudinally from the tail vein in animals under 
light isoflurane anesthesia placed on a warming pad to avoid hypo-
thermia (Supplemental Figure 5C).
Blood was drawn (~ 500 μl) using a butterfly needle (21 gauge) and 
collected in microtainer tubes. Plasma was isolated according to stan-
dard procedures, aliquoted, and stored at –80°C until assayed. This 
procedure was carried out within 4 hours of blood withdrawal.
Brain harvesting in electrical SE model for HMGB1 measurements. 
Rats were deeply anesthetized using ketamine (150 mg/kg) and 
medetomidine (2.0 mg/kg), then rapidly perfused via the ascending 
aorta with 50 mM ice-cold PBS (pH 7.4) for 1 minute to remove blood 
from brain vessels. Then rats were decapitated, brains removed, and 
the ventral hippocampi dissected out at 4°C, immediately frozen on 
dry ice, and stored at −80°C.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 3 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
Statistics. In each animal experiment, no ad interim analysis was 
done. Sample size was a priori determined based on previous experience 
with the respective models; endpoints (outcome measures) and statis-
tical tests were prospectively selected. A simple random allocation was 
applied to assign a subject to a particular experimental group. All efforts 
were made to minimize the number of animals used and their suffering 
according to the 3Rs. Data acquisition and analysis were done blindly.
Statistical analysis was performed by GraphPad Prism 6 (Graph-
Pad Software) for Windows using absolute values. Data are present-
ed as mean ± SEM (n = number of individual samples). Dot plots of 
single values are represented in Figure 5A and in Supplemental Fig-
ures 4, 7, and 10. Mann–Whitney U test for 2 independent groups and 
1-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test or Kruskal-Wallis 
followed by Dunn’s post-hoc test for more than 2 independent groups 
were used for statistical analysis of data. Repeated measures 1-way 
ANOVA was used to compare HMGB1 levels at different time points 
of disease development in the same group of rats. The performance 
of HMGB1 as a biomarker was assessed using nonparametric ROC 
curves; the AUC was calculated and compared with chance (AUC = 
0.5). The performance of the biomarker is considered excellent for 
AUC values close to 1. The progression index was calculated for each 
rat as the ratio between the total number of seizures experienced 
between 4.0 and 4.5 months divided by the total number of seizures 
from 2.0 to 2.5 months in treatment over the vehicle-injected group. 
The odds in each experimental group were calculated as the ratio 
between the number of seizures experienced by rats from 4.0 to 4.5 
months and the total number of seizures from 2.0 to 2.5 months. The 
odds ratio was the ratio between the odds of treatment and the vehi-
cle groups. Differences were considered significant at P < 0.05.
For human data, the presence of HMGB1 isoforms in human sera 
was unknown; therefore, formal sample size calculation was not under-
taken a priori. In addition, a limited number of patients were admitted 
weekly for inpatient video telemetry; therefore, we utilized convenience 
sampling in this study, as we could include only those that were available. 
Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS. Baseline total HMGB1 was 
compared between 65 patients with drug-resistant epilepsy, 20 patients 
with well-controlled epilepsy, and 74 healthy controls using 1-way 
 
ANOVA followed by Dunn’s test. To test for clinical associations with 
baseline HMGB1, continuous variables (age, epilepsy duration, seizure 
frequency, index seizure duration) were tested for association using 
linear regression, binary variables (MRI, EEG normal/abnormal) using 
2-tailed  t test, and categorical variables (sex, epilepsy type, seizure type, 
number of AEDs) using 1-way ANOVA. Monthly seizure frequency, 
index seizure duration, and epilepsy duration showed skewed distribu-
tion, and the data were log transformed to achieve normality. Due to the 
multiple tests undertaken, the false discovery rate was also calculated 
for each test. To test for association between clinical variables and the 
presence of the disulfide-HMGB1 isoform, continuous variables were 
tested for association using the t test and categorical variables using χ2 
or Fisher’s exact test.
Study approval. All experimental procedures in animals were con-
ducted in conformity with institutional guidelines in compliance with 
national (decreto legislativo n.26, gazzetta ufficiale March 4, 2014) 
and international guidelines and laws (EEC Council Directive 86/609, 
OJ L 358, 1, December 12, 1987; Guide for the Care and Use of Labora-
tory Animals, US National Research Council, 1996) and were reviewed 
and approved by the intramural ethical committee.
participants who had a baseline (randomization) sample and at least 
1 further sample obtained during follow-up. This cohort comprised 
29 patients (16 male) with a mean age at diagnosis of 29 years (range 
17–60). Of these 29 patients, 15 had an initial diagnosis of focal epi-
lepsy, 1 had primary generalized epilepsy, and 13 were unclassified at 
the time of randomization. Subsequent investigation revealed that 2 
individuals (1 focal, 1 unclassified) had NEAD. Of the full cohort of 
29 patients, 21 had normal MRIs, 6 had focal abnormalities, and 2 
were not exposed to MRI (both NEAD patients had normal MRIs).
Assessment of total HMGB1. Nonidentifiable samples were analyzed 
by an investigator blinded to the identity of the samples. Total HMGB1 
level was determined by commercially available ELISA (Shino-Test 
Corp.) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines, as described pre-
viously (61). In brief, thawed samples were centrifuged at 2000 g for 
1 minute. The 96-well plate was coated with sample diluent to which 
10 μl of sample was added in duplicate. Samples were incubated over-
night at 37°C for 20 hours. Plates were washed 5 times in wash buffer 
(400 μl/well) and air dried. Detection antibody solution (100 μl/well) 
was added for 2 hours at room temperature. Following the subsequent 
washing step, substrate solutions were added in equal parts (100 μl/
well) and incubated at room temperature protected from light with foil 
seal for 30 minutes. After incubation, the sample plate was read at 450 
nm. Results were fitted to the standard curve.
Analysis of HMGB1 isoforms by electrospray ionization LC/MS. 
Nonidentifiable samples were analyzed by an investigator blinded 
to the identity of the samples. All chemicals and solvents (iodo-
acetamide [catalog I1149], DTT [catalog D0632], NEM [cata-
log 04259], trifluoroacetic acid [TFA; catalog 91707-M]) were of 
the highest available grade (Sigma-Aldrich). Samples were pre-
cleared with 50 μl protein G–Sepharose beads for 1 hour at 4°C. 
Supernatant HMGB1 was immunoprecipitated with 5 μg rabbit 
anti-HMGB1 (ab18256; Abcam) for 16 hours at 4°C as previously 
described (22). Free thiol groups within HMGB1 were alkylated for 
90 minutes with 10 mM iodoacetamide at 4°C. Cysteine residues 
in disulfide bonds were then reduced with 30 mM DTT at 4°C for 1 
hour, followed by alkylation of newly exposed thiol groups with 90 
mM NEM at 4°C for 10 minutes. Samples were subjected to tryp-
sin (Promega) or GluC (New England Biolabs) digestion according 
to the manufacturer’s instructions and desalted using ZipTip C18 
Pipette Tips (Merck Millipore). Characterization of whole protein 
molecular weights, acetylated lysine residues, or redox modi-
fications on cysteine residues within HMGB1 were determined 
by whole protein electrospray ionization or MS-MS as described 
previously (22, 23) using either an AB Sciex QTRAP 5500 or an 
AB Sciex TripleTOF 5600 (Sciex Inc.). Peptide analysis was deter-
mined using an AB Sciex QTRAP 5500 equipped with a NanoSpray 
II source by in-line liquid chromatography using a U3000 HPLC 
System (Dionex, Thermo Fisher UK Ltd.) connected to a 180 μm 
× 20 mm nanoAcquity UPLC C18 trap column and a 75 μm × 15 
cm nanoAcquity UPLC BEH130 C18 column via reducing unions. 
A gradient from 0.05% TFA (v/v) to 50% ACN/0.08% TFA (v/v) in 
40 minutes was applied at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The ionspray 
potential was set to 2200–3500 V, the nebulizer gas to 19, and the 
interface heater to 150°C.
Unblinding and linkage to the clinical information were per-
formed by a second investigator following completion of the anal-
ysis in all cases.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 3 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
Acknowledgments
Funding was received from the Medical Research Council 
(G1000417 to LEW), the European Union’s Seventh Frame-
work Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement 
n°602102 (EPITARGET), and Citizens United for Research in 
Epilepsy (CURE) (to AV). MP is a National Institute for Health 
Research (NIHR) senior investigator. We thank Marco E. Bian-
chi for his constructive comments on this manuscript and his 
advice during study development; the MRC Centre for Drug 
Safety Science for infrastructure support; Federico Moro, 
Alberto Pauletti, and Rosaria Pascente for their contribution to 
some of the animal experiments; and Felice De Ceglie for fig-
ure editing.
Address correspondence to: Annamaria Vezzani, Department 
of Neuroscience, IRCCS–Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche 
Mario Negri, Via G. La Masa 19, 20156 Milano, Italy. Phone: 
39.02.39014410; Email: annamaria.vezzani@marionegri.it. 
Or to: Munir Pirmohamed, Institute of Translational Medicine, 
Department of Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, Uni-
versity of Liverpool, 1-5 Brownlow Street Liverpool, L69 3GL, 
United Kingdom. Phone: 44.151.794.5549; Email: munirp@ 
liverpool.ac.uk.
All patients provided written informed consent prior to inclusion 
in both clinical studies and to contributing sequential serum samples 
for biomarker analysis. The study protocols for the drug-resistant 
patient study were approved by the local ethics and research commit-
tees of both sites, North West UK REC–Haydock (Manchester, United 
Kingdom) (10/H1010/55) and the ethics committee of Tampere Uni-
versity Hospital. The prospective epilepsy study was approved by the 
West Research Ethics Committee, North Glasgow University (Glasgow, 
United Kingdom) NHS Trust in August 2003 (ref: 03/74, 1).
Author contributions
LEW conducted the United Kingdom study in patients with epilepsy, 
measured total HMGB1 in blood from patients, and drafted the man-
uscript. FF conducted the pharmacological study in the electrical SE 
model in adult rats and the relative histological analysis. TR per-
formed HMGB1 immunohistochemistry and conducted the study in 
P21 rats. ER, KT, GJS, TT, and LW conducted the kainate study in 
mice. AJ and LP conducted statistical analysis. TA and JP conducted 
the Finnish study in patients with epilepsy. MJB and GJS conducted 
the study in newly diagnosed epilepsy. REJ, BKP, and DJA performed 
the measurements of HMGB1 isoforms. DJA, GJS, and AGM contrib-
uted to study design and manuscript drafting. AV and MP supervised 
all phases of the project and wrote the final manuscript.
 1. Pitkänen A, Engel J. Past and present definitions 
of epileptogenesis and its biomarkers. Neurother-
apeutics. 2014;11(2):231–241.
 2. Kwan P, et al. Definition of drug resistant epilep-
sy: consensus proposal by the ad hoc Task Force 
of the ILAE Commission on Therapeutic Strate-
gies. Epilepsia. 2010;51(6):1069–1077.
 3. Vezzani A, French J, Bartfai T, Baram TZ. The 
role of inflammation in epilepsy. Nat Rev Neurol. 
2011;7(1):31–40.
 4. Vezzani A, Maroso M, Balosso S, Sanchez MA, 
Bartfai T. IL-1 receptor/Toll-like receptor signal-
ing in infection, inflammation, stress and neuro-
degeneration couples hyperexcitability and sei-
zures. Brain Behav Immun. 2011;25(7):1281–1289.
 5. Maroso M, et al. Toll-like receptor 4 and high- 
mobility group box-1 are involved in ictogenesis 
and can be targeted to reduce seizures. Nat Med. 
2010;16(4):413–419.
 6. Yang H, Wang H, Czura CJ, Tracey KJ. The 
cytokine activity of HMGB1. J Leukoc Biol. 
2005;78(1):1–8.
 
7. Scaffidi P, Misteli T, Bianchi ME. Release of chro-
matin protein HMGB1 by necrotic cells triggers 
inflammation. Nature. 2002;418(6894):191–195.
 8. Lamkanfi M, et al. Inflammasome-dependent 
release of the alarmin HMGB1 in endotoxemia.  
J Immunol. 2010;185(7):4385–4392.
 9. Yang H, et al. Redox modification of cysteine 
residues regulates the cytokine activity of 
high mobility group box-1 (HMGB1). Mol Med. 
2012;18:250–259.
 10. Schiraldi M, et al. HMGB1 promotes recruitment 
of inflammatory cells to damaged tissues by 
forming a complex with CXCL12 and signaling 
via CXCR4. J Exp Med. 2012;209(3):551–563.
 11. Weber MD, Frank MG, Tracey KJ, Watkins LR, 
Maier SF. Stress induces the danger-associated 
molecular pattern HMGB-1 in the hippocampus 
of male Sprague Dawley rats: a priming stimulus 
of microglia and the NLRP3 inflammasome.  
J Neurosci. 2015;35(1):316–324.
 12. Zurolo E, et al. Activation of Toll-like receptor, 
RAGE and HMGB1 signalling in malformations 
of cortical development. Brain. 2011;134(Pt 
4):1015–1032.
 13. Venereau E, et al. Mutually exclusive redox 
forms of HMGB1 promote cell recruitment or 
proinflammatory cytokine release. J Exp Med. 
2012;209(9):1519–1528.
 14. Yang H, Antoine DJ, Andersson U, Tracey KJ. The 
many faces of HMGB1: molecular structure- 
functional activity in inflammation, apoptosis, and 
chemotaxis. J Leukoc Biol. 2013;93(6):865–873.
 15. Iori V, et al. Receptor for advanced glycation end-
products is upregulated in temporal lobe epilepsy 
and contributes to experimental seizures. Neuro-
biol Dis. 2013;58:102–114.
 16. Balosso S, Liu J, Bianchi ME, Vezzani A. Disulfide- 
containing high mobility group box-1 promotes 
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor function and exci-
totoxicity by activating Toll-like receptor 4- 
dependent signaling in hippocampal neurons.  
Antioxid Redox Signal. 2014;21(12):1726–1740.
 17. Tsai MH, et al. Factors predictive of outcome in 
patients with de novo status epilepticus. QJM. 
2009;102(1):57–62.
 18. Lévesque M, Avoli M, Bernard C. Animal models 
of temporal lobe epilepsy following systemic 
chemoconvulsant administration. J Neurosci 
Methods. 2016;260:45–52.
 19. Lu B, et al. Molecular mechanism and therapeutic 
modulation of high mobility group box 1 release 
and action: an updated review. Expert Rev Clin 
Immunol. 2014;10(6):713–727.
 20. Noe FM, et al. Pharmacological blockade of 
IL-1β/IL-1 receptor type 1 axis during epilep-
togenesis provides neuroprotection in two rat 
models of temporal lobe epilepsy. Neurobiol Dis. 
2013;59:183–193.
 21. Noè F, et al. Neuropeptide Y gene therapy 
decreases chronic spontaneous seizures in 
a rat model of temporal lobe epilepsy. Brain. 
2008;131(Pt 6):1506–1515.
 22. Antoine DJ, et al. Molecular forms of HMGB1 
and keratin-18 as mechanistic biomarkers for 
mode of cell death and prognosis during clin-
ical acetaminophen hepatotoxicity. J Hepatol. 
2012;56(5):1070–1079.
 23. Antoine DJ, et al. High-mobility group box-1 
protein and keratin-18, circulating serum pro-
teins informative of acetaminophen-induced 
necrosis and apoptosis in vivo. Toxicol Sci. 
2009;112(2):521–531.
 24. Gardella S, et al. The nuclear protein HMGB1 
is secreted by monocytes via a non-classical, 
vesicle-mediated secretory pathway. EMBO Rep. 
2002;3(10):995–1001.
 25. Bonaldi T, et al. Monocytic cells hyperacetylate 
chromatin protein HMGB1 to redirect it towards 
secretion. EMBO J. 2003;22(20):5551–5560.
 26. Dingledine R, Varvel NH, Dudek FE. When and 
how do seizures kill neurons, and is cell death 
relevant to epileptogenesis? Adv Exp Med Biol. 
2014;813:109–122.
 27. Gorter JA, van Vliet EA, Aronica E. Status epi-
lepticus, blood-brain barrier disruption, inflam-
mation, and epileptogenesis. Epilepsy Behav. 
2015;49:13–16.
 28. Łotowska JM, Sobaniec-Łotowska ME, Send-
rowski K, Sobaniec W, Artemowicz B. Ultra-
structure of the blood-brain barrier of the gyrus 
hippocampal cortex in an experimental model 
of febrile seizures and with the use of a new 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 3 2
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
generation antiepileptic drug--topiramate. Folia 
Neuropathol. 2008;46(1):57–68.
 29. Parfenova H, Tcheranova D, Basuroy S, Fed-
inec AL, Liu J, Leffler CW. Functional role 
of astrocyte glutamate receptors and carbon 
monoxide in cerebral vasodilation response 
to glutamate. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 
2012;302(11):H2257–H2266.
 30. Gaillard RC. Interaction between the hypothalamo- 
pituitary-adrenal axis and the immunological sys-
tem. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2001;62(2):155–163.
 31. Tse K, Puttachary S, Beamer E, Sills GJ, Thip-
peswamy T. Advantages of repeated low dose 
against single high dose of kainate in C57BL/6J 
mouse model of status epilepticus: behavioral 
and electroencephalographic studies. PLoS One. 
2014;9(5):e96622.
 32. Dinarello CA, Simon A, van der Meer JW. Treat-
ing inflammation by blocking interleukin-1 in a 
broad spectrum of diseases. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 
2012;11(8):633–652.
 33. Andersson U, Tracey KJ. HMGB1 is a therapeutic 
target for sterile inflammation and infection. 
Annu Rev Immunol. 2011;29:139–162.
 34. Williams K. Ifenprodil, a novel NMDA receptor 
antagonist: site and mechanism of action.  
Curr Drug Targets. 2001;2(3):285–298.
 35. Balosso S, et al. A novel non-transcriptional 
pathway mediates the proconvulsive effects of  
interleukin-1beta. Brain. 2008;131(Pt 
12):3256–3265.
 36. Marcon J, et al. Age-dependent vascular changes 
induced by status epilepticus in rat forebrain: 
implications for epileptogenesis. Neurobiol Dis. 
2009;34(1):121–132.
 37. Roch C, Leroy C, Nehlig A, Namer IJ. Predictive 
value of cortical injury for the development of 
temporal lobe epilepsy in 21-day-old rats: an MRI 
approach using the lithium-pilocarpine model. 
Epilepsia. 2002;43(10):1129–1136.
 38. Pascente R, et al. Cognitive deficits and brain 
myo-Inositol are early biomarkers of epilepto-
genesis in a rat model of epilepsy. Neurobiol Dis. 
2016;93:146–155.
 39. Dubé C, Boyet S, Marescaux C, Nehlig A. Rela-
tionship between neuronal loss and interictal 
glucose metabolism during the chronic phase 
of the lithium-pilocarpine model of epilepsy 
in the immature and adult rat. Exp Neurol. 
2001;167(2):227–241.
 40. Leroy C, Pierre K, Simpson IA, Pellerin L, Van-
nucci SJ, Nehlig A. Temporal changes in mRNA 
expression of the brain nutrient transporters 
in the lithium-pilocarpine model of epilepsy 
in the immature and adult rat. Neurobiol Dis. 
2011;43(3):588–597.
 41. Ge X, et al. High mobility group box-1 
(HMGB1) participates in the pathogenesis 
of alcoholic liver disease (ALD). J Biol Chem. 
2014;289(33):22672–22691.
 42. Hladky SB, Barrand MA. Mechanisms of fluid 
movement into, through and out of the brain: 
evaluation of the evidence. Fluids Barriers CNS. 
2014;11(1):26.
 43. Lu B, Wang H, Andersson U, Tracey KJ. Regu-
lation of HMGB1 release by inflammasomes. 
Protein Cell. 2013;4(3):163–167.
 44. De Simoni MG, et al. Inflammatory cytokines and 
related genes are induced in the rat hippocam-
pus by limbic status epilepticus. Eur J Neurosci. 
2000;12(7):2623–2633.
 45. Semah F, et al. Is the underlying cause of epilepsy 
a major prognostic factor for recurrence? Neurol-
ogy. 1998;51(5):1256–1262.
 46. Yang H, Wang H, Czura CJ, Tracey KJ. HMGB1 
as a cytokine and therapeutic target. J Endotoxin 
Res. 2002;8(6):469–472.
 47. Okuma Y, Date I, Nishibori M. [Anti-high mobility 
group box-1 antibody therapy for traumatic brain 
injury]. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2014;134(6):701–705.
 48. Kim LG, Johnson TL, Marson AG, Chadwick DW, 
MRC MESS Study group. Prediction of risk of 
seizure recurrence after a single seizure and early 
epilepsy: further results from the MESS trial. 
Lancet Neurol. 2006;5(4):317–322.
 49. Bonnett L, Smith CT, Smith D, Williamson P, 
Chadwick D, Marson AG. Prognostic factors for 
time to treatment failure and time to 12 months 
of remission for patients with focal epilepsy: 
post-hoc, subgroup analyses of data from the 
SANAD trial. Lancet Neurol. 2012;11(4):331–340.
 50. Racine RJ. Modification of seizure activity by 
electrical stimulation. II. Motor seizure. Electroen-
cephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1972;32(3):281–294.
 51. Frigerio F, et al. Long-lasting pro-ictogenic 
effects induced in vivo by rat brain exposure to 
serum albumin in the absence of concomitant 
pathology. Epilepsia. 2012;53(11):1887–1897.
 52. Freeman FG, Jarvis MF. The effect of interstim-
ulation interval on the assessment and stability 
of kindled seizure thresholds. Brain Res Bull. 
1981;7(6):629–633.
 53.  
Paxinos G, Watson C. The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic 
Coordinates. New York: Academic Press; 2005.
 54. Pitkänen A, Kharatishvili I, Narkilahti S, Lukasiuk 
K, Nissinen J. Administration of diazepam during 
status epilepticus reduces development and severi-
ty of epilepsy in rat. Epilepsy Res. 2005;63(1):27–42.
 55. Gorter JA, van Vliet EA, Aronica E, Lopes da Silva 
FH. Progression of spontaneous seizures after 
status epilepticus is associated with mossy fibre 
sprouting and extensive bilateral loss of hilar 
parvalbumin and somatostatin-immunoreactive 
neurons. Eur J Neurosci. 2001;13(4):657–669.
 56. Cervo L, et al. Inhibition of glycine transporter-1 
reduces cue-induced nicotine-seeking, but 
does not promote extinction of conditioned 
nicotine cue responding in the rat. Addict Biol. 
2013;18(5):800–811.
 57. Clark SR, et al. Interleukin-1 receptor antagonist 
penetrates human brain at experimentally thera-
peutic concentrations. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 
2008;28(2):387–394.
 58.  Jasper HH. The ten-twenty electrode system of 
the international federation. Electroencephalogr 
Clin Neurophysiol. 1958;10:370–375.
 59. [No authors listed]. Proposal for revised clinical and 
electroencephalographic classification of epileptic 
seizures. From the Commission on Classification 
and Terminology of the International League 
Against Epilepsy. Epilepsia. 1981;22(4):489–501.
 60. Sills GJ, et al. Modern monotherapies in newly 
diagnosed epilepsy: comparative retention and 
efficacy. Epilepsia. 2009;50(Suppl 11):492–493.
 61. Lehner J, Wittwer C, Fersching D, Siegele B, 
Holdenrieder S, Stoetzer OJ. Methodological and 
preanalytical evaluation of an HMGB1 immuno-
assay. Anticancer Res. 2012;32(5):2059–2062.
