 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
International Journal of Drug Policy
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/drugpo
Research Paper
The implementation of overdose prevention sites as a novel and nimble
response during an illegal drug overdose public health emergency
Bruce Wallace⁎, Flora Pagan, Bernadette (Bernie) Pauly
Canadian Institute for Substance Use Research, University of Victoria, Box 1700 STN CSC, Victoria, BC, Canada
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Overdose
Supervised injection sites
Harm reduction
Implementation science
Drug consumption rooms
Overdose prevention sites
A B S T R A C T
Background: Drug-related overdoses were declared a public health emergency in British Columbia, Canada in
April, 2016 facilitating the scale-up of responses including rapid sanctioning and implementation of overdose
prevention sites (OPSs). OPSs are a health service providing supervised injection and immediate overdose re-
sponse. In BC, OPSs were operational within weeks of sanctioning. In the first year of operation over 20 OPSs
were established with approximately 550,000 visits and no overdose deaths at any site. In this paper, we ex-
amine the implementation of OPSs as a novel and nimble response to prevent overdose deaths as a result of
injection drug use.
Methods: A multiple case study design was used with the Consolidated Framework for Implementation (CFIR)
informing the analysis. Three sites in a single city were included with each site constituting a case. In this paper,
we focus on qualitative interviews with 15 staff and their perceptions of the implementation of the OPSs as well
as provincial and local documents.
Results: The legislative process to implement OPSs was unprecedented as it sanctioned supervised injection
services as an extraordinary measure under a declared public health emergency. Innovative and inclusionary
practices were possible within state-sanctioned OPSs, as the sites were government-directed yet community-
developed, with PWUD centred in service design, implementation and delivery. OPSs lack permanency and may
be limited to the duration of the public health emergency.
Conclusion: The rapid implementation of OPSs provides an international example of an alternative to lengthy
and often onerous sanctioning processes for supervised consumption services (SCSs). Overdose prevention sites
provide an example of a novel service design and nimble implementation process that combines the benefits of
state-sanctioned injection services with community-driven implementation. Such evidence questions the con-
tinued acceptability of governments’ restrictive sanctioning processes, which have limited expansion of SCSs
internationally and the implementation of services that are not necessarily aligned with the needs of PWUD.
Introduction
Overdose deaths and non-fatal overdoses largely attributed to the
presence of fentanyl have increased significantly in recent years across
Canada and the United States (Ciccarone, 2017; Ciccarone, Ondocsin, &
Mars, 2017; Fischer, Murphy, Rudzinski, & MacPherson, 2016; Rudd,
Aleshire, Zibbell, & Gladden, 2016). The crisis levels of illegal drug
overdose in many North American jurisdictions has prompted calls for
expanded responses including implementation and expansion of su-
pervised consumption services (SCSs) (Ciccarone, 2017; Fairbairn,
Coffin, & Walley, 2017; Kerr, Mitra, Kennedy, & McNeil, 2017). Su-
pervised consumption services refers to supervision of injecting and/or
smoking of illegally obtained substances. In some jurisdictions, SCSs are
also referred to as ‘drug consumption rooms’ and in many North
American jurisdictions, SCSs are limited to injection services only and
known as safer or supervised injection services.
Researchers conducting systematic reviews have found consistent
evidence of SCSs effectiveness in meeting objectives of reducing harms
associated with drug use including prevention of blood borne diseases,
mitigating overdose risks and harms, improving the health of people
who use drugs (PWUD), increasing referrals to other health and social
services, reductions in public drug use and publicly discarded syringes
(Kennedy, Karamouzian, & Kerr, 2017; Potier, Laprévote, Dubois-Arber,
Cottencin, & Rolland, 2014), with little evidence to confirm fears such
as increasing drug use or drug trafficking (Freeman et al., 2005;
Kimber, Dolan, & Wodak, 2005; Wood, Tyndall, Lai, Montaner, & Kerr,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2019.01.017
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: barclay@uvic.ca (B. Wallace), fpagan@uvic.ca (F. Pagan), bpauly@uvic.ca (B.B. Pauly).
International Journal of Drug Policy 66 (2019) 64–72
0955-3959/ © 2019 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).
T
 2006).
There are over one hundred SCSs estimated to be operating in at
least 11 countries with increasing recognition of SCSs as an integral
component of a continuum of harm reduction responses that reduce
drug-related harms (Kerr et al., 2017; McCann & Temenos, 2015). De-
spite evidence of effectiveness, SCSs remain underutilized with im-
plementation of SCSs remaining controversial and heavily regulated
(Hyshka, Bubela, & Wild, 2013; Kennedy et al., 2017; Kerr et al., 2017;
Wood, Kerr, Tyndall, & Montaner, 2008).
The province of British Columbia (BC) has experienced the highest
rate of overdose in Canada, prompting the need for innovative public
health and harm reduction responses. In April 2016, BC’s provincial
health officer declared drug-related overdoses to be a public health
emergency (BC Ministry of Health, 2016b). By year end, the BC Coroner
confirmed approximately 930 overdose deaths in 2016 (BC Coroners
Service, 2017), a rate of 20.7 deaths per 100,000 persons. In 2017, the
rate of overdose deaths would increase to 31.3 per 100,000 with an
average of about four people dying each day that year and approxi-
mately 1400 overdose deaths recorded at the end of 2017 by the cor-
oner. BC’s current overdose crisis has been named a ‘fentanyl crisis’
with fentanyl detected in 72% of illicit drugs, according to post-mortem
toxicology tests (BC Coroners Service, 2017). There was an immediate
call for scale up of SCSs and subsequent increase in number of appli-
cations submitted for federal approval following accepted processes of
community consultation and lengthy applications.
Frustrated by the perceived lack of emergency responses and spe-
cifically the lack of sanctioned SCSs, community activists (including
drug-user groups) established “pop up” unsanctioned injection sites in a
few major cities in BC in 2016. Initially pop-up SCSs were organized as
actions to raise awareness of the need and feasibility for supervising
injections to prevent overdoses and typically were not intended to be an
ongoing service (Lupick, 2016). Building on these actions, the Overdose
Prevention Society in Vancouver was established to provide an ongoing
service under a tent in an alley in Vancouver’s Downtown Eastside
stating “…we don't have to wait for red tape and bureaucratic anything.
We can just do this and save lives" (Brend, 2016). This history is similar
to that preceding the establishment of other harm reduction services by
peers in the Downtown Eastside including needle exchange, supervised
injection and assisted injection (Kerr, Oleson, & Wood, 2004; McNeil,
Small, Lampkin, Shannon, & Kerr, 2014; Wood et al., 2003)
In response to the growing number of overdose deaths and emer-
gence of unsanctioned “overdose prevention sites” (OPSs) the pro-
vince’s Minister of Health moved to enact a Ministerial Order as part of
the declared public health emergency to rapidly sanction overdose
prevention sites as “an extraordinary measure to respond to the over-
dose crisis” in December 2016 (BC Ministry of Health, 2016a). By is-
suing the order, all BC regional health authorities were directed to set
up and fund overdose prevention services as ancillary health services
for the purpose of monitoring persons who are at risk of overdose, and
providing rapid intervention as necessary.
Overdose prevention sites provide a space for people to inject their
previously-obtained illegal substances with sterile equipment in a set-
ting where staff (often peers) can observe and intervene to prevent
overdoses. The sites were not implemented as an alternative to feder-
ally-sanctioned SCSs. Rather, the province described the response as a
temporary measure that would save lives without breaching the
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (federal laws criminalizing sub-
stances across the country) while waiting for federal approval of SCSs.
Rapid implementation of OPSs sites meant that within a few days to a
few months approximately 20 sites were implemented across the pro-
vince. Thus, OPSs moved from unsanctioned and unsupported ‘pop ups’
to become a significant part of the overdose response across BC by the
beginning of 2017. Within a year, there were approximately 550,000
visits, 2500 non-fatal overdoses, and no overdose deaths recorded at
OPSs in British Columbia (BCCDC, 2018). Acknowledging the un-
precedented and increasing illegal drug overdose deaths in Canada and
the emergence of OPSs, the federal government amended legislation to
enable a more pragmatic sanctioning process for SCSs, resulting in over
25 new sites being approved in Canada by the end of 2017 (Health
Canada, 2017). However, there is very little research related to im-
plementation of SCSs and implementation research regarding OPSs is
nascent (Hunt, Lloyd, Kimber, & Tompkins, 2007; Krüsi, Small, Wood,
& Kerr, 2009; McNeil, Dilley, Guirguis-Younger, Hwang, & Small, 2014;
O’Shea, 2007; Small, Moore, Shoveller, Wood, & Kerr, 2012; Strike,
Watson, Kolla, Penn, & Bayoumi, 2015; Watson et al., 2012; Watson,
Strike, Kolla, Penn, & Bayoumi, 2015; Wenger, Arreola, & Kral, 2011).
The overall purpose of this research project was to investigate the
implementation and impact of OPSs during a public health emergency,
in a single city significantly impacted by overdose with limited harm
reduction services and challenges in implementing harm reduction
programs. Victoria, BC is one of the top three townships in the province
impacted by overdose deaths and a community that has historically
faced challenges in establishing and maintaining harm reduction ser-
vices (BC Coroners Service, 2017; MacNeil & Pauly, 2010). In this
paper, drawing on qualitative interviews from three OPSs in Victoria,
BC, we critically examine the implementation of OPSs as a novel and
nimble response to harms and risks related to illegal drug use, notably
to prevent overdose deaths as a result of injection drug use.
We explore the configuration of the sites and key issues related to
implementation including the barriers and facilitators in establishing
these services. Our analysis explores the rapid implementation of OPSs
as a temporary response to a public health emergency and how sanc-
tioned OPSs introduced a new option in the context of sanctioned and
unsanctioned
SCS
responses.
Considering
the
lengthy
SCSs’
im-
plementation processes, we suggest that knowledge generated from the
implementation of OPSs provides useful evidence to inform future de-
velopment and implementation of SCSs including the importance of
community-driven approaches.
Methods
Conceptual framework
This research was guided by the Consolidated Framework for
Implementation (CFIR) (Damschroder et al., 2009). The CFIR is a
synthesis of other implementation constructs and theories that provides
a pragmatic framework for research that seeks to include the context in
which innovation and implementation takes place. As one approach to
implementation research, the CFIR aids investigation of the complexity
of implementation processes by exploring the influences of five factors,
or domains – intervention characteristics, outer setting, inner setting,
characteristics of the individuals involved, and the process of im-
plementation. While CFIR provides a theory-informed approach to
implementation research, the framework facilitates theory-building and
inductive analysis with theory providing a framework for inquiry
(Damschroder & Lowery, 2013). Implementation research can occur at
different points in the timeline of implementation. Our study occurred
during the implementation process (rather than pre- or post-im-
plementation). Given the urgent need to establish OPSs, we employed a
case study design guided by CFIR to assess implementation of these
programs. We utilized the CFIR framework primarily to inform and
construct the interview guides as well as the use of the five domains as
an analytical tool.
Study design
The lead researchers (BW & BP) are recognized locally as commu-
nity-engaged researchers and were already collaborating with the
community agencies establishing these sites as well as the drug-user
union, the local health authority and provincial public health leaders.
Prior collaborations had revealed challenges in the implementation of
harm reduction services (Pauly, Wallace, & Barber, 2017; Wallace et al.,
B. Wallace et al.
International Journal of Drug Policy 66 (2019) 64–72
65
 2016; Wallace, Barber, & Pauly, 2018) and we had already been con-
tacted by several individuals soliciting information and advice about
how to implement OPSs. Knowing this, we contacted the community
agencies initiating the sites to gauge interest in collaborating on re-
search and to confirm relevance of the research questions. With their
support, we proceeded with the research as a collaborative inquiry,
recognizing that the shared priority for a quick turnaround of findings
would not allow for a fully collaborative and participatory approach
(Wallace, Pauly, Perkin, & Ranfft, 2015). So, while we consulted on the
research questions with our community partners, they did not partici-
pate in the process of conducting the research but reviewed the findings
prior to presentation and publication.
A multiple case study design was used to examine similarities and
differences in relation to implementation and impact of services with
each OPS constituting a case (Stake, 2013). Case study designs examine
an identified phenomenon within the local context. The phenomenon in
this research was the implementation of OPSs during a declared over-
dose emergency. Stake has identified that at least three cases are
needed for strong cross case comparisons and we undertook this re-
search with three sites (2013). A multiple case study design fit well with
our use of the CFIR framework as both incorporate an analysis of
contextual factors in the research design. Findings related to im-
plementation and impacts were examined for each case as well as across
these cases examining the variations and differences between the cases
and commonalities descriptive of the overall phenomenon. In this
paper, we report on the findings related to implementation. Impacts are
reported elsewhere.
Ethical approval for this study was obtained from the University of
Victoria Human Research Ethics Office (17-032).
Recruitment
Four potential OPSs were contacted and three agreed to participate
while the fourth was unable to respond to the research invite at the time
although they later expressed support. In addition, the local drug-user
organization was included due to their involvement in setting up and
advising on sites as well as providing peer workers for one of the re-
search sites.
While we interviewed 27 participants from four agencies including
both staff and service users, in this paper, we focus on interviews with
15 staff, including peer staff, and their shared experiences and per-
spectives with the implementation and operations of the OPSs. We
purposively sought to include: an ‘implementer’, a person identified by
the agency as most involved in the implementation of the service; a staff
person working within the service as a harm reduction worker; and a
person working in the service identified by the agency as ‘experiential’,
or a peer worker. Interviews were conducted in a confidential space
outside the overdose prevention unit.
Data collection
Data collection was conducted within the initial two to three
months of operations of services with qualitative interviews conducted
by the two primary investigators (BW & BP) over five weeks from
March to April 2017. The CFIR framework informed the development of
the interview guide and we specifically developed questions related to
the major domains – the intervention, inner and outer setting, the in-
dividuals involved, and the implementation process (Damschroder
et al., 2009). For example, we asked questions about the site and con-
text such as: “How did the site initially get started here?” and “How did
you and others react to the idea of setting up this service here?”
Questions about the implementation process included: “Can you tell me
about the experience of getting this site implemented?”, “What were
the barriers?” and “What were some facilitators?”. Interviews ranged
between 30 to 60 min in length.
All interviews were recorded and transcribed verbatim. Staff at each
agency were asked to provide any relevant policy and procedure
documents as well as program statistics from implementation date to
March 31, 2017. The researchers also visited the sites outside of oper-
ating hours and took photos of the sites without individuals present in
the images.
Data analysis
Initial transcripts were reviewed by all the authors and individually
coded, looking for broad, salient themes which were then discussed as a
group to develop initial coding categories. The eventual coding fra-
mework was utilized by one member of the research team (FP) to do
subsequent coding. Once this was completed, a second, similar process
was conducted with all the authors further refining the coding cate-
gories. With the assistance of NVivo software FP continued with a
process of coding and re-analysis. With all data coded and themes re-
fined for each case we utilized a cross-case comparison (Yin, 2009) with
each OPS defined as a unique case. Using this multiple case design, we
compared themes related to implementation across the cases to explore
the similarities, variations and develop cross-case conclusions about the
implementation of OPSs with the CFIR informing the analysis.
Results
Interview data from staff provide an in-depth understanding of their
views on the implementation of their OPS. Of the fifteen staff inter-
viewed, the average age of staff was 38.7 years with a range from early
twenties to late fifties. Sixty percent identified as female and 40% as
male. Two-thirds of staff reported attending or completing college or
university and a third reported attending some high school with one
completing high school (Fig. 1).
We begin with a brief description of the three OPSs or cases. Four
fundamental themes emerged from our analysis of the data across the
three cases. These themes related to implementation included:
• Government-directed yet community-driven
• Rapid implementation
• Shifting restrictive policies during early implementation
• Stop gap measures: OPSs and SCSs
Table 1 summarizes the barriers and facilitators for each CFIR
construct which are described within these themes.
Description of the cases
The general mandate of all OPSs is to provide access to supervised
injection services and overdose responses, harm reduction supplies, and
Fig. 1. The harm reduction service’s OPS, with two injection stations showing.
B. Wallace et al.
International Journal of Drug Policy 66 (2019) 64–72
66
 referrals to broader health and social services. All three OPSs were in-
tegrated into existing services but with differences in service models,
staffing frameworks and physical spaces.
The first site opened its OPS in a large room adjacent to its drop-in
harm reduction program and high-volume needle distribution service,
thereby extending existing harm reduction services to include su-
pervised injections. The room initially housed three injection stations,
later increased to four. The harm reduction program includes staff hired
specifically for their lived experience of drug use. The initial funding
limited operating hours to 3:00pm to 9:00pm daily (Fig. 2).
The second OPS at a drop-in centre opened in a half-size shipping
container located outdoors in its courtyard. There are three injection
stations along a single long table. The drop-in centre contracted a peer-
run drug-user agency to develop and deliver the OPS. Staffing included
one paramedic hired by the drop-in centre providing emergency care
and one peer staff providing overall support services including injection
and overdose supports. The site was open 7 days a week between
6:30a.m. and 8:30p.m.
The third site opened its OPS on the main floor of an emergency
shelter adjacent to its large drop-in space. The room was originally a
medical room with an attached outer waiting room. Staff can monitor
service users for overdose through a window while being able to pro-
vide them with some privacy. The inner room has three injecting sta-
tions, and service users are encouraged to spend time in the “chill-out”
area next to the staff desk in the outer room. Staffing includes one harm
reduction worker and one peer worker. The room was open 7 days a
week from 7:00am to 9:00pm. This OPS also provides a designated safer
smoking area, located in the shelter’s outdoor courtyard and protected
by a pop-up awning, monitored by the staff person through a window in
the OPS (Fig. 3).
Government-directed yet community-driven
The federal application processes for a sanctioned SCS were de-
scribed by participants as “onerous”, limiting agencies from responding
quickly to the rapid increases in overdoses. However, the introduction
of the provincial Ministerial Order sanctioning supervised injections
ensured staff and agency were protected from criminal charges, dra-
matically shifting and enabling the establishment of harm reduction
services (Fig. 4).
We had been wanting to set something like this up for a long time, be-
cause the situation with our bathrooms here is that we have people using
in our bathrooms all the time…but it was hard to figure out how we could
legitimately offer those services, like an [OPS] and be fairly public about
it without getting flak … So, when the Minister of Health made the
Ministerial Order around allowing health authorities to implement
emergency [OPSs], that sort of opened the door for us to implement.
[OPS 1:01]
Participants establishing the OPSs voiced that the provincial Order
was essential to the implementation of injection services. The provincial
sanctioning provided the legal foundation for supervised injection to be
funded as ancillary health services, for community agencies to provide
the services without risk of reprisal, and for staff to be paid and able to
work
within
any
professional
regulatory
guidelines.
While
the
Ministerial Order facilitated the implementation of OPSs as a provincial
solution in the face of federal legislation criminalizing substance use
Table 1
Consolidated Framework for Implementation (CFIR) domains: Barriers and fa-
cilitators to early implementation of sanctioned overdose prevention services
(OPS).
Intervention characteristics
Barriers
Required rapid implementation within existing sites and limited as a temporary,
emergency service.
Facilitators
Community defined with inclusion of people who use drugs in design or later in
removing policy barriers once implemented
Outer setting
Barriers
A stop-gap measure within continued criminalization and stigmatization of
substance use and service users.
Facilitators
Ministerial Order enabled rapid implementation and funding as a sanctioned public
health emergency measure.
Inner setting
Barriers
Some OPS implemented in settings that privilege abstinence and where substance
use was generally prohibited.
Facilitators
Sites were in services accessed by people who use drugs and agencies were
welcoming of OPS as a response to prevalent substance use in washrooms and
overdose.
Characteristics of individuals
Barriers
Some sites had limited familiarity with harm reduction services beyond
distribution of supplies.
Facilitators
People who use drugs central to services.
Process of implementation
Barriers
A lack of health and safety protocols and initially adopting Insite and federal
sanctioning policies.
Facilitators
Rapid implementation without formal neighbourhood consultation requirements
and redefining of policies (such as assisted injections).
Fig. 2. Two of the three injection stations at the drop-in centre’s OPS, set up for
two people to use next to one another.
Fig. 3. The inner room of the shelter’s OPS.
B. Wallace et al.
International Journal of Drug Policy 66 (2019) 64–72
67
 and possession, one participant pointed out that it took the fentanyl
crisis and the deaths of 1000 people to provide what has long been
understood by drug-users, harm reduction activists, and academics as a
necessary and life-saving service, stating “we’re allowed to open that
room because of the overdose crisis. Not because it was needed” [OPS 1:06].
While the provincial government mandated the establishment of
OPSs, initially they did not provide specific standards, policies, or
practices to guide implementation. Consequently, agencies were able to
define their services based on community needs. Thus, the outer setting
provided a context facilitating implementation through the establish-
ment of the Ministerial order which provided support but not direction
for establishment of OPSs. As a result, differences in implementation
were often a result of the inner setting and characteristics of the im-
plementors rather than of intervention characteristics. In particular,
agency experience with harm reduction was an important organiza-
tional characteristic that facilitated implementation. One organization
with a pre-existing harm reduction philosophy described its OPS as
essentially an extension of existing services for PWUD, with a harm
reduction worker stating “there’s all kinds of policies and procedures that
are already out there…if there’s a good foundation of offering services to
[PWUD], this is really just an extension of that, and it doesn’t have to be
complicated, it is actually quite basic” [OPS 1:01].
Another site without previous experience with harm reduction ser-
vices started by consulting experienced harm reduction providers, ex-
plaining “we invited as many people as we could to the table to say, you
know, ‘What are things we are going to need to pay attention to?’ That was
also huge. We needed that, because we learned a lot from that” [OPS 2:15].
As described by another participant however, offering harm reduction
services meant shifting from prohibition to a focus on health and safety:
At first the clients were like terrified. You know, these people kicked them
out of bathrooms and barr[ed] them for weeks and months on end be-
cause of drug use and that kind of thing. Now, suddenly they’re allowed
to sit in this room, use drugs openly in front of the people that actually
chastised them for years, you know? So it was pretty tricky, it’s been
really tricky trying to get them used to the idea that it’s okay, and it’s safe
to be there, and it’s allowed to be there because it’s actually the safest
way to go. And that they actually, [the agency] wants them to be there
and doing it this way because it’s safer. And so it’s taken quite a while for
them to get used to this idea. [OPS 2:08]
Engagement and flexibility were components of the process of
successful implementation in all sites. A manager at one agency de-
scribed the process of consulting those workers who would be staffing
the site as to how day-to-day operations would work. According to the
peer workers these engagement processes facilitated the development
of a relevant OPS, stating “So for the most part, it was really well thought
out and worked around. We all had input. And so it was fairly well put
together” [OPS 2:08]. Agency staff attributed the successful im-
plementation of this site to ongoing flexibility in decision making,
stating “This is what we need in the moment. Let’s try to work toward it’…
Like it’s very much on the fly. And then like, something comes up, and then
we’ll work towards that. And then, you know, it’s all kind of like a work in
progress” [OPS 2:12].
At another site, operating services were modified based on ongoing
input from service users, peer workers, and other staff. A manager de-
scribed the flexible implementation process, saying: “it’s all new and
nobody knew, there was no one telling us how we should be doing things, so
there was a lot of just ‘I guess we’ll try this and see how it goes’” [OPS 3:23].
Agency staff also describe “non-stop” input from service users re-
garding service design:
…we got a lot of feedback from users cause it was new for us and new for
them, and they knew it was new for us and just told, gave us feedback
pretty non stop… When they came in, users would point out what wasn’t
working…users knew it was a new project, that there would be bumps in
the road…and those using the room are the experts, know what makes
them feel uncomfortable… there was some trial and error. We originally
had [more] tables even though only three people were allowed to use, for
example, we had two tables with backs to each other, which made people
really uncomfortable, so just little things like that. [OPS 3:16]
This real-time feedback resulted in ongoing modifications. While
other agencies had engaged users at the front end of service design, the
unionized environment of one agency initially limited such opportu-
nities. However, the agency later engaged service users and peer
workers in the ongoing development with modifications being made
based on their feedback.
Rapid implementation
Participants described the process of OPSs’ implementation as rapid
compared to protracted and drawn-out processes for implementing
federally-sanctioned SCSs. In spite of Insite (the federally-sanctioned
and well-established SCS in Vancouver) operating since 2003 and with
extensive evidence as to its effectiveness, no SCSs were established
outside of Vancouver. Locally, over fifteen years of feasibility studies,
strategic plans and lobbying had been undertaken identifying the need
for enhanced harm reduction responses, including the establishment of
multiple SCSs (2005, City of Victoria, 2007; City of Victoria, 2003;
Fischer, Kendall, & Allard, 2008; Stajduhar, Poffenroth, & Wong, 2000).
In contrast, OPSs sites opened within weeks as opposed to years as a
result of the Ministerial Order. The Ministerial Order (BC Ministry of
Health, 2016a) removed legal barriers to supervised injections, a major
barrier to implementation previously identified. Participants described
the practical implementation issues of establishing a space (space,
staffing, health and safety protocols, etc.) as straightforward. One harm
reduction worker explained, “I think these services can be set up quite
easily, I mean we basically had ours set up in less than a month … it doesn’t
have to be complicated, it is actually quite basic” (OPS 1:01]. A peer
worker described the fairly simple process in designing and im-
plementing the service stating “There wasn’t any rocket science involved”
[OPS 2:08]. A worker at another agency explained how the site doesn’t
“need too many bells and whistles” [OPS 3:18] adding, “the biggest hurdle
of setting up the room was ventilation” as minimal evidence exists to in-
form health and safety protocols for staff in enclosed areas when illegal
drugs are being cooked. As well, this issue acted as a barrier to im-
plementation of safer smoking areas. While supervised injections was a
relatively simple intervention to implement, providing smoking ser-
vices was thus viewed as more challenging. In addition, the supervision
of intra-nasal and oral drug use (snorting or swallowing) was not in-
corporated in the original implementation of OPSs.
The government directive to establish OPSs as an immediate re-
sponse to a public health emergency did not require neighbourhood
Fig. 4. The safer smoking area outside the shelter’s OPS, viewed through the
window from the service’s outer waiting room.
B. Wallace et al.
International Journal of Drug Policy 66 (2019) 64–72
68
 consultation requirements or formal opportunities for public engage-
ment such as that required for federal SCS applications (Island Health,
2016). Overall, there was a lack of neighbourhood opposition to es-
tablishing the sites and all sites had existing neighbourhood engage-
ment processes or agreements. Each site reported informal consulta-
tions with their immediate neighbour groups. Notably, OPSs’ staff
described how prior community concerns about public injection and
discarded needles had shifted since the dramatic increase and devas-
tation of overdose deaths. Neighbors, who had previously voiced strong
opposition to services, did not speak up. A harm reduction worker at
one agency explained, “I don’t think anybody wants people to die….and so
when they hear that it’s saving lives that, that makes a huge difference” [OPS
2:15]. Another stated:
I think because of the nature of the current overdose crisis, there has been
a bit of a shift, publically, where I think maybe a couple of years ago, had
we attempted to open a service like this without too much warning or
prior announcement to the immediate neighborhood around where we
operate, the people may have been more in opposition. But there is so
many people who have died that I think people who sort of have a
NIMBY stance sort of in the immediate neighborhood have maybe backed
off a little bit because they understand that it is literally a horrific life, life
or death situation. So, yeah I was pleasantly surprised at the lack of
NIMBY barriers that we’ve seen in past years around implementing harm
reduction services, and unfortunately it’s taken a horrible death count, I
think, to get to that point, where people have either silenced their op-
position a bit more, or backed off, or maybe they’re changing their hearts
and minds a bit. [OPS 1:01]
However, one site did initially employ extra security as part of OPS
implementation, which was positively received by some vocal neigh-
bours: “I’ve heard fair amount of positive [feedback], and mainly because
we also hired security to be in the area at the same time as we did the OPS”
[OPS 2:15].
Shifting restrictive policies during early implementation
Initially, the OPSs policies and procedures were aligned with Insite
policies and procedures and inner settings were heavily influenced by
Insite which was developed in a different outer context and time period.
However, in the early implementation phase, participants, based on
feedback from clients questioned restrictive policies and practices that
did not meet service user needs. Participants described how they re-
interpreted and revised original guidelines to better meet service user
needs. Namely, OPSs staff shifted policies and practices to allow PWUD
assisted injections, “jugging” (injections in the jugular vein), and the
sharing or splitting of pre-obtained drugs to make services more ac-
cessible to their clients. One participant describes the initial transition
to allow assisted injecting:
…we still do have to have rules…at this point in time, people can’t inject
one another, which is a barrier. Lots of, even people who are quite often
able to inject themselves, have times when they’re, because they’re too
tired, because they are too sleep dep[rived]or have been up, or have
been using too much so they’re unable to inject themselves, and they need
someone else to do it. [OPS 3:16]
One site manager responded to similar concerns about the barriers
created by prohibiting assisted injection by asking for advice from the
health authority, stating:
…so we know that other places, they’re okay with the buddy system
[referring to assisted injection in OPSs]. We’ve talked to [the Health
Authority] and they said they’d have to talk to their risk management
team and get back to us, but said that will be a process, so right now
there’s no, you have to be self-injecting. Someone, the peer volunteer, the
staff, can kind of guide you through it, so, but I would hope that we
would move forward, cause that’s one of the barriers that we hear from
people is that “I need someone to help me”. [OPS 3:27]
The tensions of being a sanctioned injection service while also
striving to be community-driven and responsive to service user needs
were expressed by staff in the initial weeks of service delivery. One
harm reduction worker relayed how permitting the splitting or sharing
of drugs was necessary for many drug-users but initially prohibited due
to legal definitions of trafficking, stating “that’s something that we can’t
allow in the room and that’s a little bit of a, kinda push back on that too,
because we want to be welcoming and want to be open, and it’s really, it’s
not trafficking…. it’s something we should be able to manage” [OPS 1:06].
Prohibiting drug splitting and sharing was expressed as inconsistent
with drug-user culture and the need to share purchased drugs due to
limited resources. To restrict such practices would limit people from
accessing the site and increase risk of overdose.
Concerns were raised that the current policies related to ‘jugging’
limited access to the OPSs. One participant stated that if “people aren’t
allowed to be jugging in there, they’re not allowed to help each other inject
and like, that’s been like, that will deter a lot of our most vulnerable clients”
[OPS 3:23]. One worker described the challenge of implementing the
original “no helping, no jugging” policy, recalling:
That was such a huge complaint in the first couple of weeks, people are
like “I can only jug I don’t have any veins here I can use”, and I was
“sorry you’re not allowed to use here”, and they’re like “cool I’ll go use
outside and die thanks”, like they would, that’s exactly what they would
say and you’re like “oh”, like you feel so bad right. [OPS staff 3:18]
Some participants described how they now review the risks and
limitations of “jugging” with service users prior to injection, instead of
prohibiting it. The focus on policies related to assisting injection,
splitting and sharing of drugs and jugging highlight areas of tension
related to barriers to services challenging long-held policies at what was
once North America’s only SCS. In spite of these tensions, challenging
these policies was possible as these sites were being developed during
an overdose emergency, were identified as not meeting service users’
needs and were being developed and informed by community experi-
ences and processes.
Stop gap measures: OPSs and SCSs
Across all sites, participants did not see meaningful distinctions
between OPSs and SCSs, voicing that they were exactly the same, or
different in name only, with the use of a different name as a “loophole”
to get around a federal law at a provincial level:
See I don't think it's different at all….It's just the wording that they
used… I guess the loophole that they found to kind of make this okay in
this space was calling it an [OPS] or a harm reduction site instead of…a
safe injection site. [OPS 1:12]
However, staff at all sites also voiced the limits of OPSs as a tem-
porary, emergency service compared to SCSs. Overdose prevention sites
were established in reclaimed spaces such as the medical room in the
emergency shelter, a converted office space, and in temporary struc-
tures such as the shipping container. This use of reclaimed space
highlights the flexibility of spaces that can accommodate supervised
injection as well as the possibility of ease of set up. Supervised con-
sumption sites were described by participants as able to provide more
fulsome services in a bigger space, due to their larger budgets, per-
manent and stand-alone nature, as one participant said “You can call it
whatever you like … of course the permanent sites are more flushed out with
proper staffing …” [OPS 2:13].
Staff discussed the presence of medical or nursing staff at SCSs,
which they believed was needed and would facilitate an expanded
scope of services compared to OPSs, while also improving access to
primary care, detox services, and opioid agonist treatments. At the same
time, we heard a preferential distinction between community-driven
B. Wallace et al.
International Journal of Drug Policy 66 (2019) 64–72
69
 OPSs and more clinical SCSs:
But it feels more community here, and it feels like it’s going to be more
clinical [at the proposed SCS]….So I think there’s something really im-
portant about the communal feel…And, where certain people will feel
more welcome. [OPS 2:15]
Participants described the limitations of OPSs as linked to the
emergency context within which OPSs were opened. Within an emer-
gency context, there are no fixed timelines, little guidance, and limited
funding for service provision. In an ongoing and stable context, agen-
cies would be able to marry the provision of welcoming and commu-
nity-driven services with opportunities for additional supports, services
and referrals. In fact, participants readily identified the needs for better
access to primary care and other types of health and social services that
would be facilitated by connections with other outreach and nursing
staff.
Finally, while participants were extremely supportive of OPSs as a
rapid emergency response to overdose, we heard ongoing commentary
of the limits of supervised injection services within an ongoing context
of criminalization:
These are all like such small pieces of such a big puzzle. They’re im-
portant, because ... overdose prevention rooms are ways that we can
break down stigma and just another way that we can reinforce to people
that their lives matter and that … they have the right to … be able to
easily access basic health care, and be treated like human beings. And,
that’s not insignificant, but it’s a really a small part of the larger puzzle,
and, so, it really does feel like a crisis response to a crisis situation and
not a comprehensive response to a really big problem which, is ultimately
drug policy, both federally and globally. [OPS 1:01]
Many participants voiced how OPSs in their current form are a stop
gap measure that are immediately lifesaving but that wider systemic
changes in health care systems and drug policy are needed to stem the
tide of overdose deaths. The shift from providing injection supplies to
now providing spaces for injecting was incredibly significant, however,
decriminalizing and providing safe substances is also vital.
Discussion
The legislative process to implement OPSs in British Columbia was
unprecedented as it sanctioned injection services to be implemented
widely as an extraordinary measure under the provincial Health
Minister’s declared public health emergency. The declaration of a
public health emergency related to overdose deaths allowed the au-
thorization of a Ministerial Order to rapidly establish OPSs with more
than 20 OPSs operational within weeks. This emergency response was
enacted by a provincial authority, within the context of protracted
federal processes for implementing sanctioned SCSs and the federal
criminalization of drugs, which stalled implementation of a SCS in the
city for more than a decade. Drug user and harm reduction activism
preceded the government response in BC as unsanctioned sites were
implemented as acts of civil disobedience to raise awareness of the need
as well as defining the emerging services. The sanctioning of OPSs
provincially was a significant external policy shift in the outer setting
that emerged within the context of a public health emergency influ-
encing the rapid implementation of services for people who inject
drugs.
The rapid implementation of OPSs in the province of British
Columbia, Canada during a public health emergency provides an in-
ternational example of an alternative to lengthy and cumbersome
sanctioning processes for SCSs. Internationally, state-sanctioning rather
than community processes have defined SCSs implementation processes
limiting their responsiveness, adaptation and innovation (Hyshka et al.,
2013; Kerr et al., 2017). Such evidence questions the continued ac-
ceptability of governments’ restrictive and onerous sanctioning pro-
cesses, which have limited expansion of SCSs internationally and are
not necessarily aligned with the needs of PWUD. Government demands
for public consultations, collaborations with law enforcement and re-
source-intensive application processes are highly questionable in the
context of lethal drug poisonings and evidence-based alternatives such
as OPSs.
Unsanctioned SCSs are frequently recognized as providing evidence
of the need for the establishment of SCSs that more fully enact low-
threshold service design and are inclusive and responsive to PWUD
(Davidson, Lopez, & Kral, 2018; Kennedy et al., 2017; Kerr et al., 2017;
McNeil, Dilley et al., 2014; McNeil, Kerr, Lampkin, & Small, 2015). Just
as SCS originated from the organizing of PWUD and harm reduction
activists (Hyshka et al., 2013; Kerr et al., 2017; McCann & Temenos,
2015) so did OPSs in Canada. Overdose prevention sites, originating as
unsanctioned “pop-up” sites established by activists and drug-user
groups, drove subsequent government responses and initiated a context
of innovation similar to those processes Lancaster, Treloar, and Ritter,
(2017) identified as re-problematisation and resistance. When state-
approved harm reduction lacks key harm reduction principles (Hyshka
et al., 2017), fails to challenge moralizing, stigmatizing and crim-
inalizing structural forces (Pauly et al., 2017; Treloar, Mao, & Wilson,
2016), or avoids the inclusion of any interventions that may risk poli-
tical repercussion (Wild et al., 2017) resistance will include unsanc-
tioned alternatives. It is clear that these actions played a key role in
shifting the outer setting towards implementation but such actions
combined with a public health crises are only partially captured in CFIR
framework.
We found innovative and inclusionary practices were possible
within state-sanctioned OPSs, as the sites were developed and defined
in community, centering PWUD in service design, implementation and
delivery. Consistent with the research on unsanctioned injection sites
(Davidson et al., 2018; McNeil, Dilley et al., 2014), we found that rules
discounting drug-user culture limit access and effectiveness. Most sig-
nificantly, permitting assisted injections and allowing the splitting and
sharing of drugs was determined to be in the best interests of service
users and the mandate of OPSs as a response to illegal drug overdose
deaths. Research from Insite in Vancouver, BC Canada has documented
how regulations that prohibit sharing drugs and assisted injections
contribute to barriers to using the services (Small, Ainsworth, Wood, &
Kerr, 2011) notably impacting youth and women (Cheng et al., 2016).
Within blocks of the state-sanctioned SCS Insite, Vancouver’s drug-user
group VANDU successfully implemented an unsanctioned SCS in which
trained peer volunteers provided assisted injections for service users
until shut down by authorities, demonstrating the limits of sanctioned
SCSs’ policy for more systemically vulnerable communities of drug-
users (McNeil, Dilley et al., 2014). Multiple intervention characteristics
including the ability to internally develop the intervention, existing
evidence base for the intervention, the ability to tailor the intervention
to the needs of users as well as the relative low cost were all features of
the intervention facilitating rapid implementation.
Our research locates OPSs as a service design located between the
sanctioned and unsanctioned divide. Overdose prevention sites in our
study and throughout the province are sanctioned sites under the Public
Health Emergency Act while still community-defined and reportedly
more reflective of immediate service user and agency needs and con-
texts. There are many similarities between our findings of OPSs to
Davidson et al. (2018) recent research of an unsanctioned injection site
in the US. They describe the unsanctioned site as “a rapid and user-
driven response to urgent public health needs” with the “ability to
shape rules and procedures around user need rather than to meet po-
litical concerns” (p. 37). However, OPSs as sanctioned sites are not
subject to the same risks, challenges and limits faced by unsanctioned
sites. Most evident is that the removal of potential legal consequences
for staff and service users and the receipt of health funding, limitations
identified by Davidson et al. (2018) in the unsanctioned site in the US.
McNeil, Small et al. (2014) research at an unsanctioned site in
Vancouver illustrates how particular harm reduction policies – those
B. Wallace et al.
International Journal of Drug Policy 66 (2019) 64–72
70
 imposed through current SCSs sanctioning processes – act as a tool of
neoliberal governmentality. In describing the benefits of providing as-
sisted injection services, and the specific benefits for particularly vul-
nerable communities such as women and people with disabilities using
drugs, McNeil et al. highlight how state enforced practices not only
limit public health goals but further regulate and control drug-users’
bodies, responsibilizing individual drug-users while ignoring the con-
texts in which they live and thus reinforcing governmentality. Kerr
et al. (2017) also decry the lack of innovation within SCSs and cite the
need to integrate assisted injecting (as well as safer smoking interven-
tions) to address barriers knowingly associated with gender, disability,
and other structural vulnerabilities, along with an overall de-medica-
lizing of SCSs to be more inclusive of peer-based models. Such com-
mentaries support the vital need to scale-up OPSs as sites of innovation
and inclusion to fulfil mandates of harm reduction and health equity on
a permanent and ongoing basis. Thus, OPSs as an intervention that are
peer driven provide an opportunity for implementation of services that
are more responsive to users as compared to clinically driven SCS.
While a strength of this study was the initiation of the study by
community-engaged researchers at the time when OPSs were first im-
plemented, the data is also limited to this time and place. As im-
plementation research, our study occurred during the early im-
plementation process of the OPSs. The programs continued to develop
and change following this study and these modifications are not fully
captured in this paper. Secondly, the research was limited to a single
city and does not reflect the known diversity of OPSs implementation
processes and service designs that emerged throughout the approxi-
mately twenty sites established in BC in early 2017. As a qualitative
study, the strength is that it provides a view of the perspectives of
participants involved in implementation that is unique to these sites
and more research is needed to confirm and/or expand understanding
of implementation in other sites. Finally, the research was limited in its
collection of financial and statistical data as a result of the research
occurring so early in program implementation and data being too
preliminary or not yet available. Nonetheless, the study presents a
unique capturing of the rapid implementation of an international and
pioneering harm reduction response within a context of a public health
overdose emergency.
Conclusion
The rapid implementation of OPSs in the province of British
Columbia, Canada during a public health emergency provides an in-
ternational example of an alternative to drawn-out, cumbersome
sanctioning processes for SCSs. Unsanctioned SCSs provide alternative
evidence to inform the implementation of SCSs that are more inclusive
and responsive to PWUD. Our research adds to this evidence. In parti-
cular, we found evidence that shifts in the outer context facilitated
rapid implementation of a more user focused and driven intervention.
We found innovation and inclusionary practices that typically define
unsanctioned
sites
were
possible
within
state-sanctioned
OPSs.
Community-driven processes of implementation involve centering
PWUD in service design, implementation and delivery. Overdose pre-
vention sites provide an example of a novel service design and nimble
implementation process that combines the benefits of state-sanctioned
service and community-driven implementation. As described by those
individuals implementing the services, OPSs effectively provide su-
pervised injection services and overdose responses while addressing
many of the documented limitations of existing sanctioned SCSs im-
plementation processes and resultant service designs. However, OPSs
lack permanency and ongoing funding due to enactment under a
Ministerial Order that is limited to the duration of the public health
emergency. Specific attention needs to be paid to the development
maintenance of OPSs as primary points of contact and entry into the
health system and as part of an ongoing system of substance use ser-
vices.
Acknowledgement
We acknowledge Bernie Pauly’s support as the Island Health Scholar
in Residence in this project. The funding body had no role in the study
design or preparation of the manuscript. The authors report no conflicts
of interest to declare.
References
BC Coroners Service (2017). Illicit Drug Overdose Deaths in BC, January 1, 2007 to December
31, 2017. Retrieved from Burnabyhttp://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/public-safety-
and-emergency-services/death-investigation/statistical/illicit-drug.pdf.
BC Ministry of Health (2016a). Ministerial order supports urgent overdose response action
[Press release]. Retrieved fromhttps://news.gov.bc.ca/releases/2016HLTH0094-
002737.
BC Ministry of Health (2016b). Provincial health officer declares public health emergency
[Press release]. Retrieved fromhttps://news.gov.bc.ca/10694.
BCCDC (2018). Provincial overdose dataRetrieved fromwww.bccdc.ca/health-
professionals/clinical-resources/harm-reduction/overdose-data-reports.
Brend, Y. (2016). Activists bring more pop-up injections sites to Vancouver’s overdose ‘battle
zone’. November 21, 2016, Retrieved fromCBC Newshttp://www.cbc.ca/news/
canada/british-columbia/drug-overdose-vancouver-bc-pop-up-battle-zone-insite-
injection-blue-hue-1.3860193.
Cheng, T., Kerr, T., Small, W., Dong, H., Montaner, J., Wood, E., ... DeBeck, K. (2016).
High Prevalence of Assisted Injection Among Street-Involved Youth in a Canadian
Setting. AIDS and Behavior, 20(2), 377–384.
Ciccarone, D. (2017). Fentanyl in the US heroin supply: A rapidly changing risk en-
vironment. International Journal of Drug Policy, 46, 107–111. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.drugpo.2017.06.010.
Ciccarone, D., Ondocsin, J., & Mars, S. G. (2017). Heroin uncertainties: Exploring users’
perceptions of fentanyl-adulterated and -substituted ‘heroin’. International Journal of
Drug Policy, 46, 146–155. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2017.06.004.
City of Victoria (2003). Downtown action plan announced [press release].
City of Victoria (2005). Fitting the pieces together: Towards an integrated harm reduction
response to illicit drug use in Victoria, B.C. Retrieved from Victoria, BC.
City of Victoria (2007). Mayor’s task force on breaking the cycle of mental illness, addictions
and homelessness: A Victoria model. Retrieved from Victoria, BChttp://www.victoria.
ca/EN/main/city/mayor-council-committees/task-forces/homelessness.html.
Damschroder, L. J., & Lowery, J. C. (2013). Evaluation of a large-scale weight manage-
ment program using the consolidated framework for implementation research (CFIR).
Implementation Science, 8(1), 51.
Damschroder, L. J., Aron, D. C., Keith, R. E., Kirsh, S. R., Alexander, J. A., & Lowery, J. C.
(2009). Fostering implementation of health services research findings into practice: A
consolidated framework for advancing implementation science. Implementation
Science, 4(1), 50.
Davidson, P. J., Lopez, A. M., & Kral, A. H. (2018). Using drugs in un/safe spaces: Impact
of perceived illegality on an underground supervised injecting facility in the United
States. International Journal of Drug Policy, 53, 37–44.
Fairbairn, N., Coffin, P. O., & Walley, A. Y. (2017). Naloxone for heroin, prescription
opioid, and illicitly made fentanyl overdoses: Challenges and innovations responding
to a dynamic epidemic. International Journal of Drug Policy, 46, 172–179.
Fischer, B., Kendall, P., & Allard, C. (2008). The case for a supervised drug consumption
site trial in Victoria, british Columbia. British Columbia Medical Journal, 50(3),
130–131.
Fischer, B., Murphy, Y., Rudzinski, K., & MacPherson, D. (2016). Illicit drug use and
harms, and related interventions and policy in Canada: A narrative review of select
key indicators and developments since 2000. International Journal of Drug Policy, 27,
23–35.
Freeman, K., Jones, C. G. A., Weatherburn, D. J., Rutter, S., Spooner, C. J., & Donnelly, N.
(2005). The impact of the Sydney medically supervised injecting centre (MSIC) on
crime. Drug and Alcohol Review, 24(2), 173–184. https://doi.org/10.1080/
09595230500167460.
Health Canada (2017). Government of Canada actions on opioids: 2016 and 2017. Retrieved
fromhttps://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/publications/healthy-
living/actions-opioids-2016-2017.html.
Hunt, N., Lloyd, C., Kimber, J., & Tompkins, C. (2007). Public injecting and willingness to
use a drug consumption room among needle exchange programme attendees in the
UK. International Journal of Drug Policy, 18(1), 62–65.
Hyshka, E., Anderson-Baron, J., Karekezi, K., Belle-Isle, L., Elliott, R., Pauly, B., ... Wild, T.
C. (2017). Harm reduction in name, but not substance: A comparative analysis of
current Canadian provincial and territorial policy frameworks. Harm Reduction
Journal, 14(1), 50. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12954-017-0177-7.
Hyshka, E., Bubela, T., & Wild, T. C. (2013). Prospects for scaling-up supervised injection
facilities in Canada: The role of evidence in legal and political decision-making.
Addiction, 108, 468–476. https://doi.org/10.1111/add.12064.
Island Health (2016). Supervised consumption services – Service benefits and service devel-
opment history in Victoria. Retrieved fromhttp://www.viha.ca/NR/rdonlyres/
DE78AD27-CE64-494B-8C39-7CD7E902EE3B/0/scsbenefitsandoverdosestats.pdf.
Kennedy, M. C., Karamouzian, M., & Kerr, T. (2017). Public health and public order
outcomes associated with supervised drug consumption facilities: A systematic re-
view. Current HIV/AIDS Reports, 14(5), 161–183. https://doi-org.ezproxy.library.
uvic.ca/10.1007/s11904-017-0363-y.
Kerr, T., Mitra, S., Kennedy, M. C., & McNeil, R. (2017). Supervised injection facilities in
B. Wallace et al.
International Journal of Drug Policy 66 (2019) 64–72
71
 Canada: Past, present, and future. Harm Reduction Journal, 14(28), https://doi.org/
10.1186/s12954-017-0154-1.
Kerr, T., Oleson, M., & Wood, E. (2004). Harm-reduction activism: A case study of an
unsanctioned user-run safe injection site. Canadian HIV/AIDS Policy and Law Review,
9(2), 13–19.
Kimber, J., Dolan, K., & Wodak, A. (2005). Survey of drug consumption rooms: Service
delivery and perceived public health and amenity impact. Drug and Alcohol Review,
24(1), 21–24.
Krüsi, A., Small, W., Wood, E., & Kerr, T. (2009). An integrated supervised injection
program within a care facility for HIV-positive individuals: A qualitative evaluation.
AIDS Care, 21(5), 638–644. https://doi.org/10.1080/09540120802385645.
Lancaster, K., Treloar, C., & Ritter, A. (2017). ‘Naloxone works’: The politics of knowledge
in ‘evidence-based’drug policy. Health: An Interdisciplinary Journal for the Study of
Health Illness and Medicine, 21(3), 278–294.
Lupick, T. (2016). Unsanctioned supervised-injection site set up in Surrey draws attention to
drug-overdose deaths. July 27, 2016, Retrieved fromThe Georgia Straighthttp://www.
straight.com/news/745196/unsanctioned-supervised-injection-site-set-surrey-draws-
attention-drug-overdose-deaths.
MacNeil, J., & Pauly, B. (2010). Impact: A case study examining the closure of a large
urban fixed site needle exchange in Canada. Harm Reduction Journal, 7(1), 11.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1477-7517-7-11.
McCann, E., & Temenos, C. (2015). Mobilizing drug consumption rooms: Inter-place
networks and harm reduction drug policy. Health & Place, 31, 216–223.
McNeil, R., Kerr, T., Lampkin, H., & Small, W. (2015). “We need somewhere to smoke
crack”: An ethnographic study of an unsanctioned safer smoking room in Vancouver,
Canada. International Journal of Drug Policy, 26(7), 645–652.
McNeil, R., Dilley, L. B., Guirguis-Younger, M., Hwang, S. W., & Small, W. (2014). Impact
of supervised drug consumption services on access to and engagement with care at a
palliative and supportive care facility for people living with HIV/AIDS: A qualitative
study. Journal of the International AIDS Society, 17, 188855. https://doi.org/10.7448/
IAS.17.1.18855.
McNeil, R., Small, W., Lampkin, H., Shannon, K., & Kerr, T. (2014). “People knew they
could come here to get help”: An ethnographic study of assisted injection practices at
a peer-run ‘unsanctioned’supervised drug consumption room in a Canadian setting.
AIDS and Behavior, 18(3), 473–485.
O’Shea, M. (2007). Introducing safer injecting facilities (SIFs) in the Republic of Ireland:
‘chipping away’ at policy change. Drugs Education Prevention & Policy, 14(1), 75–88.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09687630600911684.
Pauly, B., Wallace, B., & Barber, K. (2017). Turning a blind eye: Implementation of harm
reduction in a transitional programme setting. Drugs Education Prevention & Policy,
25(1), 21–30. https://doi.org/10.1080/09687637.2017.1337081.
Potier, C., Laprévote, V., Dubois-Arber, F., Cottencin, O., & Rolland, B. (2014). Supervised
injection services: What has been demonstrated? A systematic literature review. Drug
and Alcohol Dependence, 145, 48–68.
Rudd, R. A., Aleshire, N., Zibbell, J. E., & Gladden, R. M. (2016). Increases in drug and
opioid overdose deaths—United States, 2000–2014. American Journal of
Transplantation, 16(4), 1378–1382. https://doi.org/10.1111/ajt.13776.
Small, W., Ainsworth, L., Wood, E., & Kerr, T. (2011). IDU Perspectives on the design and
operation of North America’s first medically supervised injection facility. Substance
Use & Misuse, 46(5), 561–568. https://doi.org/10.3109/10826084.2010.517714.
Small, W., Moore, D., Shoveller, J., Wood, E., & Kerr, T. (2012). Perceptions of risk and
safety within injection settings: Injection drug users’ reasons for attending a
supervised injecting facility in Vancouver, Canada. Health Risk & Society, 14(4),
307–324. https://doi.org/10.1080/13698575.2012.680950.
Stajduhar, K. I., Poffenroth, L., & Wong, E. (2000). Missed opportunities: Putting a face on
injection drug use and HIV/AIDS in the Capital Health Region. Retrieved fromhttp://
www.cheos.ubc.ca/monographs/Monograph10.pdf.
Stake, R. E. (2013). Multiple case study analysis. Guilford Press.
Strike, C., Watson, T. M., Kolla, G., Penn, R., & Bayoumi, A. M. (2015). Ambivalence
about supervised injection facilities among community stakeholders. Harm Reduction
Journal, 12(26), https://doi.org/10.1186/s12954-015-0060-3.
Treloar, C., Mao, L., & Wilson, H. (2016). Beyond equipment distribution in Needle and
Syringe Programmes: An exploratory analysis of blood-borne virus risk and other
measures of client need. Harm Reduction Journal, 13(1), 18.
Wallace, B., Barber, K., & Pauly, B. B. (2018). Sheltering risks: Implementation of harm
reduction in homeless shelters during an overdose emergency. International Journal of
Drug Policy, 53, 83–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2017.12.011.
Wallace, B., Pauly, B., Barber, K., Vallance, K., Patterson, J., & Stockwell, T. (2016). Every
Washroom: De facto consumption sites in the epicenter of an overdose public health
emergency. Retrieved from Victoria, BCwww.uvic.ca/research/centres/carbc/assets/
docs/bulletin-15-every-washroom-overdose-emergency.pdf.
Wallace, B., Pauly, B., Perkin, K., & Ranfft, M. (2015). Shifting the evaluative gaze:
Community-based program evaluation in the homeless sector. Gateways: International
Journal of Community Research and Engagement, 8(1), 43–58. https://doi.org/10.
5130/ijcre.v8i1.3936.
Watson, T. M., Bayoumi, A., Kolla, G., Penn, R., Fischer, B., Luce, J., ... Strike, C. (2012).
Police perceptions of supervised consumption sites (SCSs): A qualitative study.
Substance Use & Misuse, 47(4), 364–374. https://doi.org/10.3109/10826084.2011.
645104.
Watson, T. M., Strike, C., Kolla, G., Penn, R., & Bayoumi, A. M. (2015). “Drugs don’t have
age limits”: The challenge of setting age restrictions for supervised injection facilities.
Drugs Education Prevention & Policy, 22(4), 370–379. https://doi.org/10.3109/
09687637.2015.1034239.
Wenger, L. D., Arreola, S. G., & Kral, A. H. (2011). The prospect of implementing a safer
Injection Facility in San Francisco: Perspectives of community stakeholders. The
International Journal of Drug Policy, 22(3), 239–241. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
drugpo.2011.01.001.
Wild, T. C., Pauly, B., Belle-Isle, L., Cavalieri, W., Elliott, R., Strike, C., & Hyshka, E.
(2017). Canadian harm reduction policies: A comparative content analysis of pro-
vincial and territorial documents, 2000–2015. International Journal of Drug Policy, 45,
9–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2017.03.014.
Wood, E., Kerr, T., Spittal, P. M., Small, W., Tyndall, M. W., O’shaughnessy, M. V., ...
Schechter, M. T. (2003). An external evaluation of a peer-run “unsanctioned” syringe
exchange program. Journal of Urban Health, 80(3), 455–464.
Wood, E., Kerr, T., Tyndall, M. W., & Montaner, J. S. G. (2008). The Canadian govern-
ment’s treatment of scientific process and evidence: Inside the evaluation of North
America’s first supervised injecting facility. International Journal of Drug Policy, 19(3),
220–225. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2007.11.001.
Wood, E., Tyndall, M. W., Lai, C., Montaner, J. S. G., & Kerr, T. (2006). Impact of a
medically supervised safer injecting facility on drug dealing and other drug-related
crime. Substance Abuse Treatment Prevention and Policy, 1(1), 13. https://doi.org/10.
1186/1747-597X-1-13.
Yin, R. K. (2009). Case study research: Design and methods (4th ed.). London: Sage.
B. Wallace et al.
International Journal of Drug Policy 66 (2019) 64–72
72
