 © JNCCN—Journal of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network | Volume 16   Number 1 | January 2018
Original  
Research
35
Abstract
Background: Helping people achieve their preferred location of care is an important indicator of quality end-of-life (EOL) care. Using a 
sample of Australian medical oncology outpatients, this study examined (1) their preferred location of EOL care; (2) their perceived benefits 
and worries of receiving care in that location; (3) the percentage who had discussed preferences with their doctor and/or support person; 
and (4) whether they wanted their doctor to ask them where they wanted to die. Methods: Adults with a confirmed diagnosis of cancer 
were approached between September 2015 and January 2016 in the waiting room of an Australian oncology outpatient clinic. Consenting 
participants completed a home-based pen-and-paper survey indicating preferred location of care, perceived benefits and worries of that 
location, whether they had discussed preferences with their doctors, and whether they were willing to be asked about their preferences. 
Results: A total of 203 patients returned the survey (47% of those eligible). Less than half preferred to be cared for at home (47%), 34% 
preferred a hospice/palliative care unit, and 19% preferred the hospital. Common benefits and worries associated with locations included 
perceived burden on others, familiarity of environment, availability of expert medical care, symptom management, and likelihood of hav-
ing wishes respected. More patients had discussed preferences with their support persons (41%) than doctors (7%). Most wanted a doctor 
to ask them about preferred location of care (87%) and thought it was important to die in the location of their choice (93%). Conclusions: 
Patients were willing to have clinicians to ask them where they wanted to die, although few had discussed their preferences with doctors. 
Although home was the most preferred location for many patients, the overall variation suggests that clinicians should adopt a systematic 
approach to eliciting patient preferences.
J Natl Compr Canc Netw 2018;16(1):35–41 
doi: 10.6004/jnccn.2017.7025
Research into location of end-of-life (EOL) care offers 
insight into whether people are accessing resources that 
aim to improve quality of dying and support appropriate 
service planning.1 A recent population-level study of pa-
tients with cancer in 14 countries reported that between 
12% and 57% of patients die at home and between 22% 
From aHealth Behaviour Research Collaborative, School of Medicine and 
Public Health, The University of Newcastle, Callaghan; bHunter Medical 
Research Institute, New Lambton Heights; cDepartment of Medical 
Oncology, Calvary Mater Newcastle, Waratah; dClinical Ethics and Health 
Law, The University of Newcastle, Callaghan; and eClinical Research Design 
and Statistics Support Unit, Hunter Medical Research Institute, New 
Lambton Heights, Australia. 
Submitted May 14, 2017; accepted for publication August 9, 2017.
The authors have disclosed that they have no financial interests, 
arrangements, affiliations, or commercial interests with the manufacturers 
of any products discussed in this article or their competitors.
Dr. Waller is supported by an Australian Research Council DECRA 
(150101262). This research was supported by a National Health and 
Medical Research Council Partnership grant (1059760), a Strategic Research 
Partnership Grant (CSR 11-02) from Cancer Council NSW to the Newcastle 
Cancer Control Collaborative (New-3C), and infrastructure funding from 
the Hunter Medical Research Institute.
Author contributions: Study concept and design: Waller, Sanson-Fisher, 
Zdenkowski, Douglas. Patient recruitment: Zdenkowski, Douglas. 
Data acquisition: Waller, Walsh. Data analysis and interpretation: Hall. 
Manuscript preparation: All authors. 
Correspondence: Amy Waller, PhD, Health Behaviour Research Collabora-
tive, The University of Newcastle, Hunter Medical Research Institute,  
Callaghan NSW 2308, Australia. E-mail: amy.waller@newcastle.edu.au
The Right Place at the Right Time: Medical  
Oncology Outpatients’ Perceptions of Location of 
End-of-Life Care
Amy Waller, PhDa,b; Rob Sanson-Fisher, PhDa,b; Nicholas Zdenkowski, BMedc; Charles Douglas, PhDd;  
Alix Hall, PhDe; and Justin Walsh, BA
a,b
and 78% die in the hospital.1 Where people are cared 
for at EOL is an important public health issue. EOL care 
delivered in hospitals is often resource-intensive, costly, 
and does not consistently meet patients’ needs. Conse-
quently, healthcare policies in many countries aim to 
reduce EOL hospital admissions and hospital mortality.2 
 © JNCCN—Journal of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network | Volume 16   Number 1 | January 2018
Original Research
Waller et al
36
Despite the increasing availability of hospice facili-
ties and palliative care (PC) services, significant gaps 
remain in their resources and utilization.3 Instead, 
home care has been advocated as a way of minimiz-
ing the demands placed on hospitals and long-term 
care facilities.4 However, home care may not be an 
appropriate or feasible option for everyone. Insuffi-
cient community-based services often shifts the bur-
den of care to family members and friends.4 These 
individuals are not always adequately prepared to 
manage the complex needs of those nearing EOL at 
home,5 which can lead to multiple hospital admis-
sions.6,7 Additionally, many patients do not have in-
formal carers available to provide home care.8 
Helping people achieve their preferred care loca-
tion might be more indicative of high-quality EOL 
care. However, patients infrequently die in their pre-
ferred location.9 There is variation between studies 
in the proportion of people who prefer to be cared 
for at home (25%–87%) or in a hospice (9%–30%) 
at EOL.2 Despite hospitals being the most common 
place of death in many countries, few choose to be 
cared for in these facilities.2 Home care is also highly 
valued by informal carers (25%–64%).10 Patients who 
are older (age ≥55 y), female, single, and of a higher 
socioeconomic status have been found to prefer hos-
pice care, whereas those who are younger, male, of 
better physical health, and of poorer mental health 
have been found to prefer home care.11 However, few 
studies have explored how patients formulate prefer-
ences in order to choose one location over another.2 
In one US study of terminally ill patients with cancer, 
perceived quality of life, the availability and capacity 
of family carers, the impact their choice would have 
on others, and quality of healthcare were major con-
siderations in preference.12 
Greater understanding of patient choices and 
the underlying reasons for these choices can help 
inform the development of more effective, patient-
centered care models that may be more widely avail-
able and integrated across care settings.2 To do this, 
patients must be given opportunities to articulate 
and implement their choice through proper discus-
sions with key individuals, including healthcare pro-
viders and support persons. When patients’ prefer-
ences are known, their likelihood of dying in the 
location of their choice may be enhanced. Improved 
processes for the identification and communication 
of preferred place of death have been shown to in-
crease the likelihood that patients achieve their wish 
to die at home (from 31% to 71%).13,14 Those who 
did not express a preference were 3 times more likely 
to die in the hospital.13,14 The extent to which pa-
tients want to discuss, and have already discussed, 
their preferences for location of care with providers 
and support persons must first be established. 
Using a sample of Australian medical oncology 
outpatients, this study examined (1) their preferred 
location of EOL care and the importance of achiev-
ing this preference; (2) their perceived benefits and 
worries of receiving care in that location; (3) the 
percentage who had discussed preferences for EOL 
care with their doctor and/or support person; and 
 
(4) their willingness to be asked by their doctor 
where they wanted to die. 
Methods
Design
A cross-sectional survey was performed of medical 
oncology outpatients recruited from a single tertiary 
treatment center. Data on disease stage were ex-
tracted by a medical oncologist from patient medical 
records. 
Participants
Eligible patients had a confirmed cancer diagnosis, 
were attending the clinic for their second or subse-
quent appointment (to ensure that patients had expe-
rienced cancer care), were aged ≥18 years, were able 
to read and understand English, and were deemed by 
clinical staff to be physically and mentally able to give 
informed consent and to complete the survey. 
Procedure 
Clinic staff identified eligible patients from daily 
clinic lists. A trained research assistant obtained in-
formed consent by consecutively approaching eligi-
ble patients while they waited for their appointment. 
Given the potentially sensitive nature of the items, 
oncologists asked that consenting patients complete 
a pen-and-paper survey at home. Nonresponders re-
ceived a reminder letter 2 weeks later.
Outcome Measures
Preferred Location of Care: Participants were asked, 
“If you had a choice, where would you prefer to be 
 © JNCCN—Journal of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network | Volume 16   Number 1 | January 2018
Original Research
Patient Perceptions of EOL Care Location
37
cared for at the end of life?” Response options were: 
(1) in your own home, (2) in a relative’s home, (3) in 
a hospital, or (4) in a hospice/PC unit (ie, inpatient 
hospice facility or PC unit).
Perceived Benefits and Worries: Participants then 
answered a list of potential benefits and worries spe-
cific to their preferred place of care, including home, 
hospital, or hospice/PC. Participants were asked, 
“Which of the following might be benefits to receiv-
ing care at the end of life in [preferred location]?” 
Participants were asked to rank, in order of prefer-
ence, the top 3 most important benefits from the list 
provided (ie, “1” represented the most important 
perceived benefit). Participants were then asked, 
“Which of the following might you be most worried 
about if you were receiving care at the end of life in 
[preferred location]?” and rank their top 3 most im-
portant worries in order of their preference.
Discussion of Preferences With Others: Partici-
pants were asked to respond either “yes” or “no” to 
the question, “Have you ever discussed where you 
would like to be cared for at the end of life with your 
(a) doctor and/or (b) support person?” 
Willingness to Discuss Preferences: Under a head-
ing that specified, “What you would want if you were 
facing the end of your life,” participants were also 
asked to respond to the statement “I would want my 
healthcare team to ask me…where I would prefer to 
die,” with options ranging from strongly disagree to 
strongly agree. 
Dying in Location of Choice: Under a heading that 
specified, “What you would want if you were facing 
the end of your life,” participants were also asked to 
respond to the statement, “I would want to be able 
to die in the location of my choice (eg, at home, 
hospital, hospice, other),” with options ranging from 
strongly disagree to strongly agree. 
Sociodemographic and Clinical Characteristics: 
Sociodemographic and clinical characteristics in-
cluded self-reported sex, age, postcode, and can-
cer type. Patient estimation of life expectancy was 
obtained via an item “What is your estimation of 
your life expectancy?” Response options included 
“less than 6 months,” “6 months to 1 year,” “1 to 
2 years,” “more than 2 years,” “don’t know but I 
would like this information,” and “don’t know and 
I do not want this information.” Potential for cure 
was a dichotomous variable (“potentially curable 
versus incurable”), obtained using data extracted 
from the patients’ medical records and reviewed by 
a medical oncologist. 
Statistical Analysis: Stata/IC 11.1 (StataCorp LP
, 
College Station, TX) was used for all analyses. Con-
sent bias for sex was assessed with chi-square analyses. 
Frequency and percentage data were used to describe 
(1) patients’ preferred place to receive EOL care and 
whether they agreed or disagreed it was important to 
die in the location of their choice; (2) whether pa-
tients had discussed their preference with their doc-
tor and/or support person; and (3) whether patients 
would like to be asked by their healthcare team where 
they would like to die. The percentage and frequency 
of participants ranking each “benefit” and “worry” as 
either 1, 2, or 3 was calculated. To assess the relevant 
importance that patients attributed to each of the 
benefits and worries, the rank of each item was reverse 
scored and then the sum for each item was calculated 
(eg, each time an item was ranked 1, it received a 
score of 3; items ranked 2 received a score of 2; and 
items ranked 3 received a score of 1). 
Ethics Approvals
The University of Newcastle Human Research Eth-
ics Committee (H-2014-0411) and the ethics com-
mittee of the participating health service approved 
the study (14/11/19/4.04).
Results
Sample
Of the 436 eligible patients approached, 366 con-
sented to participate (83% of eligible), and 203 
(47% of eligible) returned a survey. Table 1 presents 
the characteristics of patients who returned a survey.
Preferred Location for EOL Care
Overall, 47% of patients (n=93) indicated a pref-
erence to be cared for either in their own home or 
in the home of a relative. Just more than one-third 
of patients (n=66; 34%) indicated a preference to 
be cared for in a hospice or PC unit, whereas 19% 
(n=37) indicated they would prefer to be cared for 
in a hospital. 
 © JNCCN—Journal of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network | Volume 16   Number 1 | January 2018
Original Research
Waller et al
38
Importance of Achieving Preference
Most patients (n=185; 93%) strongly agreed/agreed 
that it was important for them to be able to die in the 
location of their choice.
Patient Perceptions of Most Important Benefits 
and Worries
Home Care: The top 5 perceived benefits of home 
care were, in descending order: receiving care from 
family and friends, being in a familiar environment, 
being physically close to their loved ones, not being 
alone, and their family being able to have a more 
“normal life.” The biggest worries were, in descend-
ing order: not having pain managed well, concern 
about emotional “scarring” of family/friends, not 
having access to expert medical care, family/friends 
not knowing what to do during/after death, and not 
being found for several hours after death. See supple-
mental eAppendix 1 (available with this article at 
JNCCN.org).
Hospice: The top 5 perceived benefits of hospice 
care were, in descending order: pain being managed 
well, not being a burden to family and friends, fam-
ily being able to have a more “normal life,” access to 
specialized medical care, and having medical staff on 
call. The top 5 perceived worries were, in descending 
order: being in an unfriendly and clinical environ-
ment, having family’s/friends’ last memory of them 
being in a hospice facility, lack of privacy, not being 
ready to die, and being isolated. See supplemental 
eAppendix 2.
Hospital: The top 5 perceived benefits were, in de-
scending order: pain being managed well, not being 
a burden to family and friends, having medical staff 
on call, family being able to have a more “normal 
life,” and having access to lots of medical care. The 
top 5 worries were, in descending order: not having 
their wishes respected, not being treated respectfully, 
having family’s/friends’ last memory of them being in 
a hospital, getting an infection or becoming sicker, 
and hospital being a distance for visitors to travel. 
See supplemental eAppendix 3.
Discussions About Preferred Location of Care 
Overall, fewer than half of all patients (n=82; 41%) 
reported having discussed where they wanted to be 
cared for at EOL with either their doctor or support 
person. More patients had discussed it with their 
support person (41%; n=79) than with their doctor 
(6.7%; n=12). 
Desire to be Asked About Preferred Location of 
EOL Care
Most patients indicated they would want their 
healthcare provider to ask them about where they 
would prefer to die if facing EOL (n=176; 86.7%). 
Discussion
Almost all patients emphasized that being able to 
die in the location of their choice was important to 
them. Nearly half of the patients surveyed indicated 
a preference for receiving care at home, which is 
consistent with findings of previous studies.10 One-
third of patients indicated a preference for receiving 
care in a hospice/palliative unit. This proportion is 
Table 1.  
Sociodemographic and Clinical  
Characteristics (N=203)
Characteristics
Sample
n (%)
Sex
Male
84 (41%)
Female
119 (59%)
Age, y 
Mean (SD)
65 (11.5)
Australian born
Yes
173 (85%)
No 
25 (12%)
Missing
5 (2.5%)
Cancer type
Breast
69 (34%)
Colorectal
35 (17%)
Prostate
21 (10%)
Lung
21 (10%)
Other
55 (27%)
Missing
2 (1%)
Current cancer status (from medical records)
Curable
98 (48%)
Incurable
94 (46%)
Missing 
11 (5.4%)
Life expectancy
≤2 y
21 (10%)
>2 y
69 (34%)
Unsure
108 (53%)
Missing
5 (2.5%)
 © JNCCN—Journal of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network | Volume 16   Number 1 | January 2018
Original Research
Patient Perceptions of EOL Care Location
39
higher than reported in studies conducted a decade 
ago,11,15 which may reflect a growing recognition of 
the availability and potential benefits of these ser-
vices among patients with cancer,16,17 and be a result 
of increasing efforts to integrate oncology and PC 
services.18 Although more than half of Australians 
die in hospitals, only one-fifth of patients selected 
the hospital as their most preferred location of care. 
The perception that dying in an institution is a fail-
ure of the system does not acknowledge the poten-
tial cost to those called on to care for the person at 
home.19 Patients dying at home may have unintend-
ed consequences for caregivers, such as deterioration 
in physical health, inability to return to work, and 
protracted grief.2,19,20 Further research is needed to 
establish whether the involvement of PC shifts care 
from institutions to home, or whether dying at home 
is better than dying in a hospital.2,19 The limited 
evidence for benefits of one location over another, 
combined with the substantial proportion of patients 
who prefer to die in settings outside the home, sug-
gests that although investment in services such as 
home PC may help reduce the burden on hospitals 
and inpatient hospices, improvements in EOL care 
should continue across all care settings. 
When asked, patients in this study identified 
interpersonal factors, such as the opportunity to be 
cared for by family or friends and being in a familiar 
environment, as important benefits of receiving care 
in the home. In contrast, patients reported being 
worried about the quality of medical care available to 
them, as well as the potential burden on their family/
friends. These concerns have also been reported by 
other patient groups.12,21 Although there is conflict-
ing evidence about the quality of care received in in-
patient settings versus at home,2 some patients per-
ceive that having access to professional medical care 
in inpatient settings is essential. People may also feel 
a sense of security from receiving care at a hospital 
with which they are already familiar. 
The perception that higher-quality EOL care 
is delivered in settings outside the home was also 
echoed in the views of those indicating a preference 
for care in institutions. Patients identified availabil-
ity of expert medical care and pain management, as 
well as reduced burden on family/friends, as impor-
tant. However, participants were worried about be-
ing in an unfriendly environment that lacked pri-
vacy, not receiving care in accordance with their 
wishes, and the potential emotional impact on fam-
ily/friends of having their last memories of the pa-
tient be in a facility. Some of these concerns can 
be easily addressed, such as by allowing the patient, 
family, and friends to see the facility and meet some 
of the staff to address concerns about the clinical en-
vironment. Other concerns, such as worry about not 
receiving care in accordance with wishes, highlight 
the need for improved communication between pa-
tients, families, and providers regarding goals of care, 
and for sharing plans with all those involved.22 Al-
though less frequently endorsed, practical concerns 
such as family/friends not knowing what to do after 
death could be addressed through education. Ensur-
ing the accuracy of patients’ perceptions of the po-
tential costs and benefits of different EOL care loca-
tions is critical; inaccurate perceptions may result in 
unwanted medical care and adversely impact patient 
and family outcomes.23,24
Almost half of the patients surveyed had spo-
ken to their support person about their preference. 
However, very few patients had discussed their pref-
erences with their doctor. This is surprising because 
most indicated that they would want their doctor to 
ask them where they wanted to die if facing EOL. 
Further, almost half of the sample had incurable 
cancer. The low rates may reflect barriers previous-
ly identified in the literature, such as clinicians’ be-
ing time-poor or having concerns about their abil-
ity to conduct discussions well, or their perception 
that patients do not want to discuss these topics.25–27 
Conversely, patients and support persons may not be 
asking about this issue, because they may perceive 
that the doctor does not have time or that the doc-
tor does not feel comfortable discussing the topic.27 
Strategies to enhance the knowledge and skills 
of both patients and clinicians in effectively initi-
ating and responding to discussions are needed. 
Question prompt lists may improve patient and 
family knowledge and comfort in raising concerns. 
Improvements in patient–provider communication 
about EOL and prognostic issues have been reported 
when such tools are implemented.28,29 For clinicians, 
hypothetical scenarios may be an effective means of 
introducing EOL issues. For instance, clinicians may 
ask, “The future is uncertain for us all. If you were 
facing EOL care, where would you like this to occur: 
at home, hospice, or hospital? Would you like me to 
give you some ideas about care in each of these set-
 © JNCCN—Journal of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network | Volume 16   Number 1 | January 2018
Original Research
Waller et al
40
tings and see what we can do to increase the prob-
ability you get what you want?” Given the key role 
of family/friends in informal care and the influence 
that perceived family burden may have on patient 
choices, it would be preferable for support persons to 
be involved in these discussions to ensure that the 
patient’s choice can be supported. 
Strengths and Limitations
This is one of few studies that has quantitatively 
examined perceptions of the potential benefits and 
worries associated with preferred location of EOL 
care among a large group of medical oncology out-
patients. There are a number of limitations to this 
study. First, we acknowledge the low response rates 
for the surveys, which may be due to patients taking 
surveys home to complete and not returning them or 
to the nature of the topic. The cross-sectional nature 
of the data is also a limitation, given the potentially 
dynamic nature of decision-making about prefer-
ences for place of death and the influences of dete-
rioration in physical functioning, diminished family 
resources, or available healthcare on these prefer-
ences. A qualitative component exploring patient-
perceived worries and benefits may have provided a 
more in-depth understanding of preferences for loca-
tion of EOL care. It cannot be assumed that pref-
erences for location of care will remain stable over 
time; how often and why preferences change must 
be better understood. Prospective longitudinal data 
examining patient preferences, the views of their 
caregivers, and the extent to which individual pref-
erences are met are critical to advance the field.
Conclusions
Dying in the location of their choice is important 
to patients. Although patients were willing to have 
healthcare providers ask them where they wished 
to die, few discussed it with their doctor. Given the 
overall variation in preferred location of EOL care 
among patients, healthcare providers should take a 
systematic approach to eliciting patient preferences. 
This can help ensure that reasons for patients’ choices 
are expressed and understood, and that patients have 
the appropriate support to achieve their preferences. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors would like to acknowledge research support 
from Lucy Boyd, Judy Hollingworth, and Natalie Dodd. 
They also wish to thank hospital staff, patients, and fami-
lies for their contribution to this research.
References
1. Higginson IJ, Sarmento VP
, Calanzani N, et al. Dying at home—is it better: a 
narrative appraisal of the state of the science. Palliat Med 2013;27:918–924.
2. Cohen J, Pivodic L, Miccinesi G, et al. International study of the place of 
death of people with cancer: a population-level comparison of 14 countries 
across 4 continents using death certificate data. Br J Cancer 2015;113:1397–
1404. 
3. Meier D, McCormack E, Lagman RL. Hospice: philosophy of care and 
appropriate utilization in the United States. UpToDate. Available at https://
www.uptodate.com/contents/hospice-philosophy-of-care-and-appropriate-
utilization-in-the-united-states. Updated February 3, 2017. Accessed 
December 13, 2017.
4. Swerisson H, Duckett S. Dying well. Available at: https://grattan.edu.au/wp-
content/uploads/2014/09/815-dying-well.pdf. Grattan Institute Report No 
2014-10, September 2014. Accessed December 13, 2017.
5. Gallagher R, Krawczyk M. Family members’ perceptions of end-of-life care 
across diverse locations of care. BMC Palliat Care 2013;12:25. 
6. Goldsbury DE, O’Connell DL, Girgis A, et al. Acute hospital-based services 
used by adults during the last year of life in New South Wales, Australia: 
a population-based retrospective cohort study. BMC Health Serv Res 
2015;15:537. 
7. O’Connell DL, Goldsbury DE, Davidson P, et al. Acute hospital-based 
services utilisation during the last year of life in New South Wales, Australia: 
methods for a population-based study. BMJ Open 2014;4:e004455.
8. Aoun SM, Breen LJ, Howting D. The support needs of terminally ill people 
living alone at home: a narrative review. Health Psychol Behav Med 
2014;2:951–969. 
9. Billingham MJ, Billingham SJ. Congruence between preferred and actual 
place of death according to the presence of malignant or non-malignant 
disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Support Palliat Care 
2013;3:144–154. 
10. De Roo ML, Miccinesi G, Onwuteaka-Philipsen BD, et al. Actual and 
preferred place of death of home-dwelling patients in four European 
countries: making sense of quality indicators. PLoS One 2014;9:e93762. 
11. Gomes B, Calanzani N, Gysels M, et al. Heterogeneity and changes in 
preferences for dying at home: a systematic review. BMC Palliat Care 
2013;12:1–13. 
12. Foreman LM, Hunt RW, Luke CG, et al. Factors predictive of preferred 
place of death in the general population of South Australia. Palliat Med 
2006;20:447–453. 
13. Tang ST. When death is imminent: where terminally ill patients with cancer 
prefer to die and why. Cancer Nurs 2003;26:245–251. 
14. Arnold E, Finucane AM, Oxenham D. Preferred place of death for patients 
referred to a specialist palliative care service. BMJ Support Palliat Care 
2015;5:294–296. 
15. Oxenham D, Finucane A, Arnold E, Russell P. Delivering preference for 
place of death in a specialist palliative care setting. BMJ Qual Improv Rep 
2013;2:pii: u201375.w897.
16. Agar M, Currow DC, Shelby-James TM, et al. Preference for place of care 
and place of death in palliative care: are these different questions? Palliat 
Med 2008;22:787–795. 
17. Dionne-Odom JN, Azuero A, Lyons KD, et al. Benefits of early versus 
delayed palliative care to informal family caregivers of patients with 
advanced cancer: outcomes from the ENABLE III randomized controlled 
trial. J Clin Oncol 2015;33:1446–1452. 
18. Temel JS, Greer JA, Muzikansky A, et al. Early palliative care for patients 
with metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med 2010;363:733–
742. 
19. Hui D, Bruera E. Integrating palliative care into the trajectory of cancer care. 
Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2016;13:159–171. 
20. Currow DC, Agar M, Abernethy AP. Hospital can be the actively chosen 
place for death. J Clin Oncol 2013;31:651–652. 
 © JNCCN—Journal of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network | Volume 16   Number 1 | January 2018
Original Research
Patient Perceptions of EOL Care Location
41
21. Abernethy AP
, Currow DC, Fazekas BS, et al. Specialized palliative care 
services are associated with improved short- and long-term caregiver 
outcomes. Support Care Cancer 2008;16:585–597. 
22. Fried TR, van Doorn C, O’Leary JR, et al. Older persons’ preferences for site 
of terminal care. Ann Intern Med 1999;131:109–112. 
23. Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care. National 
consensus statement: essential elements for safe and high-quality end-of-
life care. Available at: https://www.safetyandquality.gov.au/wp-content/
uploads/2015/05/National-Consensus-Statement-Essential-Elements-
forsafe-high-quality-end-of-life-care.pdf. Accessed December 13, 2017.
24. Wright AA, Zhang B, Keating NL, et al. Associations between palliative 
chemotherapy and adult cancer patients’ end of life care and place of death: 
prospective cohort study. BMJ 2014;348:g1219.
25. Weeks JC, Catalano PJ, Cronin A, et al. Patients’ expectations about effects 
of chemotherapy for advanced cancer. N Engl J Med 2012;367:1616–1625.
26. Keating NL, Landrum MB, Rogers SO, et al. Physician factors associated 
with discussions about end-of-life care. Cancer 2010;116:998–1006.
27. You JJ, Downar J, Fowler RA, et al. Barriers to goals of care discussions with 
seriously ill hospitalized patients and their families: a multicenter survey of 
clinicians. JAMA Intern Med 2015;175:549–556.
28. Larson DG, Tobin DR. End-of-life conversations: evolving practice and 
theory. JAMA 2000;284:1573–1578.
29. Dimoska A, Butow PN, Lynch J, et al. Implementing patient question-
prompt lists into routine cancer care. Patient Educ Couns 2012;86:252–258.
See JNCCN.org for supplemental online content.
JNCCN-N-0249-0118
Thank you. 
In 2017, with your support 
we were able to make a true difference  
in the lives of patients with cancer.
Learn more at
NCCN.org/foundationdonate
