 ANNALS OF FAMILY MEDICINE ✦ WWW.ANNFAMMED.ORG ✦ VOL. 15, NO. 4 ✦ JULY/AUGUST 2017
341
Swimming Against the Tide: Primary Care Physicians’ 
Views on Deprescribing in Everyday Practice
ABSTRACT
PURPOSE Avoidable hospitalizations due to adverse drug events and high-risk 
prescribing are common in older people. Primary care physicians prescribe most 
on-going medicines. Deprescribing has long been essential to best prescribing 
practice. We sought to explore the views of primary care physicians on the bar-
riers and facilitators to deprescribing in everyday practice to inform the develop-
ment of an intervention to support safer prescribing.
METHODS We used a snowball sampling technique to identify potential partici-
pants. Physicians were selected on the basis of years in practice, employment 
status, and practice setting, with an additional focus on information-rich partici-
pants. Twenty-four semistructured interviews were audio-recorded, transcribed 
verbatim, and analyzed to identify emergent themes.
RESULTS Physicians described deprescribing as “swimming against the tide” of 
patient expectations, the medical culture of prescribing, and organizational con-
straints. They said deprescribing came with inherent risks for both themselves and 
patients and conveyed a sense of vulnerability in practice. The only incentive to 
deprescribing they identified was the duty to do what was right for the patient. 
Physicians recommended organizational changes to support safer prescribing, 
including targeted funding for annual medicines review, computer prompts, 
improved information flows between prescribers, improved access to expert 
advice and user-friendly decision support, increased availability of non-pharma-
ceutical therapies, and enhanced patient engagement in medicines management.
CONCLUSIONS Interventions to support safer prescribing in everyday practice 
should consider the sociocultural, personal, relational, and organizational con-
straints on deprescribing. Regulations and policies should be designed to support 
physicians in practicing according to their professional ethical values.
Ann Fam Med 2017;15:341-346. https://doi.org/10.1370/afm.2094.
INTRODUCTION
P
atient safety and high-value health care are among the greatest 
challenges facing modern health care systems. Adverse drug events 
and resultant hospital admissions are common in older people, cost-
ing health systems billions of dollars every year.1-3 Up to 10% of hospital 
admissions result from drug-related problems, two-thirds of which are 
considered preventable through safer prescribing.4-6 The single greatest 
predictor of adverse drug events is the number of medicines a person is 
taking.7 Polypharmacy is increasing as more people are living longer with 
more chronic conditions.
Primary care physicians prescribe most ongoing medicines. Despite evi-
dence to guide safe prescribing, high-risk prescribing in older people is com-
mon, with 1 in 5 prescriptions potentially inappropriate.8-10 Safe prescribing 
entails regular medicines review, initiating medicines that are indicated, and 
deprescribing (tapering and withdrawing medicines) when the risks out-
weigh the potential benefits.11-13 While the term “deprescribing” is relatively 
new, the process of deprescribing has long been essential to best prescribing 
practice and is a task all primary care physicians are familiar with.14
Katharine A. Wallis, MBChB, PhD, 
MBHL, FRNZCGP
Abby Andrews
Michelle Henderson
Department of General Practice &  
Primary Health Care, University of  
Auckland, New Zealand.
 Annals Journal Club selection; 
see inside back cover or http://www. 
annfammed.org/AJC/.
Conflicts of interest: authors report none.
CORRESPONDING AUTHOR
Katharine A. Wallis
Department of General Practice & Primary 
Health Care
University of Auckland
Private Bag 92019
Auckland 1142, New Zealand
k.wallis@auckland.ac.nz
 DEPRESCRIBING
ANNALS OF FAMILY MEDICINE ✦ WWW.ANNFAMMED.ORG ✦ VOL. 15, NO. 4 ✦ JULY/AUGUST 2017
342
The most effective, cost-effective, and practical 
approach to safer prescribing in everyday practice 
is not yet known. Interventions that have been tried 
include audit and feedback, education and training, 
decision support, pharmacist medicines review, and 
enhancing patient engagement.15-20 Physician input is 
key to the development of successful interventions. To 
date, however, there has been relatively little research 
investigating the views of primary care physicians on 
deprescribing in everyday practice. Most research has 
focused on deprescribing in residential care settings, 
complex case examples, and understanding the views 
of patients.21-31
We sought to explore the views of primary care 
physicians on the barriers to and facilitators of depre-
scribing in everyday practice to inform the develop-
ment of an intervention to support safer prescribing.
METHODS
This exploratory study used qualitative methodology 
with a semistructured interview format. Ethical approval 
was obtained from the University of Auckland Human 
Participants Ethics Committee (Ref no. 015783).
Primary care physicians were eligible to participate 
if they were registered to practice in New Zealand at 
the time of data collection. Participants were identified 
and recruited through personal and national networks 
and through a snowball sampling technique. Physi-
cians were invited by e-mail, telephone, or personal 
contact. To ensure diversity and reduce the risk of 
bias, participants were selected on the basis of years 
in practice, employment status, practice setting (rural, 
suburban, urban), and sex, with an additional focus on 
information-rich participants.
All 3 researchers conducted the interviews, either 
face-to-face or by telephone. Interviews ranged from 
20 to 90 minutes depending on how much informa-
tion participants had to share, but were approxi-
mately 30 minutes long on average. Interviews were 
guided by an interview schedule (see Supplemental 
Appendix 1, available at http://www.annfammed.org/
content/15/4/341/suppl/DC1). Questions explored 
physicians’ understanding of and views on polyphar-
macy and deprescribing in older people. Participants 
were asked to speak from their experience in everyday 
practice. To minimize social desirability biases, par-
ticipants were informed that they would not be judged 
or compared. Interview questions were based on the 
international literature and refined as necessary after 
the first few interviews to improve clarity and flow. 
Interviewing continued until saturation was reached; 
that is, until most of the issues that were being raised 
had already been mentioned. We conducted a few 
interviews, transcribed and analyzed them, and then 
collected more interviews until we determined, at 24 
interviews, that we had reached the saturation point. 
All interviews were audio-recorded with permission 
and transcribed verbatim.
We used multi-staged coding based on grounded 
theory to analyze the transcripts. All transcripts were 
independently read and coded by at least 2 research-
ers. Codes were assigned to key sections of data to 
reflect the content. The coding list was built through 
an iterative process, with new codes being created as 
necessary by group consent. The few discrepancies 
identified were resolved through adjudication. When 
the coding process was complete, we grouped codes 
with common features in emergent themes, and finally 
assigned them to 3 overarching themes.32, 33 We con-
sidered alternative models to describe the relationship 
between themes but, as facilitators and barriers to 
deprescribing often mirrored each other, we settled on 
a consensus model of sociocultural factors, personal 
or relational factors, and organizational factors as the 
overarching themes. 
RESULTS
Participants varied in age, sex, experience, and employ-
ment status. Participant characteristics are shown in 
Table 1. In general, participants believed deprescrib-
ing was important for safe prescribing in older people. 
They said, however, that there were many barriers and 
few incentives to deprescribing in everyday practice. 
Table 1. Participant Characteristics (n 
= 
24)
Characteristic
Number
Sex
Women
Men
10
14
Years in practice
More than 20
10–20
Less than 10
12
6
6
Employment status
Partner
Long-term locum
Locum
Trainee (3rd year)
11
10
2
1
Practice location
Urban
Suburban
Rural
13
1
10
Practice size
Small
Medium
Large
7
7
10
 DEPRESCRIBING
ANNALS OF FAMILY MEDICINE ✦ WWW.ANNFAMMED.ORG ✦ VOL. 15, NO. 4 ✦ JULY/AUGUST 2017
343
Less experienced physicians and those in short-term, 
low-trust therapeutic relationship in particular reported 
finding deprescribing challenging. Quotations high-
lighting participant views on the barriers and facilita-
tors to deprescribing in everyday practice are set out 
in Table 2 and identified in text by parenthesized par-
ticipant numbers.
Barriers to Deprescribing in Everyday Practice
Physicians described deprescribing as “swimming 
against the tide” (GP-6) of patient expectation, the 
medical culture of prescribing, and organizational 
constraints. They said prescribing was the easy option, 
while deprescribing was time-consuming and came 
with inherent risks both for themselves and for patients. 
They said patients expected there to be “a pill for every 
ill” and that this expectation was exacerbated by direct-
to-consumer advertising of medicines in New Zealand.
Some physicians reported that uncertainty and fear 
influenced their prescribing and deprescribing deci-
sions. They identified uncertainty regarding which 
medicines patients were taking and why because of 
poor information sharing among patients’ multiple 
prescribers; uncertainty and a lack of evidence regard-
ing best prescribing practice in older people with 
multiple chronic conditions; and uncertainty regard-
ing their knowledge and application of the available 
evidence. Uncertainty gave rise to fear. They feared 
the repercussions should a patient suffer a potentially 
preventable adverse outcome following deprescribing: 
they feared reputational damage (being seen to be a 
“bad doctor”—GP-5), accountability repercussions, 
and moral blame and shame (“feeling terrible”—GP-2). 
In general, physicians were more fearful of the conse-
quences of deprescribing than of prescribing.
Physicians also reported that their prescribing was 
influenced by a concern to maintain relationships with 
patients, patients’ families, and colleagues. They feared 
upsetting patients and their families, who they said 
could misinterpret the recommendation to deprescribe 
as a sign that their doctor was giving up on them and 
trying to save money rather than improve outcomes. 
Some physicians, especially the younger and less 
experienced ones, described a professional etiquette 
that left them reluctant to stop medicines initiated by 
others. They felt uncomfortable going against the pre-
Table 2. Primary Care Physicians’ Views on the Barriers to and Facilitators of Deprescribing  
in Everyday Practice
Barriers and Facilitators
Example Quotations
Sociocultural 
factors
Patient expectations
I think there seems to be an expectation that if they’ve got a problem they’ll be given another 
pill to fix it. (GP-9)
There are people who see medication as the barrier between them and the grave. (GP-7)
Medical culture of 
prescribing
I guess it’s easy to keep adding in medications without looking at whether they need all the 
medications they’re already on. (GP-21)
Prescribing is something that’s taught a lot, you know. Deprescribing isn’t really something 
that’s been talked about from the get-go. It’s not something that’s come up. As a GP trainee, 
it’s not something that we’ve had a session on. (GP-9)
Personal and 
relational 
factors
Uncertainty
We all want to do the right thing, but… We don’t know what the combinations of many 
conditions and all the medications for each of their conditions, what kind of extra risk that 
poses. (GP-8)
Fear of damage to repu-
tation, accountability 
for adverse outcomes, 
moral blame and shame
You could be viewed as being neglectful, as being a bad doctor, as being not competent, if 
you’re taking medications away and someone has an event. (GP-5)
We end up putting people on more stuff than I’m really comfortable with, but it’s hard to 
defend not complying with the guidelines. (GP-15)
If [the patient] had a heart attack and the doctor in the hospital said “Oh it’s because your 
[doctor] stopped your statin,” then [the doctor] would feel terrible, and so he doesn’t stop 
them even though he thinks he should. (GP-2)
The risk that you take on yourself…if the person, say, has a heart attack and you stopped their 
statin. So, there’s that psychological stuff that goes on. (GP-5)
Research, education and 
training
I think we need more research, more collaborations. (GP-3)
I think education would be very helpful for us, in sort of just giving us more confidence. (GP-17)
Maintaining relation-
ships with patients and 
colleagues
It can come off looking like you no longer care about the patient, you know, “You’re old 
enough to die now so it doesn’t really matter.” (GP-14)
Sometimes people will say, “Why shouldn’t I have the same treatment that a younger person 
would have? You’re just writing me off.” (GP-16)
It’s quite difficult to say, “How about we reduce [a medicine]?” when it’s only just been started 
by somebody else, like a hospital doctor or something. (GP-6)
The reason you don’t stop things is you think they [specialists] know better than you. (GP-2)
Ethical duty: beneficence
I think you’ve got to do what’s right for your patient, regardless. (GP-13)
continues
 DEPRESCRIBING
ANNALS OF FAMILY MEDICINE ✦ WWW.ANNFAMMED.ORG ✦ VOL. 15, NO. 4 ✦ JULY/AUGUST 2017
344
scribing of the patient’s usual doctor and of specialists, 
both of whom they felt knew better than they did.
The physicians identified many organizational 
barriers to deprescribing. Top among these was the 
fast pace and the many competing demands of prac-
tice. They said that telephoned repeat prescriptions 
saved time but came at the cost of opportunities for 
deprescribing. They said fragmentation of care made 
deprescribing difficult, not only because of poor infor-
mation flow between prescribers, but also because 
of the low levels of trust in short-term therapeutic 
relationships. They said single-disease-specific guide-
lines promoted prescribing, not deprescribing; and 
the limited availability of non-pharmaceutical options, 
such as psychological therapy, contributed to making 
prescribing the easy option.
Physician Recommendations for Interventions 
to Support Deprescribing
The only incentive to deprescribing that physicians 
identified was the duty to do what was right for the 
patient. The physicians recommended a number of 
organizational changes to support deprescribing in 
everyday practice. These included targeted funding for 
annual medicines review, computer alerts to prompt 
physicians’ memories, computer systems to improve 
information sharing between prescribers, improved 
access to non-pharmaceutical therapies, research to 
Table 2. Primary Care Physicians’ Views on the Barriers to and Facilitators of Deprescribing  
in Everyday Practice (continued)
Barriers and Facilitators
Example Quotations
Organizational 
factors
Fast pace and competing 
demands of practice
There is no time … [You’ve got] complicated, complex patients and you never have more than 
15 minutes and sometimes its double booked. There’s never time to spend on this. (GP-2)
Patients are not coming in for a deprescribing conversation; they’re coming in for something 
else like a repeat or to talk about their aching joints. So the deprescribing conversation is an 
added thing to the consultation. (GP-5)
A lot of the time the opportunities for deprescribing are lost by either repeat prescription 
generation without seeing the patient or doing their repeat medications in an appointment 
where they’ve come in to talk about something else. (GP-9)
With the best will in the world we get really busy, we get distracted and we mean to do things 
that we don’t do. (GP-3)
Targeted funding
You need some funded time with the patient so that you can bring the patient in and say “This 
is a special appointment that’s not to talk about your current medical problems, it’s specifi-
cally about managing your medicines better.” (GP-4)
Computer prompts and 
alerts
An alert would give you a little bit of courage to do it, or give you more reassurance, or give 
you a way to bring it up with the patient like, “Look, you see, the computer has noticed 
you’re on too many medications, maybe we can reduce it.” (GP-2)
Memory support… Prompts are good, helpful. (GP-3)
Fragmentation of care
As a locum, it’s difficult because you don’t know the indications, you don’t know the patient 
very well, you don’t know the history. Has someone tried to stop them before and it hasn’t 
gone well and had to be restarted? (GP-2)
[Deprescribing is difficult] if they don’t know me well, haven’t built up that trust. (GP-12)
Information flow between 
prescribers
The electronic portals might be something that will make it easier in the future, centralized 
storage of information that everyone can access. (GP-9)
Access to expert advice 
and user-friendly deci-
sion support
I like to ring someone up and just ask them what I should do. I would like to be able to ring a 
cardiologist or geriatrician. I often email a pharmacist. (GP-2)
I’ve recently come across an app, which I have on my iPad [MedStopper], and you can put in 
the medication list there and it will prioritize them for you. So, that’s a really neat little tool. 
(GP-11)
Guidelines
Most guidelines are suggesting you add medicines rather than take them away. (GP-7)
In each guideline for each condition, have a section on when it would be appropriate to 
reduce or stop each medication. (GP-2)
I think we need multi-morbidity guidelines, the commonest multi-morbidities like chronic pain 
from arthritis and heart failure and diabetes together. (GP-8)
Communication of risk
They’re used to being on these medications; whatever they’re feeling in their lives and the 
way that they’re experiencing their lives, this is their usual way of feeling and they’re used 
to it. You think that perhaps taking off the statin will make them feel better, but that’s a very 
subtle thing to try and tell them because most of the time they’re not actually feeling bad, 
or they don’t know they’re feeling bad. (GP-1)
Communicating risk to patients, it’s very difficult. (GP-14)
Access to non-pharmaceu-
tical options
It’s harder to access other services. Non-pharmaceutical options are often a lot harder to access 
than medications. (GP-9)
Patient activation
A recall that sends out something to the patient every year and says, “Next time you’re at the 
doctor make sure to look over the pills.” (GP-8)
[A letter] to warm the patient up … (GP-3)
 DEPRESCRIBING
ANNALS OF FAMILY MEDICINE ✦ WWW.ANNFAMMED.ORG ✦ VOL. 15, NO. 4 ✦ JULY/AUGUST 2017
345
build the evidence base in multimorbidity, education 
and training, ready access to expert advice and user-
friendly decision support, updating guidelines to include 
advice on when to consider stopping medicines, devel-
oping new guidelines for the management of common 
comorbidities, tools and resources to assist in the com-
munication of risk to patients, and activating patients to 
become more involved in medicines management and 
alert to the possibility that less might be better.
DISCUSSION
This study suggests that the barriers to deprescribing 
are formidable, ranging as they do from patient expec-
tations and the medical culture of prescribing through 
fear of bad outcomes and myriad organizational fac-
tors, while the sole incentive to deprescribing is the 
physician’s duty to do the right thing for the patient. 
The physicians recommended a number of organiza-
tional changes to support safer prescribing in practice.
Our research contributes to the growing qualitative 
literature on the factors influencing deprescribing.21-30 
Many of the suggested organizational changes we 
identified have previously been described, includ-
ing targeted funding for annual medicines review, 
computer prompts and alerts, improving information 
flows between multiple prescribers, improving access 
to expert advice and user-friendly decision support, 
increasing availability of non-pharmaceutical alterna-
tives, enhancing patient engagement in medicines man-
agement, and more research, education, and training to 
reduce the uncertainty in practice.21-30
The novel contribution of our research lies in its 
focus on everyday primary care practice, where most 
ongoing prescribing occurs, and on the sociocultural 
influences at play—the importance to physicians of 
maintaining relationships with both patients and col-
leagues. Study findings draw attention to the need for 
a change in culture and in the attitudes and behaviors 
of both patients and physicians as well as a need to 
“warm the patient up” to the idea of deprescribing; to 
the possibility that less may be better. Study findings 
also draw attention to the need to support physicians in 
practicing according to their professional ethical values. 
Reducing uncertainty through improved information 
flows and more research and education is important, 
but given the “necessary fallibility of a knowledge of 
particulars,” there will always be uncertainty in medi-
cine.34 There will always be risk. Older people will 
always suffer potentially preventable adverse outcomes 
and in some cases die; relationships can always be 
damaged. Our study thus draws attention to the need 
to support physicians in practicing according to their 
professional ethical values—in taking on the risk of 
upsetting patients and of patients suffering potentially 
preventable adverse outcomes and in tapering and with-
drawing medicines regardless when the potential harms 
start to outweigh the potential benefits.
Strengths of this study include the number and 
diversity of primary care physician participants. A limi-
tation was the risk of bias with the snowball sampling 
technique, but this was necessary to ensure diversity in 
participants and responses and to recruit participants 
who were good informants; that is, those who were 
willing to participate, had time to be interviewed, and 
were knowledgeable and articulate. While we reassured 
participants that there were no right or wrong answers 
and that they would not be judged or compared, it is 
possible they provided responses that do not accurately 
reflect their experience in everyday practice.
This research contributes to the growing body of 
literature on the views of physicians on the barriers 
to and enablers of deprescribing in everyday prac-
tice. Interventions to support safer prescribing should 
consider the sociocultural influences, the importance 
to physicians of maintaining relationships, the sense 
of vulnerability many physicians feel in practice, and 
the myriad organizational constraints. Given that the 
only incentive to deprescribing that physicians identi-
fied was the duty to do what was right for the patient, 
it would be logical to design regulations and policies 
that support physicians in practicing according to 
their professional ethical values—taking on the risks 
inherent in deprescribing and doing what was right for 
the patient, regardless.
To read or post commentaries in response to this article, see it 
online at http://www.AnnFamMed.org/content/15/4/341.
Submitted September 13, 2016; submitted, revised, January 5, 2017; 
accepted February 22, 2017.
Key words: primary care; deprescribing; polypharmacy; older people
Funding support: University of Auckland Faculty Research Develop-
ment Fund.
Prior presentations: Royal New Zealand College of General Practitio-
ners Conference (poster); July 28-31, 2016; Auckland, New Zealand.
Acknowledgements: We would like to acknowledge the physicians 
who participated in this study.
 
Supplementary materials: Available at http://www.AnnFamMed.
org/content/15/4/341/suppl/DC1/.
References
 1. Taché SV, Sönnichsen A, Ashcroft DM. Prevalence of adverse drug 
events in ambulatory care: a systematic review. Ann Pharmacother. 
2011;45(7-8):977-989.
 2. Meier F, Maas R, Sonst A, et al. Adverse drug events in patients 
admitted to an emergency department: an analysis of direct costs. 
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2015;24(2):176-186.
 DEPRESCRIBING
ANNALS OF FAMILY MEDICINE ✦ WWW.ANNFAMMED.ORG ✦ VOL. 15, NO. 4 ✦ JULY/AUGUST 2017
346
 3. Budnitz DS, Lovegrove MC, Shehab N, Richards CL. Emergency 
hospitalizations for adverse drug events in older Americans. N Engl J 
Med. 2011;365(21):2002-2012.
 4. Hakkarainen KM, Hedna K, Petzold M, Hägg S. Percentage of 
patients with preventable adverse drug reactions and preventability 
of adverse drug reactions—a meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2012;7(3): 
e33236.
 5. Thomsen LA, Winterstein AG, Søndergaard B, Haugbølle LS, 
Melander A. Systematic review of the incidence and characteristics 
of preventable adverse drug events in ambulatory care. Ann Phar-
macother. 2007;41(9):1411-1426.
 6. Howard RL, Avery AJ, Slavenburg S, et al. Which drugs cause pre-
ventable admissions to hospital? A systematic review. Br J Clin Phar-
macol. 2007;63(2):136-147.
 7. Fried TR, O’Leary J, Towle V, Goldstein MK, Trentalange M, Martin 
DK. Health outcomes associated with polypharmacy in community-
dwelling older adults: a systematic review. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2014;62 
(12):2261-2272.
 8. Guaraldo L, Cano FG, Damasceno GS, Rozenfeld S. Inappropriate 
medication use among the elderly: a systematic review of adminis-
trative databases. BMC Geriatr. 2011;11(1):79.
 9. Davidoff AJ, Miller GE, Sarpong EM, Yang E, Brandt N, Fick DM. 
Prevalence of potentially inappropriate medication use in older adults 
using the 2012 Beers criteria. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2015;63(3):486-500.
 10. Opondo D, Eslami S, Visscher S, et al. Inappropriateness of medica-
tion prescriptions to elderly patients in the primary care setting: a 
systematic review. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43617.
 11. Scott IA, Hilmer SN, Reeve E, et al. Reducing inappropriate poly-
pharmacy: the process of deprescribing. JAMA Intern Med. 2015; 
175(5):827-834.
 12. Reeve E, Shakib S, Hendrix I, Roberts MS, Wiese MD. Review of 
deprescribing processes and development of an evidence-based, 
patient-centred deprescribing process. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2014; 
78(4):738-747.
 13. O’Mahony D, O’Sullivan D, Byrne S, O’Connor MN, Ryan C, Galla-
gher P. STOPP/START criteria for potentially inappropriate prescrib-
ing in older people: version 2. Age Ageing. 2015;44(2):213-218.
 14. World Health Organization. STEP 6: Monitor (and stop?) the treat-
ment. In: Guide to good prescribing - A practical manual. Geneva, 
Switzerland: World Health Organization; 1994:79-83.
 15. Patterson SM, Cadogan CA, Kerse N, et al. Interventions to improve 
the appropriate use of polypharmacy for older people. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2014;10(10):CD008165-CD65.
 16. Duerden M, Avery T, Payne R. Polypharmacy and medicines 
optimisation: making it safe and sound. London, UK: King’s 
Fund; 2013. Available from: http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/sites/
files/kf/field/field_publication_file/polypharmacy-and-medicines-
optimisation-kingsfund-nov13.pdf.
 17. Clyne B, Fitzgerald C, Quinlan A, et al. Interventions to address 
potentially inappropriate prescribing in community-dwelling older 
adults: A systematic review of randomized controlled trials. J Am 
Geriatr Soc. 2016;64(6):1210-1222.
 18. Jansen J, Naganathan V, Carter SM, et al. Too much medicine in 
older people? Deprescribing through shared decision making. BMJ. 
2016;353:i2893.
 19. Mugunthan K, McGuire T, Glasziou P. Minimal interventions to 
decrease long-term use of benzodiazepines in primary care: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Gen Pract. 2011;61(590): 
e573-e578.
 
20. Tannenbaum C, Martin P, Tamblyn R, Benedetti A, Ahmed S. 
Reduction of inappropriate benzodiazepine prescriptions among 
older adults through direct patient education: the EMPOWER cluster 
randomized trial. JAMA Intern Med. 2014;174(6):890-898.
 21. Anderson K, Stowasser D, Freeman C, Scott I. Prescriber barriers 
and enablers to minimising potentially inappropriate medications 
in adults: a systematic review and thematic synthesis. BMJ Open. 
2014;4(12):e006544.
 22. Reeve E, To J, Hendrix I, Shakib S, Roberts MS, Wiese MD. Patient 
barriers to and enablers of deprescribing: a systematic review. 
Drugs Aging. 2013;30(10):793-807.
 23. Schuling J, Gebben H, Veehof LJG, Haaijer-Ruskamp FM. Deprescrib-
ing medication in very elderly patients with multimorbidity: the view 
of Dutch GPs. A qualitative study. BMC Fam Pract. 2012;13(1):56.
 24. Farrell B, Tsang C, Raman-Wilms L, Irving H, Conklin J, Pottie K. 
What are priorities for deprescribing for elderly patients? Captur-
ing the voice of practitioners: a modified delphi process. PLoS One. 
2015;10(4):e0122246.
 25. Sinnott C, Mc Hugh S, Browne J, Bradley C. GPs’ perspectives on 
the management of patients with multimorbidity: systematic review 
and synthesis of qualitative research. BMJ Open. 2013;3(9):e003610.
 26. Ailabouni NJ, Nishtala PS, Mangin D, Tordoff JM. General practi-
tioners’ insight into deprescribing for the multimorbid older indi-
vidual: a qualitative study. Int J Clin Pract. 2016;70(3):261-276.
 27. Bolmsjö BB, Palagyi A, Keay L, Potter J, Lindley RI. Factors influenc-
ing deprescribing for residents in Advanced Care Facilities: insights 
from General Practitioners in Australia and Sweden. BMC Fam Pract. 
2016;17(1):152.
 28. Cullinan S, O’Mahony D, Fleming A, Byrne S. A meta-synthesis of 
potentially inappropriate prescribing in older patients. Drugs Aging. 
2014;31(8):631-638.
 29. Clyne B, Cooper JA, Hughes CM, Fahey T, Smith SM; OPTI-SCRIPT 
study team. ‘Potentially inappropriate or specifically appropriate?’ 
Qualitative evaluation of general practitioners views on prescribing, 
polypharmacy and potentially inappropriate prescribing in older 
people. BMC Fam Pract. 2016;17(1):109.
 
30. Reeve J, Dickenson M, Harris J, et al. Solutions to problematic poly-
pharmacy: learning from the expertise of patients. Br J Gen Pract. 
2015;65(635):319-320.
 31. Palagyi A, Keay L, Harper J, Potter J, Lindley RI. Barricades and 
brickwalls—a qualitative study exploring perceptions of medication 
use and deprescribing in long-term care. BMC Geriatr. 2016;16(1):15.
 32. Thomas DR. A general inductive approach for analyzing qualitative 
evaluation data. Am J Eval. 2006;27(2):237-246.
 33. Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res 
Psychol. 2006;3(2):77-101.
 
34. Gorovitz S, MacIntyre A. Toward a theory of medical fallibility. 
Hastings Cent Rep. 1975;5(6):13-23.
