 SPECIAL ARTICLE
2016 Updated MASCC/ESMO consensus recommendations:
Management of nausea and vomiting in advanced cancer
Declan Walsh1,2,3 & Mellar Davis4 & Carla Ripamonti5 & Eduardo Bruera6 &
Andrew Davies7 & Alex Molassiotis8
Received: 16 May 2016 /Accepted: 4 August 2016
# Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016
Abstract
Purpose The aim of this paper is to review the existing liter-
ature related to the management of nausea and vomiting (N &
V) in advanced cancer and derive clinical evidence-based
recommendations for its management.
Methods Available systematic reviews on antiemetic drug ef-
fectiveness were used. One generic systematic review of anti-
emetics in advanced cancer (to 2009) was updated to February
2016. Agreement on recommendations was reached between
panel members, and these were voted in favor unanimously by
the larger antiemetic committee membership (n = 37).
Results The evidence base in this field is minimal with largely
poor quality trials or uncontrolled trials and case studies. The
level of evidence in most studies is low. The drug of choice for
managing N & V in advanced cancer is metoclopramide titrat-
ed to effect. Alternative options include haloperidol,
levomepromazine, or olanzapine. For bowel obstruction, the
recommendation is to use octreotide given alongside an anti-
emetic (haloperidol) and where octreotide is not an option to
use an anticholinergic antisecretory agent. For opioid-induced
N & V, no recommendation could be made.
Conclusion These new guidelines, based on the existing (but
poor) evidence, could help clinicians manage more effectively
the complex and challenging symptoms of N & Vin advanced
cancer.
Keywords Cancer . Nausea . Vomiting . Symptoms .
Antiemetics . Palliative care
Introduction
In advanced cancer, nausea and vomiting (N & V) are both
common and severely affect quality of life [1]. They may be
both treatment and non-treatment related. About 20–30 % suf-
fer from nausea—70 % in the last week of life—and this
symptom can be more problematic particularly in women [2,
3]. Nausea may occur without vomiting or retching and
vomiting without nausea. Both are multifactorial in origin
[3]. The causes of N & V in advanced disease can be multi-
faceted and include elevated intracranial pressure due to brain
tumors, cerebral secondaries, or meningeal disease; biochem-
ical syndromes such as hypercalcemia, hyponatremia and hy-
perthyroidism, or due to infections or opioid use; vestibular
dysfunction (i.e., motion sickness); and gastric stasis-related,
such as with ascites, hepatomegaly, paraneoplastic neuropa-
thy, opioid-induced, dyspepsia or gastritis, or malignant bowel
* Declan Walsh
walshtd@tcd.ie
1
Academic Department of Palliative Medicine, Our Lady’s Hospice
and Care Services, Dublin, Ireland
2
Faculty of Health Sciences, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland
3
School of Medicine and Medical Science, University College Dublin,
Dublin, Ireland
4
Section of Palliative Medicine and Supportive Oncology,
Department of Hematology- Oncology, The Cleveland Clinic,
Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland, OH, USA
5
Supportive Care in Cancer Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy
6
Department of Palliative, Rehabilitation, & Integrative Medicine UT
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA
7
Supportive & Palliative Care Department, St. Luke’s Cancer Centre,
Royal Surrey County Hospital / St. Luke’s Cancer Centre,
Guildford, UK
8
School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong
Kong, ChinaSAR
Support Care Cancer
DOI 10.1007/s00520-016-3371-3
 obstruction [1]. Constipation may cause N & V due to a sense
of fullness. Psychological problems like anxiety can too.
Hence, a careful assessment is paramount in the manage-
ment of N & V in advanced cancer. Assessment includes a
detailed history, physical examination, and investigations for
reversible causes. Assessment and management can further be
influenced by goals of care, performance status, and prognosis.
Assessment should include sentinel questions which can assist
in the identification of the cause of N & V [1]. For example,
infrequent large-volume vomiting (which relieves nausea) is
consistent with impaired gastric emptying or a partial/
complete bowel obstruction. Intermittent nausea alongside ab-
dominal cramps and changes in bowel habit can also suggest
bowel obstruction. Movement-related N & Voccurs with ves-
tibular dysfunction or mesenteric traction. Vertigo distin-
guishes the former. Intracranial pressure is linked with morning
N & Vand headaches. Nausea associated with hyperglycaemia
and hypercalcemia can co-occur with polyuria and polydipsia.
Uremia and hyponatremia both produce nausea and mental
health changes which mimic brain secondaries.
Of those with a reversible cause, about half are drug-related,
mostly from opioid drugs [4]. Other commonly prescribed drugs
(antibiotics, anticonvulsants, digoxin, iron, and nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs) may cause nausea and should be
discontinued if they are suspected to cause nausea. Radiation,
particularly to the abdomen and lumbosacral spine, is emetogenic
too. Psychogenic N & V produces low volume vomitus and is
triggered by anxiety. Adrenal insufficiency—due to inadvertent
discontinuation of corticosteroid medications—is often missed
and associated with abdominal pain, hypotension, and N & V.
The same management principles apply to both nausea and
vomiting. Treatment is often effective, but many patients still
suffer unnecessarily [5]. Success lies with effective treatment
of the underlying cause. For example, N & V from hypercal-
cemia of malignancy is best treated with calcium-reducing
agents (bisphosphonates, denosumab) and hydration.
Limited data suggests a role for complementary and alterna-
tive therapies, although good quality studies in palliative care
are lacking. Around-the-clock antiemetic regimens are usually
better than intermittent. Opioid rotation or dose reduction is
worth a trial if the cause of N & Vis suspected to be the opioid
drug used. In those who do not have a bowel obstruction,
nausea may be more difficult to manage.
There are two therapeutic approaches [6]. One is empirical;
starting with one drug and if unsuccessful adding or rotating to
another. The second is etiological; that is management tailored
to the suspected cause and/or likely receptors involved in gen-
erating nausea and/or vomiting. If antiemetics are ineffective,
decompression by nasogastric tube or (preferably) a venting
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube can help many
with bowel obstruction. In the case of bowel obstruction, sur-
gical resection of an obstructing lesion or diverting ostomies
may be needed. Corticosteroids can also reduce nausea from
brain metastasis, cranial radiation and/or surgery, or stereotac-
tic radiation. Paracentesis is effective at reducing nausea from
massive ascites. Rectal suppositories and/or enemas reduce
nausea from rectal impaction.
Aim
The aim of this paper is to develop a set of evidence-based
guidelines for the management of different syndromes related
to nausea and vomiting in advanced cancer. This is part of the
update of the MASCC/ESMO antiemetic guidelines 2015,
although advanced cancer is a new specialty area of the said
guidelines.
Methods
Existing systematic reviews [7] served as main sources of data
for discussion. A systematic review from January 1, 2009 to
May 2015 was completed by the authors of this paper,
updating the review by Davis [7], following the same process.
The search terms for the latter review are shown in Table 1.
Studies were included if they met the following criteria:
(1)
antiemetic trials in active cancer
(2)
adults (age 18 years or older)
(3)
nausea and/or vomiting from cancer or as a complication
(4)
systematic reviews and meta-analysis, randomized con-
trolled trials, prospective single arm trials, prospective
Table 1
Antiemetic systematic review—search terms
Index terms (MeSH
vocabulary)
Bkeywords^ (article
title, abstract,
or indexing)
Nausea
Nausea
Vomiting
Any antiemetics
(exploded: long list
of drug names)
Bnausea…^
Bvomit…^
emesis
Bantiemet…^
Bantiemes…^
Cancer
Any neoplasms
(exploded: long list of
specific names)
Bneoplasm…^
Bcancer…^
Bmalignan…^
Palliative
care/hospice
Palliative care
Palliative medicine
Hospice and palliative care
nursing
Hospice care
Bpalliate…^
Bhospice…^
Terminal care
Terminal care
Terminally ill
Bterminal…^
Chemotherapy
Any antineoplastic agents
(exploded: long
list of drug names)
Any neoplasms/drug therapy
Support Care Cancer
 trials that used antiemetics based on the presumed etiol-
ogy, cohort studies, case series, and single case reports.
Trials focusing on chemotherapy-induced and postopera-
tive nausea and vomiting were excluded. PubMed and Ovid
Medline were searched and yielded 411 articles in English.
Exclusion of chemotherapy trials reduced this to 219.
Twelve articles and two abstracts met the inclusion criteria.
A further extension to February 2016 yielded four additional
articles. Those specifically about antiemetics in malignant
bowel obstruction yielded another 11 articles.
Review findings were discussed by the committee mem-
bers, and recommendations were agreed upon. These were
presented in a face-to-face meeting with the wider antiemetic
guidelines panel in Copenhagen, in June 2015, and recom-
mendations underwent voting from all committee members.
Recommendations achieved unanimous agreement from the
panel. Minor alterations in terms of phrasing and for consis-
tency with the remaining guidelines were followed. Then, the
current paper was formed, summarizing the key data that led
to the development of the recommendations.
Results
Antiemetic trials (excluding malignant bowel obstruction)
Many antiemetics (largely phenothiazines) were studied in
various reports and designs, but there were no randomized
trials [7]. A systematic review of droperidol for N & V in
2010 identified 1664 abstracts (and 827 duplicates) [8].
Twenty-three studies were obtained in full and potentially
met inclusion criteria. On review of the full papers, none
did. A second systematic review from 1950 to November
2013 was limited to randomized control trials in adults [9],
and again, no relevant trials were available. A systematic re-
view of haloperidol for N & V involved literature up to 2007
[10]. No randomized controlled trials were available or pub-
lished too [10]. The Cochrane Database was updated in 2015
[11]. There were 27 non-randomized trials from the 2007
search. A further 38 studies (up to and including 2013) and
two in 2014 were found. There was one randomized placebo-
controlled study of moderate quality (and low risk of bias)
which compared BABH^ topical gel (diphenhydramine, halo-
peridol, and lorazepam) with placebo for nausea in 22 patients
[12]. The mean changes in nausea score from baseline to
60 min after treatment in the ABH gel group were 1.7 ± 2.05
and 0.9 ± 2.45 for the placebo group (P = 0.42), and hence, it
was shown that the gel was comparable to placebo [12].
Haloperidol has further been used in an open label uncon-
trolled trial [13]. Response was measured after 1 day. Out of
33 evaluable participants, 20 responded and 8 had complete
response. The overall response rates at days 2 and 5 were 47
and 40 %, respectively [13]. One trial (in abstract form only)
suggested that haloperidol was effective in 65 % of patients
given systemically.
A systematic review of levomepromazine from 1946 to
April 2012 and peer review journals from 1980 to 2001 found
seven prospective and nine retrospective studies, six case re-
ports, and two surveys [14]. There were no randomized con-
trolled trials. However, in one open label study, 60 of 70 pa-
tients (86 %) responded well to levomepromazine but there
was no dose–response association [14]. Two other prospective
quasi-experimental studies reported in this review also sup-
ported the effectiveness of levomepromazine [14]. Darvill
et al. [15] also undertook a review of levomepromazine and
found no related trials. An update of the latter Cochrane re-
view identified 35 abstracts but no randomized controlled tri-
als or additional data [16].
The Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in
Health reviewed the evidence available in nabilone for N &
V unrelated to chemotherapy. The search was from January
1982 to August 2014. There was one randomized trial in post-
operative nausea and vomiting, a case series (two patients)
with nausea in AIDS, but none in advanced cancer [17]. A
retrospective review from 2008 suggested benefit in 47 pa-
tients [18] as did two case studies of dronabinol [19, 20].
Our systematic review of antiemetics for N & V (un-
related to chemotherapy or radiation) found 93 articles but
only nine randomized trials (of moderate to poor quality)
[7]. Sustained release metoclopramide was of similar ef-
ficacy to immediate release in a 3-day trial [21].
Continuous release (sustained) metoclopramide was better
than placebo [22]. Dexamethasone did not improve the
antiemetic effect of metoclopramide [23]. Levosulpiride
was superior to metoclopramide [24]. Metoclopramide
plus tropisetron was superior to metoclopramide alone,
but dexamethasone did not add to the combination [25].
Tropisetron alone was similar to tropisetron plus
metoclopramide, and again dexamethasone did not en-
hance antiemesis. It was superior to metoclopramide and
chlorpromazine as single agents [26, 27], but trial quality
was low in both studies. Study duration in all of the ran-
domized trials was 15 days or less.
Sublingual scopolamine 0.15 mg was evaluated in a pro-
spective single arm study [28]. At 30 min, 25 of 26 partici-
pants had at least a 1-point NRS decrease in N & V and all
participants had a reduction at 60 min. Toxicity (drowsiness)
occurred in four (15 %) [28]. A three-patient case series also
reported improved nausea with scopolamine [29].
One report described the use of olanzapine from 2013–
2015 in 108 patients [30]. Doses were 2.5–5 mg daily, and
treatment duration was 39 days [30]. In a case series of 14
patients, olanzapine controlled Bdifficult to control nausea and
vomiting^ in 13 patients with an acceptable adverse effect
profile [31]. Similar results were described elsewhere [32].
Support Care Cancer
 Summary of evidence
There are no randomized trials for droperidol, haloperidol, and
nabilone. Case series of levomepromazine favor improve-
ments. A cohort study favors haloperidol. While not docu-
mented, experience suggests that clinicians favor
metoclopramide as first-line therapy due to randomized trials;
however, a quarter use haloperidol. Haloperidol is often used
as a second line. Agents used after haloperidol are multiple;
metoclopramide is used only in a minority as a second-line
agent. Unlike chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting,
there is no evidence that combining antiemetics improves re-
sponses over monotherapy, although this needs formal re-
search confirmation. Of second-line antiemetics, only
levomepromazine has evidence of benefit in prospective stud-
ies. Haloperidol has weak evidence as first line. There is no
evidence for benefit with nabilone or cannabis in prospective
studies.
Trials in malignant bowel obstruction
Based on the review of the literature, those unresponsive to
specific oncologic therapy (and unfit for surgery), can be man-
aged medically through two pharmacological approaches [33,
34]:
(1)
Antisecretory drugs like anticholinergics (hyoscine
hydrobromide, hyoscine butylbromide HB,
glycopyrrolate) and/or somatostatin analogs octreotide
± glucocorticoids
(2)
Antiemetics alone or combined with antisecretory drugs.
More specifically, few studies have assessed efficacy while
there are no comparative studies on different approaches.
From 2009 to 2015, four randomized trials (three double-
blind) were published [35–38]. Results related to octreotide
(OCT) are fairly consistent across studies. One trial [35] com-
pared OCT 600 mcg to placebo for 3 days in 87 inoperable
patients and found no reduction in vomit-free days in the two
groups. There was a significant reduction in vomiting epi-
sodes with OCT but not nausea or number of days free from
vomiting (which was the primary outcome measure). The
study had several limitations: the bowel obstruction diagnosis
was clinical, and the obstruction level and presence or not of
carcinomatosis was unclear. It also included H2 blockers, cor-
ticosteroids (dexamethasone), and antiemetics; their use may
have hidden some OCT benefits evident in a single arm de-
sign. Furthermore, ranitidine use was unique to this study also
and its use was based on a previous study demonstrating re-
duced gastric secretions.
In another trial, OCT 300 mcg/24 h was more effective
than scopolamine butylbromide (SB) 60 mg/24 h for nausea,
secretions, and vomiting in 96 patients [36]. This trial
precluded antiemetics, corticosteroids, and H2 blockers for
the first 72 h. Another trial [37] demonstrated that 12 of 32
patients (38 %) treated with OCT LAR 30 mg on days 1, 29,
and 57 plus OCT immediate release 600 mcg (+3 to 4 mg/Kg/
day methylprednisolone on days 1–6) improved their N & V
as opposed to 9 of 32 patients (28 %) in the placebo group.
This study had imbalances and significant drop out rates
which make the results difficult to interpret.
A study of 30 mg lanreotide versus placebo in 80 patients
with peritoneal carcinomatosis showed that the treatment
group had one or less episodes of vomiting/day (or no
vomiting recurrence) [38]. This was not statistically signifi-
cant in intention to treat analysis, but was for the supportive
PP and ITT analysis of the investigators’ assessment
(p < 0.05). Sense of well-being was significantly greater with
lanreotide [38]. Furthermore, in a small randomized trial of 18
patients [39], octreotide was linked with more favorable re-
sults related to N & V compared to hyoscine butylbromide. It
was also interesting that lower levels of hydration in this group
of patients resulted to more nausea irrespective of treatment
[39].
From 2009 until 2015, an additional four [40–43] prospec-
tive studies were published. One study [40] assessed
granisetron 3 mg IV plus 8 mg dexamethasone plus 2.5 mg
SC haloperidol (as rescue therapy) in 24 patients refractory to
previous antiemetics. After 4 days, abdominal pain, nausea,
and vomiting episodes decreased. N & V control was
achieved in 87 %, and 71 % did not require rescue medica-
tions. As granisetron was given with corticosteroids, it may be
the combination rather than the single drug which was
effective.
OCT 300–600 mcg/day was studied together with haloper-
idol (or prochlorperazine) for nausea and opioids for pain [41].
Fatigue, nausea, thirst, and vomiting were improved, and daily
nasogastric drainage was decreased. Another prospective trial
used 300 mcg/day for 7 days and then up to 600 mcg/day in
women with gynaecologic cancer refractory to conventional
therapy [42]. Overall response rate was 82 % on vomiting
severity. In urologic cancers (bladder, kidney, prostate, ureter),
OCTwas given early (once bowel obstruction was diagnosed)
in 14 patients [43]. The mean time to symptom improvement
(WHO toxicity grading system) was 1.6 days, and the use of
OCT was deemed safe and effective.
From 2009–2015, one retrospective study and two case
series were also published [44–46]. A retrospective study
[44] assessed olanzapine activity against nausea and vomiting
in incomplete bowel obstruction unresponsive to chlorproma-
zine, corticosteroids, domperidone, haloperidol,
metoclopramide, or prochlorperazine. The average olanzapine
dose was 4.9 ± 1.2 mg, and the treatment duration was 23
± 16 days. Olanzapine significantly decreased the average
nausea score in 90 % of the patients as well as the vomiting
frequency (p < 0.001) [44]. A retrospective case series [45]
Support Care Cancer
 evaluated 12 patients treated with dexamethasone,
metoclopramide, and OCT. Nausea resolved in all patients at
day one; the median time to resumption of oral intake was
2 days (range 1–6) in eight evaluable patients. As olanzapine
was given in the above studies with corticosteroids, it may be
that there were synergistic effects in the outcome. In four case
reports, patients received OCT plus corticosteroids; 3 of the
4 remained without tube drainage at death and survival was
51–64 days [46].
In trials where corticosteroids were not part of treatment
[36, 41–43], there appeared to be a robust improvement in
nausea and vomiting with improvements in secondary out-
comes as opposed to trials that included corticosteroids and
antiemetics [35, 37]. Adverse outcomes were minimal, and
only in one randomized trial abdominal colic was increased
necessitating an anticholinergic.
Cyclizine, an antihistamine H1 receptor antagonist, is com-
monly used as antiemetic in patients with advanced cancer,
especially in cases of mechanical bowel obstruction,
movement-related N & V, and intracranial pressure. A review
of the evidence in cyclizine [1] found only one clinical audit
where cyclizine has been used as part of a local N & V man-
agement guideline in advanced cancer, showing 82 % im-
provement in nausea and 84 % improvement in vomiting from
the use of the guidelines. Nevertheless, clinical consensus and
current practice indicate that this class of drugs have a place in
the management of N & Vin advanced cancer, despite the lack
of robust evidence.
Trials in opioid-induced nausea and vomiting
N & V are two of the most common side effects of opioid
analgesics [47] with up to 19 % incidence of moderate/
severe nausea and 40 % vomiting [48]. In some, opioid-
induced nausea and vomiting (OINV) seems an initiation
side-effect, with tolerance after 5–7-day therapy [49]. In
others, it may be chronic [1].
There are no randomized controlled trials of prophylactic
antiemetics for those starting opioids. There is no good evi-
dence to support/refute any antiemetic in OINV prophylaxis.
We found one, underpowered, placebo-controlled randomized
trial of the therapeutic use of metoclopramide and ondansetron
in established OINV [50]. In this trial, there were no signifi-
cant differences between the ondansetron, metoclopramide, or
placebo groups. Hence, overall, there is no good evidence to
support/refute specific antiemetics in OINV treatment.
Several antiemetics appear active in managing OINV. The
choice may be empirical or based on the pathophysiology e.g.,
a prokinetic for impaired gastric emptying; an antihistamine
with vestibular apparatus sensitization. There is limited evi-
dence to support opioid-switching i.e., changing the opioid or
the route [51].
Discussion
Our findings support metoclopramide as the drug of choice
(Table 2) and some other antidopaminergic agents (haloperi-
dol, levomepromazine, or olanzapine) as alternatives for N &
V in advanced cancer. It is notable that all these agents con-
tinue to have an important role for chronic nausea in cancer,
although largely replaced by 5HT3 or NK1 receptor antago-
nists in chemotherapy-induced N & V. In bowel obstruction,
octreotide with an antiemetic (such as haloperidol) is recom-
mended but may be expensive. In these situations, other
antisecretory agents like scopolamine butylbromide and
glycopyrronium bromide may be useful and less costly.
Unfortunately, a common and potentially distressing problem
like opioid-induced emesis has been studied insufficiently to
allow specific recommendations to be made. However, clini-
cians should be aware that emesis is frequently associated
with initiation and/or of significant opioid dose increases
[52]. Education and antiemetic prescriptions should help en-
sure adherence to opioids, since they will be needed by the
vast majority.
There are several challenges to clinical research on N & V
in advanced cancer. Significant issues include that this syn-
drome is frequently multicausal. Another major barrier is the
variable onset. Contrary to N & V, from medical interventions
like anesthesia, chemotherapy etc., that of advanced cancer
occurs at variable points in the illness. This suggests that the
methodology of clinical trials in N & V in advanced disease
should differ from that of, for example, chemotherapy agents.
Our findings also suggest several opportunities to improve
research:
Define the patient population
The statement Bnausea and vomiting associated with ad-
vanced cancer^ is vague and likely includes multiple etiolo-
gies. Clinical trials should thoroughly assess the major con-
tributors. In a minority, there will be a major specific mecha-
nism like mechanical bowel obstruction, most will not. Efforts
to weigh their relative contributions to the severity of emesis
will allow a better understanding of the possible role of dif-
ferent pharmacological interventions.
Define outcomes
There is a need for a consensus on appropriate and clinically
meaningful outcomes to determine response of interventions
for N & V in advanced cancer. Given the variable inception
points and since N & Vin advanced cancer is mainly a chronic
syndrome, multiple follow-up time points will be required.
People with advanced cancer often develop N & V with
Support Care Cancer
 multiple other (moderate to severe) symptoms which include
anorexia, anxiety, depression, fatigue, pain, and dyspnea. The
relative contribution of these other symptom complexes to
nausea (and the effect of antiemetics on these other symptoms)
should be determined by assessment tools capable of evaluat-
ing multiple symptoms simultaneously.
Define the intervention
There is a need for well-done randomized trials that include
haloperidol, atypical antipsychotics (levomepromazine,
olanzapine), and 5-HT3 receptor antagonists. It will be impor-
tant to explore the dose response relationships of different
antiemetics in persons given multiple other medications for
moderate to severe symptoms—thereby increasing the
potential for drug interactions and side effects. There is also
a need to determine the optimal dose of antiemetics. Due to
the more chronic nature of most of these syndromes (com-
pared to studies in chemotherapy-induced nausea and
vomiting), these drugs will be required chronically, so toxic-
ities should be measured at multiple endpoints.
Unlike the existing evidence for chemotherapy-induced
nausea and vomiting, there are no studies on multiple anti-
emetic interventions for nausea in advanced cancer. This of-
fers a unique opportunity to test agents not only with different
side effects but also those with a potential to have beneficial
effects on multiple other symptoms. Furthermore, randomized
trials which compare single versus multiple antiemetics are
needed.
Our results are encouraging since we have identified and
recommended antiemetic interventions for the major
Table 2 Antiemetic guidelines in
advanced cancer
Recommendation
MASCC/ESMO level of evidence
Drugs of choice
The antiemetic drug of choice in advanced cancer
is metoclopramide (titrated to effect).
MASCC level of consensus: high
MASCC level of confidence: moderate
ESMO level of evidence: III
ESMO grade of recommendation: C
Alternative options include haloperidol, levomepromazine,
or olanzapine.
MASCC level of consensus: high
MASCC level of confidence: low
ESMO level of evidence: V
ESMO grade of recommendation: D
The use of cyclizine* or 5-HT3 receptor antagonists
is poorly defined to date and may be used where
dopamine antagonists are contraindicated or ineffective.
MASCC level of consensus: low
MASCC level of confidence: low
ESMO level of evidence: V
ESMO grade of recommendation: D
Bowel obstruction
The drug recommended in a bowel obstruction is
octreotide, dosed around the clock and given alongside
an antiemetic (with the committee recommending haloperidol).
MASCC level of consensus: high
MASCC level of confidence: high
ESMO level of evidence: II
ESMO grade of recommendation: A
If Octreotide plus antiemetic is ineffective, the use of anticholinergic
antisecretory agents (e.g., scopolamine butylbromide, glycopyrronium
bromide) and/or corticosteroids is recommended as either adjunct or
alternative interventions.
MASCC level of consensus: high
(moderate for corticosteroids)
MASCC level of confidence: moderate
(low for corticosteroids)
ESMO level of evidence: IV
ESMO grade of recommendation: D
The use of cyclizine* or 5-HT3 receptor is poorly defined in this
setting**. Metoclopramide should be used with caution in partial
bowel obstruction and should not be used in complete bowel
obstruction.
MASCC level of consensus: low
MASCC level of confidence: low
ESMO level of evidence: V
ESMO grade of recommendation: D
Opioid-induced nausea and vomiting
No recommendation can be made for specific antiemetics, although
various antiemetics may help. Opioid rotation and route switching may
be effective approaches. There is no data to support prophylactic
antiemetics in this situation.
MASCC level of consensus: high
MASCC level of confidence: low
ESMO level of evidence: V
ESMO grade of recommendation: D
*Unavailable in some countries
**Caution should be exercised because of the risk of drug interactions
Support Care Cancer
 syndromes associated with N & V in advanced cancer albeit
the level of evidence is low. Large randomized controlled
trials with appropriate patient selection, more specific (and
multiple) endpoints, longer follow-up, and the potential for
single and multiple drug interventions, will improve the evi-
dence base. There may be a role for non-pharmacological
interventions, alone or as adjunct to pharmacological treat-
ments, in the management of N & V in advanced disease,
and this should also be the focus of future research.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of interest
AD, EB, MD declare no conflict of interest. AM
declares honoraria or grants from MSD Merck; Helsinn; Tesaro; Norgine;
Acacia Pharma. DW Advisory Role for Nualtra Ltd. & Tesaro; CR from
Teva; Norgine; Otsuka; Amgen.
References
1.
Glare P, Miller J, Nikolova T, Tickoo R (2011) Treating nausea and
vomiting in palliative care: a review. Clin Interv Aging 6:243–259
2.
Conill C, Verger E, Henriquez I, Saiz N, Espier M, Lugo F, Garrigos
A (1997) Symptom prevalence in the last week of life. J. Pain
Symptom Manag 14:328–331
3.
Walsh TD (1982) Antiemetic drug combinations in advanced can-
cer. Lancet 1(8279):1018
4.
Bentley A, Boyd K (2001) Use of clinical pictures in the manage-
ment of nausea and vomiting: a prospective audit. Palliat Med
15(3):247–253
5.
Stephenson J, Davis A (2006) An assessment of aetiology-based
guidelines for the management of nausea and vomiting in patients
with advanced cancer. Support Care Cancer 14:348–353
6.
Gupta M, Davis M, LeGrand S, Walsh D, Lagman R (2013) Nausea
and vomiting in advanced cancer: the Cleveland Clinic protocol. J
Support Oncol 11(1):8–13
7.
Davis MP, Hallerberg G, Palliative Medicine Study Group of the
Multinational Association of Supportive Care in Cancer (2010) A
systematic review of the treatment of nausea and/or vomiting in
cancer unrelated to chemotherapy or radiation. J Pain Symptom
Manag 39(4):756–767
8.
Dorman S, Perkins P (2010) Droperidol for treatment of nausea and
vomiting in palliative care patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
6(10):CD006938–10.1002/14651858.CD006938.pub2
9.
Storrar J, Hitchens M, Platt T, Dorman S (2014) Droperidol for
treatment of nausea and vomiting in palliative care patients.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD006938
10.
Perkins P, Dorman S (2009) Haloperidol for the treatment of nausea
and vomiting in palliative care patients. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2009(2)
11.
Murray-Brown F, Dorman S (2015) Haloperidol for the treatment of
nausea and vomiting in palliative care patients. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 11:CD006271
12.
Fletcher DS, Coyne PJ, Dodson PW, Parker GG, Wan W, Smith TJ
(2014) A randomized trial of the effectiveness of topical BABH
Gel^ (Ativan((R)), Benadryl((R)), Haldol((R))) vs. placebo in can-
cer patients with nausea. J Pain symptom manag 48(5):797–803
13.
Hardy JR, O’Shea A, White C, Gilshenan K, Welch L, Douglas C
(2010) The efficacy of haloperidol in the management of nausea
and vomiting in patients with cancer. J Pain Symptom Manag 40(1):
111–116
14.
Dietz I, Schmitz A, Lampey I, Schulz C (2013) Evidence for the use
of levomepromazine for symptom control in the palliative care set-
ting: a systematic review. BMC Palliat Care 12:2
15.
Darvill E, Dorman S, Perkins P (2013) Levomepromazine for nau-
sea and vomiting in palliative care. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 4:
CD009420. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD009420.pub2
16.
Cox L, Darvill E, Dorman S (2015) Levomepromazine for nausea
and vomiting in palliative care. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:
CD009420
17.
Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (2014)
Nabilone for Non-chemotherapy Associated Nausea and Weight
Loss due to Medical Conditions: A Review of the Clinical
Effectiveness and Guidelines. Sep 12. Ottawa (ON), Canada.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmedhealth/PMH0070073
18.
Maida V, Ennis M, Irani S, Corbo M, Dolzhykov M (2008)
Adjunctive nabilone in cancer pain and symptom management: a
prospective observational study using propensity scoring. J Support
Oncol 6(3):119–124
19.
Gonzalez-Rosales F, Walsh D (1997) Intractable nausea and
vomiting due to gastrointestinal mucosal metastases relieved by
tetrahydrocannabinol (dronabinol). J Pain Symptom Manag
14(5):311–314
20.
Hernandez SL, Sheyner I, Stover KT, Stewart JT (2015) Dronabinol
treatment of refractory nausea and vomiting related to peritoneal
carcinomatosis. Am j Hospice Palliat Care 32(1):5–7
21.
Bruera ED, MacEachern TJ, Spachynski KA et al (1994)
Comparison of the efficacy, safety, and pharmacokinetics of con-
trolled release and immediate release metoclopramide for the man-
agement of chronic nausea in patients with advanced cancer.
Cancer 74(12):3204–3211
22.
Bruera E, Belzile M, Neumann C, Harsanyi Z, Babul N, Darke A
(2000) A double-blind, crossover study of controlled-release
metoclopramide and placebo for the chronic nausea and dyspepsia
of advanced cancer. J Pain Symptom Manag 19(6):427–435
23.
Bruera E, Moyano JR, Sala R et al (2004) Dexamethasone in addi-
tion to metoclopramide for chronic nausea in patients with ad-
vanced cancer: a randomized controlled trial. J Pain Symptom
Manag 28(4):381–388
24.
Corli O, Cozzolino A, Battaiotto L (1995) Effectiveness of
levosulpiride versus metoclopramide for nausea and vomiting in
advanced cancer patients: a double-blind, randomized, crossover
study. J Pain Symptom Manag 10(7):521–526
25.
Mystakidou K, Befon S, Trifyllis J, Liossi C, Papadimitriou J
(1997) Tropisetron versus metoclopramide in the control of emesis
in far-advanced cancer. Oncologist 2(5):319–323
26.
Mystakidou K, Befon S, Liossi C, Vlachos L (1998) Comparison of
the efficacy and safety of tropisetron, metoclopramide, and chlor-
promazine in the treatment of emesis associated with far advanced
cancer. Cancer 83(6):1214–1223
27.
Mystakidou K, Befon S, Liossi C, Vlachos L (1998) Comparison of
tropisetron and chlorpromazine combinations in the control of nau-
sea and vomiting of patients with advanced cancer. J Pain symptom
Manag 15(3):176–184
28.
Imai K, Ikenaga M, Kodama T, Kanemura S, Tamura K, Morita T
(2013) Sublingually administered scopolamine for nausea in termi-
nally ill cancer patients. Support Care Cancer 21(10):2777–2781
29.
LeGrand SB, Walsh D (2010) Scopolamine for cancer-related nau-
sea and vomiting. J Pain Symptom Manag 40(1):136–141
30.
Kaneishi K, Nishimura K, Sakurai N, et al (2016) Use of olanzapine
for the relief of nausea and vomiting in patients with advanced cancer:
a multicenter survey in Japan. Support care cancer (in press).
31.
MacKintosh D (2016) Olanzapine in the management of difficult to
control nausea and vomiting in a palliative care population: a case
series. J Palliat Med 19(1):87–90
Support Care Cancer
 32.
Atkinson SR (2014) Olanzapine for intractable nausea and
vomiting in palliative care patients not receiving chemotherapy. J
Palliat Med 17(5):503–504
33.
Krouse RS (2007) The international conference on malignant bowel
obstruction: a meeting of the minds to advance palliative care re-
search. J Pain Symptom Manag 34:S1–S6
34.
Ripamonti C, Gerders H, Easson AM. (2013). Bowel Obstruction.
In: Principles and practice of Palliative Care and Supportive
Oncology (Eds: Berger AM, Shuster JL, Von Roenn JH) 4 Ed.
Lippincott Williams & wilkins; 15:193–209.
35.
Currow D, Quinn S, Agar M, Fazekas B, Hardy J, McCaffrey N
et al (2015) Double-blind, placebo controlled, randomized trial of
octreotide in malignant bowel obstruction. J Pain Symptom Manag
49(5):814–820
36.
Peng X, Wang P, Li S, Zhang G, Hu S (2015) Randomized clinical
trial comparing octreotide and scopolamine butylbromide in symp-
tom control of patients with inoperable bowel obstruction due to
advanced ovarian cancer. World J Surg Oncol 13:50. doi:10.1186
/s12957-015-0455-3
37.
Laval G, Rousselot H, Toussaint-Martel S, Mayer F, Terrebonne E,
Francois E et al (2012) SALTO: a randomized, multicenter study
assessing octreotide LAR in inoperable bowel obstruction. Bull
Cancer 99(2):E1–9
38.
Mariani P, Blumberg J, Landau A, Lebrun-Jezekova D, Botton E,
Beatrix O et al (2012) Symptomatic treatment with lanreotide mi-
croparticles in inoperable bowel obstruction resulting from perito-
neal carcinomatosis: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled phase III study. J Clin Oncol 30:4337–4343
39.
Mercadante S, Ripamonti C, Casuccio A, Zecca E, Groff L (2000)
Comparison of octreotide and hyoscine butylbromide in controlling
gastrointestinal symptoms due to malignant inoperable bowel ob-
struction. Support Care Cancer 8:188–191
40.
Tuca A, Roca R, Sala C, Porta J, Serrano G, Gonzalez-Barboteo J
(2009) Efficacy of granisetron in the antiemetic control of nonsur-
gical intestinal obstruction in advanced cancer: a phase II clinical
trial. J Pain Symptom Manag 37(2):259–270
41.
Hisanaga T, Shinjo T, Morita T, Nakajima N, Ikenaga M, Tanimizu
M et al (2010) Multicenter prospective study on efficacy and safety
of octreotide for inoperable malignant bowel obstruction. JPN J
Clin Onc 40(8):739–745
42.
Watari H, Hosaka M, Wakui Y, Nomura E, Hareyama H, Tanuma F
et al (2012) A prospective study on the efficacy of octreotide in the
management of malignant bowel obstruction in gynecologic cancer.
Int J Gynecol Cancer 22(4):692–696
43.
Kubota H, Taguchi K, Kobayashi D, Naruyama H, Hirose M, Fukuta
K et al (2013) Clinical impact of palliative treatment using octreotide
for inoperable malignant bowel obstruction caused by advanced uro-
logical cancer. Asian Pacific J. Cancer Pres 14:7107–7110
44.
Kaneishi K, Kawabata M, Morita T (2012) Olanzapine for the relief
of nausea in patients with advanced cancer and incomplete bowel
obstruction. J Pain Symptom Manag 44:604–607
45.
Berger J, Lester P, Rodrigues L (2016) Medical therapy of malig-
nant bowel obstruction with octreotide, dexamethasone and
metoclopramide. Am J Hospice Palliat Med 33(4):407–410
46.
Weber C (2009) Malignant irreversible intestinal obstruction: the
powerful association of octreotide to corticosteroids antiemetics and
analgesics. Am J Hosp Palliat Med 26(2):84–88
47.
Fallon MT, Cherny NI (2015) Opioid therapy: optimizing analgesic
outcomes. In: Cherny NI, Fallon MT, Kaasa S, Portenoy RK,
Currow DC (eds) Oxford Textbook of Palliative Medicine, 5th
edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 525–559
48.
Campora E, Merlini L, Pace M, Bruzzone M et al (1991) The
incidence of narcotic-induced emesis. J Pain Symptom Manag
6(7):428–430
49.
Twycross R, Wilcock A, Howard P (2014) Palliative care formu-
lary, 5 edn. palliativedrugs.com Ltd, Nottingham
50.
Hardy J, Daly S, McQuade B et al (2002) A double-blind, randomised,
parallel group, multinational, multicentre study comparing a single dose
of ondansetron 24 mg p.o. with placebo and metoclopramide 10 mg
t.d.s. p.o. in the treatment of opioid-induced nausea and emesis in
cancer patients. Support Care Cancer 10(3):231–236
51.
Laugsand EA, Kaasa S, Klepstad P (2011) Management of opioid-
induced nausea and vomiting in cancer patients: systematic review
and evidence-based recommendations. Palliat Med 25(5):442–53
52.
Sweeney C, Bogan C (2009) Assessment and management of opi-
oid side effects. In: Bruera E, Higginson IJ, Ripamonti C. von
Gunten C. Textbook of Palliative Medicine. CRC Press, Taylor &
Francis, FL, USA, pp 390–401
Support Care Cancer
