 1 
Liquid biopsies come of age: towards implementation of 
circulating tumour DNA  
 
Jonathan C. M. Wan1,2, Charles Massie1,2, Javier Garcia-Corbacho3, Florent 
Mouliere1,2, James D. Brenton1,2, Carlos Caldas1,2,4, Simon Pacey2,4, Richard 
Baird2,4*, Nitzan Rosenfeld1,2*  
 
1Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge 
2Cancer Research UK Cambridge Centre, Cambridge CB2 0RE  
3Clinical Trials Unit, Clínic Institute of Haematological & Oncological Diseases, Hospital Clínic 
de Barcelona, IDIBAPs, Carrer de Villarroel, 170 Barcelona 08036 
4Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge 
*RB and NR contributed equally. 
Please send correspondence to NR at nitzan.rosenfeld@cruk.cam.ac.uk. 
 
 
 
 
Key points 
• 
cfDNA is released predominantly by cell death into the bloodstream, though 
active secretion may play a role. Since the discovery of fetal cfDNA in the 
maternal circulation, cfDNA analysis has been rapidly implemented in clinical 
practice for non-invasive prenatal testing. 
• 
Mutations were first detected in cfDNA over two decades ago, and interest in 
ctDNA as a non-invasive cancer diagnostic has increased dramatically with 
the development of molecular methods that permit the sensitive detection and 
monitoring of multiple classes of mutation.  
• 
ctDNA may have utility at almost every stage of cancer patient management, 
including: diagnosis, minimally invasive molecular profiling, treatment 
monitoring, detection of residual disease, and identification of resistance 
mutations. ctDNA analysis may be broadly considered as a tool for both 
quantitative analysis of disease burden and for genomic analysis. 
• 
The identification of ctDNA in individuals prior to a cancer diagnosis, and in 
pre-symptomatic individuals, suggests the possibility of ctDNA analysis as a 
 2 
tool for earlier diagnosis or screening. Non-invasive cancer classification or 
sub-typing has also emerged as a possibility, though for early detection, both 
technical and biological factors introduce challenges to the detection of 
mutant DNA in plasma and its interpretation. 
• 
Monitoring multiple mutations in parallel can enhance sensitivity for ctDNA 
detection, can be used to assess clonal evolution of patients’ disease, and 
may identify resistance mutations before clinical progression is observed.  
• 
ctDNA analysis is beginning to transition from the research setting into the 
clinic. The US Food and Drug Administration and the European Medicines 
Agency have approved ctDNA tests for specific indications in the absence of 
evaluable tumour tissue. Analysis of gene panels in plasma has now become 
available as a potential clinical tool. Larger studies are underway to establish 
the overall performance and clinical utility of such assays when a tumour 
biopsy is not available for analysis. 
• 
Potential applications of ctDNA have been demonstrated by a number of 
proof-of-principle studies. Prospective clinical trials are beginning to assess 
the clinical utility of ctDNA analysis for molecular profiling and disease 
monitoring. Increasing acceptance of ctDNA is enabling the field to move from 
exploratory ctDNA studies towards clinical trials where ctDNA is guiding 
decision making. 
• 
In order to fully exploit the potential utility of liquid biopsies, it is essential that 
the biology of cfDNA and ctDNA is explored further. Mechanisms of release 
and degradation, and the factors that affect the representation of ctDNA in 
plasma, are poorly understood. The nature of ctDNA will be clarified through 
both large, well-annotated clinical studies, and through in vivo studies, where 
variables may be controlled. 
 
 
 
 3 
Preface  
Improvements in genomic and molecular methods are expanding the range of 
potential applications for circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA), both in a research setting 
and as a ‘liquid biopsy’ for cancer management. Proof-of-principle studies have 
demonstrated the translational potential of ctDNA for prognostication, molecular 
profiling, and monitoring. The field is now at an exciting transitional period where 
ctDNA analysis is beginning to be applied clinically, although there is still much to 
learn about the biology of cell-free DNA. This is an opportune time to appraise 
potential approaches for ctDNA analysis, and to consider their applications in 
personalised oncology and in cancer research.  
 
The presence of fragments of cell-free nucleic acids in human blood was first 
described in 1948 by Mandel and Métais1. The origins and characteristics of cell-free 
DNA (cfDNA) were studied intermittently in subsequent decades2. In healthy 
individuals, cfDNA concentration tends to range between 1-10ng/millilitre (ml) in 
plasma3,4. Raised cfDNA levels were first reported in the serum of cancer patients in 
19775; cfDNA concentration can also be raised by other physiological conditions or 
clinical scenarios, such as acute trauma6, cerebral infarction7, exercise8, 
transplantation9, and infection10. Furthermore, the identification of fetal DNA 
sequences in maternal plasma by Dennis Lo and colleagues in 199711 has led to 
multiple applications of cfDNA in prenatal medicine including sex determination12, 
identification of monogenic disorders13, and non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) for 
aneuploidies such as Down’s Syndrome (trisomy 21). NIPT was first demonstrated in 
2007 by Lo et al.14 and has moved rapidly into widespread clinical use15,16. 
 
In 1989, Stroun, Anker et al. identified that at least some cfDNA in the plasma of 
cancer patients originates from cancer cells2,17. In 1991, Vogelstein, Sidransky and 
colleagues showed that DNA from urinary sediments (cell pellets) from patients with 
invasive bladder cancer carried mutations in TP53, setting the stage for the use of 
genomic analysis methods in liquid biopsy applications18. KRAS mutations were soon 
found in stool or sputum that matched mutations from colorectal19, pancreatic20 or 
lung21,22 cancers. In 1994, mutated KRAS sequences were first reported to be 
 4 
detected in plasma cfDNA of patients with pancreatic cancer using polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) with allele-specific primers23. For each patient, the KRAS mutation 
found in the plasma was identical to that found in the patient’s tumour, thereby 
confirming that the mutant DNA fragments in plasma were of tumour origin. 
Mutations in cfDNA are highly specific markers for cancer, which gave rise to the 
term circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA). 
 
In the following decades, ctDNA was explored as a prognostic or predictive 
marker24,25 and for cancer detection26. Such studies confirmed the potential of ctDNA, 
though the levels of ctDNA in different clinical contexts were not yet accurately 
defined. These studies nonetheless could demonstrate potential clinical applications, 
for example detection of KRAS mutations in plasma as a potential prognostic factor 
in colorectal cancer27. The introduction of a digital PCR (dPCR) method in 1999 by 
Vogelstein and Kinzler enabled the accurate identification and absolute quantification 
of rare mutant fragments28. A modification of this technique using beads in 
emulsions29 and flow cytometry allowed the quantification of the mutant allele fraction 
of cancer mutations in the plasma of patients with different stages of colorectal 
cancer30. Diehl, Diaz et al. then showed in 2008 that ctDNA is a highly specific 
marker of tumour dynamics, and may be able to indicate residual disease31. In 
parallel, allele-specific PCR and other methods were devised and tested for their 
ability to identify epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations in serum or 
plasma of lung cancer patients32, following the elucidation of the role of such 
mutations 
in 
predicting 
response 
to 
treatment 
with 
molecularly 
targeted 
inhibitors25,33,34. 
 
The development of next generation sequencing-based technologies has facilitated 
the interrogation of the genome at a broader scale. In 2012, deep sequencing of 
multiple genes in cfDNA was demonstrated using panels of tagged amplicons, which 
allowed the identification of mutations directly in the plasma of cancer patients, and 
monitoring of multiple tumour-specific mutations in a single assay35. This method was 
subsequently applied to monitor ctDNA in a cohort of patients with metastatic breast 
cancer36. Shortly thereafter, whole-genome sequencing (WGS) of plasma cfDNA was 
 5 
first 
shown 
to 
identify 
tumour-derived 
chromosomal 
aberrations37, 
focal 
amplifications38 and gene rearrangements39, and hybrid-capture sequencing was 
introduced as a non-invasive method to analyse the evolving genomic profile of 
mutations in cancer across the entire exome40.  
 
There is a clear clinical need for novel diagnostic and molecular tools in oncology 
(Box 1). Conventional sampling methods such as needle biopsies are subject to 
procedural complications in up to one in six biopsies41, difficulty in obtaining sufficient 
material of adequate quality for genomic profiling (reported failure rates range from 
<10% to >30% of cases)42,43, and sampling biases arising from genetic 
heterogeneity44–48. Detection and monitoring of disease often relies on body fluid-
based markers that often lack specificity49, and imaging which exposes patients to 
ionising radiation50 and has limited resolution (in both time and space). Recent 
advances in ctDNA research highlight the potential applications of liquid biopsies at 
each stage of patient management (Fig. 1a). These potential applications primarily 
arise from two types of information obtainable through ctDNA analysis: quantification 
of disease burden, and genomic analysis of cancer (Fig. 1b). These may be 
combined and/or leveraged through serial sampling in order to monitor disease 
burden and clonal evolution. 
 
The increasing availability and reliability of techniques for PCR and high-throughput 
sequencing are facilitating novel high-sensitivity applications, the generation of large 
clinical datasets, and a better understanding of the origin of both cfDNA and ctDNA. 
This Review will highlight and explore recent advances in the field and the 
implications for oncology. 
 
cfDNA and ctDNA biology  
Characteristics of cfDNA and ctDNA  
cfDNA is thought to be released from cells mostly through apoptosis and necrosis, 
and possibly also active secretion2,51–54. Outside of the blood circulation, cfDNA has 
been detected a variety of body fluids including urine55–58,59, cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF)60–63, pleural fluid64 and saliva65. Genetic and epigenetic modifications of cfDNA 
 6 
molecules reflect the genome or epigenome of the cell of origin66–68 (Fig. 2). 
Methylation analysis has revealed that the majority of cfDNA in plasma is released 
from haematopoietic cells in healthy individuals67–69. These have been suggested to 
be the source of cfDNA release following intense exercise70. Observational studies 
have determined the half-life of cfDNA in the circulation as between 16 minutes and 
2.5 hours31,71–73, which allows ctDNA analysis to be considered as a ‘real-time’ 
snapshot of disease burden. Other observational studies indicate that cfDNA is 
cleared from the circulation via nuclease action72,74 and renal excretion into the 
urine55,58,75. cfDNA uptake in the liver and spleen, followed by degradation by 
macrophages, may also contribute30,76. The stability of individual fragments in the 
circulation may be increased through association with cell membranes, extracellular 
vesicles or proteins2.  
 
Nearly two decades ago, the modal size of cfDNA was determined using gel 
electrophoresis as ~180 base pairs (bp), indicating that cfDNA was likely to be 
nucleosome-associated77. Sequencing-based approaches have since refined this 
measurement, by identifying a prominent peak at 166bp78,79, corresponding to the 
length of DNA wrapped around a nucleosome (~147bp), plus linker DNA associated 
with histone H1. Fragment size traces of cfDNA show a 10bp ladder pattern54,75, 
ostensibly caused by nucleases cleaving the DNA strand at periodically exposed 
sites with each turn of the DNA double-helix. The fragmentation patterns of cfDNA 
differ between plasma and urine75, potentially contributed to by a higher nuclease 
activity in urine80.  
 
ctDNA  molecules are shorter than non-mutant cfDNA in plasma, demonstrated by 
PCR4,81 and sequencing68,82. Animal xenograft experiments79,81–83 provide an elegant 
means to interrogate ctDNA, since any human DNA sequences must have originated 
from the tumour xenograft. The modal length of ctDNA fragments has been 
measured in a rat xenograft model as between 134-144bp82, though the cause of this 
shortening is not clear. Shortening of fragments is also observed in fetal cfDNA 
relative to maternal cfDNA78, and between non-haematopoetically-derived vs. 
haematopoietically-derived cfDNA fragments in transplant patients84,85. Differences in 
 7 
nucleosome wrapping or nuclease action between haematopoietic cells, which 
contribute most to the cfDNA pool, and other tissues may play a role. Long cfDNA 
fragments (>1000bp) have been observed in healthy individuals using long-read 
sequencing techniques86, and may be released into the circulation in association with 
exosomes51,52, or by tumour cells via necrosis53. Current extraction methods often 
poorly recover these long fragments87,88 (Box 2). Commonly used library preparation 
methods introduce further biases: single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) library preparation89 
can recover DNA fragments with damaged ends, and when applied to cfDNA66,90 
uncovered a large proportion of fragments shorter than 100 bases. Diverse extraction 
and sequencing methods may therefore yield complementary data. Combining those 
with histological analysis of corresponding tissue samples could provide new insights 
into the biological determinants of cfDNA fragmentation, and the biological origins of 
cfDNA. 
 
Physiological and pathological considerations 
cfDNA has been proposed as a ligand for Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9)91,92, a sensor of 
exogenous DNA fragments, found primarily in tissues rich in immune cells. In mice, 
obesity-related adipocyte degeneration was shown to release cfDNA, which 
contributed to macrophage accumulation via TLR9 activation, leading to adipose 
tissue inflammation and insulin resistance92. Another study has suggested that 
cfDNA may inhibit pro-apoptotic caspases via TLR9-depedent signalling91, which 
could imply a potential immunomodulatory role for cfDNA.  
 
In vitro experiments suggest that cfDNA may be internalised by cells2,93,94, raising the 
possibility that cfDNA molecules could mediate the horizontal transfer of genes or 
DNA. One report showed in vitro transformation of NIH-3T3 mouse cells that were in 
contact with samples of plasma from patients with KRAS-mutant colorectal cancers, 
despite being separated to avoid tumour cell contamination95. Another study 
demonstrated integration of ctDNA into the nuclear DNA of recipient cells, and 
suggested that this may occur through non-homologous end-joining93. A similar 
phenomenon has been observed with mitochondrial DNA96. Overall, it is clear that 
 8 
there is a lot to learn about the biology of cfDNA and ctDNA, which could have an 
important impact on their potential applications in oncology. 
 
Approaches for ctDNA analysis 
Analysis of ctDNA ranges in scale from single mutations to whole-genome analyses 
(Fig. 3; See Table 1 for a comparison of selected techniques). Appropriately 
designed assays for individual mutations can achieve high sensitivity using a simple 
workflow. Allele-specific PCR methods97,98 have been applied since the mid-2000s 
for detection of hot-spot mutations in serum and plasma25,33,34,99, and some assays 
are available as kits that are approved for clinical use158,160, but have limited 
analytical sensitivity. dPCR assays on microfluidic platforms are quantitative and 
highly sensitive, and are used extensively for quantifying ctDNA levels29,30,32,57,100–102. 
Improved detection at selected loci has been demonstrated by methods such as 
single-base extension103 or enrichment for mutant alleles by electrophoretic 
methods131,132, nuclease activity104 or modified PCR105–107. The multiplexing capacity 
of such assays, that rely on differential binding affinities of mutant and wild type 
alleles, and for the most part require primers or probes that are specific to a defined 
mutation or targeted locus, is limited. These are, therefore, generally suited to 
investigating a small number of mutations, and are often applied to analysis of cancer 
hot-spot mutations. If samples need to be split into multiple reactions, this increases 
sampling error, and may impair the overall performance of an assay for very low copy 
numbers of mutant DNA. 
 
In order to interrogate a larger number of loci, targeted sequencing using PCR 
amplicons or hybrid-capture have been employed35,40,108,109. Regions for sequencing 
may range from individual exons of interest (kilobases), to the entire exome (~50 
megabases). Current off-the-shelf panels for gene sequencing can detect mutations 
with an allele fraction greater than 1%46,110. By reducing background error rates of 
sequencing, for example by molecular barcoding (Fig. 3) or multiple replicates (Fig. 
4), ctDNA can be detected at allele fractions below 0.1%111–114 (Table 1). Amplicon-
based assays that have been optimised for the purpose of ctDNA analysis can target 
 9 
dozens to hundreds of amplicons across multiple kilobases35,112,114. Hybrid-capture-
based approaches can increase the genomic region studied to dozens or hundreds 
of kilobases108,109,111,115. The sensitivity for ctDNA detection can be further enhanced, 
even with limited amounts of input material, by using multiplexed patient-specific 
panels in combination with targeted sequencing methods35,111 (Fig. 4).  
 
Amplifications and deletions may be identified through low-depth (~0.1x coverage) 
sequencing of the whole genome, with comparison of the relative number of 
sequencing reads between equally sized genomic regions across a sample or 
between samples and controls39. Such shallow WGS (sWGS) has been employed to 
detect fetal aneuploidies38, and it can also be used to detect cancer-specific copy 
number alterations37,39,116. sWGS has a limit of detection of between 5%-10% mutant 
allele fraction (Table 1), and so has limited sensitivity for profiling earlier stage 
disease. If molecular profiling of a small number of recurrent copy number alterations 
is desired, higher sensitivity may be achieved through targeted sequencing of single 
nucleotide polymorphisms, which may detect copy number alterations as low as 
0.5%117.  
 
The limit of detection for assays will vary based on whether the individual’s disease 
status, and tumour mutations, are already characterised. Tumour burden in plasma 
has often been assessed by quantifying mutations (or other alterations) that were 
previously identified in the patient’s tumour sample30,31. For mutation calling across a 
panel of genes or hotspots, the risk of false positives increases with the size of the 
panel due to multiple hypothesis testing, and filters need to be applied to increase 
specificity, which erodes sensitivity for rare variants. Prior knowledge of the mutation 
profile (e.g. from tumour sequencing data) enables the detection of known patient-
specific mutations above the background error rate, as opposed to calling mutations 
de novo35. Thus, sequencing-based assays can be used as sensitive and quantitative 
tools for ctDNA measurement and monitoring, in addition to their use for mutation 
profiling35,36,108 (Fig. 1b). 
 
 10 
ctDNA can be quantified using different metrics, such as mutant allele concentration 
(i.e. copies per ml) or mutant allele fraction118. Each of these metrics would be 
affected in a different way by analytical, pre-analytical, and physiological 
characteristics. For example, metabolic changes to the rate of cfDNA turnover would 
affect the concentration of mutant alleles more than the mutant allele fraction, 
whereas pre-analytical factors affecting release of germline DNA from blood cells 
would reduce the mutant allele fraction to a greater extent. Analysis of ctDNA (both 
fraction and concentration)118, as well as total cfDNA and cfDNA fragmentation3,119, 
could therefore provide complementary information, and may have advantages in 
different applications or in combination.  
 
ctDNA detection across cancer stages 
ctDNA relates to stage and prognosis  
The concentration of ctDNA in plasma has been shown to correlate with tumour 
size79,120 and stage121. A study of 640 patients with various cancer types and 
stages121 found a 100-fold increase in median ctDNA concentration between patients 
with Stage I and Stage IV disease. Measuring individual tumour mutations in each 
patient, patients with Stage I disease had fewer than 10 copies per 5 ml of plasma. In 
sharp contrast, patients with advanced prostate, ovarian and colorectal cancers had 
a median concentration of 100-1,000 copies per 5 ml of plasma. ctDNA levels vary 
greatly even within patients with the same type and stage of disease. This variability 
in ctDNA concentration is partially explained by differences in extent of metastatic 
spread or disease burden. In a recent report that compared ctDNA levels with tumour 
volume assessed by imaging in patients with relapsed high-grade serous ovarian 
cancer, ctDNA levels and disease volume were significantly correlated118. Mutant 
alleles in plasma increased in fraction by approximately 0.08%, and in concentration 
by 6 mutant copies per millilitre of plasma, for every cm3 of disease118. 
Notwithstanding these correlations, substantial variation in ctDNA concentration may 
arise from inter-individual differences. For example, poor tumour vascularisation 
could hamper ctDNA release into the bloodstream, or conversely, could promote 
ctDNA release via producing hypoxia and cell death. Histological differences could 
forseeably influence both the rate and type of cell death. Patients with primary brain 
 11 
tumours have very low levels of ctDNA, with a median concentration for individual 
mutations of less than 10 copies per 5 ml of plasma121, while the fraction of tumour 
DNA in CSF was found to be significantly higher61,62,121. Although not directly proven, 
the blood-brain barrier has been suggested to impede the movement of cfDNA 
fragments into the circulation61,62,121. 
 
The relationship between ctDNA levels and cancer stage suggests prognostic utility 
for ctDNA. Patients with detectable ctDNA have been shown to have worse survival 
outcomes than those without27,122–126. In one of the earliest examples in the field, the 
2-year overall survival rate for patients with colorectal cancer who had detectable 
ctDNA was 48%, as opposed to 100% for patients without27. In patients with 
detectable ctDNA, it has been found to be a more significant prognostic predictor 
than commonly used tumour markers36,118, where an increasing concentration of 
ctDNA correlates with poorer clinical and radiological outcomes36,118,121,127,128. For 
example, in patients with metastatic breast cancer, a significant inverse correlation 
was shown between ctDNA concentration and overall survival up to 2000 copies/ml, 
with a uniformly poor prognosis above this level36. In addition to ctDNA levels, 
mutational patterns identified in ctDNA (Fig. 1b) can help group patients into 
molecular subtypes with different prognosis129. 
 
Earlier diagnosis of disease 
Diagnosing cancer at an earlier stage, particularly before metastatic spread, may 
allow earlier intervention and could improve survival130. A number of studies have 
demonstrated the potential for non-invasive early diagnosis. Mutations have been 
detected in saliva and plasma from individuals up to two years prior to cancer 
diagnosis21,131, and there have been reports of incidental pre-symptomatic detection 
of cancers in pregnant women who underwent NIPT68,132,133, as WGS can identify 
copy number alterations of both fetal and tumour origin. Screening in asymptomatic 
populations introduces risks of over-diagnosis and false positives; implementation 
could therefore be explored in stages, and a first step could involve the use of ctDNA 
for earlier diagnosis of disease in symptomatic individuals, who at present may 
undergo lengthy investigation procedures. 
 12 
 
In a survey across several cancer types, ctDNA was detected in 82% of patients with 
Stage IV disease, which fell to 47% for patients with Stage I disease121. The method 
they applied was benchmarked as being able to detect one copy of an individual 
cancer mutation per 5ml of plasma121. Using a sequencing gene panel that targeted a 
median of four mutations per patient, ctDNA was detected in 50% of patients with 
stage I non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)108. Targeting known tumour mutations in 
plasma using ddPCR assays in early-stage breast cancer showed a sensitivity of 
93.3%134. A sWGS method adapted from an NIPT assay was recently shown to 
detect 6/16 (37.5%) cases of early ovarian cancer135, though this approach may not 
perform as well in other cancer types with fewer copy number alterations. Together, 
these studies outline the possibility, and the challenge, of detection of ctDNA in early 
stage disease. 
 
If analysis is performed on a few millilitres of plasma containing only a few thousand 
copies of the genome, increasing the analytical sensitivity beyond the range of 
~1/1000 may not produce any sensitivity benefit since at low allele fractions, it 
becomes increasingly likely that the mutation of interest may not be found due to 
sampling noise. One approach may be to collect greater volumes of plasma (and 
more cfDNA) through methods such as plasmapheresis or implanted devices 
containing materials that bind cfDNA; similar approaches have been tested for 
enhancing the yield of circulating tumour cells (CTCs)136. Given these challenges, it is 
important that pre-analytical factors surrounding the collection, processing, and 
extraction of cfDNA are optimised (Box 2). Alternatively, for some cancer types, other 
minimally invasive samples may have a higher tumour DNA content, such as urine 
for bladder cancer57 or stool for colorectal cancers19; or cytological specimens such 
as cervical smears137, uterine lavage138, or oesophageal brushings139 for 
gynaecological or oesophageal cancers, respectively (Fig. 3c). For cancers with a 
viral aetiology, e.g. nasopharyngeal carcinoma or cervical cancer, detection of the 
cancer-associated viral DNA that may be present in body fluids in many more copies 
than tumour DNA can enhance the identification of individuals with early stage 
disease or pre-malignant lesions with a high risk for cancer140,141. 
 13 
 
Technical and biological advances facilitate enhanced mutation detection: the finding 
that ctDNA is shorter than cfDNA4,81,82 suggests the utility of experimental or in silico 
size selection (Fig. 3d). Where the input amount of plasma or DNA is limiting, assays 
that interrogate multiple mutations in the same reaction (through broad genomic 
coverage or by patient-specific multiplexed panels) may produce a higher overall 
sensitivity for detecting the presence of any ctDNA35,36,108,110,111, compared to focused 
analysis of individual loci (Fig. 4). Taken to a (currently impractical) extreme, ultra-
deep sequencing of the entire genome could in the future allow sensitive detection of 
cancer even from small volumes of plasma37 (or other fluids). 
 
Although technical advances may improve sensitivity for ctDNA analysis further, 
biological and genomic factors may eventually become limiting. For confident de 
novo cancer detection using ctDNA, detected alterations should have a high positive 
predictive value for cancer. However, mutations known to be associated with cancer 
(e.g. in TP53, KRAS, and Notch pathway genes) have been found at low levels in 
skin biopsies of healthy individuals142. If non-tumourigenic clones were to increase to 
sufficient size and release mutated cfDNA, they could introduce biological noise. 
Clonal haematopoiesis with leukaemia-associated mutations has been observed in 
10% of individuals older than 65 years of age, though the absolute risk of conversion 
to haematologic cancer is 1%143. Genomic alterations known to be associated with 
cancer have been found in plasma from healthy individuals111,115,144,145. Clinical 
outcomes for apparently healthy individuals in whom mutant DNA is detected in 
plasma should be characterised in order to understand the biological and clinical 
implications of such findings. 
 
Cancer localisation 
Tissue-of-origin information from liquid biopsies might be able to aid cancer 
localisation, for example, for cancers of unknown primary146. Methylation and 
nucleosome occupancy patterns in cfDNA have been found to encode tissue- and 
cell-specific information66–68,147: in one case, a pregnant woman had chromosomal 
abnormalities detectable by NIPT, and so tissue-specific methylation signals in 
 14 
plasma were studied, enabling quantification of the relative contributions of each 
tissue to the total cfDNA pool68. This revealed an increased contribution of cfDNA 
from B-lymphocytes, consistent with a diagnosis of follicular lymphoma68. While it 
may be possible in the future to deduce the tissue type of origin of a cancer in this 
fashion, it remains to be seen whether the site or sites of metastatic spread can be 
determined through a measurable increase in tissue-specific cfDNA signal.  
 
Non-invasive molecular profiling  
Analysis of heterogeneity 
The extent of genetic heterogeneity has been confirmed over recent years as multi-
regional sequencing studies have demonstrated clear differences in mutation profiles 
between different tumour regions in the same patient148,149 and between different 
specimens from primary and metastatic sites150. Although the potentially confounding 
effects of heterogeneity are recognised, it is often neither feasible nor desirable to 
perform multiple tumour biopsies on patients to try to account for this. Analysis of an 
individual biopsy might not accurately reflect the genomic architecture of a patient’s 
cancer, introducing bias to the selection and efficacy of personalised medicines. 
Furthermore, in a recent study of patients with lung cancer treated with an EGFR 
inhibitor, the tumour EGFRT790M allele fraction correlated with the degree of tumour 
shrinkage151, suggesting that the current paradigm of treatment selection based on 
mutation presence or absence alone may be suboptimal.  
 
Liquid biopsies sample ctDNA released from multiple tumour regions, and may 
thereby reflect both intratumour heterogeneity45,47,62 and spatially separated disease 
foci48,152–154. While individual tumour biopsies from different tumour regions may differ 
in mutation profile due to intratumour heterogeneity155,156, ctDNA analysis has 
detected mutations missed in corresponding tissue samples45,48,157,158. Multi-region 
tumour sequencing data show that stem mutations (shared by all tumour regions) 
show a higher allele fraction in plasma compared to private mutations47,48. Therefore, 
for tracking tumour burden in plasma, stem mutations would provide the most reliable 
detection. Alternatively, tracking a large set of mutations may compensate for 
potential biases of individual private mutations. 
 15 
 
Hotspot mutations and gene panels 
By comparing mutation detection in plasma against matched tumour samples, the 
sensitivity of ctDNA analysis has been estimated in retrospective studies as between 
65%-98%100,102,119,154,157,159–161. For profiling specific loci, for example in order to 
stratify patients for matched molecular therapies, international studies have begun to 
demonstrate that large-scale testing is feasible and may be standardised, although 
the use of assays with limited analytical sensitivity resulted in low detection rates of 
ctDNA162–164. Using assays developed specifically to detect low levels of ctDNA3, a 
blinded prospective study demonstrated sensitivity for KRAS and BRAF mutations in 
metastatic colorectal cancer of 92% and 100%, respectively, with concordance rates 
of 96% and 100% for each119. 
 
Considerable attention has been devoted to analysis of EGFR mutations in patients 
with NSCLC34,99, as it is often challenging to obtain tissue biopsies to help inform 
treatment41,42. Meta-analysis of 27 selected studies published between 2007-2015, 
comprising altogether nearly 4000 patients, resulted in a pooled sensitivity of 60% 
and specificity of 94% for detection of EGFR mutations in plasma or serum, with a 
variety of methods34. In a phase IV study of the EGFR inhibitor gefitinib, mutation 
status was compared between tumour and plasma samples from 652 patients. The 
sensitivity and specificity for detecting mutations in plasma were determined as 
65.7% and 99.8%, respectively164,165, likely affected by the limited analytical 
sensitivity of the PCR-based method used166, as the version of the kit used in that 
study had a limit of detection (at ≥95% analytical sensitivity) of 1.64% and 1.26% for 
EGFR deletions and L858R mutations, respectively164. Low rates of concordance of 
EGFRT790M status were also observed in a recent phase III trial of osimertinib167, in 
which tissue testing was compared to plasma using an allele-specific PCR assay for 
ctDNA analysis that has a limit of detection (with ≥95% analytical sensitivity) of 100 
copies of EGFRT790M per ml of plasma168. Using methods with greater analytical 
sensitivity, higher concordance rates were obtained157,169. The EGFRT790M mutation 
confers resistance to gefitinib and erlotinib, and frequently emerges following initial 
treatment with those EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors33,170,171. In plasma, the 
 16 
sensitivity for detecting this mutation was lower than for EGFRL858R and EGFREx19del 
(70% vs. ≥90%), which occur earlier in the development of disease157,169. Initial data 
suggests that this may be due to heterogeneous presence of resistance mutations at 
disease relapse157.  
 
In retrospective analyses, despite limited concordance rates of EGFR mutation status 
between plasma and tumour samples observed in some studies, response rates for 
patients who were plasma positive for mutations in EGFR were similar to response 
rates of patients who were tissue positive157,164,165,167,169. Data showing the response 
of patients treated solely on the basis of ctDNA analysis are starting to emerge: 
patients who were treated with osimertinib based on detection of EGFRT790M in 
plasma, and had response rates similar to the response rates of patients treated 
based on tissue analysis172. Interestingly, objective responses were also seen in 
patients with very low allele fractions of mutant EGFRT790M in plasma (<0.5%)172.  
 
At present, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) and the US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) approve the use of information from ctDNA analysis to help 
select patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC for gefitinib (EMA)173, erlotinib (FDA)168 or 
osimertinib (EMA and FDA)168,174 therapy in the event that a tumour sample is not 
evaluable. This could offer a pragmatic solution to provide molecular profiling 
information for patients, while avoiding repeat biopsies for some individuals. Current 
recommendations168,174 state that if liquid biopsies are carried out in advance of a 
tumour biopsy, ctDNA detection may abrogate the need for tissue biopsy, but if 
ctDNA analysis is negative, a tissue biopsy may still provide valuable genomic 
information. 
 
Molecular profiling using ctDNA may have particular utility for stratifying patients in 
‘basket trials’, which enrol patients independent of tumour histology, or ‘umbrella 
trials’, which assign patients to multiple investigational drugs or treatment options175. 
For example, a 54-gene panel detected ctDNA in 58% of patients across multiple 
cancer types176. Of the patients with alterations, 71.4% had at least one mutation 
actionable by an FDA-approved drug176. This panel is being used to test the 
 17 
feasibility of matching patients with different metastatic cancer types to targeted 
therapies in a prospective clinical trial177. In another study presented at the 2016 
Molecular Analysis for Personalised Therapy meeting, a 34-gene panel identified 
mutations in 79% of 174 patients with NSCLC, allowing 28 patients (17%) to receive 
personalised treatment based on ctDNA molecular profiling178. Personalised therapy 
selection presents challenges: even if mutations are successfully detected using 
ctDNA in patients, an efficacious molecularly targeted agent may not exist. However, 
data from a prospective clinical trial presented at the 2016 Molecular Analysis for 
Personalised Therapy meeting demonstrated that selecting therapies based on 
genomic analysis can improve outcomes for cancer patients, even when patients with 
well-established actionable targets (for which approved drugs are available) were 
excluded179.  
 
Improvements in the analytical sensitivity of molecular profiling tools could further 
increase detection and concordance rates or allow for sensitive multiplexed analysis 
(Table 1), though biological factors and heterogeneity may reduce sensitivity in some 
cancer types and stages121,157,180. The utility of ctDNA should, therefore, be assessed 
for different clinical indications. However, benchmarking ctDNA against individual 
tumour biopsies may be confounded by sampling error, as rare private mutations 
may be sampled in the biopsy, but release insufficient ctDNA into the bloodstream to 
be detectable.  
 
Structural variants 
Copy number alterations can be detected in cfDNA using WGS38,181–183, amplicon-
based116,184,114, 
and 
hybrid-capture 
approaches40,108,160,185. 
In 
patients 
with 
hepatocellular carcinoma, WGS was able to identify amplifications and deletions in 
plasma matching those identified in tumour tissue38,186. Heterogeneous copy number 
changes were also identified in a patient with synchronous breast and ovarian 
cancers, as copy number changes unique to each cancer were detected in plasma38. 
In a study of 80 patients with prostate cancer, androgen receptor (AR) copy number 
gain prior to abiraterone therapy predicted a worse overall survival, thus identifying 
patients with primary resistance187. For patients with advanced disease, sWGS may 
 18 
provide a relatively cost-effective measure of ctDNA level that is applicable across 
cancer types. This approach may have utility as a sample screening step in a ctDNA 
analysis workflow116, where high-burden patient samples are triaged for exome 
sequencing40. 
 
Chromosomal rearrangements in plasma can be identified through both WGS37 and 
hybrid-capture sequencing approaches39,188, though the latter may be more 
economical due to the depth of coverage needed to confidently identify a 
rearrangement. In one study of patients with prostate cancer, sWGS was able to 
detect a deletion on chromosome 21 in 5 patients, though higher-depth capture 
sequencing was necessary to identify a rearrangement between exon 1 of TMPRSS2 
and exon 3 of ERG39.  
 
Longitudinal monitoring  
Monitoring response 
The short half-life of cfDNA,31,71–73 as well as the ease and reduced risk of repeating 
liquid biopsies relative to imaging50 or tissue biopsies41, enables liquid biopsies to be 
used for real-time monitoring of cancer burden in response to therapy. Studies 
monitoring patients during treatment have shown that ctDNA dynamics correlate with 
treatment response31,35,36,108,126, and may identify response earlier than clinical 
detection36,189,190. In patients with breast cancer, ctDNA showed the greatest range in 
concentration and provided the earliest measure of response to chemotherapies, as 
well as the earliest indication of impending relapse compared to imaging and other 
blood-based cancer markers, such as CTCs and Cancer Antigen 15-3 (CA 15-3, also 
known as MUC1)36. In relapsed ovarian cancer, pre-treatment ctDNA levels and the 
extent of ctDNA decrease after chemotherapy initiation were significantly associated 
with time to progression, and were more informative than levels of CA 125 (also 
known as MUC16) 118.  
 
A recent study suggested that an early spike in ctDNA levels (allele fractions of 
BRAF mutations) in the first week following the initiation of immunotherapy in 
melanoma patients may predict response191. This may reflect a transient increase in 
 19 
cell death. If these data are confirmed, sampling at early time points could be applied 
in the clinic as well as in drug development. However, the presence or timing of such 
spikes in cell death would likely vary based on the pharmacological properties and 
biological responses to treatments used. An early spike was not observed a few days 
after initiation of treatment with chemotherapy for patients with colorectal cancer159 or 
with EGFR inhibitor for patients with NSCLC190. If analysis of plasma immediately 
after the start of therapy could reliably detect the destruction of sensitive cancer cells, 
this raises an exciting possibility that the existence of resistant sub-clones could be 
identified very rapidly through differential early dynamics of mutations. In the context 
of immunotherapy, liquid biopsies may provide the opportunity to monitor both ctDNA 
and the response of the immune system, for example through the analysis of cfDNA 
released from distinct T-cell clones192. 
 
Minimal residual disease and recurrence monitoring 
Following surgery or treatment with curative intent, even in the absence of any other 
clinical evidence of disease, detection of ctDNA may signal the presence of minimal 
residual disease (MRD), which could identify patients who may be at a higher risk of 
relapse. Stratification of patients into high- and low-risk groups would enable 
adjuvant therapy to be given to patients who stand to benefit most, while sparing low-
risk patients from unnecessary comorbidities and risks of adverse events. In a 
prospective study of 230 early-stage colorectal cancer patients, assessment of 
ctDNA at the first follow-up visit after surgical resection indicated that recurrence-free 
survival at 3 years was 0% for the ctDNA-positive and 90% for the ctDNA-negative 
groups193. In a separate study of 55 patients with early-stage breast cancer, 
assessment of ctDNA showed that detection of ctDNA at first follow-up could also 
indicate poor prognosis in early-stage breast cancer194. Furthermore, stratification 
based on mutation detection across serial samples improved prediction of relapse, 
and this and other studies have observed an interval of 7.9-11 months between 
ctDNA detection and clinical relapse194–196, similar to that identified in the metastatic 
setting36. With more sensitive approaches (Fig. 4), earlier identification of clinical 
relapse should be possible. Combining monitoring for known mutations with 
molecular profiling assays could allow identification of potential targets for early 
 20 
therapeutic intervention – ideally, such intervention would, in future, prevent or 
postpone overt relapse. 
 
Patient-specific DNA rearrangements identified from sequencing tumour samples can 
be used to design assays to track tumour burden in plasma196–199. Curative surgery 
could provide an excellent opportunity to obtain tumour DNA that can be sequenced 
to guide the design of assays for post-operative monitoring. Patient-specific 
rearrangements may be more readily detected in ctDNA with high sensitivity197,198, 
since rearrangements are less confounded by background noise. One of the 
challenges of individualised panel design is that sequencing an individual tumour 
biopsy may not sample every mutation in heterogeneous disease; therefore, 
sequencing matched body fluid and tumour samples may be desirable for 
comprehensive mutation profiling. In future, if tumour sequencing becomes routine, 
monitoring disease using patient-specific panels could become viable, although 
regulation of such assays will likely be more complex than fixed panels.  
 
Clonal evolution and resistance  
As discussed above, rising or falling ctDNA concentration may provide an indication 
of treatment effect on overall tumour burden. If multiple tumour mutations are 
interrogated, then the relative change between each may provide insight into 
molecular evolution of the patient’s cancer40,200,201. Ratios between the levels of 
different mutations in plasma can indicate heterogeneity and may be informative to 
predict patient response to treatment targeting particular alterations157,160. Liquid 
biopsies have been shown to contain ctDNA from multiple tumour sites45,47,48,62, and 
their analysis has a faster turnaround time than tissue biopsies39,102,188, and may be 
less prone to biases resulting from the analysis of individual tumour biopsies148,149,202.  
 
Studies demonstrate that ctDNA can monitor clonal evolution and identify resistance 
mechanisms to treatment110,158,160,200,203,204. Serial ctDNA analysis in patients with 
colorectal cancer demonstrated the positive selection of mutant KRAS clones during 
EGFR blockade, which later decline upon the withdrawal of anti-EGFR therapy158,205. 
In patients with NSCLC undergoing treatment with EGFR inhibitors, resistance-
 21 
conferring mutations emerged in plasma ahead of clinical progression170,171. Exome 
sequencing of plasma DNA may identify resistance mechanisms in patients across 
cancer types40, though the sensitivity of exome sequencing currently limits its 
application to advanced cancer patients where ctDNA levels are high (>5% mutant 
allele fraction). Design of patient-specific mutation panels35,48,111,206 could be a more 
cost-effective alternative for high-sensitivity monitoring, though may miss subsequent 
de novo events unless appropriately designed. Serial sWGS analysis also 
demonstrates highly dynamic copy number adaptations in response to selection 
pressures, with a mean interval of 26.4 weeks between new amplifications207.  
  
Serial liquid biopsies may have particular utility for adaptive or reactive therapy, in 
which resistance mutations are prospectively identified, and therapy adapted in real-
time (Fig. 5). In the clinical research setting, non-invasive monitoring could facilitate a 
clinical trials that prospectively identify efficacious treatment regimens or drug 
combinations, and identify resistance mechanisms to novel therapies. In addition, in 
vitro or in vivo experiments carried out in parallel may provide greater insight into 
cancer biology. For example, colorectal cancer cell line experiments carried out in 
parallel with ctDNA analysis showed that resistance mutations may arise from both 
the selection of pre-existing minor clones, and through ongoing mutagenesis200. 
Another study investigating resistance to a pan-tropomyosin-related kinase (TRK, 
also known as NTRK) inhibitor in colorectal cancer demonstrated that simultaneous 
analysis of patient-derived xenografts and liquid biopsies may characterise 
resistance more comprehensively than plasma alone199.  
 
Future directions 
Proof-of-concept studies provide an excellent starting point for larger prospective 
studies into the clinical utility of ctDNA, and demonstrate that ctDNA may be a useful 
research tool for drug development, and for the study of intratumour heterogeneity 
and clonal evolution. Moving forwards, randomised trials comparing ctDNA-guided 
decision-making against the standard of care would be definitive, and the EMA have 
outlined good practice guidelines for the design of such trials208. Trials to test the 
clinical utility of ctDNA analysis for treatment monitoring are now being carried 
 22 
out209,210. In one trial, patients with NSCLC receiving erlotinib are being prospectively 
monitored, and if resistance mutations emerge in plasma, then additional scans to 
search for signs of disease progression would be carried out209. Another clinical trial 
aims to demonstrate the efficacy of targeting mutations identified in plasma from 
patients with advanced breast cancer211, which could support the future use of 
plasma-only mutation profiling and treatment stratification. Together, these studies 
highlight that the field is moving from exploratory ctDNA studies, towards clinical 
trials where ctDNA is guiding decision-making. 
 
A better understanding of the origin and biology of cfDNA and ctDNA would aid the 
implementation of liquid biopsies2. The relative contributions of apoptosis, necrosis 
and active release, particularly at different time points during treatment, should be 
explored. Our limited understanding of the release and clearance mechanisms of 
cfDNA hampers interpretation of current studies. Studies of the dynamics and 
reproducibility of ctDNA measurement in the absence of intervention will become 
increasingly important as we aim to interpret ctDNA signal in response to treatment. 
It is also not clear whether all tumour subclones contribute proportionately to the total 
ctDNA pool, or whether their representation in the bloodstream is biased by other 
biological factors, such as tumour vascularity or metabolic activity. In vivo cellular 
barcoding experiments212 and autopsy studies48 could elucidate the contribution of 
individual subclones, and histological studies may clarify the factors that modulate 
ctDNA release. The differences in size between cfDNA and ctDNA fragments4,68,81,82 
suggest that optimising processing and extraction methods (as well as downstream 
assays) for recovery of selected fragment sizes may provide further improvement to 
overall performance. 
 
While ctDNA can have greater sensitivity and specificity compared to other 
circulating biomarkers36, taking a multi-marker approach may offer a more 
comprehensive insight into a patient’s disease3,119,213. For example, total cfDNA 
concentration correlates with disease status3,5 and is associated with prognosis214. 
Epigenetic analysis of cfDNA may identify cancer gene hypermethylation27,153 or the 
cell-type giving rise to cfDNA fragments66–68, and may provide a window into the 
 23 
tumour microenvironment, which usually lacks somatic mutations. Other circulating 
nucleic acids such as mRNA and microRNA can provide additional layers of 
information215. Targeting multiple types of nucleic acid, with independent 
mechanisms of release, may increase sensitivity for detection of MRD, for example 
through the co-isolation of both exosomal RNA and cfDNA216. Actively released 
nucleic acids may be preferred for the detection of mutations in subclones resistant 
to therapy, whereas fragments arising from dying cells following the initiation of 
therapy may identify treatment-responsive subclones. Next, although it may be 
possible to infer gene expression patterns from cfDNA217, sequencing RNA within 
exosomes218, CTCs219 or platelets220 could provide more direct evidence. Analysis of 
cell-free DNA in plasma alongside other fluids such as urine221 or CSF45 can provide 
complementary information. We further echo the suggestion by Gormally, Hainaut 
and colleagues145, made a decade ago, that characterisation of proteins associated 
with cfDNA may provide a rich source of information on an individual’s disease, and 
the biology of cfDNA. 
 
The clinical uptake of liquid biopsies will depend on the practical advantages for 
patients and clinicians, the infrastructure required, and its cost-effectiveness. Tissue 
biopsies will continue to play a key role in cancer management, particularly for the 
histological diagnosis and classification of cancers. At present, specialised 
laboratories handle CTC and ctDNA samples222, though in future hospital laboratories 
may carry out analysis locally if appropriate processes can be established223. 
 
Point-of-care devices for the identification of individual hotspot mutations with 
clinically meaningful sensitivities are starting to be used for tissue and plasma 
samples224,225. The feasibility of single molecule (third generation) sequencing of 
maternal plasma DNA was first demonstrated in 201586, and subsequently it was 
shown that structural variants in cell line DNA can be detected226. The portability of 
such technologies was demonstrated by the real-time genomic surveillance in the 
field during the Ebola virus disease epidemic227. At present, such platforms are 
limited by a high error rate226, making single nucleotide variant and indel detection 
challenging. Another challenge is that of sequencing short DNA fragments, which 
 24 
requires optimised library preparation methods228. Sequencing capacity is also limited 
(currently to ~150 megabases)229, though this is likely to increase in the near future, 
and specific amplicons may be targeted through real-time selective sequencing230. 
These studies support the possibility of molecular profiling at the point of care, 
especially if blood plasma can be interrogated without the relatively cumbersome and 
time-consuming step of DNA purification87,231. 
 
The initial approvals by the EMA and FDA for mutation detection in plasma as a 
companion diagnostic168,173,174, and emerging ctDNA-guided clinical trials209–211, 
represent key milestones towards the implementation of liquid biopsies in 
personalised oncology. Improving technologies are enabling an ever-wider scope for 
non-invasive molecular analysis of cancer, providing information that opens new 
avenues for genomic research and may aid in clinical decisions. In order to fully 
exploit the potential utility of liquid biopsies, it is essential that the biology of ctDNA 
be explored further. Thus far, liquid biopsies have demonstrated the potential for 
utility across a range of applications, and are beginning to be used for patient benefit. 
 
 25 
Boxes 
Box 1 - Clinical need for liquid biopsies in oncology  
There are multiple areas of oncology where novel diagnostics may have utility and 
produce clinical benefit.  
• 
Cancer diagnosis – earlier diagnosis of cancer would enable treatment to be 
initiated sooner, and curative surgery may be carried out if the tumour is 
diagnosed at an early stage. For symptomatic patients, sensitive and specific 
cancer detection may speed up the time to diagnosis and treatment. At a 
population level, pre-symptomatic individuals may be screened for markers of 
disease, enabling early intervention.  
• 
Prognosis, residual disease and risk of relapse – assessment of risk of 
progression is essential to select the extent or aggressiveness of treatment. 
After treatment with curative intent, the identification of patients with residual 
disease who are at high risk of relapse may be used to stratify patients to 
adjuvant therapy. Effective stratification would also spare low-risk patients 
from overtreatment.  
• 
Treatment selection – the introduction of a wide array of novel molecularly 
targeted and immunotherapy agents necessitates improved tools for 
molecular profiling of patients and treatment stratification. At present, tumour 
biopsies are the standard for obtaining tumour DNA; these cannot always be 
obtained and their interpretation may be confounded by intratumour 
heterogeneity44–48, which could lead to false negative results and suboptimal 
therapy selection.  
• 
Monitoring disease burden – treatment monitoring, presently performed 
through imaging or molecular methods, may identify response or progression, 
enabling clinicians and patients to adapt therapy accordingly. Current 
methods have limited accuracy, associated logistical burden or radiation 
exposure50. The ideal monitoring assay should be repeatable serially over 
time, with minimal risk to patients, and should provide an accurate read-out of 
tumour burden. 
 26 
Box 2 – Pre-analytical considerations  
In low-burden disease, or certain cancer types, the concentration of ctDNA molecules 
may be low and any loss of sampled material could reduce the sensitivity of 
molecular profiling. For quantitative applications, reproducibility of measurement is 
essential to achieving a robust result, and so the following pre-analytical factors 
should be considered: 
• 
Samples should be collected in tubes containing an anticoagulant that is 
compatible with PCR, with EDTA being preferred. Plasma from heparinised blood 
leads to inhibition of PCR232, although some studies have been able to utilise 
such samples33. 
• 
It is important that the first centrifugation of the blood is done within a few hours 
of the blood draw in order to remove blood cells that may lyse and release 
germline DNA which would dilute ctDNA69,233–236. Tubes containing fixative agents 
may stabilise cells and prevent lysis for several days at room temperature234,236–
239, including during shipping239,240.  
• 
Following centrifugation, buffy coat DNA from the same tubes can be used as a 
source of germline DNA, although this may contain small or trace amounts of 
ctDNA.  
• 
From a blood draw, plasma is preferred over serum for ctDNA analysis235. Serum 
also contains ctDNA241, but blood cell lysis during the preparation of serum 
samples could release DNA from non-cancerous cells, which would dilute any 
ctDNA signal. Other body fluids or cytological specimens may be used, and may 
contain a higher amount or concentration of tumour DNA depending on tumour 
proximity (Fig. 3c).  
• 
cfDNA extraction may be carried out with affinity-column, magnetic bead, 
polymer, phenol-chloroform methods, or by filtration. Different methods show 
variation in their ability to recover particular fragment sizes87,88, which could have 
implications for ctDNA detection, given the differences in size between cfDNA 
and ctDNA. 
 
 27 
Figures 
 
 
 
Figure 1 | Applications of ctDNA analysis during the course of disease 
management  
(A) A schematic time course for a hypothetical patient who undergoes surgery (or 
other initial treatment) has a disease relapse, and then undergoes systemic 
therapy. The potential applications of liquid biopsies during this patient’s care are 
indicated. The patient starts with one single disease focus, but multiple 
metastases and distinct clones emerge following treatment, depicted in different 
colours. 
(B) The information extracted from ctDNA may be classified, broadly, into 
quantitative 
information 
(i.e. 
tumour 
burden) 
or 
genomic 
information. 
Quantification of ctDNA at a single time point may allow disease staging and 
prognostication, and genomic analysis can inform selection of targeted therapies. 
Therefore, longitudinal analysis allows the quantitative tracking of tumour burden, 
such as response monitoring; and by comparing genomic profiles over time, 
clonal evolution may be monitored. The whole genome sequencing image was 
kindly provided by Dennis Lo, based on data published by Chan et al.38. 
 28 
 
 
 
Figure 2 | Origins and spectrum of alterations in cell-free DNA 
Cells release cfDNA through a combination of apoptosis, necrosis, and secretion. 
cfDNA can arise from cancerous cells but also from cells in the tumour 
microenvironment, immune cells, or other body organs. In the bloodstream cfDNA 
may exist as either free, or associated with extracellular vesicles such as exosomes2. 
Multiple classes of genetic and epigenetic alterations can be found in cell-free DNA. 
Adapted with permission from Schwarzenbach et al.215. 
 29 
 
 
Figure 3 | Current and future paradigms for sensitive detection of ctDNA 
(A) The analysis of cfDNA can range from the interrogation of individual loci, 
to analysing the whole genome (Table 1). Off-the-shelf dPCR assays can 
achieve high sensitivity with a simple workflow, but are limited by a low 
multiplexing capability. Targeted sequencing can allow the interrogation of 
multiple loci with high sensitivity, using methods that suppress 
background noise242. The targeted sequencing image is modified with 
permission from Forshew et al.35 and the whole genome sequencing 
image was kindly provided by Dennis Lo, based on data published by 
Chan et al.38.  
(B) In molecular barcoding, unique molecular sequences are added to each 
molecule during library preparation so that sequencing reads originating 
from the same starting molecule can be identified. By comparing all reads 
from the same molecule, a single consensus sequence can be taken, 
which can suppress errors arising from PCR or sequencing. 
(C) To improve sensitivity of analysis, for example for disease diagnosis or 
detection of MRD, other body fluids may be considered in combination 
with, or instead of, plasma. Sampling of body fluids or cytological 
specimens proximal to the tumour site may yield a higher concentration of 
DNA of tumour origin.  
 30 
(D) ctDNA has been shown to be shorter than cfDNA4,81,82,85. Thus, selection 
of shorter fragments experimentally or in silico may enrich for sequences 
of cancer origin82 and can improve sensitivity for samples with low 
fractions of ctDNA. 
 31 
 
 
Figure 4 | Leveraging multiple mutations to detect low-burden disease and 
overcome sampling noise  
Even with a perfectly sensitive assay, the probability of detection of ctDNA decreases 
as ctDNA concentration declines, as any single mutation of interest may not be 
present in a given volume of sample. At low ctDNA concentrations, due to sampling 
error, some mutations will be detected while others are missed. Sampling multiple 
pre-specified mutations in each reaction may improve detection of low levels of 
ctDNA, since every target provides an independent opportunity to test for the 
presence of a mutant molecule in the set of DNA molecules at that locus35,111. 
Sensitivity can be further improved by analysis of multiple replicates, with few 
molecules each, so that the mutant allele, where present in a reaction, will constitute 
a large fraction of the DNA template113. Boxes below the graph show hypothetical 
examples of sets of molecules that may be captured by each replicate in the analysis 
of a sample. 
 32 
 
 
Figure 5 | Adaptive or reactive treatment paradigms using liquid biopsies  
(A) During systemic anti-cancer therapy, serial liquid biopsies may identify 
biochemical response or progression. If progression is identified, the clinician 
may be able to switch therapy, or select a therapy to target arising clones 
carrying additional mutations that were identified by this analysis.  
(B)  This adaptive or reactive monitoring and treatment may continue as a loop, 
which would be facilitated by a fast turnaround time for ctDNA analyses, for 
example through the use of point-of-care diagnostics. The timeframes for this 
analysis can vary between hours and months; the former could allow analysis 
of early kinetics in response to therapy. 
 33 
Tables 
Table 1 | Comparison and utility of technology platforms for ctDNA analysis 
 
Scale of 
analysis 
Example technologies 
Loci 
interrogated  
Indicative limit of 
detection (mutant 
allele fraction or 
concentration) 
Clinical utility 
Single-
locus or 
multiplexed 
assays  
PCR-based: 
• 
Digital PCR28,32,101,243 
• 
BEAMing29,30 
• 
Intplex3,119 
 
 
 
Enrichment for mutant alleles: 
• 
COLD-PCR105 
• 
SCODA244,245 
• 
NaME-PrO104 
 
• 1 to 10 loci 
• Both ctDNA and 
cfDNA (IntPlex) 
 
 
 
 
 
• 10-100 loci  
Varies by method, 
optimal 
implementations can 
reach sensitivity of 
0.001%-0.01% or  
individual mutant 
copies/ml30,119,243,246 
 
• 
Detection and 
quantification of 
recurrent hotspot 
mutations 
• 
Monitoring for 
recurrent resistance 
mutations 
• 
Rapid turnaround time 
Allele-specific or ARMS-PCR 
kits for companion diagnostics 
(CDx): 
 
• 
cobas EGFR168 
 
 
• 
therascreen EGFR166 
 
 
 
 
7 mutation assays 
covering multiple 
variants 
 
3 mutation assays 
covering multiple 
variants 
Limit of detection 
(≥95% sensitivity): 
 
25-100 copies/ml168 
 
 
 
Median 1.42% 
(range 0.05%-
12.47% for different 
variants)166 
Approved for in vitro 
diagnostic (IVD) use: 
 
• 
FDA-approved 
 
 
 
• 
CE-marked 
Targeted 
sequencing 
approaches  
Amplicon-based: 
• 
TAm-Seq35  
• 
Enhanced TAm-Seq114 
• 
Safe-SeqS112 
 
Hybrid capture-based: 
• 
Exome sequencing40 
• 
CAPP-Seq108,111 
• 
Digital 
Sequencing109,115,185 
10 kilobases to 50 
megabases 
<0.01%-0.5% for 
purpose-built 
panels35,109,111,112,176,1
14  
 
1% for off-the-shelf 
multiplexed 
panels46,110.  
 
5% for exome 
sequencing40 
• 
Profiling gene panels 
• 
Monitoring for de novo 
resistance mutations. 
• 
Monitoring clonal 
evolution in response 
to therapy.  
• 
Sensitivity for disease 
burden can be 
increased by testing 
multiple loci in parallel 
(Fig. 4) 
Genome-
wide  
WGS: 
• 
Plasma-Seq39 
• 
PARE197 
 
Amplicon-based: 
• 
FAST-SeqS184 
• 
mFAST-SeqS116 
3.2 gigabases 
(whole genome) 
 
 
21.6 unique 
kilobases of LINE-
1184 
 
 
5%-10%39 
• 
Identification of 
structural variants 
• 
Stratification of patient 
samples based on 
disease burden 
• 
Detecting the 
presence of 
chromosomal 
aberrations 
 
 34 
Table 1 | Abbreviations used: BEAMing, beads, emulsion, amplification, and 
magnetics; CAPP-Seq, cancer personalized profiling by deep sequencing; COLD-
PCR, co-amplification at lower denaturation temperature PCR; FAST-SeqS, fast 
aneuploidy screening test-sequencing system; LINE-1, long interspersed nucleotide 
element-1; mFAST-SeqS, modified fast aneuploidy screening test-sequencing 
system; NaME-PrO, nuclease-assisted minor-allele enrichment with probe-overlap; 
PARE, personalized analysis of rearranged ends; SCODA, synchronous coefficient 
of drag alteration; TAm-Seq, tagged amplicon deep sequencing 
 
 35 
References 
1. 
Mandel, P. & Métais, P. Les acides nucléiques du plasma sanguin chez l’homme. C. R. 
Seances Soc. Biol. Fil. 142, 241–243 (1948). 
2. 
Thierry, A. R., El Messaoudi, S., Gahan, P. B., Anker, P. & Stroun, M. Origins, structures, 
and functions of circulating DNA in oncology. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 35, 347–376 (2016). 
3. 
Mouliere, F., El Messaoudi, S., Pang, D., Dritschilo, A. & Thierry, A. R. Multi-marker analysis 
of circulating cell-free DNA toward personalized medicine for colorectal cancer. Mol. Oncol. 
8, 927–941 (2014). 
4. 
Mouliere, F. et al. High Fragmentation Characterizes Tumour-Derived Circulating DNA. PLoS 
One 6, e23418 (2011). 
5. 
Leon, S. A., Shapiro, B., Sklaroff, D. M. & Yaros, M. J. Free DNA in the serum of cancer 
patients and the effect of therapy. Cancer Res. 37, 646–650 (1977). 
6. 
Rodrigues Filho, E. M. et al. Elevated Cell-Free Plasma DNA Level as an Independent 
Predictor of Mortality in Patients with Severe Traumatic Brain Injury. J. Neurotrauma 31, 
1639–1646 (2014). 
7. 
Tsai, N.-W. et al. The value of serial plasma nuclear and mitochondrial DNA levels in patients 
with acute ischemic stroke. Clin. Chim. Acta 412, 476–479 (2011). 
8. 
Breitbach, S., Sterzing, B., Magallanes, C., Tug, S. & Simon, P. Direct measurement of cell-
free DNA from serially collected capillary plasma during incremental exercise. J. Appl. 
Physiol. 117, 119–130 (2014). 
9. 
De Vlaminck, I. et al. Circulating cell-free DNA enables noninvasive diagnosis of heart 
transplant rejection. Sci. Transl. Med. 6, 241ra77 (2014). 
10. De Vlaminck, I. et al. Noninvasive monitoring of infection and rejection after lung 
transplantation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 112, 13336–41 (2015). 
11. Lo, Y. M. D. et al. Presence of fetal DNA in maternal plasma and serum. Lancet 350, 485–
487 (1997). 
12. Hyett, J. A. et al. Reduction in diagnostic and therapeutic interventions by non-invasive 
determination of fetal sex in early pregnancy. Prenat. Diagn. 25, 1111–1116 (2005). 
13. Saito, H., Sekizawa, A., Morimoto, T., Suzuki, M. & Yanaihara, T. Prenatal DNA diagnosis of 
a single-gene disorder from maternal plasma. Lancet 356, 1170 (2000). 
14. Lo, Y. M. D. et al. Digital PCR for the molecular detection of fetal chromosomal aneuploidy. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 104, 13116–13121 (2007). 
15. Allyse, M. et al. Non-invasive prenatal testing: A review of international implementation and 
challenges. Int. J. Womens. Health 7, 113–126 (2015). 
16. Hill, M. et al. Evaluation of non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) for aneuploidy in an NHS 
setting: a reliable accurate prenatal non-invasive diagnosis (RAPID) protocol. BMC 
Pregnancy Childbirth 14, 229 (2014). 
17. Stroun, M. et al. Neoplastic Characteristics of the DNA Found in the Plasma of Cancer 
Patients. Oncology 46, 318–322 (1989). 
18. Sidransky, D. et al. Identification of p53 gene mutations in bladder cancers and urine 
samples. Science 252, 706–709 (1991). 
19. Sidransky, D. et al. Identification of ras oncogene mutations in the stool of patients with 
curable colorectal tumors. Science 256, 102–5 (1992). 
20. Caldas, C. et al. Detection of K-ras mutations in the stool of patients with pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma and pancreatic ductal hyperplasia. Cancer Res. 54, 3568–3573 (1994). 
21. Mao, L., Hruban, R. H., Boyle, J. O., Tockman, M. & Sidransky, D. Detection of Oncogene 
Mutations in Sputum Precedes Diagnosis of Lung Cancer. Cancer Res. 54, 1634–1637 
(1994). 
22. Takeda, S., Ichii, S. & Nakamura, Y. Detection of K-ras mutation in sputum by mutant-allele-
specific amplification (MASA). Hum. Mutat. 2, 112–117 (1993). 
23. Sorenson, G. D. et al. Soluble Normal and Mutated Dna-Sequences From Single-Copy 
Genes in Human Blood. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. 3, 67–71 (1994). 
24. Swisher, E. M. et al. Tumor-specific p53 sequences in blood and peritoneal fluid of women 
with epithelial ovarian cancer. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 193, 662–667 (2005). 
25. Kimura, H. et al. Detection of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Mutations in Serum as a 
Predictor of the Response to Gefitinib in Patients with Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer. Clin 
Cancer Res 12, 3915–3921 (2006). 
26. Sozzi, G., Musso, K., Ratcliffe, C., Goldstraw, P. & Pierotti, M. A. Detection of Microsatellite 
Alterations in Plasma DNA of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Patients: A Prospect for Early 
Diagnosis. Clin Cancer Res 5, 2689–2692 (1999). 
27. Lecomte, T. et al. Detection of free-circulating tumor-associated DNA in plasma of colorectal 
cancer patients and its association with prognosis. Int. J. Cancer 100, 542–548 (2002). 
28. Vogelstein, B. & Kinzler, K. W. Digital PCR. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 96, 9236–9241 (1999). 
 36 
29. Dressman, D., Yan, H., Traverso, G., Kinzler, K. W. & Vogelstein, B. Transforming single 
DNA molecules into fluorescent magnetic particles for detection and enumeration of genetic 
variations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100, 8817–8822 (2003). 
30. Diehl, F. et al. Detection and quantification of mutations in the plasma of patients with 
colorectal tumors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 102, 16368–16373 (2005). 
31. Diehl, F. et al. Circulating mutant DNA to assess tumor dynamics. Nat. Med. 14, 985–990 
(2008). 
32. Yung, T. K. F. et al. Single-molecule detection of epidermal growth factor receptor mutations 
in plasma by microfluidics digital PCR in non-small cell lung cancer patients. Clin. Cancer 
Res. 15, 2076–2084 (2009). 
33. Kuang, Y. et al. Noninvasive Detection of EGFR T790M in Gefitinib or Erlotinib Resistant 
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 15, 2630–2636 (2009). 
34. Qian, X. et al. Circulating cell-free DNA has a high degree of specificity to detect exon 19 
deletions and the single-point substitution mutation L858R in non-small cell lung cancer. 
Oncotarget 7, 29154–29165 (2016). 
35. Forshew, T. et al. Noninvasive Identification and Monitoring of Cancer Mutations by Targeted 
Deep Sequencing of Plasma DNA. Sci. Transl. Med. 4, 136ra68-136ra68 (2012). 
36. Dawson, S.-J. et al. Analysis of circulating tumor DNA to monitor metastatic breast cancer. N. 
Engl. J. Med. 368, 1199–209 (2013). 
37. Leary, R. J. et al. Detection of Chromosomal Alterations in the Circulation of Cancer Patients 
with Whole-Genome Sequencing. Sci. Transl. Med. 4, 162ra154 (2012). 
38. Chan, K. C. A. et al. Cancer Genome Scanning in Plasma: Detection of Tumor-Associated 
Copy Number Aberrations, Single-Nucleotide Variants, and Tumoral Heterogeneity by 
Massively Parallel Sequencing. Clin. Chem. 59, 211–224 (2013). 
39. Heitzer, E. et al. Tumor-associated copy number changes in the circulation of patients with 
prostate cancer identified through whole-genome sequencing. Genome Med. 5, 30 (2013). 
40. Murtaza, M. et al. Non-invasive analysis of acquired resistance to cancer therapy by 
sequencing of plasma DNA. Nature 497, 108–12 (2013). 
41. Overman, M. J. et al. Use of research biopsies in clinical trials: Are risks and benefits 
adequately discussed? J. Clin. Oncol. 31, 17–22 (2013). 
42. VanderLaan, P. A. et al. Success and failure rates of tumor genotyping techniques in routine 
pathological samples with non-small-cell lung cancer. Lung Cancer 84, 39–44 (2014). 
43. Ellis, P. M. et al. Dacomitinib compared with placebo in pretreated patients with advanced or 
metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer (NCIC CTG BR.26): A double-blind, randomised, phase 
3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 15, 1379–1388 (2014). 
44. Popper, H. H. Commentary on tumor heterogeneity. Transl. Lung Cancer Res. 5, 433–435 
(2016). 
45. De Mattos-Arruda, L. et al. Capturing Intra-Tumor Genetic Heterogeneity by De Novo 
Mutation Profiling of Circulating Cell-Free Tumor DNA: A Proof-of-Principle. Ann. Oncol. 25, 
1729–1735 (2014). 
46. Lebofsky, R. et al. Circulating tumor DNA as a non-invasive substitute to metastasis biopsy 
for tumor genotyping and personalized medicine in a prospective trial across all tumor types. 
Mol. Oncol. 9, 783–790 (2015). 
47. Jamal-Hanjani, M. et al. Detection of Ubiquitous and Heterogeneous Mutations in Cell-Free 
DNA from Patients with Early-Stage Non‒Small-Cell Lung Cancer. Ann. Oncol. 27, 862–7 
(2016). 
48. Murtaza, M. et al. Multifocal clonal evolution characterized using circulating tumour DNA in a 
case of metastatic breast cancer. Nat. Commun. 6, 8760 (2015). 
49. Duffy, M. J. Serum tumor markers in breast cancer: Are they of clinical value? Clin. Chem. 
52, 345–351 (2006). 
50. Fazel, R. et al. Exposure to Low-Dose Ionizing Radiation from Medical Imaging Procedures. 
N. Engl. J. Med. 361, 849–857 (2009). 
51. Thakur, B. K. et al. Double-stranded DNA in exosomes: a novel biomarker in cancer 
detection. Cell Res. 24, 766–9 (2014). 
52. Kahlert, C. et al. Identification of Double-stranded Genomic DNA Spanning All Chromosomes 
with Mutated KRAS and p53 DNA in the Serum Exosomes of Patients with Pancreatic 
Cancer. J. Biol. Chem. 289, 3869–3875 (2014). 
53. Jahr, S. et al. DNA Fragments in the Blood Plasma of Cancer Patients: Quantitations and 
Evidence for Their Origin from Apoptotic and Necrotic Cells. Cancer Res. 61, 1659–1665 
(2001). 
54. Stroun, M., Lyautey, J., Lederrey, C., Olson-Sand, A. & Anker, P. About the possible origin 
and mechanism of circulating DNA: Apoptosis and active DNA release. Clin. Chim. Acta 313, 
139–142 (2001). 
55. Botezatu, I. et al. Genetic Analysis of DNA Excreted in Urine: A New Approach for Detecting 
 37 
Specific Genomic DNA Sequences from Cells Dying in an Organism. Clin. Chem. 46, 1078–
1084 (2000). 
56. Chan, K. C. A., Leung, S. F., Yeung, S. W., Chan, A. T. C. & Lo, Y. M. D. Quantitative 
analysis of the transrenal excretion of circulating EBV DNA in nasopharyngeal carcinoma 
patients. Clin. Cancer Res. 14, 4809 (2008). 
57. Birkenkamp-Demtröder, K. et al. Genomic Alterations in Liquid Biopsies from Patients with 
Bladder Cancer. Eur. Urol. 70, 75–82 (2016). 
58. Reckamp, K. L. et al. A Highly Sensitive and Quantitative Test Platform for Detection of 
NSCLC EGFR Mutations in Urine and Plasma. J. Thorac. Oncol. 11, 1690–1700 (2016). 
59. Su, Y.-H. et al. Human Urine Contains Small, 150 to 250 Nucleotide- Sized, Soluble DNA 
Derived from the Circulation and May Be Useful in the Detection of Colorectal Cancer. J. Mol. 
Diagnostics 6, 101–7 (2004). 
60. Wang, Y. et al. Detection of tumor-derived DNA in cerebrospinal fluid of patients with primary 
tumors of the brain and spinal cord. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 112, 9704–9 (2015). 
61. Pan, W., Gu, W., Nagpal, S., Gephart, M. H. & Quake, S. R. Brain Tumor Mutations Detected 
in Cerebral Spinal Fluid. Clin. Chem. 61, 514–522 (2015). 
62. De Mattos-Arruda, L. et al. Cerebrospinal fluid-derived circulating tumour DNA better 
represents the genomic alterations of brain tumours than plasma. Nat. Commun. 6, 8839 
(2015). 
63. Rhodes, C. H., Honsinger, C. & Sorenson, G. D. PCR-detection of tumor-derived p53 DNA in 
cerebrospinal fluid. Am. J. Clin. Pathol. 103, 404–408 (1995). 
64. Sriram, K. B. et al. Pleural fluid cell-free DNA integrity index to identify cytologically negative 
malignant pleural effusions including mesotheliomas. BMC Cancer 12, 428 (2012). 
65. Mithani, S. K. et al. Mitochondrial resequencing arrays detect tumor-specific mutations in 
salivary rinses of patients with head and neck cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 13, 7335–7340 
(2007). 
66. Snyder, M. W., Kircher, M., Hill, A. J., Daza, R. M. & Shendure, J. Cell-free DNA Comprises 
an In Vivo Nucleosome Footprint that Informs Its Tissues-Of-Origin. Cell 164, 57–68 (2016). 
67. Lehmann-Werman, R. et al. Identification of tissue-specific cell death using methylation 
patterns of circulating DNA. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 113, E1826-34 (2016). 
68. Sun, K. et al. Plasma DNA tissue mapping by genome-wide methylation sequencing for 
noninvasive prenatal, cancer, and transplantation assessments. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 112, 
E5503–E5512 (2015). 
69. Lui, Y. Y. N. et al. Predominant hematopoietic origin of cell-free DNA in plasma and serum 
after sex-mismatched bone marrow transplantation. Clin. Chem. 48, 421–427 (2002). 
70. Tug, S. et al. Exercise-induced increases in cell free DNA in human plasma originate 
predominantly from cells of the haematopoietic lineage. Exerc. Immunol. Rev. 21, 164–173 
(2015). 
71. To, E. W. H. et al. Rapid Clearance of Plasma Epstein-Barr Virus DNA After Surgical 
Treatment of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma. Clin. Cancer Res. 9, 3254–3259 (2003). 
72. Lo, Y. M. et al. Rapid clearance of fetal DNA from maternal plasma. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 64, 
218–24 (1999). 
73. Wang, Y., Chen, M., Xiao, N. & Liu, H. Evaluation and comparison of in vitro degradation 
kinetics of DNA in serum, urine and saliva: A qualitative Study. Gene 590, 142–148 (2016). 
74. Tamkovich, S. N. et al. Circulating DNA and DNase activity in human blood. Ann. N. Y. Acad. 
Sci. 1075, 191–196 (2006). 
75. Tsui, N. B. Y. et al. High Resolution Size Analysis of Fetal DNA in the Urine of Pregnant 
Women by Paired-End Massively Parallel Sequencing. PLoS One 7, e48319 (2012). 
76. Chused, T. M., Steinberg,  a D. & Talal, N. The clearance and localization of nucleic acids by 
New Zealand and normal mice. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 12, 465–76 (1972). 
77. Giacona, M. B. et al. Cell-free DNA in human blood plasma: length measurements in patients 
with pancreatic cancer and healthy controls. Pancreas 17, 89–97 (1998). 
78. Lo, Y. M. D. et al. Maternal plasma DNA sequencing reveals the genome-wide genetic and 
mutational profile of the fetus. Sci. Transl. Med. 2, 61ra91 (2010). 
79. Thierry, A. R. et al. Origin and quantification of circulating DNA in mice with human colorectal 
cancer xenografts. Nucleic Acids Res. 38, 6159–6175 (2010). 
80. Nadano, D., Yasuda, T. & Kishi, K. Measurement of deoxyribonuclease I activity in human 
tissues and body fluids by a single radial enzyme-diffusion method. Clin. Chem. 39, 448–452 
(1993). 
81. Mouliere, F. et al. Circulating Cell-Free DNA from Colorectal Cancer Patients May Reveal 
High KRAS or BRAF Mutation Load. Transl. Oncol. 6, 319–328 (2013). 
82. Underhill, H. R. et al. Fragment Length of Circulating Tumor DNA. PLOS Genet 12, 426–37 
(2016). 
83. Gorges, T. M. et al. Cancer therapy monitoring in xenografts by quantitative analysis of 
 38 
circulating tumor DNA. Biomarkers 17, 498–506 (2012). 
84. Zheng, Y. W. L. et al. Nonhematopoietically derived DNA is shorter than hematopoietically 
derived DNA in plasma: A transplantation model. Clin. Chem. 58, 549–558 (2012). 
85. Jiang, P. & Lo, Y. M. D. The Long and Short of Circulating Cell-Free DNA and the Ins and 
Outs of Molecular Diagnostics. Trends Genet. 32, 360–371 (2016). 
86. Cheng, S. H. et al. Noninvasive prenatal testing by nanopore sequencing of maternal plasma 
DNA: Feasibility assessment. Clin. Chem. 61, 1305–1306 (2015). 
87. Breitbach, S. et al. Direct Quantification of Cell-Free, Circulating DNA from Unpurified 
Plasma. PLoS One 9, e87838 (2014). 
88. Beránek, M. et al. Carrier molecules and extraction of circulating tumor DNA for next 
generation sequencing in colorectal cancer. Acta Medica (Hradec Kralove) 59, 54–58 (2016). 
89. Gansauge, M.-T. & Meyer, M. Single-stranded DNA library preparation for the sequencing of 
ancient or damaged DNA. Nat. Protoc. 8, 737–48 (2013). 
90. Burnham, P. et al. Single-stranded DNA library preparation uncovers the origin and diversity 
of ultrashort cell-free DNA in plasma. Sci. Rep. 6, 27859 (2016). 
91. Kostyuk, S. V. et al. Fragments of cell-free DNA increase transcription in human 
mesenchymal stem cells, activate TLR-dependent signal pathway, and suppress apoptosis. 
Biochem. Suppl. Ser. B Biomed. Chem. 6, 68–74 (2012). 
92. Nishimoto, S. et al. Obesity-induced DNA released from adipocytes stimulates chronic 
adipose tissue inflammation and insulin resistance. Sci. Adv. 2, e1501332 (2016). 
93. Dvořáková, M. et al. DNA released by leukemic cells contributes to the disruption of the bone 
marrow microenvironment. Oncogene 32, 5201–5209 (2013). 
94. Porath, J. & GARTLER, S. M. Cellular Uptake of Deoxyribonucleic Acid by Human Tissue 
Culture Cells. Nature 184, 1505–1506 (1959). 
95. García-Olmo, D. C. et al. Cell-free nucleic acids circulating in the plasma of colorectal cancer 
patients induce the oncogenic transformation of susceptible cultured cells. Cancer Res. 70, 
560–567 (2010). 
96. Ju, Y. S. et al. Frequent somatic transfer of mitochondrial DNA into the nuclear genome of 
human cancer cells. Genome Res. 25, 814–824 (2015). 
97. Wu, D. Y., Ugozzoli, L., Pal, B. K. & Wallace, R. B. Allele-specific enzymatic amplification of 
beta-globin genomic DNA for diagnosis  of sickle cell anemia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
86, 2757–2760 (1989). 
98. Newton, C. R. et al. Analysis of any point mutation in DNA. The amplification refractory 
mutation system (ARMS). Nucleic Acids Res. 17, 2503–2516 (1989). 
99. Normanno, N., Denis, M. G., Thress, K. S., Ratcliffe, M. & Reck, M. Guide to detecting 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations in ctDNA of  patients with advanced non-
small-cell lung cancer. Oncotarget (2016). doi:10.18632/oncotarget.13915 
100. Schiavon, G. et al. Analysis of ESR1 mutation in circulating tumor DNA demonstrates 
evolution during therapy for metastatic breast cancer. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 313ra182-
313ra182 (2015). 
101. Taly, V. et al. Multiplex picodroplet digital PCR to detect KRAS mutations in circulating DNA 
from the plasma of colorectal cancer patients. Clin. Chem. 59, 1722–1731 (2013). 
102. Sacher, A. G. et al. Prospective Validation of Rapid Plasma Genotyping for the Detection of 
EGFR and KRAS Mutations in Advanced Lung Cancer. JAMA Oncol. 2, 1014–22 (2016). 
103. Mosko, M. J. et al. Ultrasensitive Detection of Multiplexed Somatic Mutations Using MALDI-
TOF Mass Spectrometry. J. Mol. diagnostics 18, 23–31 (2016). 
104. Song, C. et al. Elimination of unaltered DNA in mixed clinical samples via nuclease-assisted 
minor-allele enrichment. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, 1–11 (2016). 
105. Li, J. et al. Replacing PCR with COLD-PCR enriches variant DNA sequences and redefines 
the sensitivity of genetic testing. Nat. Med. 14, 579–584 (2008). 
106. Guha, M., Castellanos-Rizaldos, E., Liu, P., Mamon, H. & Makrigiorgos, G. M. Differential 
strand separation at critical temperature: A minimally disruptive enrichment method for low-
abundance unknown DNA mutations. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, e50 (2013). 
107. Gadgeel, S. et al. Assessment of EGFR mutations in matched urine, plasma and tumor 
tissue in NSCLC patients treated with rociletinib (CO-1686). in Proceedings of the AACR-
NCI-EORTC International Conference: Molecular Targets and Cancer Therapeutics (AACR; 
Mol Cancer Ther, 2015). 
108. Newman, A. M. et al. An ultrasensitive method for quantitating circulating tumor DNA with 
broad patient coverage. Nat. Med. 20, 548–54 (2014). 
109. Lanman, R. B. et al. Analytical and clinical validation of a digital sequencing panel for 
quantitative, highly accurate evaluation of cell-free circulating tumor DNA. PLoS One 10, 
e0140712 (2015). 
110. Frenel, J.-S. et al. Serial Next Generation Sequencing of Circulating Cell Free DNA 
Evaluating Tumour Clone Response To Molecularly Targeted Drug Administration. Clin. 
 39 
Cancer Res. 21, 4586–96 (2015). 
111. Newman, A. M. et al. Integrated digital error suppression for improved detection of circulating 
tumor DNA. Nat Biotechnol 34, 547–55 (2016). 
112. Kinde, I., Wu, J., Papadopoulos, N., Kinzler, K. W. & Vogelstein, B. Detection and 
quantification of rare mutations with massively parallel sequencing. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
108, 9530–9535 (2011). 
113. Rosenfeld, N., Forshew, T., Marass, F. & Murtaza, M. Patent WO2016009224 A1 - A method 
for detecting a genetic variant. (2016). 
114. Gale, D. et al. Abstract 3639: Analytical performance and validation of an enhanced TAm-
Seq circulating tumor DNA sequencing assay. Cancer Res. 76, 3639 (2016). 
115. Schwaederle, M. C. et al. Detection rate of actionable mutations in diverse cancers using a 
biopsy-free (blood) circulating tumor DNA assay. Oncotarget 33, 11004 (2015). 
116. Belic, J. et al. Rapid Identification of Plasma DNA Samples with Increased ctDNA Levels by a 
Modified FAST-SeqS Approach. Clin. Chem. 61, 838–849 (2015). 
117. Kirkizlar, E. et al. Detection of Clonal and Subclonal Copy-Number Variants in Cell-Free DNA 
from Patients with Breast Cancer Using a Massively Multiplexed PCR Methodology. Transl. 
Oncol. 8, 407–416 (2015). 
118. Parkinson, C. A. et al. Exploratory analysis of TP53 mutations in circulating tumour DNA as 
biomarkers of treatment response for patients with relapsed high-grade serous ovarian 
carcinoma: a retrospective study. PLoS Med. 13, e1002198 (2016). 
119. Thierry, A. R. et al. Clinical validation of the detection of KRAS and BRAF mutations from 
circulating tumor DNA. Nat. Med. 20, 430–435 (2014). 
120. Kamat, A. A. et al. Circulating cell-free DNA: A novel biomarker for response to therapy in 
ovarian carcinoma. Cancer Biology & Therapy 5, 1369–1374 (2006). 
121. Bettegowda, C. et al. Detection of Circulating Tumor DNA in Early- and Late-Stage Human 
Malignancies. Sci. Transl. Med. 6, 224ra24 (2014). 
122. Nygaard, A. D., Garm Spindler, K.-L., Pallisgaard, N., Andersen, R. F. & Jakobsen, A. The 
prognostic value of KRAS mutated plasma DNA in advanced non-small cell lung cancer. 
Lung Cancer 79, 312–7 (2013). 
123. Wang, S. et al. Potential clinical significance of a plasma-based KRAS mutation analysis in 
patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 16, 1324–1330 (2010). 
124. Gautschi, O. et al. Origin and prognostic value of circulating KRAS mutations in lung cancer 
patients. Cancer Lett. 254, 265–273 (2007). 
125. Santiago-Walker, A. et al. Correlation of BRAF mutation status in circulating-free DNA and 
tumor and association with clinical outcome across four BRAFi and MEKi clinical trials. Clin. 
Cancer Res. 22, 567–74 (2016). 
126. Gray, E. S. et al. Circulating tumor DNA to monitor treatment response and detect acquired 
resistance in patients with metastatic melanoma. Oncotarget 6, 42008–18 (2015). 
127. Lipson, E. J. et al. Circulating tumor DNA analysis as a real-time method for monitoring tumor 
burden in melanoma patients undergoing treatment with immune checkpoint blockade. J. 
Immunother. Cancer 2, 42 (2014). 
128. Oshiro, C. et al. PIK3CA mutations in serum DNA are predictive of recurrence in primary 
breast cancer patients. Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 150, 299–307 (2015). 
129. Scherer, F. et al. Distinct biological subtypes and patterns of genome evolution in lymphoma 
revealed by circulating tumor DNA. Sci. Transl. Med. 8, 364ra155 (2016). 
130. Office for National Statistics. Cancer survival by stage at diagnosis for England (experimental 
statistics): Adults diagnosed 2012 , 2013 and 2014 and followed up to 2015. (2016). at 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/conditionsand
diseases/bulletins/cancersurvivalbystageatdiagnosisforenglandexperimentalstatistics/adultsdi
agnosed20122013and2014andfollowedupto2015> 
131. Gormally, E. et al. TP53 and KRAS2 Mutations in Plasma DNA of Healthy Subjects and 
Subsequent Cancer Occurrence: A Prospective Study. Cancer Res. 66, 6871–6876 (2006). 
132. Amant, F. et al. Presymptomatic Identification of Cancers in Pregnant Women During 
Noninvasive Prenatal Testing. JAMA Oncol. 1, 814 (2015). 
133. Bianchi, D. W. et al. Noninvasive Prenatal Testing and Incidental Detection of Occult 
Maternal Malignancies. JAMA 314, 162 (2015). 
134. Beaver, J. A. et al. Detection of cancer DNA in plasma of patients with early-stage breast 
cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 20, 2643–50 (2014). 
135. Cohen, P. A. et al. Abnormal plasma DNA profiles in early ovarian cancer using a non-
invasive prenatal testing platform: implications for cancer screening. BMC Med. 14, 126 
(2016). 
136. Gorges, T. M. et al. Enumeration and Molecular Characterization of Tumor Cells in Lung 
Cancer Patients Using a Novel In Vivo Device for Capturing Circulating Tumor Cells. Clin. 
Cancer Res. 22, 2197–206 (2016). 
 40 
137. Kinde, I. et al. Evaluation of DNA from the Papanicolaou test to detect ovarian and 
endometrial cancers. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 167ra4 (2013). 
138. Nair, N. et al. Genomic Analysis of Uterine Lavage Fluid Detects Early Endometrial Cancers 
and Reveals a Prevalent Landscape of Driver Mutations in Women without Histopathologic 
Evidence of Cancer: A Prospective Cross-Sectional Study. PLOS Med. 13, e1002206 (2016). 
139. Ross-Innes, C. S. et al. Risk stratification of Barrett’s oesophagus using a non-endoscopic 
sampling method coupled with a biomarker panel: a cohort study. Lancet Gastroenterol. 
Hepatol. 2, 23–31 (2016). 
140. Chan, K. C. A. et al. Early detection of nasopharyngeal carcinoma by plasma Epstein-Barr 
virus DNA analysis in a surveillance program. Cancer 119, 1838–1844 (2013). 
141. Guerrero-Preston, R. et al. Molecular Triage of Premalignant Lesions in Liquid-Based 
Cervical Cytology and Circulating Cell-Free DNA from Urine, Using a Panel of Methylated 
Human Papilloma Virus and Host Genes. Cancer Prev. Res. 9, 915–924 (2016). 
142. Martincorena, I. et al. High burden and pervasive positive selection of somatic mutations in 
normal human skin. Science 348, 880–886 (2015). 
143. Genovese, G. et al. Clonal hematopoiesis and blood-cancer risk inferred from blood DNA 
sequence. N. Engl. J. Med. 371, 2477–87 (2014). 
144. Fernandez-Cuesta, L. et al. Identification of Circulating Tumor DNA for the Early Detection of 
Small-cell Lung Cancer. EBioMedicine 10, 6–12 (2016). 
145. Gormally, E., Caboux, E., Vineis, P. & Hainaut, P. Circulating free DNA in plasma or serum 
as biomarker of carcinogenesis: practical aspects and biological significance. Mutat. Res. 
635, 105–17 (2007). 
146. Rosenfeld, N. et al. MicroRNAs accurately identify cancer tissue origin. Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 
462–469 (2008). 
147. Olsen, J. A. et al. A Minimally-invasive Blood-derived Biomarker of Oligodendrocyte Cell-loss 
in Multiple Sclerosis. EBioMedicine 10, 227–235 (2016). 
148. Gerlinger, M. et al. Intratumor Heterogeneity and Branched Evolution Revealed by 
Multiregion Sequencing. N. Engl. J. Med. 366, 883–892 (2012). 
149. Yates, L. R. et al. Subclonal diversification of primary breast cancer revealed by multiregion 
sequencing. Nat. Med. 21, 751–9 (2015). 
150. Turajlic, S. & Swanton, C. Metastasis as an evolutionary process. Science 352, 169–175 
(2016). 
151. Piotrowska, Z. et al. Heterogeneity Underlies the Emergence of EGFRT790 Wild-Type 
Clones Following Treatment of T790M-Positive Cancers with a Third-Generation EGFR 
Inhibitor. Cancer Discov. 5, 37–54 (2015). 
152. De Mattos-Arruda, L. et al. Establishing the origin of metastatic deposits in the setting of 
multiple primary malignancies: the role of massively parallel sequencing. Mol. Oncol. 8, 150–
158 (2014). 
153. Chan, K. C. A. et al. Noninvasive detection of cancer-associated genome-wide 
hypomethylation and copy number aberrations by plasma DNA bisulfite sequencing. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. 110, 18761–8 (2013). 
154. Kuo, Y. Bin, Chen, J. S., Fand, C. W., Li, Y. S. & Chan, E. C. Comparison of KRAS mutation 
analysis of primary tumors and matched circulating cell-free DNA in plasmas of patients with 
colorectal cancer. Clin. Chim. Acta 433, 284–289 (2014). 
155. de Bruin, E. C. et al. Spatial and temporal diversity in genomic instability processes defines 
lung cancer evolution. Science 346, 251–256 (2014). 
156. Zhang, J. et al. Intratumor heterogeneity in localized lung adenocarcinomas delineated by 
multiregion sequencing. Science 346, 256–9 (2014). 
157. Oxnard, G. R. et al. Association Between Plasma Genotyping and Outcomes of Treatment 
With Osimertinib  (AZD9291) in Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 34, 
3375–3382 (2016). 
158. Siravegna, G. et al. Clonal evolution and resistance to EGFR blockade in the blood of 
colorectal cancer patients. Nat. Med. 21, 795–801 (2015). 
159. Tie, J. et al. Circulating Tumor DNA as an Early Marker of Therapeutic Response in Patients 
with Metastatic Colorectal Cancer. Ann. Oncol. 26, 1715–22 (2015). 
160. Chabon, J. J. et al. Circulating tumour DNA profiling reveals heterogeneity of EGFR inhibitor 
resistance mechanisms in lung cancer patients. Nat. Commun. 7, 11815 (2016). 
161. Karachaliou, N. et al. Association of EGFR L858R Mutation in Circulating Free DNA With 
Survival in the EURTAC Trial. JAMA Oncol. 1, 149–157 (2015). 
162. Reck, M. et al. Circulating Free Tumor-derived DNA (ctDNA) Determination of EGFR 
Mutation Status in European and Japanese Patients with Advanced NSCLC: the ASSESS 
Study. J. Thorac. Oncol. 11, 1682–1689 (2016). 
163. Han, B. et al. Determining the prevalence of EGFR mutations in Asian and Russian patients 
(pts) with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (aNSCLC) of adenocarcinoma (ADC) and 
 41 
non-ADC histology: IGNITE study. Ann. Oncol. 26, i29–i44 (2015). 
164. Douillard, J.-Y. et al. Gefitinib Treatment in EGFR Mutated Caucasian NSCLC. J. Thorac. 
Oncol. 9, 1345–1353 (2014). 
165. Douillard, J.-Y. et al. First-line gefitinib in Caucasian EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC 
patients: a phase-IV, open-label, single-arm study. Br. J. Cancer 110, 55–62 (2014). 
166. QIAGEN. therascreen EGFR Plasma RGQ PCR Kit Handbook - Version 2. (2016). 
167. Mok, T. S. et al. Osimertinib or Platinum–Pemetrexed in EGFR T790M–Positive Lung 
Cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. NEJMoa1612674 (2016). doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1612674 
168. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Premarket Approval P150044 - Cobas EGFR 
MUTATION TEST V2. (2016). at 
<http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfpma/pma.cfm?id=P150044> 
169. Thress, K. S. et al. EGFR mutation detection in ctDNA from NSCLC patient plasma: A cross-
platform comparison of leading technologies to support the clinical development of AZD9291. 
Lung Cancer 90, 509–515 (2015). 
170. Sorensen, B. S. et al. Monitoring of epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor-
sensitizing and resistance mutations in the plasma DNA of patients with advanced non-small 
cell lung cancer during treatment with erlotinib. Cancer 120, 3896–3901 (2014). 
171. Oxnard, G. R. et al. Noninvasive detection of response and resistance in EGFR-mutant lung 
cancer using quantitative next-generation genotyping of cell-free plasma DNA. Clin. Cancer 
Res. 20, 1698–705 (2014). 
172. Remon, J. et al. Osimertinib benefit in EGFR-mutant NSCLC patients with T790M-mutation 
detected by circulating tumour DNA. Ann. Oncol.  Off. J. Eur. Soc. Med. Oncol. (2017). 
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdx017 
173. European Medicines Agency. Iressa: Public Assessment Report - Product Information. 
(2016). at <http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/EPAR_-
_Product_Information/human/001016/WC500036358.pdf> 
174. European Medicines Agency. Tagrisso: Public Assessment Report - Product Information. 
(2016). at <http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/EPAR_-
_Product_Information/human/004124/WC500202022.pdf> 
175. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov, 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02693535. (2017). at 
<https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02693535> 
176. Schwaederle, M. et al. Use of Liquid Biopsies in Clinical Oncology: Pilot Experience in 168 
Patients. Clin. Cancer Res. (2016). doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-16-0318 
177. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov, 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02140463. (2015). 
178. Remon, J. et al. Liquid biopsies for molecular profiling of mutations in non-small cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC) patients lacking tissue samples. in Molecular Analysis for Personalised 
Therapy (2016). 
179. Institut Gustave Roussy. The Prospective MOSCATO 01 Trial Demonstrates that Molecular 
‘Portraits’ Improve Outcome of Patients with Metastatic Cancer. (2016). at 
<http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/the-prospective-moscato-01-trial-demonstrates-
that-molecular-portraits-improve-outcome-of-patients-with-metastatic-cancer-
594507371.html> 
180. Pishvaian, M. J. et al. A pilot study evaluating concordance between blood-based and 
patient-matched tumor molecular testing within pancreatic cancer patients participating in the 
Know Your Tumor (KYT) initiative. Oncotarget 5, (2016). 
181. Heitzer, E. et al. Establishment of tumor-specific copy number alterations from plasma DNA 
of patients with cancer. Int. J. Cancer 133, 346–56 (2013). 
182. Heitzer, E. Heitzer 2013 Plasma-seq supplementary methods. (2013). 
183. Mohan, S. et al. Changes in Colorectal Carcinoma Genomes under Anti-EGFR Therapy 
Identified by Whole-Genome Plasma DNA Sequencing. PLoS Genet. 10, e1004271 (2014). 
184. Kinde, I., Papadopoulos, N., Kinzler, K. W. & Vogelstein, B. FAST-SeqS: A simple and 
efficient method for the detection of aneuploidy by massively parallel sequencing. PLoS One 
7, e41162 (2012). 
185. Abdueva, D. et al. Abstract 11541: Detection, frequency and actionability of recurrent copy 
number gains detected by non-invasive liquid biopsy of 3,942 lung and breast cancer 
samples. J. Clin. Oncol. 34, (2016). 
186. Jiang, P. et al. Lengthening and shortening of plasma DNA in hepatocellular carcinoma 
patients. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 112, E1317-25 (2015). 
187. Romanel, A. et al. Plasma AR and abiraterone-resistant prostate cancer. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 
312re10-312re10 (2015). 
188. Paweletz, C. P. et al. Bias-corrected targeted next-generation sequencing for rapid, 
multiplexed detection of actionable alterations in cell-free DNA from advanced lung cancer 
 42 
patients. Clin. Cancer Res. 22, 915–922 (2016). 
189. Schreuer, M. et al. Quantitative assessment of BRAF V600 mutant circulating cell-free tumor 
DNA as a tool for therapeutic monitoring in metastatic melanoma patients treated with 
BRAF/MEK inhibitors. J. Transl. Med. 14, 95 (2016). 
190. Marchetti, A. et al. Early Prediction of Response to Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors by 
Quantification of EGFR Mutations in Plasma of NSCLC Patients. J. Thorac. Oncol. 10, 1437–
43 (2015). 
191. Xi, L. et al. Circulating Tumor DNA as an Early Indicator of Response to T-Cell Transfer 
Immunotherapy in Metastatic Melanoma. Clin. Cancer Res. 22, 5480–5486 (2016). 
192. Xin, Y. et al. Patent CN105087789A - Method for detecting BCR and TCR immune repertoire 
in blood plasma cfDNA. (2015). 
193. Tie, J. et al. Circulating tumor DNA analysis detects minimal residual disease and predicts 
recurrence in patients with stage II colon cancer. Sci. Transl. Med. 8, 346ra92-346ra92 
(2016). 
194. Garcia-Murillas, I. et al. Mutation tracking in circulating tumor DNA predicts relapse in early 
breast cancer. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 302ra133-302ra133 (2015). 
195. Reinert, T. et al. Analysis of circulating tumour DNA to monitor disease burden following 
colorectal cancer surgery. Gut 65, 625–34 (2015). 
196. Olsson, E. et al. Serial monitoring of circulating tumor DNA in patients with primary breast 
cancer for detection of occult metastatic disease. EMBO Mol. Med. 7, 1034–1047 (2015). 
197. Leary, R. J. et al. Development of personalized tumor biomarkers using massively parallel 
sequencing. Sci. Transl. Med. 2, 20ra14 (2010). 
198. Mcbride, D. J. et al. Use of Cancer-Specific Genomic Rearrangements to Quantify Disease 
Burden in Plasma from Patients with Solid Tumors. Genes Chromosom. Cancer 49, 1062–
1069 (2011). 
199. Russo, M. et al. Acquired resistance to the TRK inhibitor entrectinib in colorectal cancer. 
Cancer Discov. 6, 36–44 (2016). 
200. Misale, S. et al. Emergence of KRAS mutations and acquired resistance to anti EGFR 
therapy in colorectal cancer. Nature 486, 532–536 (2012). 
201. Diaz, L. A. J. et al. The molecular evolution of acquired resistance to targeted EGFR 
blockade in colorectal cancers. Nature 486, 537–540 (2012). 
202. Ilié, M. & Hofman, P. Pros: Can tissue biopsy be replaced by liquid biopsy? Transl. Lung 
Cancer Res. 5, 420–423 (2016). 
203. Thress, K. S. et al. Acquired EGFR C797S mutation mediates resistance to AZD9291 in non-
small cell lung cancer harboring EGFR T790M. Nat. Med. 21, 560–562 (2015). 
204. Russo, M. et al. Tumor heterogeneity and lesion-specific response to targeted therapy in 
colorectal cancer. Cancer Discov. 6, 147–53 (2015). 
205. Morelli, M. P. et al. Characterizing the patterns of clonal selection in circulating tumor DNA 
from patients with colorectal cancer refractory to anti-EGFR treatment. Ann. Oncol. 26, 731–
736 (2015). 
206. Gremel, G. et al. Distinct sub-clonal tumour responses to therapy revealed by circulating cell-
free DNA. Ann. Oncol. 27, 1959–1965 (2016). 
207. Ulz, P. et al. Whole-genome plasma sequencing reveals focal amplifications as a driving 
force in metastatic prostate cancer. Nat. Commun. 7, 12008 (2016). 
208. European Medicines Agency. Guideline on good pharmacogenomic practice. (2016). 
209. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov, 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02284633. (2015). 
210. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov, 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02743910. (2016). 
211. The Institute of Cancer Research Clinical Trials & Statistics Unit. plasmaMATCH: A clinical 
trial aiming to assess the safety and activity of targeted treatments in patients with advanced 
breast cancer where the targetable mutation is identified through circulating tumour DNA 
screening. (2016). doi:10.1186/ISRCTN16945804 
212. Naik, S. H., Schumacher, T. N. & Perie, L. Cellular barcoding: A technical appraisal. Exp. 
Hematol. 42, 598–608 (2014). 
213. El Messaoudi, S. et al. Circulating DNA as a Strong Multimarker Prognostic Tool for 
Metastatic Colorectal Cancer Patient Management Care. Clin. Cancer Res. 22, 3067–3077 
(2016). 
214. Spindler, K. L. G., Pallisgaard, N., Andersen, R. F. & Jakobsen, A. Changes in mutational 
status during third-line treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer - Results of consecutive 
measurement of cell free DNA, KRAS and BRAF in the plasma. Int. J. Cancer 135, 2215–
2222 (2014). 
215. Schwarzenbach, H., Hoon, D. S. B. & Pantel, K. Cell-free nucleic acids as biomarkers in 
cancer patients. Nat. Rev. Cancer 11, 426–437 (2011). 
 43 
216. Sullivan, R. J. et al. Plasma-Based Monitoring of BRAF Mutations During Therapy for 
Malignant Melanoma Using Combined Exosomal RNA and Cell-Free DNA Analysis. J. Clin. 
Oncol. 33, 9017 (2015). 
217. Ulz, P. et al. Inferring expressed genes by whole-genome sequencing of plasma DNA. Nat. 
Genet. 48, 1273–1278 (2016). 
218. Shao, H. et al. Chip-based analysis of exosomal mRNA mediating drug resistance in 
glioblastoma. Nat. Commun. 6, 6999 (2015). 
219. Alix-Panabières, C. & Pantel, K. Clinical Applications of Circulating Tumor Cells and 
Circulating Tumor DNA as Liquid Biopsy. Cancer Discov. 6, 479–491 (2016). 
220. Best, M. G. et al. RNA-Seq of Tumor-Educated Platelets Enables Blood-Based Pan-Cancer, 
Multiclass, and Molecular Pathway Cancer Diagnostics. Cancer Cell 28, 666–676 (2015). 
221. Reckamp, K. L. et al. A highly sensitive and quantitative test platform for detection of NSCLC 
EGFR mutations in urine and plasma. J. Thorac. Oncol. 11, 1690–1700 (2016). 
222. Webb, S. The cancer bloodhounds. Nat. Biotechnol. 34, 1090–1094 (2016). 
223. Long-Mira, E., Washetine, K. & Hofman, P. Sense and nonsense in the process of 
accreditation of a pathology laboratory. Virchows Arch. 468, 43–49 (2016). 
224. Melchior, L. et al. Multi-center evaluation of the novel fully-automated PCR-based Idylla 
BRAF Mutation Test on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue of malignant melanoma. 
Exp. Mol. Pathol. 99, 485–491 (2015). 
225. Janku, F. et al. BRAF Mutation Testing in Cell-Free DNA from the Plasma of Patients with 
Advanced Cancers Using a Rapid, Automated Molecular Diagnostics System. Mol. Cancer 
Ther. 15, 1397–404 (2016). 
226. Norris, A. L., Workman, R. E., Fan, Y., Eshleman, J. R. & Timp, W. Nanopore sequencing 
detects structural variants in cancer. Cancer Biol. Ther. 17, 246–253 (2016). 
227. Quick, J. et al. Real-time, portable genome sequencing for Ebola surveillance. Nature 530, 
228–32 (2016). 
228. Wei, S. & Williams, Z. Rapid short-read sequencing and aneuploidy detection using minION 
nanopore technology. Genetics 202, 37–44 (2016). 
229. Ip, C. L. C. et al. MinION Analysis and Reference Consortium: Phase 1 data release and 
analysis. F1000Research 4, 1075 (2015). 
230. Loose, M., Malla, S. & Stout, M. Real-time selective sequencing using nanopore technology. 
Nat Meth 13, 751–754 (2016). 
231. Umetani, N., Hiramatsu, S. & Hoon, D. S. B. Higher amount of free circulating DNA in serum 
than in plasma is not mainly caused by contaminated extraneous DNA during separation. 
Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1075, 299–307 (2006). 
232. Willems, M., Moshage, H., Nevens, F., Fevery, J. & Yap, S. H. Plasma collected from 
heparinized blood is not suitable for HCV-RNA detection by  conventional RT-PCR assay. J. 
Virol. Methods 42, 127–130 (1993). 
233. Jung, M., Klotzek, S., Lewandowski, M., Fleischhacker, M. & Jung, K. Changes in 
Concentration of DNA in Serum and Plasma during Storage of Blood Samples. Clin. Chem. 
49, 1028–1029 (2003). 
234. Parpart-Li, S. et al. The effect of preservative and temperature on the analysis of circulating 
tumor DNA. Clin. Cancer Res. (2016). doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-16-1691 
235. El Messaoudi, S., Rolet, F., Mouliere, F. & Thierry, A. R. Circulating cell free DNA: 
Preanalytical considerations. Clin. Chim. Acta 424, 222–230 (2013). 
236. Sherwood, J. L. et al. Optimised pre-analytical methods improve KRAS mutation detection in 
circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA) from patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). 
PLoS One 11, 1–14 (2016). 
237. Toro, P. V. et al. Comparison of cell stabilizing blood collection tubes for circulating plasma 
tumor DNA. Clin. Biochem. 48, 993–998 (2015). 
238. Kang, Q. et al. Comparative Analysis of Circulating Tumor DNA Stability In K3EDTA, Streck 
and CellSave Blood Collection Tubes. Clin. Biochem. 49, 1354–1360 (2016). 
239. Medina Diaz, I. et al. Performance of Streck cfDNA blood collection tubes for liquid biopsy 
testing. PLoS One 11, e0166354 (2016). 
240. Norton, S. E., Lechner, J. M., Williams, T. & Fernando, M. R. A stabilizing reagent prevents 
cell-free DNA contamination by cellular DNA in plasma during blood sample storage and 
shipping as determined by digital PCR. Clin. Biochem. 46, 1561–1565 (2013). 
241. Dietz, S. et al. Low Input Whole-Exome Sequencing to Determine the Representation of the 
Tumor Exome in Circulating DNA of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Patients. PLoS One 11, 
e0161012 (2016). 
242. Schmitt, M. W. et al. Detection of ultra-rare mutations by next-generation sequencing. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. 109, 14508–14513 (2007). 
243. Zonta, E., Garlan, F., Perez-Toralla, K. & Taly, V. Multiplex Detection of Rare Mutations by 
Picoliter Droplet Based Digital PCR: Sensitivity and Specificity Considerations. PLoS One 11, 
 44 
e0159094 (2016). 
244. Marziali, A., Pel, J., Bizzotto, D. & Whitehead, L. A. Novel electrophoresis mechanism based 
on synchronous alternating drag perturbation. Electrophoresis 26, 82–90 (2005). 
245. Thompson, J. D., Shibahara, G., Rajan, S., Pel, J. & Marziali, A. Winnowing DNA for rare 
sequences: Highly specific sequence and methylation based enrichment. PLoS One 7, 
e31597 (2012). 
246. Kidess, E. et al. Mutation profiling of tumor DNA from plasma and tumor tissue of colorectal 
cancer patients with a novel, high-sensitivity multiplexed mutation detection platform. 
Oncotarget 6, 2549–61 (2015). 
 
 
 
 
Highlighted References 
 
Diehl, F. et al. Circulating mutant DNA to assess tumor dynamics. Nat. Med. 14, 985–
990 (2008). 
Demonstration that ctDNA dynamics in patients undergoing treatment for colorectal cancer 
reflect tumour responses and progression, and that ctDNA detection after surgery could 
detect residual disease as a prognostic factor. 
 
Forshew, T. et al. Noninvasive Identification and Monitoring of Cancer Mutations by 
Targeted Deep Sequencing of Plasma DNA. Sci. Transl. Med. 4, 136ra68–136ra68 
(2012). 
Identification of cancer mutations directly in plasma using a next-generation sequencing-
based assay, and application of this method to quantify and monitor multiple mutations. 
 
Murtaza, M. et al. Non-invasive analysis of acquired resistance to cancer therapy by 
sequencing of plasma DNA. Nature 497, 108–12 (2013). 
Exome sequencing of cfDNA from serial plasma samples to study clonal evolution and to 
track ctDNA dynamics in high-burden disease. 
 
Sun, K. et al. Plasma DNA tissue mapping by genome-wide methylation sequencing for 
noninvasive prenatal, cancer, and transplantation assessments. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
201508736 (2015). doi:10.1073/pnas.1508736112. 
Analysis of the relative contributions of different tissues to the total cfDNA pool using 
methylation deconvolution. 
 
 45 
Mouliere, F. et al. High Fragmentation Characterizes Tumour-Derived Circulating DNA. 
PLoS One 6, e23418 (2011). 
Specific characterisation of ctDNA fragmentation patterns and biological properties using an 
animal model system and clinical samples. 
 
Bettegowda, C. et al. Detection of circulating tumor DNA in early- and late-stage human 
malignancies. Sci. Transl. Med. 6, 224ra24 (2014). 
A comprehensive quantitative analysis found varying levels of ctDNA across patients with 
distinct cancer types, and provided indicative ranges of ctDNA levels across the stages of 
disease. 
 
Newman, A. M. et al. Integrated digital error suppression for improved detection of 
circulating tumor DNA. Nat Biotechnol 34, 547–55 (2016). 
An error suppression method for capture-enrichment sequencing which uses a combination of 
in silico elimination of stereotyped background artifacts, and molecular barcoding. 
 
Garcia-Murillas, I. et al. Mutation tracking in circulating tumor DNA predicts relapse in 
early breast cancer. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 302ra133-302ra133 (2015). 
Demonstration of the use of ctDNA for detection of MRD in early-stage breast cancer 
following treatment with curative intent. 
 
Thierry, A. R. et al. Clinical validation of the detection of KRAS and BRAF mutations 
from circulating tumor DNA. Nat. Med. 20, 430–435 (2014). 
A blinded prospective multi-centre study comparing KRAS and BRAF mutation status in 
tumour and plasma using an allele-specific quantitative PCR approach. 
 
Leary, R. J. et al. Detection of Chromosomal Alterations in the Circulation of Cancer 
Patients with Whole-Genome Sequencing. Sci. Transl. Med. 4, 1–21 (2012). 
WGS of cfDNA from plasma identified copy number alterations and rearrangements. 
 
 46 
Tie, J. et al. Circulating tumor DNA analysis detects minimal residual disease and 
predicts recurrence in patients with stage II colon cancer. Sci. Transl. Med. 8, (2016). 
A prospective cohort study of 230 patients with resected stage II colon cancer demonstrated 
that post-operative ctDNA detection predicts a poorer recurrence-free survival.  
 
Heitzer, E. et al. Tumor-associated copy number changes in the circulation of patients 
with prostate cancer identified through whole-genome sequencing. Genome Med. 5, 30 
(2013). 
A demonstration that WGS of plasma cfDNA at a shallow sequencing depth can establish 
copy number profiles in patients with prostate cancer with a rapid turnaround time. 
 
Misale, S. et al. Emergence of KRAS mutations and acquired resistance to anti EGFR 
therapy in colorectal cancer. Nature 486, 532–536 (2012). 
Serial ctDNA analysis identified KRAS mutant allels in the plasma of cetuximab-treated 
patients 10 months before disease relapse was identified by imaging. 
 
Thress, K. S. et al. Acquired EGFR C797S mutation mediates resistance to AZD9291 in 
non-small cell lung cancer harboring EGFR T790M. Nat. Med. 21, 560–562 (2015). 
Serial ctDNA monitoring of patients with lung cancer treated with AZD9291, an EGFR 
inhibitor, revealed a diversity of resistance mechanisms to therapy. 
 
Jiang, P. et al. Lengthening and shortening of plasma DNA in hepatocellular carcinoma 
patients. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 112, E1317-25 (2015). 
Genome-wide analysis of plasma DNA from patients with hepatocellular carcinoma found that 
short molecules of cfDNA were enriched for tumour-associated copy number alterations.  
 
Oxnard, G. R. et al. Association Between Plasma Genotyping and Outcomes of 
Treatment With Osimertinib (AZD9291) in Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer. J. 
Clin. Oncol. 34, 3375–3382 (2016). 
In retrospective analysis, patients with NSCLC who were positive for EGFRT790M in plasma 
 47 
showed outcomes with osimertinib that were equivalent to patients positive by a tissue-based 
assay, supporting the use of plasma analysis to avoid tumour biopsies for patients who are 
positive for T790M in plasma. 
 
Chabon, J. J. et al. Circulating tumour DNA profiling reveals heterogeneity of EGFR 
inhibitor resistance mechanisms in lung cancer patients. Nat. Commun. 7, 11815 
(2016). 
ctDNA analysis by a large panel of genes was used to identify multiple hetereogeneous 
resistance mechanisms in patients with NSCLC treated by rociletinib, an EGFR-inhibitor.  
 
 
Glossary  
Liquid biopsy – analysis of tumour material (e.g. cells or nucleic acids) obtained in a 
minimally or non-invasive manner, through sampling of blood or other body fluids. 
 
Hybrid-capture sequencing – DNA sequencing of kilobases to megabases of the genome, 
in which DNA to be sequenced is selected using complementary oligonucleotide baits that 
hybridise to the target DNA. The DNA is then captured in solution, commonly through binding 
to magnetic beads.  
 
Limit of detection – The threshold below which mutations cannot be confidently 
discriminated from background noise; for sequencing-based approaches, this is often 
determined by technical artefacts such as PCR or sequencing errors.  
 
Stem mutations – Mutations that occur early in a cancer’s development and are present in 
all cells. 
 
Private mutations – Mutations that are present only in a specific region of a tumour, or in a 
subset of cells, due to intratumour heterogeneity.  
 
Molecular barcoding – Unique molecular sequences that are added to each molecule when 
creating a sequencing library, so that reads originating from the same molecule may be 
identified and the consensus taken, correcting for some PCR or sequencing errors.  
 48 
 
Mutant allele fraction – the proportion of mutant DNA fragments at a given locus. 
 
Mutant allele concentration – the number of mutant DNA fragments at a given locus, per 
unit volume. 
 
Digital PCR - Many micro-litre or nano-litre scale PCR reactions are run in parallel within 
physically separated reaction chambers, or droplets in an emulsion (droplet dPCR, ddPCR). 
By partitioning molecules into hundreds or up to millions of reactions, rare mutant molecules 
may be accurately identified and quantified. 
 
Targeted Sequencing – massively parallel (next generation) sequencing that uses methods 
such as PCR amplification or hybrid capture to focus on a subset of the genome, which can 
range from few genes or mutation loci, to large fractions of the genome such as the entire 
exome. Smaller panels yield higher sequencing depth at lower costs. 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to thank all members of the Rosenfeld Lab, in particular Christopher G 
Smith, Davina Gale, Keval M Patel and Wendy N Cooper for expert advice and proofreading 
of this manuscript. We would like to thank Dennis Lo for providing the image used in Figure 
3a. We would like to acknowledge the support of The University of Cambridge, Cancer 
Research UK (grant numbers A11906, A20240, A15601) (to N.R., J.D.B.), the European 
Research Council under the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme (FP/2007-
2013) / ERC Grant Agreement n. 337905 (to N.R.), and Hutchison Whampoa Limited (to 
N.R.), AstraZeneca (to R.B., S.P.), the Cambridge Experimental Cancer Medicine Centre 
(ECMC) (to R.B., S.P.), and NIHR Biomedical Research Centre (BRC) (to R.B., S.P.). 
J.G.C. acknowledges clinical fellowship support from SEOM. 
 
 
Competing interests statement 
NR is the CSO of Inivata. NR and JDB are cofounders and shareholders of Inivata. NR and 
FM are co-inventors of patent applications describing methods for analysis of DNA fragments 
and applications of ctDNA. 
