 Opposing Effects of Fasting Metabolism on Tissue Tolerance in 
Bacterial and Viral Inflammation
Andrew Wang1,2,7, Sarah C. Huen1,3,7, Harding H. Luan1,7, Shuang Yu1, Cuiling Zhang1, 
Jean-Dominique Gallezot4, Carmen J. Booth5, and Ruslan Medzhitov1,6,*
1Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA
2Department of Medicine (Rheumatology), Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06520, USA
3Department of Medicine (Nephrology), Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06520, USA
4Yale PET Center, Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA
5Section of Comparative Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, 
USA
6Howard Hughes Medical Institute
Summary
Acute infections are associated with a set of stereotypic behavioral responses, including anorexia, 
lethargy, and social withdrawal. Although these so called sickness behaviors are the most common 
and familiar symptoms of infections, their roles in host defense are largely unknown. Here we 
investigated the role of anorexia in models of bacterial and viral infections. We found that anorexia 
was protective while nutritional supplementation was detrimental in bacterial sepsis. Furthermore, 
glucose was necessary and sufficient for these effects. In contrast, nutritional supplementation 
protected against mortality from influenza infection and viral sepsis, while blocking glucose 
utilization was lethal. In both bacterial and viral models, these effects were largely independent of 
pathogen load and magnitude of inflammation. Instead, we identify opposing metabolic 
requirements tied to cellular stress adaptations critical for tolerance of differential inflammatory 
states.
Introduction
Sickness behaviors are a collection of prominent symptoms of acute illness that include 
anorexia, lethargy, fever, altered sleep patterns, depression, lack of grooming and social 
*Correspondence: ruslan.medzhitov@yale.edu.
7These authors contributed equally to this work
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS: A.W., S.C.H., and H.H.L. contributed equally to this work. A.W., S.C.H., H.H.L., and R.M. 
designed the study, analyzed the data, and wrote the manuscript with input from the other authors. A.W., S.C.H., and H.H.L. 
performed the experiments with assistance from S.Y. and C.Z. J.G. performed all analyses for PET studies. C.J.B. evaluated tissue 
histology.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2016 September 08; 166(6): 1512–1525.e12. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.07.026.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 withdrawal. It has been long appreciated that sickness behaviors are motivational states, 
rather than a result of debilitation of physiological functions (Miller, 1964). Furthermore, 
sickness behaviors have been conceptualized as adaptive programs that promote survival of 
acute infections (Hart, 1988; Kluger et al., 1975). However, the mechanisms whereby 
different sickness behaviors contribute to survival remain largely unknown. This issue is 
particularly important because a popular treatment for acute infections is the use of non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, which work primarily by suppressing the symptoms of 
sickness behaviors (Pecchi et al., 2009). Understanding the biology of sickness behaviors is 
also important for improved management of critically ill patients suffering from conditions 
with poorly defined pathogenesis, such as sepsis. Indeed, sepsis remains a largely intractable 
clinical problem with high mortality rates even in modern medical facilities (Angus and van 
der Poll, 2013). It is now increasingly appreciated that the mortality of sepsis can stem from 
at least three distinct phases of the disease: hemodynamic shock, multiple organ failure and 
prolonged immunosuppression (Hotchkiss et al., 2013). Furthermore, different forms of 
sepsis can result from bacterial, fungal and viral infections, each creating a distinct challenge 
and potentially requiring different management strategies.
Anorexia of infection is an aspect of sickness behavior that is conserved from humans to 
insects (Adamo, 2005), and much effort has been dedicated to understanding the role of 
nutrition in septic critical illness (Casaer and Van den Berghe, 2014). In the 1970s it was 
demonstrated that interfering with the anorexia induced by Listeria infection using caloric 
supplementation led to pronounced mortality in mice (Murray and Murray, 1979; Wing and 
Young, 1980). Importantly, Ayres et al found that in Drosophila, anorexia was beneficial in 
some but not all infections (Ayres and Schneider, 2009). Similarly, it was recently shown 
that the fasting metabolic state was critical to surviving bacterial sepsis (Feingold et al., 
2012). The mechanism remains elusive, and clinically, the role of nutrition in managing 
patients with sepsis is unclear.
An important new paradigm that can help explain at least some benefits of sickness behavior 
is the notion of resistance and tolerance: survival of infections can be promoted by either 
reducing pathogen burden, or by increasing host tolerance to the damage of infection (Ayres 
and Schneider, 2012; Soares et al., 2014). During an infection, multiple physiological 
processes undergo dramatic alterations with often unknown rationale. Depending on the 
infection, these can include profound changes in metabolism and alterations in hepatic, renal 
and cardiovascular functions. In principle, these responses can be either beneficial, induced 
as part of a general defense program, or they can be unintended and detrimental but 
unavoidable consequences of infections. Furthermore, the physiological changes that are 
beneficial for host survival can contribute to elimination of pathogens (resistance) or to 
mitigation of tissue damage caused by infection (tolerance). These physiological responses 
are poorly understood aspects of infection biology, where most of the focus has been 
devoted to the immune response and microbial pathogenesis.
There are several examples where organismal metabolism has been shown to be regulated in 
order to deprive necessary substrates for pathogen viability as a strategy of enhancing host 
resistance (Liu et al., 2012; Nairz et al., 2015), but how organismal metabolic states, such as 
the fasted state of anorexia, contributes to host defense, is not understood. Indeed, the role of 
Wang et al.
Page 2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 metabolic homeostasis during sepsis, which is directly impacted by nutritional status, is 
becoming increasingly recognized as critical in surviving sepsis in the clinical setting. In 
addition to the well-studied, but contentious role of glucose homeostasis in managing sepsis 
in the intensive care units (Investigators et al., 2009; van den Berghe et al., 2001), the largest 
proteomic and metabolomic screen of patients with sepsis to date identified fatty acid, 
glucose and beta-oxidation pathways as being discriminatory between survivors and non-
survivors (Langley et al., 2013). Bacterial sepsis leads to a pro-lipolytic state, which affects 
the ability of target tissues to utilize glucose via glycolysis and alternative fuel sources such 
as ketone bodies (KB) and free fatty acids (FFA) via oxidative phosphorylation (Agwunobi 
et al., 2000). Growing evidence suggests that a shift from glucose to KB/FFA utilization is 
protective in bacterial sepsis and these studies largely rely on pharmacologic targeting of 
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARαα, the master regulator of the 
ketogenic program and fasting metabolism (Budd et al., 2007; Camara-Lemarroy et al., 
2015). The role of substrate utilization in viral infections is even less understood (Greseth 
and Traktman, 2014). These metabolic changes are presumed to be protective but their 
mechanism of protection remains obscure.
Here we report that while nutritional supplementation increased mortality of Listeria 
monocytogenes infection, it protected against lethality of influenza virus infection. The 
causative component of food was determined to be glucose, and this effect was largely 
independent of inflammation or pathogen burden. To study the differential effects of glucose 
metabolism in bacterial and viral inflammation and sepsis generally, we utilized 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and Poly(I:C) models of sepsis, and found that while therapeutic 
blockade of glucose utilization with 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2DG) protected against LPS-
mediated sepsis, it was uniformly lethal with Poly(I:C) sepsis. We found that whereas 
glucose was necessary for adaptation to and survival from the stress of anti-viral 
inflammation by preventing initiation of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-mediated 
apoptotic pathways, glucose prevented adaptation to the stress of bacterial inflammation by 
inhibiting ketogenesis, which was necessary for limiting reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
induced by anti-bacterial inflammation. Our study elucidates how specific metabolic 
programs are coupled to different types of inflammation to regulate tolerance to 
inflammatory damage.
Results
Anorexia Protects Against L. monocytogenes Infection
To assess the role of anorexia in infection, we revisited the model of listeriosis used in prior 
studies (Murray and Murray, 1979; Wing and Young, 1980). We confirmed that upon 
infection with L. monocytogenes, mice exhibited a dose-dependent decrease in their food 
intake (Figure 1A), and that enteral supplementation by gavage of one kilocalorie twice 
daily (bis in die, BID) starting 8 hours post-infection uniformly killed L. monocytogenes 
infected mice (Figure 1B). The caloric content supplemented was one-fifth of healthy mouse 
daily food intake. Additionally, we found that gavage with an isocaloric isovolumetric 
amount of glucose alone was sufficient to cause 100% mortality in infected mice (Figure 
1B). To exclude contributions from enteroendocrine incretin signaling, we injected glucose 
Wang et al.
Page 3
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 intraperitoneally (IP) at a dose iso-osmolar to PBS, which provided about 2% of normal 
daily caloric intake, and found that this was sufficient to recapitulate the lethal effects of 
enteral glucose (Figure 1C). To assess if glucose was necessary for lethality, we injected L. 
monocytogenes infected mice with 2DG and found that 2DG fully rescued mice from 
listeriosis-induced mortality (Figure 1C), consistent with previous work (Miller et al., 1998). 
Collectively, these data suggest that glucose is the component of food that is necessary and 
sufficient to mediate lethality in listeriosis when anorexia is blocked by force-feeding.
We found that glucose treatment did not significantly affect bacterial burden or immune 
infiltration, but did increase plasma interferon gamma (IFNɣ) 24 hours post-infection 
(Figure 1D-F and Figure S1). In contrast, 2DG-treated mice had significantly decreased 
bacterial load compared to controls (Figure 1E). The decreased bacterial burden was not due 
to heightened immune response, as plasma IFNɣ, plasma interleukin-6 (IL-6), and liver 
immune infiltrate were all decreased in 2DG-treated animals (Figure 1D-F and Figure S1). 
These data raised the possibility that 2DG was mediating clearance of L. monocytogenes 
through direct inhibition of bacterial growth. To address this, we tested the effect of 2DG on 
the growth of L. monocytogenes and on the antimicrobial activity of macrophages infected 
with L. monocytogenes. In both cases, 2DG administration did not affect bacterial growth 
(Figures 1G and 1H). Since the protective effect of anorexia during L. monocytogenes 
infection was neither mediated through conventional immune clearance mechanisms, nor 
was it due to inhibition of bacterial proliferation, we hypothesized that tissue protective 
mechanisms may be at play.
Inhibition of Glucose Utilization is Protective in Endotoxemia
To examine the role of tissue tolerance in mediating the protective effects of anorexia in 
bacterial sepsis, we used the LPS sepsis model, where mortality results entirely from a 
systemic inflammatory response. We found that gavaging mice with enteral nutrition starting 
one hour post-LPS injection led to significantly increased mortality, while fluid resuscitation 
improved survival (Figure 2A). To dissect the nutritional components that contribute to 
mortality, we gavaged mice with isocaloric isovolumetric amounts of glucose, olive oil, or 
casein and found that only glucose significantly increased mortality (Figure 2B). We then 
tested whether the effects of food intake on susceptibility to sepsis could be reversed with 
concurrent 2DG treatment. IP injection of 2DG concurrently with gavage of enteral nutrition 
in endotoxemic mice significantly improved survival (Figure 2C). As was the case in L. 
monocytogenes infection, IP injection of glucose was sufficient to uniformly kill 
endotoxemic mice while IP injection of 2DG was sufficient to fully rescue them (Figure 
2D). To exclude contributions from carbohydrate-responsive element-binding protein 
(ChREBP) signaling, which would still be activated with 2DG, we utilized a glucose 
utilization inhibitor, D-mannoheptulose (DMH), which does not activate downstream 
ChREBP signaling (Li et al., 2010), and observed the same protective effects as 2DG 
(Figure S2A). Together, these data suggest that the component of nutritional intake that 
increased susceptibility to endotoxic shock was glucose and that inhibition of glucose 
utilization during sepsis was protective.
Wang et al.
Page 4
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The advantage of the LPS sepsis model is that it isolates the inflammatory response, as 
opposed to direct pathogen toxicity, as the source of tissue damage. In this model, nutrients 
can affect survival by altering the magnitude of inflammatory response, or the tissue's ability 
to tolerate it. We found no difference in circulating levels of TNFα and IL-6 or hepatic 
expression of acute phase response genes in endotoxemic mice treated with PBS, glucose, or 
2DG (Figure 2E,F). These findings suggest that glucose utilization does not affect the 
magnitude of the inflammatory response in endotoxic shock, but rather the ability of the 
tissues to tolerate inflammatory damage.
Glucose Utilization Promotes Tissue Damage in Endotoxemia
We observed that mice challenged with LPS and glucose displayed symptoms consistent 
with tonic-clonic seizure. Prior to death, animals would develop high-amplitude convulsions 
followed by decerebrate posturing. This is consistent with studies which have demonstrated 
neurologic deficits, including seizure, and neuronal apoptosis in animals suffering from 
endotoxic shock (Sayyah et al., 2003; Singer et al., 2016; Song et al., 2014). Hypoglycemia 
is a common cause of seizure, but we found that blood glucose did not differ significantly 
between groups over time (Figure S2B). We performed vital sign monitoring (body 
temperature, blood O2 saturation, respiratory rate, and heart rate) in endotoxemic mice 
treated with PBS, glucose, or 2DG 24 hours post-LPS injection, and found that 2DG-treated 
mice maintained their body temperature significantly better than glucose and PBS treated 
mice (Figure S2C). To assess other evidence of end-organ damage, we measured plasma 
markers of tissue injury (troponin-I, alanine aminotransferase, and creatinine), which were 
largely unchanged between treatments, with the exception that glucose treated mice had 
higher levels of plasma creatinine (Figure S2D). Finally, detailed histopathololgic analysis of 
hematoxylin & eosin (H&E) stained slides of brain, heart, lung, liver, kidney, pancreas, 
stomach, bone marrow, thymus, and spleen was performed to identify any pathologic 
changes including edema, hemorrhage, inflammation, necrosis, and apoptosis. The only 
difference in histopathologic changes was a decreased presence of dark, shrunken neurons in 
the brains of LPS mice given 2DG, compared to mice given LPS and PBS or glucose. 
Together, these data implicate neuronal dysfunction as a possible proximal cause of death in 
LPS endotoxemia.
Inhibition of Glucose Utilization is Lethal in Influenza Infection
We next asked whether viral infections, which induce a different type of immune response 
compared to bacterial infections, were also affected by caloric supplementation. We 
employed an influenza model in which mice are infected intranasally with influenza virus 
A/WSN/33. We observed that mice infected with influenza also exhibited anorexia, albeit 
less severely than in L. moncytogenes infection (Figure 3A). Surprisingly, we found that 
gavage of one kilocalorie BID of enteral nutrition starting eight hours post infection 
protected mice from influenza-associated mortality (Figure 3B). Gavage of isocaloric 
isovolumetric glucose partially recapitulated the effect of enteral nutrition, while IP injection 
of 2DG concurrently with feeding completely ablated the survival benefit (Figure 3C). 
Caloric supplementation with casein and olive oil provided little to no survival benefit 
(Figure S3A). With a lower dose of influenza infection, we found that 2DG alone was able 
to uniformly kill flu-infected mice compared to vehicle control (Figure 3D). These data 
Wang et al.
Page 5
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 together indicate that glucose availability and utilization are critical to surviving influenza 
infection.
Next we assessed whether the effect of caloric supplementation on influenza infection was 
mediated through immune resistance of virus or tissue tolerance. Differences in viral burden 
and/or immune activation would implicate an effect of caloric supplementation on host 
resistance. Six days post-infection, we performed plaque assays using both lung homogenate 
and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BAL) from mice treated with PBS or 2DG. Additionally, 
we assayed gene expression of the influenza gene NP from lung tissue homogenate. In all 
three cases, we found no differences in viral load between groups (Figure 3E). We then 
assayed antiviral inflammatory mediators to determine if immunopathology could account 
for the lethality caused by 2DG treatment. We found that expression of interferon inducible 
genes as well as Cxcl1 and Il6 were similar between PBS and 2DG-treated groups (Figures 
3F and S3B). Likewise, we found no difference in plasma IFNα levels or immune cell 
infiltration into the lung after infection (Figure 3G and Figure S3C).
Mortality from influenza infection is often linked to development of pneumonia 
(Taubenberger and Morens, 2008). To determine if 2DG impacted the extent of lung 
damage, we assessed the pathological outcomes of PBS versus 2DG treatment in influenza 
infection. Histopathologic examination of lung showed no difference in edema, hemorrhage, 
or inflammatory cell infiltrates (Figures 3H, 3I, and Figure S3D). To identify alternative 
causes of death, we assayed vital signs of PBS or 2DG-treated mice over the course of 
influenza infection. We found that 2DG-treated mice had no difference in blood O2 level, but 
had decreased heart rate, respiratory rate, and body temperature (Figure 3J). These findings 
are consistent with a derangement of central autonomic control. To verify that 2DG was not 
itself causing neuronal dysfunction and lethality, we administered the identical 2DG regimen 
utilized in influenza to mice infected with another pulmonary pathogen, Legionella 
pneumophila, and this did not cause mortality, indicating that the lethal effects of 2DG 
occurred only in the context of the viral inflammation induced by influenza infection (Figure 
S3E). Collectively, this suggests that the effect of caloric supplementation on influenza 
infection is mediated through availability of glucose utilization and its impact on tissue 
tolerance mechanisms, which are likely impaired in the brain.
Inhibition of Glucose Utilization is Lethal in Viral Inflammation
To generalize the findings from influenza infection, we next utilized intravenous Poly(I:C) 
injection as a model of systemic viral inflammation (Smorodintsev et al., 1978). Co-
administration of Poly(I:C) and 2DG or DMH was uniformly lethal (Figure 4A and S4A). 
Since we were unable to generate a dose of Poly(I:C) that caused lethality by itself, we were 
unable to assess if glucose supplementation would be protective. To test if type I IFN was 
required for the effect of 2DG on Poly(I:C)-induced inflammation, we subjected IFNα-
receptor (IFNaR) deficient (Ifnar1-/-) mice to Poly(I:C) and 2DG challenge. Ifnar1-/- mice 
were completely protected (Figure 4B), indicating that IFNaR signaling was required for 
mediating the lethal effects of 2DG.
To examine if the lethal effects of 2DG were mediated by differences in the magnitude of the 
inflammatory response, we assessed plasma cytokines and did not find significant 
Wang et al.
Page 6
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 differences in circulating IFNα (Figure 4C). Histopathologic analyses showed no 
differences between treatment groups. To identify the cause of mortality, we performed vital 
sign monitoring and found that mice challenged with Poly(I:C) and 2DG, like flu-infected 
mice, exhibited profound defects in the control of body temperature, respiratory and heart 
rate, but not oxygen saturation (Figure 4D). Thus, we reasoned that neuronal dysfunction 
and loss of autonomic control was responsible for mortality.
LPS and Poly(I:C) induced inflammation cause differential glucose uptake in the brain
To globally assess 2DG and glucose uptake and distribution following Poly(I:C) or LPS 
challenge, we subjected mice to 2-deoxy-2-[18F] fluorodeoxy-D-glucose-positron emission 
tomography-computed tomography (18F-FDG-PET-CT). We found that glucose was actively 
taken up by the brainstem after Poly(I:C), but not with LPS challenge. In contrast, LPS 
induced more glucose uptake in the hypothalamic area (Figure 4E). There were no other 
differences in glucose compartmentalization between Poly(I:C) and LPS (Figure S4B). 
Increased 2DG uptake in the hindbrain in Poly(I:C)-treated mice was associated with 
decreased levels of Il1b, Il6, and Tnfa and no difference in Mx1 in the hindbrain, indicating 
that neuronal dysfunction in brainstem was not due to increased inflammation (Figure S4C). 
Consistent with the PET data, we did not detect differences in blood glucose or measures of 
cardiac, liver, or renal dysfunction (Figure S4D).
These data suggest that the lethal effect of Poly(I:C) and 2DG co-administration was likely 
independent of the magnitude of inflammation, but rather was dependent on tissue tolerance 
to immunopathology in the hindbrain, downstream of IFNaR signaling.
Lethal effect of 2DG in viral inflammation is mediated by CHOP
Because we found that mice displayed signs of neuronal damage in both influenza infection 
and Poly(I:C)-induced viral inflammation, we further investigated the effect of inhibition of 
glucose utilization in viral inflammation. We reasoned that ER-stress mediated apoptotic 
pathways, which are integral to the cellular response to viral infection, might link viral 
inflammation to neuronal damage (Lin et al., 2008). In particular, we focused on the ER-
stress induced transcription factor CHOP, which can induce apoptosis upon prolonged or 
excessive activation (Tabas and Ron, 2011). We found that expression of CHOP protein and 
its target gene Gadd34 was elevated in the hindbrains of mice treated with Poly(I:C) and 
2DG, an effect that was IFNaR dependent (Figure 5A and 5B). Moreover, CHOP-deficient 
mice (Ddit3-/- mice) were completely protected from Poly(I:C) and 2DG challenge in a 
manner independent of inflammatory magnitude (Figures 5C and 5D). Autonomic 
dysfunction was also completely abrogated in CHOP-deficient mice challenged with 
Poly(I:C) and 2DG (Figure 5E). To test the contribution of CHOP to host tolerance and 
resistance, we utilized the influenza infection model. We found that CHOP-deficient mice 
were significantly protected from influenza and 2DG challenge in a manner independent of 
pathogen burden or degree of inflammation (Figure 5F-H and Figure S5A). This is in 
contrast to models of bacterial inflammation where CHOP deficiency promotes tissue injury 
and morbidity (Esposito et al., 2013). Interestingly, 2DG and IFNα together led to sustained 
and elevated CHOP expression and apoptosis in MEFs (Figure S5B and S5C). These data 
Wang et al.
Page 7
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 together suggest that glucose utilization is critical to tissue tolerance of virally-induced 
inflammation through maintenance of an appropriate ER stress response.
Glucose Promotes Neuronal ROS and Seizure-induced Death in Bacterial Inflammation
Prolonged fasting results in hypoglycemia accompanied by lipolysis and followed by 
ketogenesis. In anorexia following acute LPS challenge, there was a decrease in blood 
glucose and an increase in plasma FFA, plasma beta-hydroxybutyrate (BHOB), and the 
fasting hormone FGF21 (Figure 6A and S2B). The switch to this fasting metabolic profile 
was ablated by glucose administration (Figure 6A). There was no appreciable difference in 
the kinetics of blood glucose subsequent to treatment with glucose or 2DG (Figure S2B).
We observed that the administration of glucose to LPS-challenged mice potentiated seizures, 
implicating neurotoxicity as a mechanism for death. We therefore asked if anti-epileptic 
drugs would be sufficient to rescue glucose-mediated death, and found that administration of 
valproic acid (VA), but not levetiracetam (two commonly used anti-epileptic agents) was 
able to completely rescue LPS-challenged mice treated with glucose (Figure 6B). The anti-
epileptic effects of valproic acid are incompletely understood but appear to impact HDAC-
inhibition (HDACi), GABA transduction, and PI3K and calcium handling (Terbach and 
Williams, 2009). Ketone bodies have also been implicated as HDACi of the same class as 
VA, and have recently been shown to coordinate gene expression programs that confer 
resistance to ROS-mediated damage (Shimazu et al., 2013). We thus hypothesized that the 
suppression of ketone bodies by glucose administration may be inhibiting these HDACi-
mediated ROS adaptation pathways. To test this, we utilized dihydroethidium staining to 
measure ROS in situ in the brains of LPS-challenged mice treated with glucose, and 
observed increased ROS in the brains of these mice (Figure S6A). We also observed more 
TUNEL-positive nuclei in sections of mouse brain in glucose-treated mice compared to 
2DG- or PBS-treated mice challenged with LPS (Figure S6B). All groups had TUNEL-
positive nuclei in areas of lymphoid cell death (thymus, spleen), but there were no TUNEL-
positive nuclei in any other tissues surveyed (heart, lung, liver, and kidney). The brain was 
the only tissue where differences in TUNEL-positive nuclei were seen between groups 
(Figure S6C and D); however, the amount of cell death, which was assessed in the 
hypothalamus – given PET localization – was not dramatically different, indicating that 
cellular dysfunction, and not necessarily cell death, was being potentiated by glucose 
administration. Together, these data suggest that the enhanced lethality caused by glucose 
supplementation in endotoxemia is likely mediated through increased ROS and neuronal 
dysfunction.
Inhibition of the Ketogenic Program in Bacterial Inflammation, but not Viral Inflammation, 
Results in Mortality
To test the role of ketogenesis in bacterial and viral inflammation, we subjected mice 
deficient in PPARα and FGF21 to LPS or influenza infection. Both PPARα and FGF21-
deficient mice displayed enhanced mortality after LPS administration (Figure 6C). We 
verified that PPARα-deficient mice have severely impaired ketogenesis following LPS 
challenge, and did not observe significant changes in the level of BHOB in FGF21-deficient 
animals, consistent with findings observed in the fasting state (Potthoff et al., 2009) (Figure 
Wang et al.
Page 8
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 6D). We also did not detect an increase in systemic cytokines in PPARα deficient mice 
(Figure 6E). We hypothesized that either the lack of FGF21 or the lack of alternative fuel 
sources, which were both suppressed after glucose supplementation, was the cause of 
mortality. Since FGF21 is a known downstream target of PPARα (Feingold et al., 2012; 
Inagaki et al.), we tested if defective FGF21 production was the causative lesion in PPARα-
deficiency. We reconstituted PPARα-deficient and FGF21-deficient mice with recombinant 
FGF21 and found that while FGF21 was sufficient to rescue FGF21-deficient mice, it was 
not sufficient to rescue PPARα-deficient mice (Figure 6F), arguing that other aspects of the 
fasting program were necessary to mediate survival of LPS sepsis. Finally, VA, but not 2DG, 
was able to rescue PPARα mice challenged with LPS (Figure 6G), indicating that some 
aspect of VA action – likely its HDACi activity – was sufficient to rescue the lack of ketone 
bodies in PPARα mice, and also that the protective effects of 2DG required an intact 
ketogenic program.
Since ketotic pre-conditioning has been shown to improve other neurologic conditions such 
as epilepsy (Levy et al., 2012), we tested whether it would improve survival in sepsis. We 
found that mice pre-fasted for 24 hours or mice fed ketogenic diets for 3 days displayed 
enhanced sensitivity to LPS despite generating adequate levels of ketone bodies (Figure S7A 
and B). We excluded the possibility that ketoacidosis was driving death (Figure S7C). These 
data indicate that the activation of the ketogenic program must be temporally coupled to the 
course of the inflammatory challenge.
We hypothesized that, since our viral and bacterial models had opposite dependencies on 
glucose, they would also have opposite dependencies on ketogenesis. Therefore, we 
subjected PPARα-deficient mice to influenza challenge. Whereas PPARα deficiency was 
lethal following LPS challenge, it was protective in influenza infection in a manner 
independent of pathogen control (Figure 6H and 6I). This protective effect was not observed 
in FGF21-deficient animals (Figure S7D). Together, these data show that whereas 
impairment of ketogenesis, whether through genetic deletion of PPARα or glucose 
administration, was lethal in bacterial inflammation, it was protective in viral inflammation, 
in a manner independent of the magnitude of inflammation.
Discussion
Here we addressed the effect of anorexia during acute infection, and uncovered a surprising 
differential role for fasting metabolism in maintaining tissue tolerance in different infectious 
states. It is increasingly appreciated that inflammatory responses must be coupled to specific 
metabolic programs to support their energetic demands (Buck et al., 2015; Galvan-Pena and 
O'Neill, 2014). In this study, we observed that systemic metabolism appears to be 
coordinated to support tolerance to different inflammatory states. We found that whereas 
glucose utilization was required for survival in models of viral inflammation, it was lethal in 
models of bacterial inflammation. Concordantly, we found that whereas ketogenesis was 
required for survival in bacterial inflammation, it was dispensable in the case of viral 
inflammation. Unexpectedly, we found that these effects on mortality were largely 
independent of the degree of inflammation and pathogen clearance. In the case of viral 
inflammation, lethality subsequent to inhibition of glucose utilization appeared to be 
Wang et al.
Page 9
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mediated by type I IFN signaling on target tissues – likely the brain – which require glucose 
to mitigate the ER stress response and CHOP-mediated cellular dysfunction. In the case of 
bacterial inflammation, lethality subsequent to glucose administration appeared to be 
mediated by suppression of ketogenesis, which lead to impaired resistance to ROS-mediated 
damage in the brain (Figure 7). Thus, our results suggest that distinct inflammatory 
responses may be coupled with specific metabolic programs in order to support unique 
tissue tolerance mechanisms, that, when uncoupled, lead to enhanced immunopathology 
leading to death.
Host defense from infections involves both resistance and tolerance mechanisms. Whereas 
host resistance promotes pathogen clearance, host tolerance relies on adaptation to a given 
level of pathogen or a given level of inflammatory response (Raberg et al., 2007; Schneider 
and Ayres, 2008). Disease morbidity and mortality can be a result of either inadequate or 
impaired host resistance, characterized by high pathogen burden, or impaired host tolerance. 
Immunopathology falls into the latter category, and insufficient tissue protection is likely to 
be an important determinant in conditions characterized by excessive inflammation, such as 
sepsis. Tissue protection is likely a function of cellular stress adaptation pathways, which 
allow cells to survive noxious states such as increased free radicals and accumulation of 
unfolded proteins (Figueiredo et al., 2013; Larsen et al., 2010). When these adaptation 
pathways are overwhelmed, cells can undergo apoptotic cell death (Boison, 2013; Tabas and 
Ron, 2011). Thus, one important determinant of host tolerance may be related to the ability 
of cellular adaptation programs to tolerate noxious states found in infections (Medzhitov et 
al., 2012). Because different infections generate different inflammatory responses and 
noxious states, specific cellular adaption programs would need to be activated in distinct 
infectious contexts.
We found that interfering with the normal ketogenic state following LPS-mediated 
inflammation was lethal, likely by interfering with ROS adaption programs in the brain. Our 
findings are consistent with observations that PPARα agonism and inhibition of glucose 
utilization are generally protective in bacterial sepsis models (Budd et al., 2007; Camara-
Lemarroy et al., 2015; Yoo et al., 2013). However, unlike many of these studies, we did not 
observe large differences in the magnitude of inflammation, likely because we administered 
2DG and glucose after and not before infectious or inflammatory challenge. Thus, our 
observations are likely unrelated to the body of literature that supports a role for HIF1α, 
PKM2, and aerobic glycolysis in generating the LPS inflammatory response (Liu et al., 
2016; Yang et al., 2014). Consistent with our inability to detect differences in inflammation 
in sterile inflammatory models, we did not detect differences in pathogen burden in live 
infection models where glucose administration led to lethality in L. monocytogenes 
infection in the absence of increased pathogen burden or bolstered immune response.
ROS-mediated cytotoxicity is a well-appreciated phenomenon in bacterial sepsis 
(Hoetzenecker et al., 2012; Kolls, 2006), and ROS-detoxification pathways have been 
implicated in mitigating tissue damage and mortality. Shimazu et al recently reported that 
BHOB functioned as an HDAC-1 inhibitor, and that this lead to transcription of ROS-
detoxification pathways (Shimazu et al., 2013). Furthermore, we found that the timing of 
ketogenesis, an adequately nourished host, or both, are necessary for the protective effect of 
Wang et al.
Page 10
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 fasting that occurs as a coordinated response to bacterial inflammation. Instead of rescuing 
mice from LPS mortality, fasting and ketogenic pre-conditioning potentiated death. Taken 
together, we present evidence that the fasting response that occurs as part of the 
inflammatory response is required to maintain resistance to oxidative stress in LPS sepsis.
Although anorexia is a common response in both bacterial and viral infections, we find the 
opposite consequence of fasting metabolism in our models of bacterial and viral 
inflammation. Whereas in bacterial infection and LPS-induced inflammation we found a 
detrimental effect of glucose, a protective effect of 2DG, and a requirement for ketogenesis 
in order to maintain tolerance, in viral infection and Poly(I:C)-induced inflammation these 
effects were opposite. 2DG administration led to lethality in Poly(I:C)-induced inflammation 
in a manner that was independent of the magnitude of IFNα expression, but dependent on 
IFNaR signaling. Manipulation of fasting metabolism did not affect viral burden in influenza 
infection. Viral infections are known to stimulate the unfolded protein response mediated, in 
part, via the PERK-eIF2a-ATF4-CHOP pathway (Janssens et al., 2014). When this pathway 
is engaged, cells can either adapt to ER stress, or induce apoptosis through CHOP if ER 
stress cannot be managed (Tabas and Ron, 2011). Our data suggests that glucose utilization 
is required for the cytoprotective response in neurons in the setting of viral inflammation, as 
inhibition of glucose utilization lead to death, which was CHOP-dependent. Indeed, our PET 
studies indicate that glucose redistribution is largely the same between the early phases of 
bacterial and viral inflammatory challenge with the exception of sub-regions in the brain, 
where LPS and Poly(I:C) appear to regulate glucose uptake differentially. The purpose and 
mechanism underlying this observation remains to be elucidated. The precise mechanism 
whereby IFN signaling converges with glucose utilization programs also remains to be fully 
resolved, but recent studies demonstrated that interferon signaling leads to changes in 
glucose uptake, which is important for the antiviral response (Burke et al., 2014). Thus, 
whereas alternative fuel substrate availability is coupled to and necessary for adaptation to 
bacterial inflammation, glucose availability is coupled to and necessary for cellular 
adaptation to viral inflammation. The logic of their coupling is likely related to the substrate-
dependence of the cellular adaptation programs that are engaged. These findings are 
consistent with our previous study where we found that synergistic lethality in mice co-
infected with influenza and Legionella occurred in a manner independent of pathogen 
burden (Jamieson et al., 2013), and it is interesting to speculate here that perhaps one cause 
of lethality in this co-infection model is a result of metabolic incompatibility in the setting of 
both a viral and bacterial infection.
Given the conservation of cellular adaptation and metabolic programs in mouse and human, 
our findings likely have clinical implications. The role of nutrition in managing patients with 
sepsis is unclear at best, and multiple studies have failed to show differences in survival from 
feeding, including the most recent study which asked if lower caloric supplementation would 
improve outcomes (Arabi et al., 2015). There have been a series of studies exploring 
different feeding formulations with different caloric or micronutrient contents (Casaer and 
Van den Berghe, 2014). However, we could not find an example where different feeding 
formulations were targeted to different types of infections, as opposed to different types of 
organ failure (Seron-Arbeloa et al., 2013), or where post-hoc analyses was directed at 
pathogen class. Our study implicates a differential need for metabolic fuels as a function of 
Wang et al.
Page 11
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 infection (or inflammation) class, and sheds light on the biology behind the old adage 
“starve a fever, stuff a cold.” Much work will need to be done to identify how organismal 
metabolism is coordinated in other infectious and inflammatory states, and whether or not 
these findings can be extended to humans in the management of inflammatory diseases and 
critical illness.
Limitations, Caveats and Open Questions
One limitation of this study (common to most animal studies) is that it was performed on a 
single mouse strain (C57BL/6J) in one mouse facility. Thus, the roles of genetic background 
and facility-specific environment remain unknown. In addition, there are many caveats with 
extrapolating data on organismal biology from studies in unnatural settings of animal 
facilities. There are also many open questions raised by this study, including: why are 
different brain regions differentially affected by bacterial and viral inflammation? What are 
intrinsic properties of the affected neurons that make them susceptible to damage depending 
on inflammatory pathway and available metabolic fuels? Finally, it remains to be seen how 
these results apply to critical illness in humans.
Methods and Resources
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Rabbit polyclonal anti-β Tubulin
Santa Cruz
Cat# sc-9104; RRID: 
AB_2241191
Mouse monoclonal anti-GADD153 (clone B-3)
Santa Cruz
Cat# sc-7351; RRID: 
AB_627411
Hamster monoclonal anti-TNF alpha (clone 
TN3-19.12)
eBioscience
Cat# 14-7423; RRID: 
AB_468492
Rat monoclonal anti-IL-6 (clone MP5-20F3)
eBioscience
Cat# 14-7061; RRID: 
AB_468423
Biotin-conjugated rabbit polyclonal anti-TNF alpha
eBioscience
Cat# 13-7341; RRID: 
AB_466951
Biotin-conjugated rat monoclonal anti-IL-6 (clone 
MP5-32C11)
BD
Cat# 554402; RRID: 
AB_395368
Anti-mouse CD4 FITC (clone GK1.5)
eBioscience
Cat# 11-0041; RRID: 
AB_464893
Anti-mouse CD4 BV421 (clone GK1.5)
BioLegend
Cat# 100438; RRID: 
AB_11203718
Anti-mouse CD11c FITC (clone N418)
eBioscience
Cat# 11-0114; RRID: 
AB_464941
Anti-mouse B220 PE (clone RA3-6B2)
eBioscience
Cat# 12-0452; RRID: 
AB_465673
Anti-mouse Ly6G PE-Cy7 (clone RB6-8C5)
eBioscience
Cat# 25-5931; RRID: 
AB_469663
Anti-mouse CD45 APC-eFluor 780 (clone 30-F11)
eBioscience
Cat# 47-0451; RRID: 
AB_1548781
Anti-mouse NK1.1 PE (clone PK136)
eBioscience
Cat# 12-5941; RRID: 
AB_466051
Anti-mouse CD11b BV421 (clone M1/70)
eBioscience
Cat# 12-0112; RRID: 
AB_465548
Wang et al.
Page 12
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Anti-mouse TCR beta FITC (clone H57-597)
eBioscience
Cat# 11-5961; RRID: 
AB_465324
Anti-mouse Ly6C PE (clone AL-21)
BD
Cat# 560592; RRID: 
AB_1727556
Anti-mouse CD8a APC (clone 53-6.7)
eBioscience
Cat# 17-0081; RRID: 
AB_469335
Anti-mouse F4/80 PE-Cy5 (clone BM8)
BioLegend
Cat# 123112; RRID: 
AB_893482
Anti-mouse CD16/32 (clone 93)
eBioscience
Cat# 16-0161; RRID: 
AB_468900
Annexin V FITC
eBioscience
Cat# BMS500FI/300, RRID: 
AB_2575600
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
2-deoxy-D-glucose
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# G8270; CAS: 154-17-6
D-mannoheptulose
Cayman Chemical
Cat# 16548; CAS: 
3615-44-9
Valproic acid
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# P4543; CAS: 
1069-66-5
Levetiracetam
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# L8668; CAS: 
102767-28-2
Mouse recombinant FGF21
R&D Systems
Cat# 8409-FG/CF; GenPept: 
Q9JJN1
Lipopolysaccharide from E. coli strain 055:B5
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# L2880
Poly(I:C)
Invivogen
Cat# tlrl-pic-5
BHI broth
BD
Cat# 241830
Thapsigargin
Cayman Chemical
Cat# 10522; CAS: 
67526-95-8
Mouse recombinant IFNα
R&D Systems
Cat# 12100-1; GenPept: 
NP_996753
Dihydroethidium
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Cat# D1306; CAS: 
28718-90-3
DAPI
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Cat# D1168; CAS: 
38483-26-0
Propidium iodide
eBioscience
Cat# BMS500FI/300
N-PER Neuronal Protein Extraction Reagent
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Cat# 87792
RNA-Bee
Tel Test, Inc
Cat# CS-501B
SMART MMLV Reverse Transcriptase
Clontech
Cat# 639524
Low ROX PerfeCTa SYBR Green SuperMix
Quanta
Cat# 95056
Ethidium monoazide bromide
Biotium
Cat# 40015
Critical Commercial Assays
Mouse IFNα ELISA kit
eBioscience
Cat# BMS6027
Mouse IL-1β ELISA kit
eBioscience
Cat# 88-7013
Mouse Cardiac Troponin-I ELISA kit
Life Diagnostics
Cat# CTNI-1-HSP
Alanine Transaminase Activity Assay Kit
Cayman Chemical
Cat# 700260
Non-esterified Fatty Acid Assay Reagent
Wako Diagnostics
Cat# 999-34691, Cat# 
995-34791, Cat# 991-34891, 
Cat# 993-35191
Wang et al.
Page 13
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
β-hydroxybutyrate Assay Kit
Cayman Chemical
Cat# 700190
RNeasy Mini Kit
Qiagen
Cat# 74106
i-STAT CG4+ Cartridge
Abaxis Global Diagnostics
Cat# 600-9000
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
Mouse: C57BL/6J
The Jackson Laboratory
Stock No. 000664
Mouse: CHOP KO: B6.129S(Cg)-Ddit3tm2.1Dron/J
The Jackson Laboratory
Stock No. 005530
Mouse: PPARα B6;129S4-Pparatm1Gonz/J
The Jackson Laboratory
Stock No. 008154
Mouse: IFNaR KO: B6.129S2-Ifnar1tm1Agt/Mmjax
The Jackson Laboratory
Stock No. 32045
Mouse: FGF21 KO
David J. Mangelsdorf (Potthoff 
et al., 2009)
RRID: MGI_4354176
Listeria monocytogenes: Strain 10403s
Daniel A. Portnoy (Auerbuch 
et al., 2004)
Influenza: Strain A/WSN/33
Akiko Iwasaki (Lund et al., 
2004)
Legionella pneumophila: serogroup 1 strain JR32
Craig R. Roy (Archer and Roy, 
2006)
Sequence-based Reagents
Primers for qPCR, see Table S1
This paper
Software and Algorithms
Inveon Research Workplace
Siemens Healthineers
IDL 8.0
Exelis Visual Information 
Solutions
Other
Medical food (Abbott Promote)
Abbott
Cat# 50774
Ketogenic diet
Envigo
Cat# TD.96355.PWD
Standard mouse chow (Teklad Global 18% Protein 
Rodent Diets)
Envigo
Cat# 2018S
Pulse oximeter
Starr Life Sciences Corp.
MouseOx Plus
Rectal probe thermometer
Physitemp
TH-5 Thermalert
Handheld blood analyzer
Abaxis Global Diagnostics
VetScan i-STAT 1
Lysing Matrix D, 2 mL Tube
MP Biomedicals
Cat# 116913500
Plasma separator tubes
BD
Cat# 365985
Contact for Reagent and Resource Sharing
Further information and requests for reagents may be directed to, and will be fulfilled by the 
corresponding author Ruslan Medzhitov (ruslan.medzhitov@yale.edu).
Experimental Model and Subject Details
Mice
All animal experiments were performed in accordance with institutional regulations after 
protocol review and approval by Yale University's Institutional Animal Care and Use 
Committee. Male C57BL/6J mice (The Jackson Laboratory Stock No. 000664) between 7 
Wang et al.
Page 14
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and 10 weeks of age were used for all animal experiments in this study except where 
indicated. CHOP knockout mice are strain B6.129S(Cg)-Ddit3tm2.1Dron/J purchased from 
Jackson Laboratory (Stock No. 005530). PPARα knockout mice are strain B6;129S4-
Pparatm1Gonz/J purchased from Jackson Laboratory (Stock No. 008154). FGF21 knockout 
mice were a generous gift from Dr. David J. Mangelsdorf. IFNaR knockout mice (strain 
B6.129S2-Ifnar1tm1Agt/Mmjax, Jackson Laboratory Stock No. 32045) were a generous gift 
from Dr. Akiko Iwasaki.
For infection of mice, Listeria monocytogenes strain 10403s was originally obtained from 
the laboratory of Dr. Daniel Portnoy. L. monocytogenes was grown to log phase in brain 
heart influsion (BHI) broth (BD), washed once with PBS, and resuspended in fresh BHI. 
Mice were injected retro-orbitally with 5×104 colony forming units (CFU) of L. 
monocytogenes diluted in PBS. Influenza virus strain A/WSN/33 was originally obtained 
from the laboratory of Dr. Akiko Iwasaki and was propagated using Madin-Darby Canine 
Kidney (MDCK) cells and titrated to determine concentration by plaque assay described 
below. For influenza infection, mice were anesthetized with a ketamine/xylazine mixture and 
indicated plaque forming units (PFU) of influenza in 30 μl PBS was administered 
intranasally dropwise. Legionella pneumophila (wild-type serogroup 1 strain JR32) was 
originally obtained from the laboratory of Dr. Craig Roy and was grown on charcoal-yeast 
extract agar (Sigma-Aldrich) plates for 2 days, then cultured overnight in N-(2-
acetamido)-2-aminoethanesulfonic acid (ACES)-buffered yeast extract (AYE) broth (10 g/
liter yeast extract, 10 g/liter ACES, 0.4 g/liter L-cysteine HCl-H2O, 0.135 g/liter ferric 
nitrate, all components from Sigma-Aldrich) and grown to an optical density at 600 nm of 1 
in AYE broth. L. pneumophila culture was then diluted in PBS and 1×106 CFU in 40 μl PBS 
was administered intranasally dropwise to mice anesthetized with ketamine/xylazine.
For the LPS endotoxemia, mice were injected intraperitoneally with the indicated dose of 
LPS derived from Escherichia coli 055:B5 (Sigma-Aldrich) diluted in 100 μl PBS. For the 
Poly(I:C) viral inflammation model, mice were injected retro-orbitally with 30 mg/kg of 
high molecular weight Poly(I:C) (InvivoGen) diluted in 100 μl of normal saline provided by 
the manufacturer.
For feeding experiments, enteral nutrition/supplementation consisted of Abbott Promote 
(25%, 23%, and 52% calories from protein, fat, and carbohydrates, respectively) which is an 
enteral nutrition commonly used in supportive care of critically ill patients with a nearly 
identical nutritional profile to laboratory Global 2018 Teklad chow (24%, 18%, and 58% 
calories from protein, fat, and carbohydrates, respectively). Mice were gavaged PBS control 
or the equivalent of one kilocalorie of the indicated substance (glucose, casein, olive oil, or 
Abbott Promote) twice a day starting 8 hours post-infection in infection models and 1 hour 
post-injection in sterile inflammatory models.
For intraperitoneal administration of D-(+)-glucose (Sigma-Aldrich G8270), D-
mannoheptulose (DMH, Cayman Chemical), and 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2DG, Sigma-Aldrich), 
mice were injected intraperitoneally with glucose (20 mg in 100 μl water), DMH (1 mg in 
100 μl water) or 2DG (5 mg in 100 μl water) twice a day starting 8 hours post-infection in 
infection models and 1 hour post-injection in sterile inflammatory models. Valproic acid and 
Wang et al.
Page 15
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 levetiracetam were administered intraperitoneally starting 6 hours post-injection at 125 
mg/kg and 18 mg/kg in 100 μL PBS, respectively. FGF21 supplementation was done by 
retro-orbital injection of recombinant mouse FGF21 (R&D Systems) twice daily at 5 ng in 
100 μl PBS per injection.
Blood oxygen saturation, breath rate, and heart rate were measured by pulse oximetry using 
the MouseOx Plus (Starr Life Sciences Corp.). Core body temperature was measured by 
rectal probe thermometry (Physitemp TH-5 Thermalert). Fasting was performed by placing 
mice over wire-bottomed cages with food removed from the hopper. The ketogenic diet was 
purchased from Envigo. Venous pH was measured using an iSTAT 1 Handheld Analyzer 
(Abaxis) and the CG4+ cartridges as per manufacturers instruction.
Cell culture
To prepare bone marrow derived macrophages (BMDMs), C57BL/6J mice were euthanized 
by CO2 asphyxiation and femurs and tibias were isolated. The bones were cleansed with 
ethanol then washed with RPMI 1640 (Corning 10-040-CV), and pulverized in a mortar. 
Resulting contents were filtered through a 70 μm nylon cell strainer. This pulverizing and 
filtering process was repeated two more times, after which the resulting contents were 
treated with ACK lysing buffer (Lonza) for 5 minutes, then washed with RPMI, contents 
were centrifuged and the pellet was resuspended in macrophage growth medium (RPMI 
1640 supplemented with 10% FBS (Gibco), 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco), 2 mM L-
glutamine (Gibco), 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Gibco), 0.01 M HEPES (AmericanBio), and 
30% L929-conditioned media as a source of CSF-1), and plated on petri dishes. Macrophage 
growth medium was supplemented on day 3. Cells were plated for use on day 6. For 
assaying the effect of 2DG on L. monocytogenes replication in macrophages, BMDMs were 
plated at a density of 5×105 in 24-well tissue culture plates. BMDMs were infected with 
5×105 of L. monocytogenes in the presence or absence of 2DG (2.5 mg/ml). After 24 hours, 
both supernatant and cell lysate were harvested for quantification of bacterial load.
To prepare mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), pregnant C57BL/6J female mice were 
euthanized by CO2 asphyxiation at 13.5 to 14.5 days post conception. Embryos were 
harvested and washed in PBS. After removal of the head and visceral organs, the remaining 
tissue was washed in PBS then minced in 0.05% Trypsin with EDTA (Gibco). After a 30-
minute incubation at 37 °C, the minced tissue is washed with DMEM (Sigma-Aldrich), 
centrifuged and cell pellet re-suspended in complete MEF media (DMEM supplemented 
with 10% FBS, 1% penicillin-streptomycin, 2 mM L-glutamine, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, and 
0.01 M HEPES). After overnight incubation, cells were trypisinized and filtered through 70 
μm cell strainer and plated in complete MEF media. For assaying the effect of glucose and 
2DG on various cell stress and cytokine treatments, MEFs were plated at a density of 1×105 
cells per well in a 24 well plate. After overnight rest, cells were treated with the indicated 
chemicals or cytokines in the presence of additional glucose (final concentration 9 g/L), 15 
mM 2DG, or vehicle control. Thapsigargin (Cayman Chemical) was administered at 1 μM. 
Poly(I:C) was given at 20 μg/mL. Recombinant mouse IFNα (R&D Systems) was used at 
1000 U/ml.
Wang et al.
Page 16
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Method Details
Quantification of bacterial and viral loads
L. monocytogenes CFU titers were determined by plating titrated amounts of liver and 
spleen homogenate on BHI plates. Briefly, liver and spleen were harvested at indicated times 
post-infection and weighed. Tissue homogenates were generated by pushing the tissue 
through a 70 μm cell strainer using the plunger of a 5 mL syringe. Titrated dilutions of tissue 
homogenate were generated in 1% Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich), plated on BHI plates, and 
grown overnight at 37 °C. For in vitro assays testing the effect of 2DG on L. monocytogenes 
growth in macrophages, titrated amounts of culture supernatant and cell lysate were plated 
on BHI plates and grown overnight at 37 °C. To test the effect of 2DG on growth of L. 
monocytogenes in BHI broth, 5 ×103 L. monocytogenes was inoculated into 25 ml of BHI 
with or without 10 mg/ml of 2DG. Flasks were incubated overnight. Titrated volumes of L. 
monocytogenes containing BHI broth were plated the following day on BHI plates and 
incubated overnight for quantification.
To determine influenza virus strain A/WSN/33 titers in the lung, lung tissue was harvested at 
the indicated times post-infection, weighed, and disrupted by bead homogenization. For 
viral titers in the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid, mice were euthanized and trachea 
exposed. BAL was performed via cannulation of the trachea and lungs were lavaged with 1 
mL of PBS. Virus titer was determined by infection of MDCK cells with titrated amounts of 
lung homogenate and BAL followed by addition of an agar overlay for 48 hours. Cell 
monolayers were then stained with crystal violet and plaque numbers were determined.
Plasma cytokine, metabolite, and tissue injury marker analysis
Whole blood was harvested from mice by retro-orbital bleeding and plasma was isolated 
using lithium heparin coated plasma separator tubes (BD). Plasma TNFα and IL-6 
concentration were assayed by sandwich ELISA using capture antibodies (eBioscience), 
biotin-conjugated detection antibodies (eBioscience and BD, respectively), HRP-conjugated 
streptavidin (BD), and TMB substrate reagent (BD). Plasma IFNα and IL-1β concentrations 
were assayed using kits according to the manufacturer's protocols (eBioscience). Plasma 
Tropinin-I concentration (Life Diagnostics) and Alanine Aminotransferase (ALT) activity 
(Cayman Chemical) were assayed using kits according to manufacturers' protocols. Plasma 
creatinine was assayed using HPLC by The George M. O'Brien Kidney Center at Yale. 
Plasma non-esterified fatty acid concentration was measured using a kit according the 
manufacturer's protocols (Wako Diagnostics). Plasma β-hydroxybutyrate concentrations 
were measured using a kit according the manufacturer's protocols (Cayman Chemical).
RNA extraction and quantification
For tissue RNA extraction, tissues were harvested into RNA Bee RNA isolation reagent (Tel 
Test, Inc) and disrupted by bead homogenization in Lysing Matrix D tubes using a 
FastPrep-24 5G homogenizer (MP Biomedicals). RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Kit 
according to manufacturer's protocol (Qiagen). For RNA extraction from cultured cells, 
RNA was harvested using phenol-chloroform extraction according to manufacturer's 
protocol (Tel Test, Inc). cDNA synthesis was performed using MMLV reverse transcriptase 
Wang et al.
Page 17
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Clontech) with oligo(dT) primers. qRT-PCR reactions were performed on either a CFX96 
Real-Time System or CFX384 Real-Time System (Bio-Rad) using PerfeCTa SYBR Green 
SuperMix (Quanta Biosciences) and transcript levels were normalized to Rpl13a. Primers 
used for qRT-PCR are cataloged in Table S1.
Flow cytometry
Antibodies used for flow cytometry are cataloged in the antibodies section of the key 
resources table. Cell viability was determined using ethidium monoazide bromide (EMA) 
following manufacturer's suggested protocol (Biotium). Samples were Fc-blocked with 
functional grade mouse anti-CD16/32 antibody (93) (eBioscience). Annexin V-FITC and PI 
were used for apoptosis assays following the manufacturer's protocol (eBioscience). For 
tissue analyses, at least 1 × 105 cells were acquired on CD45+ cells within the singlet live 
gate, as defined by size, granularity and pulse-width. Samples were acquired on an LSRII 
flow cytometer (BD), and analyzed using FlowJo (Tree Star Technologies).
In vivo reactive oxygen species staining
24 hours after administration of indicated treatments, mice were injected with 0.2 mg of 
dihydroethidium in 100 μl PBS. After 30 minutes, mice were anesthetized with a ketamine/
xylazine mixture and perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde. Brains were harvested and 50 
micron sections were cut on a vibratome (Lancer Vibratome 1000 Plus). Sections were then 
stained with DAPI (ThermoFisher Scientific) for 48 hours and visualized immediately.
Positron-emission tomography and analyses
Mice were imaged on the Inveon small animal PET/CT scanner (Siemens Medical 
Solutions) using 5.3±3.9 MBq of 18F-FDG. Mice were injected with either LPS or 
Poly(I:C), and two hours after challenge, injected with 18F-FDG. Mice were scanned 
for 18F-FDG localization continuously over two hours under isoflurane anesthesia. To draw 
the lung, heart, liver and whole body ROIs, we used the Inveon Research Workplace (IRW) 
software (Siemens Healthineers). Regions-of-interest were manually drawn for the heart, 
liver and lung, and we used a template for the brain (Ma et al., 2005). To co-register the 
brain images with the template of brain regions, J.G. manually estimated translations and 
rotations, using a custom-built visualization tool written in IDL 8.0 (Exelis Visual 
Information Solutions). Standard uptake values (SUVs) at 40-60 min post-injection were 
used to assess glucose metabolism.
Histology
All mice were euthanized by carbon dioxide asphyxiation and perfused with PBS or fixative. 
Tissues were immersion-fixed in either 10% neutral buffered formalin or Bouin's fixative 
(Ricca Chemical Corporation). Tissues were trimmed, processed, embedded, and sectioned 
and stained for hematoxylin and eosin by routine methods. Tissues were evaluated by a 
veterinarian (C.J.B.) trained in veterinary pathology with extensive expertise in mouse 
pathology blinded to both experimental and genetic manipulations.
Digital light microscopic images were acquired using a Zeiss Axio Imager A1 microscope, 
an AxioCam MRc5 Camera, and AxioVision 4.8.3.0 imaging software (Carl Zeiss 
Wang et al.
Page 18
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 MicroImaging, Inc.). The resulting images were optimized using Adobe Photoshop 13.0.1× 
64.
TUNEL staining was performed by the Yale Research Histology Service. TUNEL images 
were not captured by C.J.B. These images were captured on a Leica DMI6000B. All other 
images were captured by C.J.B. For TUNEL staining quantification, at least 7 non-
overlapping 400× magnification fields per mouse brain were counted for total nuclei and 
TUNEL-stained nuclei to generate a final % TUNEL-positive count. Counts were performed 
by three independent, blinded investigators and averaged.
Western Blot
Hindbrain samples were harvested and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen tissues were 
pulverized in liquid nitrogen, then protein extracted with N-PER Neuronal Protein 
Extraction Reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific), supplemented with HALT protease and 
phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (ThermoFisher Scientific), according to the manufacturer's 
protocols. Equal amounts of protein were loaded per well of a 10% Bis-Tris mini-gel 
(Invitrogen) and run in 1× MOPS buffer (Invitrogen). Protein was transferred onto activated 
PVDF membrane (Millipore), then blocked in 5% milk in TBST (20 mM Tris, 150 mM 
NaCl, 0.05% Tween 20) for 30 minutes. Membranes were incubated with primary antibodies 
mouse anti-GADD153 (B-3) and rabbit anti-β Tubulin (H-235), both from Santa Cruz, 
overnight at 4°C. Anti-GADD153 was incubated at 1:1000 dilution in SignalBoost reagent 
(Millipore). Anti-β Tubulin was incubated at 1:5000 dilution in 4% BSA TBST. Membranes 
were washed 3× with TBST, then incubated with secondary antibodies at 1:10,000 dilution 
for one hour at room temperature. After washing, protein was visualized using enhanced 
chemiluminescence reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific).
Quantification and Statistical Analysis
Results were statistically analyzed using Student's t test or an analysis of variance (ANOVA) 
test with multiple comparisons where appropriate using Prism 6.0 (GraphPad Software, Inc). 
Kaplan Meier survival curves were compared using log-rank Mantel-Cox test. A p value of 
< 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank members of the Medzhitov lab for helpful discussions, Marya Shanabrough and Tamas Horvath for help 
with processing of brain specimens, and David Mangelsdorf and Steven Kliewer for making available the Fgf21-/- 
mice. This study was supported by the HHMI, Else Kröner Fresenius Foundation, The Blavatnik Family 
Foundation, and grants from the NIH (AI046688, AI089771, CA157461). A.W. was supported by NIH Grant T32 
AR07107-39. S.C.H. was supported by American Heart Association Grant 13FTF17070000. H.H.L. was supported 
by the Gruber Science Fellowship. Plasma creatinine was processed through the Yale George M. O'Brien Kidney 
Center, NIH Grant P30-DK079310. Preparation of histology sections were performed by the Yale Research 
Pathology and Histology Core.
Wang et al.
Page 19
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
Adamo SA. Parasitic suppression of feeding in the tobacco hornworm, Manduca sexta: Parallels with 
feeding depression after an immune challenge. Arch Insect Biochem Physiol. 2005; 60:185–197. 
[PubMed: 16304613] 
Agwunobi AO, Reid C, Maycock P, Little RA, Carlson GL. Insulin resistance and substrate utilization 
in human endotoxemia. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000; 85:3770–3778. [PubMed: 11061537] 
Angus DC, van der Poll T. Severe sepsis and septic shock. N Engl J Med. 2013; 369:840–851. 
[PubMed: 23984731] 
Arabi YM, Aldawood AS, Haddad SH, Al-Dorzi HM, Tamim HM, Jones G, Mehta S, McIntyre L, 
Solaiman O, Sakkijha MH, et al. Permissive Underfeeding or Standard Enteral Feeding in Critically 
Ill Adults. N Engl J Med. 2015; 372:2398–2408. [PubMed: 25992505] 
Archer KA, Roy CR. MyD88-dependent responses involving toll-like receptor 2 are important for 
protection and clearance of Legionella pneumophila in a mouse model of Legionnaires' disease. 
Infect Immun. 2006; 74:3325–3333. [PubMed: 16714560] 
Auerbuch V, Brockstedt DG, Meyer-Morse N, O'Riordan M, Portnoy DA. Mice lacking the type I 
interferon receptor are resistant to Listeria monocytogenes. J Exp Med. 2004; 200:527–533. 
[PubMed: 15302899] 
Ayres JS, Schneider DS. The Role of Anorexia in Resistance and Tolerance to Infections in 
Drosophila. PLoS Biol. 2009; 7:e1000150. [PubMed: 19597539] 
Ayres JS, Schneider DS. Tolerance of infections. Annu Rev Immunol. 2012; 30:271–294. [PubMed: 
22224770] 
Boison D. Chopping Out CHOP Chops the Fate of Neurons. Epilepsy Curr. 2013; 13:219–220. 
[PubMed: 24348111] 
Buck MD, O'Sullivan D, Pearce EL. T cell metabolism drives immunity. J Exp Med. 2015; 212:1345–
1360. [PubMed: 26261266] 
Budd A, Alleva L, Alsharifi M, Koskinen A, Smythe V, Mullbacher A, Wood J, Clark I. Increased 
survival after gemfibrozil treatment of severe mouse influenza. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 
2007; 51:2965–2968. [PubMed: 17562808] 
Burke JD, Platanias LC, Fish EN. Beta interferon regulation of glucose metabolism is PI3K/Akt 
dependent and important for antiviral activity against coxsackievirus B3. J Virol. 2014; 88:3485–
3495. [PubMed: 24403577] 
Camara-Lemarroy CR, Guzman DELAGFJ, Cordero-Perez P, Ibarra-Hernandez JM, Munoz-Espinosa 
LE, Fernandez-Garza NE. Gemfibrozil attenuates the inflammatory response and protects rats 
from abdominal sepsis. Exp Ther Med. 2015; 9:1018–1022. [PubMed: 25667670] 
Casaer MP, Van den Berghe G. Nutrition in the Acute Phase of Critical Illness. N Engl J Med. 2014; 
370:1227–1236. [PubMed: 24670169] 
Esposito V, Grosjean F, Tan J, Huang L, Zhu L, Chen J, Xiong H, Striker GE, Zheng F. CHOP 
deficiency results in elevated lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammation and kidney injury. Am J 
Physiol Renal Physiol. 2013; 304:F440–450. [PubMed: 23235477] 
Feingold KR, Grunfeld C, Heuer JG, Gupta A, Cramer M, Zhang T, Shigenaga JK, Patzek SM, Chan 
ZW, Moser A, et al. FGF21 Is Increased by Inflammatory Stimuli and Protects Leptin-Deficient 
ob/ob Mice from the Toxicity of Sepsis. Endocrinology. 2012; 153:2689–2700. [PubMed: 
22474187] 
Figueiredo N, Chora A, Raquel H, Pejanovic N, Pereira P, Hartleben B, Neves-Costa A, Moita C, 
Pedroso D, Pinto A, et al. Anthracyclines induce DNA damage response-mediated protection 
against severe sepsis. Immunity. 2013; 39:874–884. [PubMed: 24184056] 
Galvan-Pena S, O'Neill LA. Metabolic reprograming in macrophage polarization. Front Immunol. 
2014; 5:420. [PubMed: 25228902] 
Greseth MD, Traktman P. De novo fatty acid biosynthesis contributes significantly to establishment of 
a bioenergetically favorable environment for vaccinia virus infection. PLoS Pathog. 2014; 
10:e1004021. [PubMed: 24651651] 
Hart BL. Biological basis of the behavior of sick animals. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 1988; 12:123–137. 
[PubMed: 3050629] 
Wang et al.
Page 20
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Hoetzenecker W, Echtenacher B, Guenova E, Hoetzenecker K, Woelbing F, Bruck J, Teske A, 
Valtcheva N, Fuchs K, Kneilling M, et al. ROS-induced ATF3 causes susceptibility to secondary 
infections during sepsis-associated immunosuppression. Nat Med. 2012; 18:128–134.
Hotchkiss RS, Monneret G, Payen D. Sepsis-induced immunosuppression: from cellular dysfunctions 
to immunotherapy. Nat Rev Immunol. 2013; 13:862–874. [PubMed: 24232462] 
Inagaki T, Dutchak P, Zhao G, Ding X, Gautron L, Parameswara V, Li Y, Goetz R, Mohammadi M, 
Esser V, et al. Endocrine Regulation of the Fasting Response by PPARα-Mediated Induction of 
Fibroblast Growth Factor 21. Cell Metab. 5:415–425.
Investigators NSS, Finfer S, Chittock DR, Su SY, Blair D, Foster D, Dhingra V, Bellomo R, Cook D, 
Dodek P, et al. Intensive versus conventional glucose control in critically ill patients. N Engl J 
Med. 2009; 360:1283–1297. [PubMed: 19318384] 
Jamieson AM, Pasman L, Yu S, Gamradt P, Homer RJ, Decker T, Medzhitov R. Role of tissue 
protection in lethal respiratory viral-bacterial coinfection. Science. 2013; 340:1230–1234. 
[PubMed: 23618765] 
Janssens S, Pulendran B, Lambrecht BN. Emerging functions of the unfolded protein response in 
immunity. Nat Immunol. 2014; 15:910–919. [PubMed: 25232821] 
Kluger MJ, Ringler DH, Anver MR. Fever and survival. Science. 1975; 188:166–168. [PubMed: 
1114347] 
Kolls JK. Oxidative stress in sepsis: a redox redux. J Clin Invest. 2006; 116:860–863. [PubMed: 
16585954] 
Langley RJ, Tsalik EL, van Velkinburgh JC, Glickman SW, Rice BJ, Wang C, Chen B, Carin L, Suarez 
A, Mohney RP, et al. An integrated clinico-metabolomic model improves prediction of death in 
sepsis. Sci Transl Med. 2013; 5:195ra195–195ra195.
Larsen R, Gozzelino R, Jeney V, Tokaji L, Bozza Fa, Japiassú AM, Bonaparte D, Cavalcante MM, 
Chora A, Ferreira A, et al. A central role for free heme in the pathogenesis of severe sepsis. Sci 
Transl Med. 2010; 2:51ra71.
Levy RG, Cooper PN, Giri P. Ketogenic diet and other dietary treatments for epilepsy. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2012 CD001903. 
Li MV, Chen W, Harmancey RN, Nuotio-Antar AM, Imamura M, Saha P, Taegtmeyer H, Chan L. 
Glucose-6-phosphate mediates activation of the carbohydrate responsive binding protein 
(ChREBP). Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010; 395:395–400. [PubMed: 20382127] 
Lin JH, Walter P, Yen TS. Endoplasmic reticulum stress in disease pathogenesis. Annu Rev Pathol. 
2008; 3:399–425. [PubMed: 18039139] 
Liu JZ, Jellbauer S, Poe AJ, Ton V, Pesciaroli M, Kehl-Fie TE, Restrepo NA, Hosking MP, Edwards 
RA, Battistoni A, et al. Zinc sequestration by the neutrophil protein calprotectin enhances 
Salmonella growth in the inflamed gut. Cell Host Microbe. 2012; 11:227–239. [PubMed: 
22423963] 
Liu L, Lu Y, Martinez J, Bi Y, Lian G, Wang T, Milasta S, Wang J, Yang M, Liu G, et al. 
Proinflammatory signal suppresses proliferation and shifts macrophage metabolism from Myc-
dependent to HIF1alpha-dependent. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016; 113:1564–1569. [PubMed: 
26811453] 
Lund JM, Alexopoulou L, Sato A, Karow M, Adams NC, Gale NW, Iwasaki A, Flavell RA. 
Recognition of single-stranded RNA viruses by Toll-like receptor 7. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2004; 101:5598–5603. [PubMed: 15034168] 
Ma Y, Hof PR, Grant SC, Blackband SJ, Bennett R, Slatest L, McGuigan MD, Benveniste H. A three-
dimensional digital atlas database of the adult C57BL/6J mouse brain by magnetic resonance 
microscopy. Neuroscience. 2005; 135:1203–1215. [PubMed: 16165303] 
Medzhitov R, Schneider DS, Soares MP. Disease tolerance as a defense strategy. Science. 2012; 
335:936–941. [PubMed: 22363001] 
Miller ES, Bates RA, Koebel DA, Fuchs BB, Sonnenfeld G. 2-deoxy-D-glucose-induced metabolic 
stress enhances resistance to Listeria monocytogenes infection in mice. Physiol Behav. 1998; 
65:535–543. [PubMed: 9877421] 
Miller NE. Some psychophysiological studies of motivation and of the behavioural effects of illness. 
Bull Br Psychol Soc. 1964; 17:1–20.
Wang et al.
Page 21
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Murray MJ, Murray AB. Anorexia of infection as a mechanism of host defense. Am J Clin Nutr. 1979; 
32:593–596. [PubMed: 283688] 
Nairz M, Ferring-Appel D, Casarrubea D, Sonnweber T, Viatte L, Schroll A, Haschka D, Fang FC, 
Hentze MW, Weiss G, et al. Iron Regulatory Proteins Mediate Host Resistance to Salmonella 
Infection. Cell Host Microbe. 2015; 18:254–261. [PubMed: 26190773] 
Pecchi E, Dallaporta M, Jean A, Thirion S, Troadec JD. Prostaglandins and sickness behavior: old 
story, new insights. Physiol Behav. 2009; 97:279–292. [PubMed: 19275907] 
Potthoff MJ, Inagaki T, Satapati S, Ding X, He T, Goetz R, Mohammadi M, Finck BN, Mangelsdorf 
DJ, Kliewer SA, et al. FGF21 induces PGC-1α and regulates carbohydrate and fatty acid 
metabolism during the adaptive starvation response. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009; 106:10853–
10858. [PubMed: 19541642] 
Raberg L, Sim D, Read AF. Disentangling genetic variation for resistance and tolerance to infectious 
diseases in animals. Science. 2007; 318:812–814. [PubMed: 17975068] 
Sayyah M, Javad-Pour M, Ghazi-Khansari M. The bacterial endotoxin lipopolysaccharide enhances 
seizure susceptibility in mice: involvement of proinflammatory factors: nitric oxide and 
prostaglandins. Neuroscience. 2003; 122:1073–1080. [PubMed: 14643773] 
Schneider DS, Ayres JS. Two ways to survive infection: what resistance and tolerance can teach us 
about treating infectious diseases. Nat Rev Immunol. 2008; 8:889–895. [PubMed: 18927577] 
Seron-Arbeloa C, Zamora-Elson M, Labarta-Monzon L, Mallor-Bonet T. Enteral nutrition in critical 
care. J Clin Med Res. 2013; 5:1–11. [PubMed: 23390469] 
Shimazu T, Hirschey MD, Newman J, He W, Shirakawa K, Le Moan N, Grueter CA, Lim H, Saunders 
LR, Stevens RD, et al. Suppression of Oxidative Stress by β-Hydroxybutyrate, an Endogenous 
Histone Deacetylase Inhibitor. Science. 2013; 339:211–214. [PubMed: 23223453] 
Singer BH, Newstead MW, Zeng X, Cooke CL, Thompson RC, Singer K, Ghantasala R, Parent JM, 
Murphy GG, Iwashyna TJ, et al. Cecal Ligation and Puncture Results in Long-Term Central 
Nervous System Myeloid Inflammation. PLoS One. 2016; 11:e0149136. [PubMed: 26862765] 
Smorodintsev AA, Aksenov OA, Konstantinova IK, Vil'ner LM, Tinufanov AV. Comparative study of 
the toxicity of poly G-poly C and poly I-poly C in different objects. Vopr Virusol. 1978:201–206. 
[PubMed: 664621] 
Soares MP, Gozzelino R, Weis S. Tissue damage control in disease tolerance. Trends Immunol. 2014; 
35:483–494. [PubMed: 25182198] 
Song Y, Shen J, Lin Y, Shen J, Wu X, Yan Y, Zhou L, Zhang H, Zhou Y, Cao M, et al. Up-regulation of 
podoplanin involves in neuronal apoptosis in LPS-induced neuroinflammation. Cell Mol 
Neurobiol. 2014; 34:839–849. [PubMed: 24821010] 
Tabas I, Ron D. Integrating the mechanisms of apoptosis induced by endoplasmic reticulum stress. Nat 
Cell Biol. 2011; 13:184–190. [PubMed: 21364565] 
Taubenberger JK, Morens DM. The pathology of influenza virus infections. Annu Rev Pathol. 2008; 
3:499–522. [PubMed: 18039138] 
Terbach N, Williams RS. Structure-function studies for the panacea, valproic acid. Biochem Soc Trans. 
2009; 37:1126–1132. [PubMed: 19754465] 
van den Berghe G, Wouters P, Weekers F, Verwaest C, Bruyninckx F, Schetz M, Vlasselaers D, 
Ferdinande P, Lauwers P, Bouillon R. Intensive insulin therapy in critically ill patients. N Engl J 
Med. 2001; 345:1359–1367. [PubMed: 11794168] 
Wing EJ, Young JB. Acute Starvation Protects Mice Against Listeria monocytogenes. Infect Immun. 
1980; 28:771–776. [PubMed: 6772566] 
Yang L, Xie M, Yang M, Yu Y, Zhu S, Hou W, Kang R, Lotze MT, Billiar TR, Wang H, et al. PKM2 
regulates the Warburg effect and promotes HMGB1. release in sepsis Nat Commun. 2014; 5
Yoo SH, Abdelmegeed MA, Song BJ. Activation of PPARalpha by Wy-14643 ameliorates systemic 
lipopolysaccharide-induced acute lung injury. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013; 436:366–
371. [PubMed: 23727576] 
Wang et al.
Page 22
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Glucose caloric supplementation during Listeria monocytogenes infection worsens 
survival, while 2DG promotes survival
(A) Food consumption after infection with 5 × 104 and 5 × 105 CFU wild-type L. 
monocytogenes.
(B) Survival after infection with 5 × 104 L. monocytogenes. Mice were per os (PO) gavaged 
with Abbott Promote (Food), glucose, or PBS vehicle, and injected intraperitoneally (IP) 
with 2DG or PBS. PO PBS/IP PBS n=20, PO Food/IP PBS n= 15 (p=0.0011 vs PO PBS/IP 
PBS), PO Glucose/IP PBS n=19 (p=0.004 vs PO PBS/IP PBS), PO PBS/IP 2DG n=10 
(p=0.0085 vs PO PBS/IP PBS).
Wang et al.
Page 23
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (C-F) Mice were infected with 5 × 104 CFU L. monocytogenes, then treated with IP PBS, 
glucose, or 2DG. n=5/group.
(C) Survival after L. monocytogenes and indicated treatments. PBS vs Glucose p=0.0396, 
PBS vs 2DG p=0.0344, Glucose vs 2DG p=0.0017.
(D) Plasma IL-6 and IFNγ 24 and 48 hours after 5 × 104 L. monocytogenes infection. 24h 
plasma IL-6: PBS vs 2DG p=0.0005, Glucose vs 2DG p=0.0014; 24h plasma IFNγ: PBS vs 
Glucose, PBS vs 2DG, Glucose vs 2DG all p<0.0001. n=5/group.
(E) Listeria CFUs from spleen and liver 4 days post-infection.
(F) Flow cytometry analysis of CD45+ cells within the liver 4 days post-infection.
(G) CFU growth of L. monocytogenes after incubation in brain heart infusion broth with or 
without 15 mM 2DG for 18 hours.
(H) Bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDM) were infected with 5 × 105 CFU of L. 
monocytogenes in the presence or absence of 15 mM 2DG for 24 hours. CFU of L. 
monocytogenes grown from the BMDM cell media supernatant and cell lysate.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. *p<0.05, ***p<0.001, ****p<0.0001. See also Figure 
S1.
Wang et al.
Page 24
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Glucose caloric supplementation during LPS sepsis worsens survival, while 2DG 
promotes survival
(A and B) Survival after 15 mg/kg IP LPS and PO gavage with Abbott Promote (Food), 
glucose, olive oil, casein, or PBS vehicle. PO PBS n=10, PO Food n=10 (p=0.0002 vs PO 
PBS), PO Glucose n=8 (p<0.0001 vs PO PBS), no gavage n=10 (p=0.0679 vs PO PBS). 
Panel A is a subset of panel B, separated for clarity (the same PBS-treated, food-treated, and 
no gavage groups are shown in (A and B)).
(C) Survival after 15 mg/kg IP LPS and PO gavage with Food with IP injections of PBS or 
2DG. p=0.0433
Wang et al.
Page 25
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (D-F) Mice were given 15 mg/kg IP LPS, then treated with IP PBS, glucose, or 2DG.
(D) Survival after LPS and indicated treatments. IP PBS n=16, IP Glucose n=10 (p<0.0001 
vs IP PBS), IP 2DG n=10 (p=0.01 vs IP PBS).
(E) Plasma TNFα and IL-6. (n=5-10/group)
(F) Liver mRNA expression 4 hours after LPS and treatment with PBS (LPS-PBS), glucose 
(LPS-glucose), and 2DG (LPS-2DG) compared to PBS alone. n=3-5/group.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. See also Figure S2.
Wang et al.
Page 26
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Caloric supplementation and glucose utilization is required for surviving influenza 
infection
(A) Food consumption after infection with 450 plaque forming units (PFU) of Influenza 
strain A/WSN/33.
(B-C) Survival after infection with 800 PFU of influenza virus. Mice were gavaged with 
Abbott Promote (Food), glucose, or PBS vehicle. Mice gavaged with Food were also 
injected with IP PBS (Food) or 2DG (Food+2DG). PBS vs Food p=0.0047, PBS vs Glucose 
p=0.1058, Food vs Food+2DG p=0.0001, PBS vs Food+2DG p=0.0256. n=10/group. Panel 
Wang et al.
Page 27
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 B is a subset of panel C, separated for clarity (the same PBS-treated and food-treated groups 
are shown in (B and C)).
(D) Survival after infection with 375 PFU of influenza virus, and treatment with IP PBS or 
2DG. p<0.0001, n=10/group.
(E-J) Mice were infected with 375 PFU influenza virus, and treated with IP PBS or 2DG. 
n=4-5/group
(E) Lung and broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) viral load 6 days after influenza infection by 
PFU and quantitative PCR for WSN nucleoprotein (NP).
(F) mRNA expression of whole lung tissue at day 6.
(G) Plasma IFNα measured by ELISA.
(H and I) H&E staining of lung tissue 6 days post-infection and histologic scoring. Scale bar 
= 500 μm. For magnified views of insets please see Figure S3E.
(J) Vital signs after influenza infection.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001, ****p<0.0001. See 
also Figure S3.
Wang et al.
Page 28
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Inhibition of glucose utilization is lethal in Poly(I:C) inflammation
(A) Survival of mice after Poly(I:C) challenge and treatment with either IP PBS, glucose, or 
2DG. IP PBS n=15, IP Glucose n=10 (p=0.2207 vs IP PBS), and IP 2DG n=15 (p<0.0001 vs 
IP PBS).
(B) Survival of B6 wild-type (WT) mice and Ifnar-/- mice after Poly(I:C) challenge and 
treatment with IP PBS, glucose, or 2DG. B6 vs Ifnar-/- p=0.0027, n=5/group.
(C-D) Mice were challenged with Poly(I:C), then treated with either IP PBS, glucose, or 
2DG.
Wang et al.
Page 29
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (C) Plasma IFNα. n=5/group.
(D) Vital signs measured 18 hours after Poly(I:C) administration. n=3-7/group.
(E) Averaged brain PET images after PBS vehicle (baseline), LPS, and Poly(I:C) 
administration. “A” is the brainstem and “B” is the hypothalamus. Anatomic atlas of 
regions-of-interest (ROI) and T2-weighted magnetic resonance images provided for 
reference. CT, computed tomography. n=3/group.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. **p<0.01, ***p<0.001, ****p<0.0001. See also 
Figure S4.
Wang et al.
Page 30
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Inhibition of glucose utilization in Poly(I:C)-induced inflammation enhances ER stress
(A) B6 WT and Ifnar-/- mice were challenged with Poly(I:C), then treated with either IP PBS 
or 2DG. Whole hindbrain lysates 24 hours after Poly(I:C) treatment immunoblotted for 
CHOP and β-Tubulin.
(B) Hindbrain mRNA expression of Gadd34 18 hours after Poly(I:C) challenge and 
treatment with IP PBS, glucose, or 2DG in WT mice. n=5/group (one death in Poly(I:C) 
group).
Wang et al.
Page 31
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (C) Survival of B6 WT mice and Ddit3-/- mice after Poly(I:C) challenge and treatment with 
IP PBS or 2DG. WT vs Ddit3-/- p=0.0015 WT: Poly(I:C) + 2DG vs Ddit3-/-: Poly(I:C) 
+ 2DG, n=5/group.
(D and E) B6 WT and Ddit3-/- mice were challenged with Poly(I:C) and treated with 2DG.
(D) Plasma IFNα after Poly(I:C) challenge and treatment with 2DG. n=5/group.
(E) Vital signs measured 18 hours after Poly(I:C) + 2DG. n=3-7/group (vital sign values of 
B6 WT mice same as those in Figure 4D)
(F-H) B6 WT mice and Ddit3-/- mice were infected with 700 PFU of influenza virus and 
treated with 2DG.
(F) Survival after influenza infection and treatment with 2DG. p=0.048 n=5/group (G) 
Plasma IFNα after influenza infection and treatment with 2DG. n=5/group.
(H) Lung and BAL viral load 5 days post-infection. n=5/group.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. **p<0.01, ***p<0.001. See also Figure S5.
Wang et al.
Page 32
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Role of ketogenic program in surviving bacterial, but not viral inflammation
(A) Plasma nonesterified fatty acids (NEFA), beta-hydroxybutyrate (BHOB), and fibroblast 
growth factor 21 (FGF21) after LPS, with treatment with IP PBS or glucose. n=10/group.
(B) Survival after 8 mg/kg IP LPS and treatment with glucose. Mice were treated with 
vehicle, valproic acid (VA) or levetiracetam (Keppra) starting 6 hours after LPS. p<0.0001 
for Glucose+VA vs Glucose and Glucose+VA vs Glucose+Keppra. n=15 Glucose, n=15 
Glucose+VA, n=4 Glucose+Keppra.
Wang et al.
Page 33
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (C) Survival after 12.5 mg/kg IP LPS in B6 WT, Fgf21-/- and Ppara-/- mice. n=10/group. 
p<0.0001 for WT vs Fgf21-/-; p=0.0003 for WT vs Ppara-/-.
(D) Plasma BHOB after 12.5 mg/kg IP LPS in WT, Fgf21-/- and Ppara-/- mice. n=4-6/group.
(E) Plasma TNFα and IL-6 in B6 WT, Fgf21-/-, and Ppara-/- mice after LPS. n=5/group 
*p<0.05.
(F) Survival after 12.5 mg/kg IP LPS in Fgf21-/- and Ppara-/- mice, treated with i.v. 5 ng 
recombinant mouse FGF21 (rmFGF21) twice daily starting 6 hours after LPS injection. 
n=5-6/group. p=0.0491 Fgf21-/- VEH vs Fgf21-/- rmFGF21. p=0.5767 Ppara-/- VEH vs 
Ppara-/- rmFGF21.
(G) Survival after 8 mg/kg IP LPS in B6 WT and Ppara-/- mice. 2DG treatment was initiated 
one hour after LPS. Valproic acid (VA) was initiated 6 hours after LPS. n=4-5/group. 
p=0.0177 Ppara-/- VEH vs Ppara-/- VA.
(H-I) WT and Ppara-/- mice were infected with 400 PFU of influenza virus.
(H) Survival after influenza infection. p=0.0074 WT n=6, Ppara-/- n=8, representative of 
three independent experiments.
(I) Lung and BAL viral load 5 days post-infection. n=6-7/group.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001, ****p<0.0001. See 
also Figures S6 and S7.
Wang et al.
Page 34
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. Model of glucose utilization during viral and bacterial-mediated inflammation 
supporting unique tissue tolerance mechanisms
(A) Glucose inhibits PPARα-dependent ketogenesis and cellular adaptation programs 
required for tissue tolerance during LPS and Listeria-mediated (bacterial) inflammation. 
Ketones act as fuel source and as HDACi allowing for cellular and tissue adaptation. 
Inhibition of glucose utilization during bacterial inflammation with 2DG protects against 
tissue dysfunction and organismal mortality.
(B) Glucose utilization is required for adaptation to Poly(I:C) and influenza mediated (viral) 
sepsis. Viral inflammation activates ER stress and the unfolded protein response (UPR) 
downstream of type I interferon signaling through IFNaR. Inhibition of glucose utilization in 
viral inflammation with 2DG enhances ER stress through a CHOP-dependent pathway 
leading to tissue dysfunction and death.
Wang et al.
Page 35
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Wang et al.
Page 36
Gene
Forward Primer
Reverse Primer
Cxcl1
5′-ATCCAGAGCTTGAAGGTGTTGC-3′
5′-AAGGCAAGCCTCGCGACC-3′
Ddit3 (Chop)
5′-TCTCATCCCCAGGAAACGAAG-3′
5′- TGTGCGTGTGACCTCTGTTGG-3′
Ifit1
5′-ACCCAGAGAACAGCTACCAC-3′
5′-GAACTGGACCTGCTCTGAG-3′
Ifit2 (Isg54)
5′-TCTGATTCTGAGGCCTTGCA-3′
5′-CTTGCTGACCTCCTCCATTCTC-3′
Ifnb1
5′-GCACTGGGTGGAATGAGACTATTG-3′
5′-TTCTGAGGCATCAACTGACAGGTC-3′
Il1b
5′-CAGTTGTCTAATGGGAACGTCA-3′
5′- GCACCTTCTTTTCCTTCATCTTT-3′
Il6
5′-GACTTCCATCCAGTTGCCTTCTTGG-3′
5′-CCAGTTTGGTAGCATCCATCATTTCT-3′
Mx1
5′-TCCTCCCCAAATGTTTTCAG-3′
5′-ACTGAGATGACCCAGCACCT-3′
Oasl1
5′-CAGAGGTCAGCTGGAAAGGA-3′
5′-CTTGAGTACCTTGAGCACGC-3′
Ppp1r15a (Gadd34)
5′-CAGCAAGGAAATGGACTG-3′
5′-GCGGCTCAGATTGTTCAAAG-3′
Rpl13a
5′-GAGGTCGGGTGGAAGTACCA-3′
5′-TGCATCTTGGCCTTTTCCTT-3′
Rsad2
5′-CTTCAACGTGGACGAAGACA-3′
5′-ATTCAGGCACCAAACAGGAC-3′
Saa3
5′-ATGCTCGGGGGAACTATGAT-3′
5′-TCCATGTCCCGTGAACTTCT-3′
Tnf
5′-TCTGTCTACTGAACTTCGGGGTG-3′
5′-ACTTGGTGGTTTGCTACGACG-3′
Tnfsf10
5′-ACCTCAGCTTCAGTCAGCACTTC-3′
5′-TGTAAGTCACAGCCACAGACACAG-3′
Trex1
5′-TTAGACCTGGAAGCCACTGG-3′
5′-GAGCAATGCACAGAGAGAGC-3′
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 08.
