 N E U R O D E G EN E R A T I V E D I SE A S E
2017 © The Authors,
some rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science.
Individuals with progranulin haploinsufficiency exhibit
features of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
Michael E. Ward,1,2,3 Robert Chen,1,3 Hsin-Yi Huang,4,5 Connor Ludwig,1,3 Maria Telpoukhovskaia,1
Ali Taubes,1 Helene Boudin,4,6 Sakura S. Minami,1 Meredith Reichert,1 Philipp Albrecht,7
Jeffrey M. Gelfand,3 Andres Cruz-Herranz,3 Christian Cordano,3 Marcel V. Alavi,8 Shannon Leslie,1
William W. Seeley,3 Bruce L. Miller,3 Eileen Bigio,9 Marek-Marsel Mesulam,9 Matthew S. Bogyo,10
Ian R. Mackenzie,11 John F. Staropoli,12 Susan L. Cotman,12 Eric J. Huang,4,13
Li Gan,1,3* Ari J. Green3,8*
Heterozygous mutations in the GRN gene lead to progranulin (PGRN) haploinsufficiency and cause frontotemporal
dementia (FTD), a neurodegenerative syndrome of older adults. Homozygous GRN mutations, on the other hand, lead
to complete PGRN loss and cause neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (NCL), a lysosomal storage disease usually seen in
children. Given that the predominant clinical and pathological features of FTD and NCL are distinct, it is controversial
whether the disease mechanisms associated with complete and partial PGRN loss are similar or distinct. We show that
PGRN haploinsufficiency leads to NCL-like features in humans, some occurring before dementia onset. Noninvasive
retinal imaging revealed preclinical retinal lipofuscinosis in heterozygous GRN mutation carriers. Increased lipofuscinosis
and intracellular NCL-like storage material also occurred in postmortem cortex of heterozygous GRN mutation carriers.
Lymphoblasts from heterozygous GRN mutation carriers accumulated prominent NCL-like storage material, which could
be rescued by normalizing PGRN expression. Fibroblasts from heterozygous GRN mutation carriers showed impaired
lysosomal protease activity. Our findings indicate that progranulin haploinsufficiency caused accumulation of NCL-like
storage material and early retinal abnormalities in humans and implicate lysosomal dysfunction as a central disease pro-
cess in GRN-associated FTD and GRN-associated NCL.
INTRODUCTION
Neurodegenerative diseases of adulthood are usually thought to occur
via mechanisms distinct from those of childhood. Neuronal ceroid lipo-
fuscinosis (NCL) is the most common neurodegenerative disease of
childhood. Progranulin-related frontotemporal dementia (FTD), a neuro-
degenerative syndrome of older adults, is the most common cause of
dementia in those <60 years old. Individuals affected by FTD usually
present withbehavioralchanges, language difficulties, ormotorsymptoms
(1). Heterozygousmutationsintheprogranulin(GRN)geneare common
causes of familial FTD. Such mutations lead to progranulin (PGRN)
haploinsufficiency, reducing PGRN expression by 60 to 70% via nonsense-
mediatedmRNAdecay(2).PGRNhasbeenreportedtoregulatenumerous
cellular processes, including cell survival, inflammation, and protein
clearance (3–12). However, it is not understood why partial loss of PGRN
causes neurodegeneration.
Recently, we discovered that retinal degeneration occurs in preclinical
heterozygous GRN mutation carriers (13), a phenotype also observed in
Grn knockout mice (13, 14). Grn knockout mice also develop prominent
deposits of autofluorescent aggregates known as lipofuscin throughout
the central nervous system (CNS) (7, 15, 16). Ultrastructurally, this storage
material bears a striking resemblance to storage material found in NCL, a
disease clinically characterized by early vision loss and retinal atrophy. In-
dividuals with homozygous GRN mutations develop a clinical syndrome
consistent with NCL (vision loss followed by seizures and ataxia) (17–19).
Electron microscopy (EM) analysis of lymphocytes from one of these
subjects revealed NCL-like storage material (18).
Classically, NCL encompasses a family of related genetic syndromes
with shared clinical and pathologic features, which together are the major
cause of neurodegeneration in childhood. Vision loss is often an early
clinicalfeatureofNCLandcanprecededevelopmentofotherneurological
symptoms, whichusually include seizures, ataxia, cognitive dysfunction,
and early death(20). Most of the known mutations associated with NCL
cause loss of function in genes necessary for normal lysosome function.
In keeping with this, deposition of autofluorescent intralysosomal storage
material known as lipofuscin is a pathological hallmark of NCL (21).
Although it is generally agreed that NCL can be caused by complete
loss of PGRN, whether FTD caused by partial loss of PGRN shares sim-
ilarclinical,pathological, ormechanistic featureswithNCLremainscon-
troversial. Unlike the Grn knockout mice, heterozygous Grn mice do not
develop CNS lipofuscinosis (7). Furthermore, the classic clinical and
pathological findings considered characteristic of GRN-associated FTD
appeardistinctfromthoseinNCL(namely,earlybehavioral/languageab-
normalities with pathologic TDP-43 mislocalization in FTD versus vision
loss,seizures, and ataxiawithpathologic lipofuscin accumulation in NCL).
However, a comprehensive evaluation of humans with PGRN haploinsuf-
ficiency for clinicopathological features of NCL has not been conducted.
On the basis of our previous observations of early retinal degenera-
tion in humans with heterozygous GRN mutations—which could be
consistent with an NCL phenotype—we suspected that other NCL-like
1Gladstone Institute of Neurological Disease, Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco,
CA 94158 USA. 2National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. 3Department of Neurology, Uni-
versity of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158 USA. 4Department of
Pathology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
5Department of Pathology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei City,
Taiwan. 6INSERM UMR 913, Université de Nantes, Nantes, France. 7Department
of Neurology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine University Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf,
Germany. 8Department of Ophthalmology, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. 9Department of Pathology, Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. 10Department of Pathology,
Stanford Medical School, Palo Alto, CA 94305, USA. 11Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. 12Center for
Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02114, USA. 13Pathology Service, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San
Francisco, CA 94141, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: lgan@gladstone.ucsf.edu (L.G.); agreen@ucsf.edu
(A.J.G.)
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ward et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah5642 (2017)
12 April 2017
1 of 10
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 features may occur in these patients but may have been overlooked. We
examined retinas of living presymptomatic heterozygous GRN muta-
tion carriers by noninvasive autofluorescence imaging and analyzed post-
mortem cortical tissues from FTD subjects with heterozygous GRN
mutations. In addition, we imaged lymphoblasts from heterozygous
GRN mutation carriers and their normal siblings by EM to quantify
NCL-like storage material. We enhanced PGRN expression in lympho-
cytes from heterozygous GRN mutation carriers to assess the effects of
PGRN on NCL-like structures and storage material. Finally, we directly
assessed lysosomal function in fibroblasts from heterozygous GRN muta-
tion carriers. Our findings indicate that core clinicopathological features
of NCL occur in humans with PGRN haploinsufficiency caused by het-
erozygous GRN mutations, implicating lysosomal dysfunction as a
potential disease process in GRN-associated FTD.
RESULTS
Lipofuscinosis and NCL-like storage material in retinal
neurons from Grn knockout mice
Vision loss is often the first symptom noticed by patients with some
forms of NCL, and it is accompanied by retinal atrophy and deposition
of autofluorescent lipofuscin. We reported retinal degeneration accom-
panied by electrophysiological dysfunction in Grn knockout mice (13),
which was subsequently reported by others (14). Similar to findings in
cortical neurons from Grn knockout mice and in various NCL animal
models (7), we observed NCL-like lysosomal storage material in retinal
neurons from Grn knockout mice (Fig. 1A).
Age-dependent autofluorescent lipofuscin deposition was observed
throughout the retina in Grn knockout mice, reminiscent of autofluo-
rescent lipofuscin deposits in NCL (Fig. 1, B and C). In addition, sub-
retinaldrusen-likeautofluorescentdepositswerehigherinagedGrnknockout
mice than in control animals: 16.0 + 2.7 versus 3.2 ± 1.9 deposits per
retinal cross section (n = 5, P < 0.001, mixed-model linear regression).
Pathologic retinal lipofuscinosis occurred in very young Grn knockout
mice (1.5 months of age), preceding any other functional or degenerative
phenotype in these animals (Fig. 1, C and D, and table S3) (7, 8, 13, 22, 23).
Consistent with previous evaluations of the cortex (7), we did not see
increased retinal lipofuscinosis in aged Grn +/− mice (figs. S1 and S2).
Noninvasive imaging of retinal autofluorescence is routinely per-
formedin clinical settingswith confocal scanning laserophthalmoscopy
(cSLO) and can be used to detect retinal lipofuscin deposits. To deter-
mine whether retinal lipofuscinosis secondary to PGRN deficiency can
be imaged in vivo, we used a modified cSLO to image the retina of anes-
thetized Grn knockout mice. Similar to our observations in fixed tissue,
we detected retinal lipofuscin using cSLO in Grn knockout mice (Fig. 1, E
and F). We simultaneously imaged Grn knockout mice with spectral
domain optical coherence tomography (OCT) to determine whether
individual lipofuscin deposits could be localized to specific retinal layers.
Although most autofluorescent deposits were below the resolution of
OCT in mice, we did note occasional aggregates of subretinal deposits
in Grn knockout mice, consistent with our pathological observations
(Fig. 1E, insets).
Noninvasive imaging of retinal lipofuscin in heterozygous
GRN mutation carriers by autofluorescent retinal imaging
We previously reported retinal thinning in humans with heterozygous
GRN mutations (13). We used cSLO to image retinal autofluorescence
in 11 heterozygous GRN mutation carriers and 22 age-matched and
sex-matched healthy controls (tables S1 and S2). Retinal lipofuscinosis
was seen more often in heterozygous GRN mutation carriers than in
controls (Fig. 2, A to C). Most lipofuscin deposits were not visible on
OCT scans through the same region (Fig. 2B). Occasional lipofuscin
deposits correlated with subretinal drusen-like aggregates (Fig. 2C).
Quantification of subretinal drusen revealed a trend toward increased
drusen per eye in GRN mutation carriers, but this was not statistically
significant (table S2). Heterozygous GRN mutation carriers were about
twice as likely to have retinal lipofuscin deposits than controls (Fig. 2D
and tables S1 and S3). In addition, both the average number and the
area of lipofuscin deposits were substantially greater in GRN mutation
carriers(Fig.2,EandF),includingthosewhowereclinicallyasymptomatic
(Fig. 2, E and F).
Increased storage material in postmortem cortex
of heterozygous GRN mutation carriers
We next asked whether storage material deposition also occurred in the
frontal cortex of heterozygous GRN mutation carriers, because degen-
eration of this region of the CNS causes many of the clinical symptoms
of FTD. Formalin-fixed postmortemhuman cortexsamplesfrom 15 GRN
mutation carriers, 16 nondemented control subjects, and 6 Alzheimer’s
disease (AD) subjects were imaged by EM. We noted a marked increase
in storage material accumulation in cortical neurons of GRN mutation
carriers but not AD subjects compared to nondemented controls (Fig.
2, G and H). Morphologically, the storage material found in the formalin-
fixed postmortem cortex from GRN mutation carriers resembled granular
osmiophilic deposits. Such deposits occur in a broad range of NCL sub-
types, including recessive infantile-onset forms caused by PPT1 mutations
(NCL type 1) and an adult-onset form caused by dominant mutations in
DNAJC5 (NCL type 4). Both the percentage of neurons that contained
storage material and the number of storage material deposits per neuron
were increased in heterozygous GRN mutation carriers (Fig. 2H). Storage
material was also present in microglia in heterozygous GRN mutation
carriers (fig. S3). We did not observe an increase in NCL-like storage
material in postmortem cervical spinal cord tissue from heterozygous
GRN mutation carriers, an area of the CNS that does not typically
degenerate in GRN-related neurodegeneration (fig. S4). Consistent with
the results from EM, we observed an increase in autofluorescent lipo-
fuscin deposits in the frontal cortex tissue from GRN mutation carriers
by fluorescence microscopy (Fig. 2I). Lipofuscin staining using Sudan
black showed a similar result (Fig. 2, J and K).
NCL-like storage material in lymphoblasts from
heterozygous GRN mutation carriers
The presence of intracellular storage material with characteristic ultra-
structural patterns is a defining pathological feature of NCL. Such storage
material accumulates in neurons and certain non-neuronal cells in NCL
patients. Evaluation of peripheral blood lymphocytes for storage material
is commonly performed in clinical settings when a diagnosis of NCL is
under consideration. Recently, a patient diagnosed with NCL was post-
humously found to carry a heterozygous GRN mutation (c.1477C>T
pArg493X), but neither electron micrographs nor tissue samples were
available at the time to confirm the original diagnosis (17). We obtained
lymphoblasts that had been banked from this patient and processed
them for EM to evaluate the presence or absence of NCL-like storage
material. We simultaneously evaluated lymphoblasts from a healthy in-
dividual and a patient with juvenile NCL (CLN3 homozygous ~1-kb
deletion). As expected, lymphoblasts carrying a CLN3 mutation had
numerousenlargedvacuolatedstructures,manycontainingmultilamellar
fingerprint profile patterns or onion skin-like storage material (Fig. 3A).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ward et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah5642 (2017)
12 April 2017
2 of 10
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Strikingly, lymphoblasts from the heterozygous GRN mutation carrier
had prominent vacuolated structures containing storage material that
was morphologically similar to that found in lymphoblasts carrying the
CLN3mutation.Storagematerialwaslargelyabsentinlymphoblastsfrom
a healthy control (Fig. 3A, inset)
We next asked whether NCL-like storage material also occurred in
heterozygous GRN mutation carriers lacking a clinical diagnosis of
NCL. We cultured lymphoblasts from five heterozygous GRN mutation
carriers and processed them for EM. Siblings with WT GRN alleles of
similar age served as controls. Lymphoblasts from these GRN mutation
carriers had membrane-bound multilamellar NCL-like storage material
deposits, similar in morphology to the GRN mutation carrier clinically
diagnosedwithNCL (fig. S5A). When analyzed asagroup, we saw more
storage material in lymphoblasts from GRN mutation carriers than in
those from controls (Fig. 3B). When analyzed as matched sibling pairs,
three of the GRN mutation carriers had lymphoblasts with more storage
materialthan theircontrolsiblings(fig. S5, B andC). A similar but less pro-
nounced difference was observed in the other two pairs (fig. S5, B and C).
Reduced NCL-like storage material in lymphoblasts
from GRN mutation carriers treated with
PGRN-expressing retrovirus
WenextdeterminedwhethertheNCL-likestorage materialphenotype in
lymphoblastsfromGRNmutationcarrierscouldberescuedbyincreasing
Fig. 1. Retinal NCL-like storage material and lipofuscinosis in Grn knockout mice. (A) Representative EM images of retinal ganglion cell layer (GCL) neurons from 18-month-old
wild-type (WT) andGrn knockout (Grn KO) mice. Note the characteristic fingerprint profile patterns of NCL-like storage material (GrnKO, inset). (B)Representative retinal cross section from
24-month-oldGrnKOmiceshowingautofluorescentlipofuscinthroughouttheretina.EspeciallyprominentlipofuscinosisoccursintheGCL,innernuclearlayer(INL),deeplayersoftheinner
plexiform layer (IPL), outer plexiform layer (OPL), and outer nuclear layer (ONL). Additionally, subretinal drusen-like autofluorescent aggregates occurred in Grn KO mice (white arrow). DAPI,
4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole;IS,innersegment;OS,outersegment.(C)Representativelipofuscindeposits(redpuncta)inretinalwholemountsfromagingWTandGrnKOmice.(D)Quantification
of lipofuscin deposits from (C) n = 4 to 26 mice per age per genotype. ***P < 0.001, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey’s post hoc test. (E) Representative images of retinal
lipofuscin in Grn KO mice imaged in vivo using cSLO. Green lines overlaid on cSLO images indicate the location of cross-sectional OCT scans. Occasional subretinal drusen-like deposits
were observed in Grn KO mice (insets 1 and 2, red arrow), but most autofluorescent puncta were below the limit of detection of OCT cross-sectional scans through the same area (insets 3
and 4). (F) Quantification of in vivo imaging of retinal lipofuscin from (E). n = 11 to 12 eyes from six mice per genotype. ***P < 0.001, mixed-effect multivariate linear regression model.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ward et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah5642 (2017)
12 April 2017
3 of 10
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 PGRN expression in these cells. A PGRN-expressing retrovirus was used
to transduce lymphoblasts carrying the GRNV200GfsX18 mutation to in-
crease PGRN expression to WT levels or higher (Fig. 3, C and D, and
table S3). The NCL-like storage material was reduced in GRNV200GfsX18
lymphoblasts infected with PGRN-expressing retrovirus compared to
control cells transduced with an empty retrovirus (Fig. 3, E to G).
Fig. 2. Autofluorescent NCL-like
storagematerialintheCNSofhumans
with heterozygous GRN mutations.
(A to C) In vivo imaging of retinal lipo-
fuscinosis in humans with GRN haploin-
sufficiency. Representative images of
cSLO autofluorescent retinal imaging of
one control subject (Ctrl) and two GRN
mutation carriers (GRN mt) are shown.
OCTcross-sectionalscans(greendashed
lines) are shown below the autofluores-
cent images. Lipofuscin deposits (insets)
occurred more frequently in GRN muta-
tion carriers than in control subjects. Most
lipofuscin deposits did not correlate
with detectable abnormalities in OCT
cross-sectional scans (B), although some
correlated with subretinal drusen-like
material (C, red arrows). Scale bars,
1 mm. (D to F) Blinded quantification
of retinal autofluorescence images ob-
tained by cSLO. Data are grouped by all
GRN mutation subjects versus all controls
(n = 11 and 22), presymptomatic GRN
mutation subjects versus matched
controls(n=8and16),andsymptomatic
GRN mutation subjects versus matched
controls (n = 3 and 6). (D) Heterozygous
GRN mutation carriers were more likely
than controls to have retinal lipofuscin
deposits; P = 0.027, Fisher’s exact test.
Asymptomatic and symptomatic GRN
mutation carriers also were more fre-
quently found to have retinal lipofuscin
deposits, although the difference was
notsignificant.P=0.18and0.46,respec-
tively, Fisher’s exact test. The number of
affected subjects is shown inside the
bars. *P < 0.05. (E) Quantification of the
total number of retinal lipofuscin de-
posits per subject. Heterozygous GRN
mutation carriers had more lipofuscin
depositsthandidcontrols,includingsub-
groups of asymptomatic and sympto-
matic GRN mutation carriers. *P <0.05,
***P < 0.001, Mann-Whitney U test.
(F) Quantification of the total area of
retinal lipofuscin deposits per subject.
Heterozygous GRN mutation carriers had a greater total area of lipofuscin deposits than did controls, including a subgroup of asymptomatic GRN mutation carriers. **P < 0.01,
Mann-Whitney U test. N.S., not significant. (G) Increased accumulation of electron-dense storage material in postmortem cortical tissue from heterozygous GRN mutation
carriers. Shown are representative electron micrographs of formalin-fixed frontal cortex from control and heterozygous GRN mutation carriers. Note the presence of granular
osmiophilic deposit–like storage material in neurons in cortical tissue from GRN mutation carriers (insets, yellow arrow), which was rarely observed in control cortical neurons.
(H) Quantification of electron-dense storage material seen in (G). The percentage of neurons that contained such storage material and the number of deposits per neuron are
shown. n = 4 to 26 neurons from 15 GRN mutation carriers, 16 control subjects, and 6 AD subjects. Percentage of neurons: ***P < 0.001, one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s
multiple comparison test; number of deposits per cell: **P < 0.001, mixed model linear regression. (I) Increased autofluorescent lipofuscin aggregates in postmortem cortical
tissue from heterozygous GRN mutation carriers. n = 6 to 30 fields of view from nine GRN mutation carriers and nine controls; **P = 0.009, mixed-model linear regression.
(J) Representative bright-field images of frontal cortex showing an increase in Sudan black–stained lipofuscin in postmortem cortical tissue from a heterozygous GRN mutation
carrier versus control. (K)Quantification of Sudan black staining seen in (J). The number of lipofuscin deposits per field of view is shown. n = 10 GRN mutation carriers and 14 control
subjects; ****P < 0.0001, Student’s t test. Means ± SEM are shown in (E), (F), (H), (I), and (K).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ward et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah5642 (2017)
12 April 2017
4 of 10
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 3. GRN haploinsufficiency results in NCL-like storage material in lymphoblasts. (A) NCL-like storage material accumulates in lymphoblasts from a heterozygous GRN
mutation carrier who clinically presented with NCL symptoms. Representative images of lymphoblasts from a healthy non–mutation-carrying control subject, an NCL patient
(homozygous CLN3 mutation carrier), and a heterozygous GRN mutation carrier are shown. Note the similar ultrastructural patterns of the storage material observed in the CLN3
mutation carrier and the GRN mutation carrier, consisting of prominent vacuolated structures containing storage material with a fingerprint profile pattern (insets). (B) Quanti-
fication of NCL-like storage material in lymphoblasts from heterozygous GRN mutation carriers without clinical evidence of NCL versus noncarrier sibling controls. Five paired sets
of lymphoblasts from control and heterozygous GRN mutation siblings were imaged with EM, and the number of vacuoles with storage material per cell and cross-sectional area
occupied by storage material containing vacuoles was quantified in a blinded manner. n = 19 to 38 cells per subject from five pairs of GRN mutation carrier and control subjects;
***P < 0.001 via mixed-effect multivariate linear regression model. (C to G) Restoring normal PGRN expression in lymphoblasts from heterozygous GRN mutation carriers rescued
the NCL-like storage material phenotype. (C) Western blot of intracellular PGRN and tubulin showing reduced expression of PGRN in heterozygous GRNExon 8 (IVS7-1g) mutation
carrier lymphoblasts, which was rescued by treatment with a PGRN-expressing retrovirus. Control (empty vector) retrovirus did not alter PGRN expression. GRNExon 8 (IVS7-1g)
mutation carrier lymphoblasts transduced with the PGRN-retrovirus that expressed PGRN at two different levels (endogenous, +; high, ++) were used for EM analysis. (D) Quan-
tification of PGRN expression (normalized totubulin). n = 3 wells per group; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, one-way ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple comparison test. (E) Representative electron
micrographs of heterozygous GRNExon 8 (IVS7-1g) mutation carrier lymphoblasts transduced with control (empty vector) or huPGRN retrovirus expressing PGRN at an endogenous
level. Lymphoblasts transduced with PGRN-expressing retrovirus had less storage material than did those that were treated with empty vector (insets). (F and G) Quantification of
the number of vacuoles with storage material per lymphoblast (F) or total cross-sectional area of storage material per lymphoblast (G) in lymphoblasts transduced with control or
PGRN-expressing retrovirus. n = 45 to 65 cells per group, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, one-way ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple comparison test. Means ± SEM are shown (B, D, F, and G).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ward et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah5642 (2017)
12 April 2017
5 of 10
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Impaired lysosomal function in fibroblasts from
heterozygous GRN mutation carriers
In NCL, lipofuscin accumulation is thought to be the pathological con-
sequence of dysfunctional lysosomal proteolysis. We directly assessed
lysosomal protease activity in human fibroblasts from heterozygous
GRN mutation carriers and control siblings. We measured the activity
of cysteine cathepsin proteases in living patient fibroblasts using a
quenched fluorescent activity–based probe (24) and found that cathepsin
activity in fibroblasts from GRN mutation carriers was reduced by ~40%
compared to that in fibroblasts from control siblings (Fig. 4, A and B,
fig. S6A, and table S3). We also saw reduced cathepsin D activity in fibro-
blast lysates from GRN mutation carriers (Fig. 4C and fig. S6B).
DISCUSSION
Our study shows that FTD caused by PGRN haploinsufficiency shares
several fundamental clinicopathological features with NCL. Similar to
other areas of the CNS, lipofuscin deposits formed in the retina in Grn
knockout mice in a panretinal pattern similar to that seen in human
NCL. Retinal lipofuscin deposition was an early phenotype in these
mice, preceding neuron loss, and could be imaged in vivo. Retinal lipo-
fuscin deposits also occurred in humans with heterozygous GRN muta-
tions, including cognitively normal individuals, and could be detected
with imaging technology used in clinical settings. Autofluorescent
NCL-like storage material was present in the frontal cortex of human
subjects with heterozygous GRN mutations. EM analysis of lympho-
blasts from heterozygous GRN mutation carriers revealed the presence
ofNCL-likestoragematerial,regardlessofwhethertheirclinicalsyndrome
hadNCL-likefeatures.TransductionoflymphoblastsfromGRNmutation
carriers with PGRN-expressing retrovirus reduced storage material accu-
mulation. Finally, lysosomal protease activity was impaired in fibroblasts
from heterozygous GRN mutation carriers.
Whereas patients with homozygous GRN mutations have a clinical
syndrome that closely resembles NCL, those with heterozygous GRN
mutations usually present with FTD. Because the primary symptoms
and pathological features of FTD and NCL are distinct, homozygous
and heterozygous GRN mutations may cause neurodegeneration via di-
vergent pathophysiological processes (17). In contrast, our study pro-
vides direct evidence that core clinicopathological phenotypes of NCL
occur in heterozygous GRN mutation carriers. Vision loss and retinal
atrophy are early phenotypes in most patients with NCL. Our recent
observations of moderate retinal thinning in heterozygous GRN muta-
tion carriers, compared to nearly complete vision loss and severe retinal
atrophy in homozygous GRN mutation carriers (18), suggest a relation-
ship between GRN gene dosage and the severity of retinal involvement.
We also found that lipofuscinosis and membrane-bound storage material
deposition—pathologic hallmarks of NCL—occurred in heterozygous
GRN mutation carriers, consistent with what has been seen in homozy-
gous GRN mutation carriers. A recent finding that an NCL case caused
by a homozygousGRN mutation segregatedin afamily withneuropatho-
logically confirmed FTLD further supports the notion that PGRN-
deficient NCL and FTLD are pathophysiologically related (19).
On the basis of our findings, we propose that neurodegeneration is
driven by a common central mechanism in both homozygous and het-
erozygous GRN mutation carriers but that the specific clinicalsyndrome
is driven by GRN gene dosage. In homozygous GRN mutation carriers
with complete PGRN loss, disease onset is in early adulthood and NCL
symptoms predominate. In heterozygous GRN mutation carriers with
partial PGRN loss, subclinical NCL features (such as retinal thinning)
are present,but diseaseonset isinlateadulthoodandcognitivesymptoms
predominate. Additional subclinical features could also occur in hetero-
zygous GRN mutation carriers that would require further investigation to
detect. For example, although motor seizures are not commonly reported
in GRN-associated FTD, prolonged electroencephalography might reveal
subclinical epileptiform activity, similar to that seen in subjects with AD
Fig. 4. Impaired lysosomal protease activity in primary cells from heterozygous
GRN mutation carriers. (A) Representative images of fluorescence after staining with
BMV109 (red), a cell-permeable probe for active cysteine cathepsin proteases, in HDFs
from heterozygous GRN mutation carrier and control siblings (blue, DAPI nuclear stain).
(B) Quantification of BMV109 fluorescence in heterozygous GRN mutation carrier and
control HDFs. n = 6 wells imaged per HDF line from three pairs of GRN mutation carrier
and matchedsibling controls; ****P < 0.0001viamixed-effectmultivariatelinear regres-
sion model. AU, arbitrary units. (C) Cathepsin D enzyme activity in HDF lysates from
heterozygous GRN mutation carrier and control sibling pairs. n = 10 assays per HDF
line from three pairs of GRN mutation carrier and matched sibling controls; ****P <
0.0001 via mixed-effect multivariate linear regression. Mean enzyme activity, normalized
to matched sibling control lines, ±SEM is shown (B and C).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ward et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah5642 (2017)
12 April 2017
6 of 10
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 (25). Other symptoms seen in homozygous GRN carriers, such as cer-
ebellar dysfunction, have not been documented in heterozygous GRN
mutation carriers. One possible explanation is that such symptoms can
be notoriously difficult to detect in clinical settings when they are subtle
and difficult to localize, for example, behavioral manifestations of cere-
bellar dysfunction. Also, potential cerebellar pathology is not always as-
sessed in these cases at autopsy. It will therefore be of interest to
determine whether structural changes to the cerebellum occur in these
individuals, for example, through assessment of cerebellar volume loss or
changes in neural tracts as evidence of disruption of normal cerebellar
input/output. It remains unclear why heterozygous PGRN-deficient
mice failed to exhibit NCL-like pathology, despite striking NCL-like pa-
thology in Grn knockout mice. It is possible that mice do not live long
enough to develop such pathology or that additional genetic modi-
fiersarerequiredforNCL-likepathologytoemerge,forexample,disease-
related TMEM106b polymorphisms.
Notably, we observed NCL-like storage material in a heterozygous
GRN mutation carrier who presented with symptoms compatible with
late-stage NCL, for example, limb dystonia, gait abnormalities, and
spasticity at the age of 46. Because whole-genome sequencing is more
broadly used to assist in the diagnosis of unusual neurological cases, ad-
ditional atypical clinical presentations of heterozygous GRN mutation
carriers may be discovered. Alternatively, this subject may have had ad-
ditional partial loss-of-function sequence variants in NCL-related genes
that pushed their clinical syndrome toward an NCL-like phenotype.
PGRN has been reported to regulate a diverse range of cellular func-
tions, including cell proliferation, cell survival, tumor invasion, protein
turnover, inflammation, and synaptic plasticity, and more recently,
lysosomal function. It has been unclear which of these functions is di-
rectly regulated by PGRN, and numerous mechanisms have been pro-
posed to explain how partial PGRN loss causesFTD. PGRN is asecreted
glycoprotein and, in neurons, localizes predominantly to endolysosomes
(26). It binds directly to sortilin, a transmembrane receptor involved in
receptor scavenging and protein trafficking from the Golgi to the lyso-
somes (26). In addition, mutations in the TMEM106b gene markedly
influence the age of onset of FTD in heterozygous GRN mutation carriers
(27, 28). TMEM106b localizes to endolysosomes and may regulate
vesicular transport (29). On the basis of our observations of NCL-like
phenotypes in heterozygous GRN mutation carriers, we propose that
endolysosomaldysregulationisapotentialcentralmechanismunderlying
neurodegeneration in humans with PGRN-deficient FTD.
Because nearly all heterozygous GRN mutations cause FTD through
loss of PGRN expression, it has been speculated that increasing PGRN
in GRN mutation carriers using therapeutic interventions should alter
disease progression. However, one significant challenge in the develop-
ment of effective therapeutics in FTD has been a lack of markers to
monitor relevant pathophysiological processes. We found that PGRN-
deficient lymphoblasts had increased NCL-like storage material and that
increasing PGRN in these cells could rescue this phenotype, supporting a
possible causalroleof PGRN deficiencyin endolysosomaldysfunction. It
is largely accepted that the pathological accumulation of lipofuscin in
NCL indicates ongoing endolysosomal dysfunction, but future studies
are needed to clarify whether lipofuscin accumulation itself is pathogenic.
Our study further suggests that autofluorescent retinal imaging may
have potential utility for GRN mutation carriers. Longitudinal auto-
fluorescent retinal imaging could be an inexpensive, rapid, and non-
invasive means of monitoring lipofuscinosis in the CNS, especially
when paired with OCT analysis of retinal tissue loss in GRN mutation
carriers. Future proof-of-concept studies in Grn knockout mice using
serial in vivo retinal imaging could inform whether normalization of
PGRN expression clears existing lipofuscin, slows future lipofuscin accu-
mulation, and prevents retinal neuronal loss. Adaptation of OCT acqui-
sition protocols may also permit the detection of abnormalities other
than the subretinal deposits identified here.
It is important to note the limitations associated with this study. We
found that PGRN-deficient lymphoblasts had increased NCL-like
storage material and that increasing PGRN in these cells could rescue
this phenotype. However, EM analysis of NCL-like storage material in
lymphoblasts is too labor-intensive to be used in the clinic. It remains to
be established whether other assays of impaired lysosome function in
PGRN-deficient lymphoblasts could be used to measure disease pro-
gression or efficacy of potential treatments. We observed a robust
difference in lipofuscin deposition in the retina and CNS of a single co-
hort of GRN mutation carriers compared to healthy controls. However,
given their lack of specificity, these differences would not be sufficient
for identification of presymptomatic individuals without an additional
risk assessment, that is, genetics or family history. Replication of our
findings in an independent cohort of GRN mutation carriers would re-
inforce our conclusions.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
The overall aim of the study was to determine whether cells and tissue
from heterozygous GRN mutation carriers exhibited evidence of NCL-
like accumulation of lysosomal storage material and lysosomal dys-
function. The objective of the first portion of the study was to determine
whether NCL-like storage material occurred in Grn knockout mice
using EM, histology, and live imaging techniques. The objective of the
second portion of the study was to determine whether NCL-like storage
material was present in the CNS of heterozygous GRN mutation carriers
using retinal imaging of living subjects and analysis of postmortem hu-
man cortical tissue by EM. Subjects with heterozygous GRN mutations
and age-matched and sex-matched control subjects without known
neurological diseases were enrolled in the study through the University
of California, San Francisco (UCSF) Memory and Aging Center in 2011–
2014 as part of a larger study to evaluate retinal manifestations of neuro-
degenerative diseases. Predefined exclusion criteria included a history of
ophthalmologic disease, including glaucoma, age-related macular de-
generation (AMD), diabetic retinopathy, and ocular surgery (except cata-
ractsurgery).One GRN mutation carrier hadAMD(dry) andwasexcluded
from the analysis; the remainder did not have any of the above exclusion
criteria. GRN mutation carriers also underwent a standardized neuro-
logical evaluation by a board-certified neurologist with fellowship
training in behavioral neurology. Clinical disease rating (CDR) scores
were assigned to each subject on the basis of the result of this evaluation.
For the purposes of this study, subjects were classified as asymptomatic
(CDR = 0) or symptomatic (CDR > 0). Written informed consent was
obtained from all participants with capacity. In those unable to provide
informed consent because of diminished capacity, assent was obtained
from the participant and written consent was obtained from a designated
surrogate decision-maker. The study protocol wasapproved by the UCSF
Committee on Human Research [IRB (Institutional Review Board) #11-
05333]. The objective of the third portion of the study was to evaluate
primary cells from heterozygous GRN mutation carriers for evidence of
lysosomal dysfunction using EM analysis of storage material accumula-
tionandfunctionalreadoutsoflysosomalhydrolaseactivity.Alldatawere
included (there was no outlier exclusion).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ward et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah5642 (2017)
12 April 2017
7 of 10
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Lymphoblast analysis
Epstein-Barr virus–transformed lymphocytes from deidentified human
subjects were grown in RPMI + 10% fetal calf serum + 1% penicillin/
streptomycin. Equal numbers of cells from each line were seeded into
10 ml of medium in T75 tissue culture flasks, and medium was doubled
in volume each time cells reached saturation (determined by medium
pH)untilthe totalvolume was40ml. Cellswereagainallowedtoexpand
until saturation density and were then pelleted and gently resuspended
in ice-cold EM fixative [2.5% glutaraldehyde, 2% paraformaldehyde,
and 0.025% calcium chloride, in a 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer
(pH7.4)]. Aftera 15-min incubation infixative onice, cellswere repelleted
at 5000 rpm in a swinging-bucket rotor centrifuge for 10 min at 4°C.
The fixative was removed, and fresh fixative was gently layered on
top of the cell pellet. Samples were centrifuged again at 5000 rpm for
10 min at 4°C and then processed further for EM.
Retroviral transduction of lymphoblasts
Untagged human progranulin was cloned into a murine stem cell virus
(MSCV) backbone vector that coexpressed mRuby as a fluorescent
marker, with an empty vector serving as a control. 293T cells were co-
transfected with the MSCV vector and pCL-Ampho via Lipofectamine
2000, and viral supernatant was collected 2 days later and filtered
through a 0.45-mm filter. GRN mutation lymphoblasts were resuspended
in empty vector or PGRN-expressing retroviral supernatant and
monitoredforexpression viafluorescencemicroscopy.PGRN-expressing
cells were sorted into two groups by fluorescence-activated cell sorting:
“high PGRN-expressing” cells were the brightest 5% of cells sorted,
and “low PGRN-expressing” cells were the remaining mRuby-positive
cells. These groups were then expanded in parallel as described above
and processed for EM.
Electron microscopy
Lymphoblast pellets were generated as described above, mouse retinal
tissue was fixed directly after harvest in EM fixative. Formalin-fixed
postmortem human cortex was postfixed in EM fixative before further
processing. For lymphoblasts and retinal tissue, subsequent processing
was performed in a Leica Lynx automatic tissue processor. Briefly, the
tissue was postfixed in osmium tetroxide, stained en bloc with uranyl
acetate,dehydratedingradedethanolsolutions,infiltratedwithpropylene
oxide/Epon mixtures, embedded in pure Epon, and polymerized
overnight at 60°C. One-micrometer sections were cut, stained with tolui-
dine blue, and examined by light microscopy. Representative areas were
chosen for electron microscopic study, and the Epon blocks were trimmed
accordingly. Thin sections were cut with an LKB 8801 ultramicrotome and
diamondknife,stainedwithleadcitrate,andexaminedinanFEI Morgagni
transmission electron microscope.
Quantification of lymphoblast storage material
EM images were blindly acquired by an experienced EM technologist,
who, to reduce the chance of bias, was instructed to take whole-cell images
at ×1200 magnification of the first 20 to 30 cells encountered during im-
aging, in which the nucleus was bisected at the plane of section. Blinded
quantification of lymphocyte storage material was then carried out. The
total number of vacuoles per lymphocyte with NCL-like storage material
(defined by the presence of multilamellar, fingerprint profile storage
material or the granular osmiophilic deposit profile storage material)
was determined. Simultaneously, regions of interest around each vacuole
containing storage material were traced, and the summed area of storage
material–containing vacuoles per lymphocyte was determined.
Quantification of cathepsin activity (fluorescent-based and
cathepsin D activity assay)
Human-derived fibroblasts (HDFs) were passaged into 10- or 15-cm
tissue culture–treated culture dishes, allowed to expand to confluency,
and cultured in 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS)/Dulbecco’s modified
Eagle’s medium (DMEM) for 1 month. For experiments, 0.25% trypsin-
EDTA solution was used to dissociate cells, and the cells were plated in
100-ml aliquots to a density of 2000 cells per well in TPP 96-well tissue
culture plates. After adhesion of cells for 24 hours, the medium was
removed from wells, and a probe, BMV109, was added to each well
(0.25 mM BMV109 in 100 ml of FBS/DMEM). The probe was incubated
with cells for 2 hours, after which point the probe-containing medium
was removed, and wells were washed with nonfluorescent DMEM three
times. Cells were incubated with Hoechst stain (1.6 mM) in nonfluores-
cent DMEM. The plates were imaged at ×10 magnification on Cellomics
ArrayScan, with an exposure of 1 s. Two channels were used for imaging:
386 nm for nuclear stain and 650 nm for BMV109. The signal was quan-
tified after imaging with Cellomics software using Cell Health Profiling.
Wells with no probe were used as blanks. For cathepsin D activity assays,
a fluorometric cathepsin D assay kit was used (BioVision). Briefly, HDFs
were lysed with CD lysis buffer, incubated on ice for 10 min, and clarified
via centrifugation at 16,000g for 5 min, and total protein levels were nor-
malized across samples. Lysates were added to the master assay mix,
mixed, and incubated for 1 hour at 37°C. Fluorescence was read on a flu-
orescent plate reader (excitation, 328 nm; emission, 460 nm).
In vivo retinal imaging in mice
All animals were maintained in full-barrier facilities free of specific
pathogens on a 12-hour light/dark cycle with food and water ad libitum.
Experimentswere conductedin compliance withtheARVO (Association
for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology) Statement for the Use of
Animals in Ophthalmic and Visual Research, and all protocols were
approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the
UniversityofCalifornia,SanFrancisco(#AN087501-02A).Grnknockout
mice were fully backcrossed into C57BL/6J, and WT mice of the same
genetic background served as controls. Mice were anesthetized with a
steady flow of 1.5 to 3% isofluorane, eyes were anesthetized with propa-
caine, dilated with 1% tropicamide and 2.5% phenylephrine, and corneas
were kept moist with 2.5% methylcellulose. A contact lens was placed over
the mouse eye to improve the optics of the system. Retinal images were
taken with a modified confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscope/OCT
device (Heidelberg Spectralis, Heidelberg Engineering). After assuring
centered beam placement by infrared cSLO and 90° position of the retina
to the beam in the vertical and horizontal planes by OCT, autofluorescent
retinal images were then taken at 457-nm excitation and 500-nm long-
pass filter detection using TruTrack eye-tracking software, averaging
at least 80 frames for each image, followed by OCT volume scans (100
automatic real-time, high resolution) through selected areas of interest.
Retinal lipofuscin quantification in mice
Eyes were enucleated and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde overnight.
Retinas were dissected out and mounted between slides and coverslips
in a whole-mount configuration. Five separate fields of view, equally
spaced around the perimeter of the retina, were imaged in each retina,
located about 500 mm from the peripheral edge of the retina. Full-thickness
confocal images were obtained at 2-mm step sizes using a Nikon Spinning
Disk confocal microscope in the green fluorescent protein channel to
image autofluorescent lipofuscin deposits. Individual lipofuscin de-
posits were marked with the cell counter feature by a blinded technician,
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ward et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah5642 (2017)
12 April 2017
8 of 10
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 and the total number of lipofuscin deposits per z-stack was quantified.
The average number of lipofuscin deposits per z-stack across all five
fields of view was determined for each mouse.
Human retinal imaging
After pupillary dilation with 1% tropicamide ophthalmic solutions
(Akorn), study participants underwent retinal autofluorescence imaging
with a cSLO and OCT (Heidelberg Spectralis). cSLO imaging was per-
formed using the standard autofluorescence settings of the device using
TruTrack eye-tracking software, averaging at least 80 frames for each
image. Trained technologists who were blinded to the mutation status
acquired the images using standardized illumination and gain settings.
Image quality was assessed by a blinded neuro-ophthalmologist, and only
eyes with in-focus retinal images of sufficient quality to assess for the pres-
ence or absence of lipofuscin were analyzed further. Blinded quantifica-
tion of retinal lipofuscin was performed jointly by a neuro-ophthalmologist
(A.J.G.) and behavioral neurologist (M.E.W.). For each eye, the number of
individual lipofuscin deposits was counted, and regions of interest were
drawn around each lipofuscin deposit. The total number of lipofuscin
deposits and the summed area of lipofuscin deposits were then cal-
culated for each eye.
Quantification of lipofuscin in postmortem human
cortical tissue
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded, deidentified postmortem human
frontal cortex and cervical spinal cord from heterozygous GRN mutation
carriers, AD subjects, and age-similar and sex-similar control subjects
without a clinical or pathological diagnosis of neurodegenerative disease
wereobtainedfromtheUniversity of BritishColumbia,the UCSFNeuro-
degenerative Disease Brain Bank, and Northwestern University. The
work was deemed not human-subjects research per UCSF Committee
onHumanResearchguidelines.7.5-mm-thicksectionswerecut,dewaxed,
and counterstained with DAPI (4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole). Auto-
fluorescence imaging of lipofuscin and imaging of Sudan black–stained
sections was performed by a blinded technician using a 20× objective
and Cy5 filter set and bright field. Six to 30 nonoverlapping fields of
view of superficial cortex were imaged, and regions of interest were
drawn around lipofuscin deposits viaan automated algorithm (Volocity
software).Thetotalareaofcortexoccupiedbylipofuscindepositswasthen
calculated for each field of view. For EM analysis of storage material from
postmortem human cortex, formalin-fixed cortex was post-fixed in EM
fixative and processed for EM analysis, as above. Quantification of the
percentage of neurons with lysosomal storage deposits and number of
lysosomal storage deposits per cell was performed blindly.
Statistics
We used unpaired two-tailed t tests for normally distributed data and
Mann-Whitney U tests for nonparametric data in experiments in which
two comparison groups were involved. In experiments in which more
than two comparison groups were involved, we used an ANOVA test
with post hoc testing. A mixed-effects multivariable linear regression
analysis, when used, accounted for intramouse and intraindividual var-
iability. Statistical testing was performed using Stata 12.0 and Prism 6.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/9/385/eaah5642/DC1
Fig. S1. Increased lipofuscin in retinas from aged Grn−/− but not Grn+/− mice.
Fig. S2. Increased subunit C deposition in retinas of Grn−/− mice.
Fig. S3. Progranulin-deficient microglia accumulate NCL-like lysosomal storage material.
Fig. S4. EM analysis of postmortem spinal cord from control subjects and heterozygous GRN
mutation carriers.
Fig. S5. Increased NCL-like storage material in lymphoblasts from heterozygous GRN mutation
carriers versus sibling controls.
Fig. S6. Reduced cysteine cathepsin protease activity and cathepsin D activity in HDFs from
heterozygous GRN mutation carriers versus sibling controls.
Table S1. Patient characteristics and quantification of human retinal autofluorescence imaging.
Table S2. Patient characteristics and quantification of human OCT macular cross-sectional
scans.
Table S3. Data values for small sample sizes.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. E. D. Roberson, Frontotemporal dementia. Curr. Neurol. Neurosci. Rep. 6, 481–489
(2006).
2. M. Baker, I. R. Mackenzie, S. M. Pickering-Brown, J. Gass, R. Rademakers, C. Lindholm,
J. Snowden, J. Adamson, A. D. Sadovnick, S. Rollinson, A. Cannon, E. Dwosh, D. Neary,
S. Melquist, A. Richardson, D. Dickson, Z. Berger, J. Eriksen, T. Robinson, C. Zehr,
C. A. Dickey, R. Crook, E. Mcgowan, D. Mann, B. Boeve, H. Feldman, M. Hutton,
Mutations in progranulin cause tau-negative frontotemporal dementia linked to
chromosome 17. Nature 442, 916–919 (2006).
3. J. Xu, M. Xilouri, J. Bruban, J. Shioi, Z. Shao, I. Papazoglou, K. Vekrellis, N. K. Robakis,
Extracellular progranulin protects cortical neurons from toxic insults by activating
survival signaling. Neurobiol. Aging 32, 2326.e5–2326.e16 (2011).
4. C. L. Ryan, D. C. Baranowski, B. P. Chitramuthu, S. Malik, Z. Li, M. Cao, S. Minotti,
H. D. Durham, D. G. Kay, C. A. Shaw, H. P. J. Bennett, A. Bateman, Progranulin is
expressed within motor neurons and promotes neuronal cell survival. BMC Neurosci.
10, 130 (2009).
5. P. Van Damme, A. Van Hoecke, D. Lambrechts, P. Vanacker, E. Bogaert, J. Van Swieten,
P. Carmeliet, L. Van Den Bosch, W. Robberecht, Progranulin functions as a
neurotrophic factor to regulate neurite outgrowth and enhance neuronal survival.
J. Cell Biol. 181, 37–41 (2008).
6. J. Gass, W. C. Lee, C. Cook, N. Finch, C. Stetler, K. Jansen-West, J. Lewis, C. D. Link,
R. Rademakers, A. Nykjaer, L. Petrucelli, Progranulin regulates neuronal outgrowth
independent of Sortilin. Mol. Neurodegener. 7, 33 (2012).
7. Z. Ahmed, H. Sheng, Y.-F. Xu, W.-L. Lin, A. E. Innes, J. Gass, X. Yu, H. Hou, S. Chiba,
K. Yamanouchi, M. Leissring, L. Petrucelli, M. Nishihara, M. L. Hutton, E. Mcgowan,
D. W. Dickson, J. Lewis, Accelerated lipofuscinosis and ubiquitination in granulin
knockout mice suggest a role for progranulin in successful aging. Am. J. Pathol. 177,
311–324 (2010).
8. L. H. Martens, J. Zhang, S. J. Barmada, P. Zhou, S. Kamiya, B. Sun, S.-W. Min, L. Gan,
S. Finkbeiner, E. J. Huang, R. V. Farese Jr., Progranulin deficiency promotes
neuroinflammation and neuron loss following toxin-induced injury. J. Clin. Invest. 122,
3955–3959 (2012).
9. A. S. Laird, A. Van Hoecke, L. De Muynck, M. Timmers, L. Van Den Bosch,
P. Van Damme, W. Robberecht, Progranulin is neurotrophic in vivo and protects
against a mutant TDP-43 induced axonopathy. PLOS ONE 5, e13368 (2010).
10. F. Yin, R. Banerjee, B. Thomas, P. Zhou, L. Qian, T. Jia, X. Ma, Y. Ma, C. Iadecola, M. F. Beal,
C. Nathan, A. Ding, Exaggerated inflammation, impaired host defense, and
neuropathology in progranulin-deficient mice. J. Exp. Med. 207, 117–128 (2010).
11. B. Cenik, C. F. Sephton, B. Kutluk Cenik, J. Herz, G. Yu, Progranulin: A proteolytically
processed protein at the crossroads of inflammation and neurodegeneration. J. Biol.
Chem. 287, 32298–32306 (2012).
12. M. E. Ward, B. L. Miller, Potential mechanisms of progranulin-deficient FTLD. J. Mol.
Neurosci. 45, 574–582 (2011).
13. M. E. Ward, A. Taubes, R. Chen, B. L. Miller, C. F. Sephton, J. M. Gelfand, S. Minami,
J. Boscardin, L. H. Martens, W. W. Seeley, G. Yu, J. Herz, A. J. Filiano, A. E. Arrant,
E. D. Roberson, T. W. Kraft, R. V. Farese, A. Green, L. Gan, Early retinal
neurodegeneration and impaired Ran-mediated nuclear import of TDP-43 in
progranulin-deficient FTLD. J. Exp. Med. 211, 1937–1945 (2014).
14. B. P. Hafler, Z. A. Klein, Z. Jimmy Zhou, S. M. Strittmatter, Progressive retinal degeneration
and accumulation of autofluorescent lipopigments in Progranulin deficient mice. Brain
Res. 1588, 168–174 (2014).
15. A. J. Filiano, L. H. Martens, A. H. Young, B. A. Warmus, P. Zhou, G. Diaz-Ramirez, J. Jiao,
Z. Zhang, E. J. Huang, F.-B. Gao, R. V. Farese, E. D. Roberson, Dissociation of
frontotemporal dementia–related deficits and neuroinflammation in progranulin
haploinsufficient mice. J. Neurosci. 33, 5352–5361 (2013).
16. T. Petkau, S. Neal, A. Milnerwood, A. Mew, Synaptic dysfunction in progranulin-deficient
mice. Neurobiol. Dis. 72, 711–722 (2011).
17. K. R. Smith, J. Damiano, S. Franceschetti, S. Carpenter, L. Canafoglia, M. Morbin, G. Rossi,
D. Pareyson, S. E. Mole, J. F. Staropoli, K. B. Sims, J. Lewis, W.-L. Lin, D. W. Dickson,
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ward et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah5642 (2017)
12 April 2017
9 of 10
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 H.-H. Dahl, M. Bahlo, S. F. Berkovic, Strikingly different clinicopathological phenotypes
determined by progranulin-mutation dosage. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 90, 1102–1107
(2012).
18. L. Canafoglia, M. Morbin, V. Scaioli, D. Pareyson, L. D’Incerti, V. Fugnanesi, F. Tagliavini,
S. F. Berkovic, S. Franceschetti, Recurrent generalized seizures, visual loss, and palinopsia
as phenotypic features of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis due to progranulin gene
mutation. Epilepsia 55, e56–e59 (2014).
19. M. R. Almeida, M. C. Macário, L. Ramos, I. Baldeiras, M. H. Ribeiro, I. Santana,
Portuguese family with the co-occurrence of frontotemporal lobar degeneration and
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis phenotypes due to progranulin gene mutation.
Neurobiol. Aging 41, 200.e1–200.e5 (2016).
20. A. Jalanko, T. Braulke, Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1793,
697–709 (2009).
21. G. W. Anderson, H. H. Goebel, A. Simonati, Human pathology in NCL. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1832, 1807–1826 (2013).
22. F. Yin, M. Dumont, R. Banerjee, Y. Ma, H. Li, M. T. Lin, M. F. Beal, C. Nathan,
B. Thomas, A. Ding, Behavioral deficits and progressive neuropathology in
progranulin-deficient mice: A mouse model of frontotemporal dementia. FASEB J. 24,
4639–4647 (2010).
23. H. Lui, J. Zhang, S. R. Makinson, M. K. Cahill, K. W. Kelley, H.-Y. Huang, Y. Shang,
M. C. Oldham, L. H. Martens, F. Gao, G. Coppola, S. A. Sloan, C. L. Hsieh, C. C. Kim,
E. H. Bigio, S. Weintraub, M.-M. Mesulam, R. Rademakers, I. R. Mackenzie, W. W. Seeley,
A. Karydas, B. L. Miller, B. Borroni, R. Ghidoni, R. V. Farese Jr., J. T. Paz, Ben A Barres,
E. J. Huang, Progranulin deficiency promotes circuit-specific synaptic pruning by
microglia via complement activation. Cell 165, 921–935 (2016).
24. M. Verdoes, K. Oresic Bender, E. Segal, W. A. van der Linden, S. Syed, N. P. Withana,
L. E. Sanman, M. Bogyo, Improved quenched fluorescent probe for imaging of cysteine
cathepsin activity. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135, 14726–14730 (2013).
25. K. A. Vossel, A. J. Beagle, G. D. Rabinovici, H. Shu, S. E. Lee, G. Naasan, M. Hegde, S. B. Cornes,
M. L. Henry, A. B. Nelson, W. W. Seeley, M. D. Geschwind, M. L. Gorno-Tempini, T. Shih,
H. E. Kirsch, P. A. Garcia, B. L. Miller, L. Mucke, Seizures and epileptiform activity in the early
stages of Alzheimer disease. JAMA Neurol. 70, 1158–1166 (2013).
26. F. Hu, T. Padukkavidana, C. B. Vægter, O. A. Brady, Y. Zheng, I. R. Mackenzie,
H. H. Feldman, A. Nykjaer, S. M. Strittmatter, Sortilin-mediated endocytosis
determines levels of the frontotemporal dementia protein, progranulin. Neuron 68,
654–667 (2010).
27. C. Cruchaga, C. Graff, H.-H. Chiang, J. Wang, A. L. Hinrichs, N. Spiegel, S. Bertelsen,
K. Mayo, J. B. Norton, J. C. Morris, A. Goate, Association of TMEM106B gene
polymorphism with age at onset in granulin mutation carriers and plasma granulin
protein levels. Arch. Neurol. 68, 581–586 (2011).
28. A. M. Nicholson, N. A. Finch, A. Wojtas, M. C. Baker, R. B. Perkerson III,
M. Castanedes-Casey, L. Rousseau, L. Benussi, G. Binetti, R. Ghidoni, G.-Y. R. Hsiung,
I. R. Mackenzie, E. Finger, B. F. Boeve, N. Ertekin-Taner, N. R. Graff-Radford, D. W. Dickson,
R. Rademakers, TMEM106B p.T185S regulates TMEM106B protein levels: Implications for
frontotemporal dementia. J. Neurochem. 126, 781–791 (2013).
29. B. M. Schwenk, C. M. Lang, S. Hogl, S. Tahirovic, D. Orozco, K. Rentzsch,
S. F. Lichtenthaler, C. C. Hoogenraad, A. Capell, C. Haass, D. Edbauer, The FTLD risk
factor TMEM106B and MAP6 control dendritic trafficking of lysosomes. EMBO J. 33,
450–467 (2013).
Acknowledgments: We thank J. Herz, L. Mitic, and R. Pearlman for their helpful feedback
and A. Karydas for assistance in genetic testing of study participants and for help in
obtaining lymphoblastoid cell lines. We thank the Program in Membrane Biology
Microscopy Core at Massachusetts General Hospital and A. Simas for technical
assistance in some of the lymphoblastoid EM studies. S. Arnow assisted in human
retinal imaging. Funding: This study was funded by NIH (K08EY023610), Bluefield
Foundation, American Brain Foundation (to M.E.W.); That Man May See (AW141505
and AW121324), Research to Prevent Blindness (Core), and National Eye Institute
(PAR 13-269) (to A.J.G.); NIH (R01AG036884 and R01AG051390) and Consortium for
Frontotemporal Dementia Research (to L.G.); NIH grant R01 NS098516, VA Merit Awards
I01 RX002133 and I01 BX001108, and Consortium for Frontotemporal Dementia
Research (to E.J.H.); NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
(R01NS073813) (to S.L.C.); Alzheimer’s Disease Center P30 A.13854 (to E.B. and M.-M.M.)
and P30 AG13854 (to M.-M.M.); Philippe Foundation (to H.B.); National Multiple
Sclerosis Society (FG 20102-A-1) (to A.C.-H.); and Consortium for Frontotemporal Dementia
Research and NIH grants AG023501 and AG19724 (to W.W.S.). Author contributions:
Experimental design: M.E.W., R.C., M.T., J.M.G., S.L.C., L.G., and A.J.G. Collection
of data: M.E.W., R.C., H.-Y.H., C.L., A.T., C.C., S.L., H.B., S.S.M., P.A., A.C.-H., M.V.A., and J.F.S.
Data analysis and interpretation: M.E.W., R.C., H.-Y.H., C.C., S.L., M.T., A.T., H.B., M.R., J.M.G.,
A.C.-H., M.V.A., W.W.S., B.L.M., J.F.S., E.J.H., L.G., and A.J.G. Subject recruitment: R.C.,
A.T., and W.W.S. Provision of reagents: W.W.S., I.R.M., J.F.S., E.B., M.-M.M., M.S.B., S.L.C., and
E.J.H. Writing of the manuscript: M.E.W., L.G., and A.J.G. Competing interests: L.G. has
received honoraria from Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute. W.W.S.
has received consulting fees from Merck Inc. J.M.G. has received consulting fees from
Genentech and MedImmune, medical legal consulting, and research support from
Genentech, Quest Diagnostics, and MedDay. P.A. has received speaker honoraria,
consultation fees, or travel support from Allergan, Biogen, Eisai, GlaxoSmithKline, Ipsen,
Merz, Novartis, and Teva and research grants from Biogen, Ipsen, Merz, Novartis, and
Roche. B.L.M. serves as the medical director for the John Douglas French Alzheimer’s
Foundation; the scientific director for the Tau Consortium; the director/medical advisory
board member of the Larry L. Hillblom Foundation; a scientific advisory board member
for the National Institute for Health Research Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre and
its subunit, the Biomedical Research Unit in Dementia (U.K.); and a board member for
the American Brain Foundation. A.J.G. is a founder of Inception 5 Biosciences and is on
the scientific advisory board of Bionure. All other authors declare that they have no
competing interests.
Submitted 8 October 2014
Resubmitted 14 July 2016
Accepted 21 November 2016
Published 12 April 2017
10.1126/scitranslmed.aah5642
Citation: M. E. Ward, R. Chen, H.-Y. Huang, C. Ludwig, M. Telpoukhovskaia, A. Taubes,
H. Boudin, S. S. Minami, M. Reichert, P. Albrecht, J. M. Gelfand, A. Cruz-Herranz, C. Cordano,
M. V. Alavi, S. Leslie, W. W. Seeley, B. L. Miller, E. Bigio, M.-M. Mesulam, M. S. Bogyo,
I. R. Mackenzie, J. F. Staropoli, S. L. Cotman, E. J. Huang, L. Gan, A. J. Green, Individuals with
progranulin haploinsufficiency exhibit features of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. Sci. Transl.
Med. 9, eaah5642 (2017).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ward et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah5642 (2017)
12 April 2017
10 of 10
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 lipofuscinosis
Individuals with progranulin haploinsufficiency exhibit features of neuronal ceroid
Bogyo, Ian R. Mackenzie, John F. Staropoli, Susan L. Cotman, Eric J. Huang, Li Gan and Ari J. Green
Marcel V. Alavi, Shannon Leslie, William W. Seeley, Bruce L. Miller, Eileen Bigio, Marek-Marsel Mesulam, Matthew S.
Sakura S. Minami, Meredith Reichert, Philipp Albrecht, Jeffrey M. Gelfand, Andres Cruz-Herranz, Christian Cordano, 
Michael E. Ward, Robert Chen, Hsin-Yi Huang, Connor Ludwig, Maria Telpoukhovskaia, Ali Taubes, Helene Boudin,
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aah5642
, eaah5642.
9
Sci Transl Med 
-associated FTD and NCL.
GRN
central mechanism in both 
a
system, and their cells exhibit signs of lysosomal dysfunction. These findings implicate lysosomal dysfunction as 
 mutations accumulate storage material throughout the central nervous
GRN
individuals with heterozygous 
 mutations exhibit clinical and pathological features that are strikingly similar to NCL. Like NCL patients,
GRN
. show that patients with heterozygous 
et al
progranulin-deficient FTD and NCL remains unexplored. Now, Ward 
(NCL), a lysosomal storage disease that mainly affects children. The underlying relationship between 
 mutations cause neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
GRN
(FTD) in the elderly population, whereas homozygous 
 mutations lead to progranulin haploinsufficiency and cause frontotemporal dementia
GRN
Heterozygous 
Connecting the dots in neurodegenerative disease
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/385/eaah5642
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/04/10/9.385.eaah5642.DC1
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/385/eaah5642#BIBL
This article cites 29 articles, 5 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
