 International  Journal  of
Environmental Research
and Public Health
Article
A Qualitative Exploration of the Role of Vape Shop
Environments in Supporting Smoking Abstinence
Emma Ward 1,* ID , Sharon Cox 2 ID , Lynne Dawkins 2 ID , Sarah Jakes 3, Richard Holland 4 and
Caitlin Notley 1
1
Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia, Norwich Research Park, Norwich NR4 7TJ, UK;
c.notley@uea.ac.uk
2
Centre for Addictive Behaviours Research, School of Applied Sciences, London South Bank University,
103 Borough Road, London SE1 0AA, UK; coxs15@lsbu.ac.uk (S.C.); dawkinl3@lsbu.ac.uk (L.D.)
3
New Nicotine Alliance, 8 Northumberland Avenue, London WC2N 5BY, UK; sarah@nnalliance.org
4
George Davies Centre, Leicester Medical School, University of Leicester, Lancaster Road, Leicester LE1 7RH,
UK; rch23@leicester.ac.uk
*
Correspondence: emma.ward@uea.ac.uk; Tel.: +44-1603-592304
Received: 15 December 2017; Accepted: 27 January 2018; Published: 9 February 2018
Abstract: E-cigarettes are the most popular method of quitting smoking in England and most are
purchased in specialist vape shops. This qualitative study explores how the vape shop environment is
experienced by quitters to support smoking abstinence. Semi-structured qualitative interviews were
conducted to elicit experiences of e-cigarette use, including experiences of vape shops, in 40 people
who had used e-cigarettes in a quit attempt. Observations of six shops in a range of locations were
also undertaken. Interview and observation data were analysed using inductive thematic analysis
and triangulated. At an individual level, smoking abstinence was supported through shop assistants’
attempts to understand customers’ smoking preferences in order to: (i) tailor advice about the most
appropriate product; and (ii) offer an ongoing point of contact for practical help. At an interpersonal
level, shops offered opportunity to socialise and reinforce a vaping identity, although the environment
was perceived as intimidating for some (e.g., new and female users). At a structural level, shops
ensured easy access to products perceived to be good value by customers and had adapted to
legislative changes. Vape shops can provide effective behavioural support to quitters to maintain
smoking abstinence. Health professionals could capitalise on this through partnership working with
shops, to ensure best outcomes for clients wanting to use e-cigarettes to quit smoking.
Keywords:
electronic cigarettes; vape shops; smoking cessation; relapse prevention; stop
smoking services
1. Introduction
For smokers, quitting combustible tobacco is the best way to improve health outcomes [1], but an
estimated 90% of traditional quit attempts end in relapse [2]. E-cigarettes are now the most popular
method of quitting smoking in England [3] and they can be as effective, if not more effective, than
other methods [4–6]. Smokers are addicted to the nicotine in tobacco, but smoking is also a complex
psychosocial behaviour incorporating habits, beliefs, and identity [7]. Nicotine replacement therapy
(NRT) may fail to address these behavioural and social aspects of smoking, whereas e-cigarettes
relieve nicotine cravings and replace the behavioural and social aspects [8–10]. Vapers also report
that e-cigarettes have their own unique pleasurable qualities [8,10–12] and advantages over tobacco
such as flavours, less stigma, and lower cost [8,9]. Research reviews indicate that e-cigarettes are
considerably safer than smoking [13,14], and their potential usefulness as a harm reduction measure
has been acknowledged in UK policy [15] and practice guidance [16,17].
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 297; doi:10.3390/ijerph15020297
www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerph
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 297
2 of 14
Many Stop Smoking Services (SSS) identify themselves as ‘e-cigarette friendly’ [18,19], but advice
about specific vaping products is limited and there are no e-cigarettes currently licensed for medicinal
use. National guidance recommends that SSS familiarise themselves with e-cigarettes through visiting
a ‘reputable retailer’ (p. 10) [16]. How many SSS actively do this is unknown, and SSS advisors vary in
their response to the commercial success of e-cigarettes based on their personal beliefs about nicotine
addiction and normalisation, and the tobacco industry [20]. This highlights a need for research into
the possible role of vape shops in supporting quitters so that health professionals can make informed
decisions when referring clients to shops.
Vape shops are often the ‘frontline’ for cessation support [21] because most people who choose
e-cigarettes to quit smoking do so without the support of SSS. Specialist vape shops are by far the
most popular places that the estimated 2.9 million vapers in Britain [22] purchase e-cigarettes [3].
Currently, there are approximately 2000 shops in the UK and the industry is estimated to be worth over
£600 million annually in the UK alone [23]. As yet, vape shops do not require a licence and instead
the industry has its own trade associations [24,25] and code of conduct [26]. UK shops are obliged to
comply with the Tobacco and Related Products Regulations 2016 (TRPR), an EU directive, which sets
out restrictions on e-liquid and tank sizes, nicotine strengths and advertising, and new requirements
for notification of ingredients, emissions and product labelling. The legislation has been met with
concern from vapers [27], industry [28], and the scientific community [29], with suggestion that it may
negatively affect numbers of people switching from tobacco to vaping by increasing vaping costs and
reducing accessibility, choice and effectiveness. The current study adds insight into how vape shops
have reacted to the legislation.
There is some evidence that vape shops can influence smoking cessation success rates. In a
prospective real world study of seventy-one tobacco quitters who bought their first e-cigarette from
a vape shop, 41% were still abstinent from tobacco after 12 months [30]. The authors suggest that a
‘combination of high quality e-vapour products together with personalized e-cig support and advice
at vape shops promotes high success rates’ and that ‘vape shops may become valuable allies in the
fight against smoking’ [30] (pp. 3435–3436). It is important to acknowledge that this study is limited
by having no control group, having a small self-selecting sample, and using self-report measures.
However, it does hint that interaction with a vape shop could promote success rates potentially higher
than those achieved with traditional SSS methods [31], warranting further exploration of their role in
helping people quit smoking.
Whilst there seems to be evidence that some consumers would appreciate traditional smoking
cessation advice from vape shops [9], most vapers appear to value shop advice relating to vaping
products [9,32]. Vapers report that an unsatisfying vaping setup, device malfunction or a lack of access
to vaping consumables, can trigger smoking relapse [33]. Therefore, product support offered by vape
shops in these areas may help sustain smoking abstinence.
Existing US vape shop research shows that most staff have personal experience of using
e-cigarettes to quit tobacco, hold strong beliefs regarding the health benefits and safety of e-cigarettes,
and their ability to help smokers quit [34–36]. Vape shop observations showed that they extensively
promoted their products and offered cessation related product advice [36,37], as well as offering a
place of recreation [38]. One study showed that the most successful shops were more likely to be
endorsed in online reviews for: helping to fix devices, having ‘helpful/patient/respectful staff’, and a
‘bar type’ environment [39] (p. 1). The existing research indicates that vape shops do not passively
sell e-cigarettes like other retailers [40], but instead may offer ‘expert by experience’ product advice
in an enticing environment. It is not clear, however, how the shop environment is experienced by
tobacco quitters to support them to remain smoke free. This study aims to address this research gap by
triangulating qualitative data collected through vape shop observations and quitters’ experiences of
vape shops.
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 297
3 of 14
2. Materials and Methods
The data drawn upon to answer the research question ‘what role does the vape shop environment
have in supporting smoking abstinence?’ are taken from a wider qualitative study (ECtra Study)
exploring patterns of e-cigarette use in relation to preventing smoking relapse [41]. Two data sources
were used in analysis: semi-structured interviews and observations. The study received ethical
approval from the UEA Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences Research Ethics Committee (project
reference: 2015/2016-144).
2.1. Interview Sample, Recruitment, and Data Collection
In-depth semi-structured interviews were conducted between September 2016 and May 2017 with
forty people (20 male and 20 female) who had used e-cigarettes to try to quit smoking. Participants
were recruited through word of mouth, local press articles, university bulletins, and social media, and
were purposively sampled for maximum variation in demographic characteristics.
Participants gave written consent before participating in a face-to-face (35) or telephone/Skype
interview (5). Interviews were recorded, transcribed verbatim, and anonymised. The anonymous
participant code used to reference quotes refers to the participant’s gender and age (e.g., ‘F24’ is
shorthand for ‘female aged 24 years’). In line with the objectives of the wider ECtra Study, the topic
guide covered all aspects of e-cigarette use, including experiences of vape shops. Participants were free
to discuss any vape shop they had experienced, and although it is possible that they had visited the
observation sample shops due to sampling from the same geographical areas, this was not recorded or
used in analysis. Interview participants are referred to as ‘vapers’ in the results section.
2.2. Observation Sample, Recruitment and Data Collection
It became apparent from the interview data that vape shops had an important role in the success of
many participants’ smoking quit attempts. The qualitative approach used in the ECtra Study allowed
flexibility and iterative use of appropriate methods to explore avenues of inquiry further, such as
the supportive role of vape shops, prompting an amendment to the protocol to include observations.
Observations were conducted in six vape shops recruited by researchers through informal discussions
with shop managers and staff, purposely sampled to include a range of urban city (4) and rural
town (2) locations. All shop staff who were approached across these six shops, agreed to participate (9).
Observations took place from May to September 2017 at a variety of times during the week and
weekends. The shops were based in London (3) and East Anglia (3).
With full written consent from the manager and participating staff, a researcher sat in situ for
around 3 h per visit taking handwritten notes about the shop context, the interactions between
customers and staff, and conversations with participating shop staff. Formal written consent was
not required from customers as minimal data were collected about them: observations focused on
the support shop staff gave to customers, rather than the characteristics of the customer or what the
customer did. Instead, a notice was displayed in the shop informing customers that an observation was
taking place, staff checked with customers that they agreed to being observed for research purposes,
and an information sheet aimed at customers was made available. Immediately following each
observation, notes were typed up by the researcher who added their own thoughts and reflections.
Notes were anonymised and each shop was randomly assigned a code.
2.3. Analysis
Interview transcripts and observation notes were uploaded onto NVivo11 qualitative software.
Interview transcripts were broad coded for data relating to vape shops by coding the part of the
transcript relating to the questions about shops. In addition, a word search was performed to capture
data relating to shops in other parts of the interview. The interview data extracts relating to shops
and observation notes were coded using an established inductive thematic analysis methodology [42].
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 297
4 of 14
E.W. coded interview and observation data for latent and semantic content. Codes were reviewed
and sorted into subthemes and overarching themes by E.W. in discussion with C.N. The themes
were written up and triangulated with illustrative quotes from both interviews and observations for
each identified theme. This analytical write up was critically reviewed by C.N. and S.C. resulting in
a comprehensive interpretation of the data in relation to the research question. The final thematic
structure agreed by E.W., C.N., and S.C. is shown in Figure 1.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW  
4 of 13 
 
reviewed and sorted into subthemes and overarching themes by E.W. in discussion with C.N. The 
themes were written up and triangulated with illustrative quotes from both interviews and 
observations for each identified theme. This analytical write up was critically reviewed by C.N. and 
S.C. resulting in a comprehensive interpretation of the data in relation to the research question. The 
final thematic structure agreed by E.W., C.N., and S.C. is shown in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. Thematic structure relating to the role the vape shop environment has in supporting 
smoking abstinence. 
3. Results 
Vapers’ ages ranged from 21 to 70 years (mean 41, SD 13.97). All vapers identified as White 
British or European, 16 were employed in managerial, professional or technical occupations [43], and 
all were recruited in England, 11 from rural areas, with 33 resident in the East Anglia region. Vaping 
experience varied from 2 weeks to 7 years. Thirty-one participants were vaping and abstinent from 
tobacco (19 reported lapses), six participants had relapsed (5 dual using both tobacco and vaping), 
and three were no longer using either e-cigarettes or tobacco. Demographics were not collected for 
observation shop staff. Overarching themes relating to structural, interpersonal, and individual 
environments were identified (Figure 1) and are discussed in turn using illustrative quotes from both 
observation and interview data. Some quotes have been edited to improve readability by removing 
repeated/redundant words and discourse markers (e.g., ‘um’, ‘er’). 
3.1. Structural Level Environment—Making Vaping Accessible and Affordable 
3.1.1. Accessibility and Normalization 
Many vapers commented on the increased accessibility of vape shops in commercial 
environments such as highstreets. The presence of vape shops in these everyday environments 
normalised vaping for some quitters, making it appear socially acceptable and low risk to health, 
prompting them to try e-cigarettes: 
I think you just see a lot of people using [e-cigarettes] now and there’s a lot of shops selling them. 
Certainly, in this area where I am, I only live in a small town, and there’s two shops that sell vaping 
Figure 1. Thematic structure relating to the role the vape shop environment has in supporting
smoking abstinence.
3. Results
Vapers’ ages ranged from 21 to 70 years (mean 41, SD 13.97). All vapers identified as White British
or European, 16 were employed in managerial, professional or technical occupations [43], and all
were recruited in England, 11 from rural areas, with 33 resident in the East Anglia region. Vaping
experience varied from 2 weeks to 7 years. Thirty-one participants were vaping and abstinent from
tobacco (19 reported lapses), six participants had relapsed (5 dual using both tobacco and vaping),
and three were no longer using either e-cigarettes or tobacco. Demographics were not collected
for observation shop staff. Overarching themes relating to structural, interpersonal, and individual
environments were identified (Figure 1) and are discussed in turn using illustrative quotes from both
observation and interview data. Some quotes have been edited to improve readability by removing
repeated/redundant words and discourse markers (e.g., ‘um’, ‘er’).
3.1. Structural Level Environment—Making Vaping Accessible and Affordable
3.1.1. Accessibility and Normalization
Many vapers commented on the increased accessibility of vape shops in commercial environments
such as highstreets. The presence of vape shops in these everyday environments normalised vaping
for some quitters, making it appear socially acceptable and low risk to health, prompting them to
try e-cigarettes:
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 297
5 of 14
I think you just see a lot of people using [e-cigarettes] now and there’s a lot of shops selling them.
Certainly, in this area where I am, I only live in a small town, and there’s two shops that sell vaping
supplies, so it’s really common. I went into a shop and you could actually try them there. So I tried
them in the shop and then I bought one.
(F40)
3.1.2. Competition and Value for Money
Nearly every vaper interviewed commented on the reduced cost of vaping compared to smoking
as a key benefit. Shops reinforced this message via posters outlining the cost of vaping vs. smoking.
One shop assistant described how he explained to new switchers: ‘how much [they] can financially save
by vaping, so even if they are not sure they like it, if they see/hear that they are saving money they are likely
to carry on’ (Ob2). Shops displayed promotional adverts and offered deals such as loyalty cards and
multi-buy offers, which vapers appreciated: ‘they’re five pound each juices and they do three for ten pounds,
so I always get three’ (F59).
Shop staff acknowledged that vapers often ‘buy online where it’s cheaper’ (Ob5). Vapers described
advantages to purchasing online including reduced cost, customer reviews, subscriptions, and a
second-hand market. However, unlike online stores, the shops offered instant access to essential
consumables: ‘if I’m about to run out [of liquid] then I’ll buy it from a shop, if it’s going to last me another
week I’ll buy it off eBay cos it’s a bit cheaper’ (M49). Access to consumables may be crucial in preventing
tobacco lapse [33]. The growing number of shops meant more competition: ‘although we have a handful of
customers that are really loyal most people will go where the prices are good’ (Ob5). Familiarity was important
to novice users establishing vaping, but those with more confidence shopped around: ‘I went to the
same shop to begin with, but then as more cropped up around the area, I thought right, let’s go see what these
guys have got’ (M53).
3.1.3. Regulation
It was clear that the TRPR brought commercial challenges to the shops, such as ensuring stock
was compliant and refitting shop shelves to house smaller bottles. One staff member commented that:
‘they still have hundreds or thousands of pounds of non-TPD compliant products in storage that they are unable
to sell’ (Ob3). Staff discussed being uncertain about some aspects of the legislation around devices,
especially drippers, with some shops still stocking them and others taking the decision to no longer
sell them. Labelling of vaping hardware as containing nicotine seemed nonsensical to vapers familiar
with the legislative changes and the shops: ‘it seems strange to give a nicotine warning on products that
don’t actually contain nicotine’ (Ob5). Shop staff, who had to explain the legislation to customers, felt it
was confusing them and in some instances had resulted in hostility from angry customers upset that
non-compliant products were no longer available.
As a reaction to liquid bottle size restrictions some vapers were investigating making their own
liquid to avoid the increased cost of buying liquids in smaller amounts. Five of the shops appeared
to embrace the home mixing trend, stocking products such as flavour shots which could be added
to home mixed liquid, and nicotine shots which could be added to larger sized zero nicotine bottles.
These shops were happy to provide ongoing support and advice: ‘because some of [their customers] were
skint, some were on the verge of smoking, so [mixing] is good for keeping people excited and keeping down the
cost’ (Ob2). Shops felt the smaller bottles encouraged people to experiment with flavours also adding
to the excitement of vaping. Overall, it appeared that the shops had adapted to the legislative changes
for the most part.
3.1.4. Health Professional Referral
Traditional smoking cessation support was not perceived as the main role of the shops by
either staff or vapers. Yet shops discussed promoting the health benefits of switching to e-cigarettes.
For example, one shop displayed a poster outlining why vaping is better for health than tobacco [44].
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 297
6 of 14
Some of the shop staff had an awareness and interest in research. For example, the 2015 Public Health
England report was mentioned by a couple of staff who had relayed the finding ‘e-cigarettes are around
95% safer than tobacco’ to customers [14] (p. 6).
Although one shop assistant feared that medicalisation would negatively affect consumer freedom,
most shops were interested in working closer with health professionals. One shop had received patient
referrals because ‘according to the shop assistant, the shop owner took the time to meet with the local GP
(family doctor) when he first opened the store and the GP was “fully on-board” (Ob3). A couple of quitters
had also heard of similar informal arrangements between health professionals and shops:
I said to [shop assistant] “look I’d seen the stop smoking service and that” and he said “have you
seen <SSS advisor>?” and I was like “yes I have” and he said “yes she comes in here occasionally
and she comes and she talks to us”. So it was almost like that she was taking the time to go out visit
the retailers, find out what they were offering.
(M46)
Nearly all participating vapers wanted the National Health Service to promote e-cigarette use
including more information for GPs and even e-cigarettes available on prescription. Interestingly
though, around a third of vapers interviewed planned to stop using e-cigarettes. E-cigarette cessation
could be in conflict with vape shops’ commercial interests and needs to be explored further, especially
given that partnership working between shops and health professionals appears to be increasing.
3.2. Interpersonal Environment—Creating a Shared Social Vaping Experience
3.2.1. Friendly Personal Service
A friendly personal service was commented on by vapers and witnessed during the observations.
Most of the shop assistants made an effort to be friendly and take a personal interest, but were also
sensitive to customers who seemed in a rush or didn’t want to engage in chat. One shop assistant
commented that: ‘it is the customer service the managers want and is why the chain is succeeding when
others are going under’ (Ob4). This approach was very inclusive of ‘all types of vapers from beginners to
enthusiasts’ (Ob3) and seemed to make commercial sense to shop staff who were aware of building
a customer base through reviews and retaining customers long-term. This also benefitted vapers
through developing trust and relationships with staff who could offer ongoing support to prevent
future relapse.
3.2.2. Socialising and Relaxation
Two types of customers were observed during the visits; those who bought consumables and left,
and those who stayed to vape and chat seemingly using the vape shop as an opportunity to socialise
and relax. Five of the six shops had a similar ‘café feel’ interior with bar stools at the counter, chairs
and sofas, a coffee machine, and snacks available to buy. One shop even had ‘a fake fireplace and two
leather chairs, plus a chess table’ (Ob5), attempting to encourage customers to stay longer. Much of
the conversation observed between staff and customers was ‘vaping talk’ discussing devices, home
mixing, and vaping anecdotes. The conversations also strayed onto non-vaping topics including cars,
workplaces, health, children, local gossip, and socialising plans. A few vapers discussed enjoying this
informal atmosphere: ‘you can go in and sit down and have a coffee, there’s a coffee machine, and have a little
vape, quite friendly, quite helpful’. (F33)
This sense of community could be supportive for quitters, and may be especially appealing
to those who enjoyed the social aspect of smoking. However, this café style did not appeal to all
vapers interviewed:
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 297
7 of 14
I’ve seen various vaping shops almost like trying to encourage your café atmosphere, none of them
have succeeded. You walk in, you buy your liquid, you bugger off, you know. If someone was to set
up sort of like a vaping type café, good luck to them, I’m not sure I would use it.
(M53)
One shop did not have a café feel and instead had ‘a familiar high-street store feel, it is recognisable
as a shop that sells consumer goods’ (Ob2). This may potentially be more appealing to vapers, like the
person quoted above, who require only access to products and could be less intimidating for someone
new to e-cigarettes.
3.2.3. Vaping Identity Reinforcement
Shop staff discussed how there were generally two types of vapers (also identified in previous
research [10]); those who used e-cigarettes primarily to replace or cut down smoking, and those who
were vaping as both a replacement for smoking and also a hobby, investing greater amounts of time
and money into building and modifying devices, making the best-flavoured liquids, or performing
cloud blowing tricks. For the latter, spending time in the shop with likeminded people reinforced their
vaper identity. For some vapers, the culture presented by the shops was intriguing and exciting, and a
couple of vapers described how shop staff had ignited their interest in vaping as a hobby, as well as a
replacement for smoking: ‘I had another world was opening up to me and I thought I’d really like to try it and
I could see that [shop staff] were really enthusiastic and yes I wanted to join in with it really’ (F34).
For those enjoying vaping as a hobby, vape shops created a feeling of belonging and reinforced a
sense of identity. However, other vapers felt that shop staff were not interested in them because they
did not identify in the same way and were only interested in people using more advanced setups. Most
vapers interviewed saw the vaping culture presented in shops as strange and not relevant to them:
I opened the door [of the shop] and I just thought oh my god. They’ve got these big square things,
the place is on fire! That don’t do nothing for me. I call them serious vapers. It might sound really
silly, but I don’t know if they do it for different reasons, that’s how that comes across to me, that to
sit there and [vaping noises] and then fill the room up with vape. It’s like going into a smoking room
in an airport, which I used to find absolutely vile, and that’s what these shops have become.
(F60)
Shop observations and interviews with vapers revealed that different shop environments seemed
to appeal to different people, but most vapers interviewed had to discover this for themselves through
trialing different shops.
3.2.4. Masculine Territories
Regardless of who the shop appealed to, the shops observed did seem to be largely masculine
territories. Nearly all the shops had more of a ‘masculine looking’ interior with hard colours and metal
finishes. All the participating shop staff, bar one, were male, and by far the majority of customers
who stayed to vape and chat were male: ‘at this point the shop feels very much like a traditional pub with
men joking and discussing hardware and vaping’ (Ob4). A small minority of female vapers did mention
their gender as a reason for not feeling confident in vape shops: ‘I had a feeling [in the shop] of being
a woman going into the car mechanics, like they assume you don’t know, so you get fleeced’ (F36b). Three
women discussed having their male partner or colleague visit shops on their behalf and, in three shops,
male customers were observed buying products and asking advice for their absent female partners.
Although this may have simply been for convenience, it is of note that no women were observed doing
this for male partners. One vaper felt that the hobbyist aspect of some of the shops was especially
off-putting for women:
I still find [shops] a little bit intimidating because [the shop] I go to they also sell like all the heavily
modded tanks and batteries and stuff like that, so they are still a little bit kind of ‘boys clubby’ to me
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 297
8 of 14
[...]. It’s blokes with their massive batteries and stuff like that, so I just kind of go in and go “right I
want that liquid in that strength” and kind of take my leave.
(F38)
3.3. Individual Level Environment—Ensuring a Satisfying and Functioning Vaping Setup
Most quitters did not achieve abstinence with their first device because it did not provide a
sufficient nicotine hit to tackle cravings or did not work properly due to user error or malfunction.
Therefore, it is helpful if shops are able to offer a supportive environment ensuring that quitters have a
satisfying e-cigarette set-up and provide ongoing support for issues ensuring the device continues
working properly.
3.3.1. Advice and Navigating Choice
Navigating product choice was an issue for many vapers who described feeling overwhelmed
by the product range and, for a few, this had been a barrier to trying e-cigarettes. A couple of vapers
had purposefully limited their choice by deciding to buy in supermarkets and pharmacies instead:
‘[vape shop] would be introducing the complexity that I don’t want, I want to keep it simple’ (F62b). Whilst this
may make purchasing less confusing, some vapers found limiting product options prompted relapse
because the device was less suited to their needs:
If you are serious about [quitting], I don’t think just buying, like I got the one from the factory shop.
It was only like a tenner, it just wasn’t enough. I think you’ve probably got to get a bit of advice,
cos it just didn’t work for me.
(F29)
The shops had organised their devices into ‘beginner’ ‘intermediate’ and ‘advanced’ displays,
in an effort to be less confusing. One shop had ‘devices on display but tied by elastic to the counter, they have
adopted the mobile phone shop method of display’ (Ob2), allowing the customer to feel the devices. Verbal
support appeared most useful in helping vapers navigate this potentially confusing area. Advice to
customers looking to quit smoking related to nicotine hit, usability and flavour.
A satisfying physiological experience and reduction in craving was identified by vapers and
shops as the fundamental reason for e-cigarette success:
[Shop assistant] actually took the time to ask me some pertinent questions like “when you smoked
your cigarettes, did you breathe direct to lung or did you breathe it into your mouth and then kind
of breathe it down?” I quickly found out afterwards these questions are really quite important to
getting the right sort of e-cigarette, because if you get the wrong it’s not going to satisfy the need
and the chance are that you’re more likely to start smoking again.
(M46)
Most of the shops discussed ‘rules of thumb’ when recommending nicotine strengths. Generally
those smoking up to 10 cigarettes a day were recommended 3–6 mg nicotine, 10–20 cigarettes a day
were recommended 6–12 mg, and 20+ cigarettes a day were recommended 18 mg. Vapers liked this
approach as it bridged the gap between their familiar smoking habit and their new vaping habit,
offering them reassurance that their nicotine needs would be satisfied by switching:
I just found [shop assistant] to be incredibly helpful. She asked us more about our smoking history
than actually I got asked at the smoking cessation clinic. She identified what it was we were smoking
at the time, how much we were smoking, and then sort of looked at different strengths of the flavours
what would suit us best. She recommended that I started on 18 mg strength nicotine liquid.
(M44)
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 297
9 of 14
The ability of a vaper to operate the device long-term was highlighted by shops as important.
Shops discussed finding out how ‘tech savvy’ customers were and would take time to explain how to
operate and maintain devices: ‘we would go through all the information about charging and coils because it
can seem quite daunting and if you get one thing wrong then it can mean that it won’t work (Ob6)’. Discussion
about battery life was seen as important by vapers and shops:
[The shop] were helpful in terms of finding something useable and reliable and had a big battery
in it so you don’t have to constantly charge it, which is very important actually because I forget to
charge it and then I’m in trouble because I don’t have my fall back.
(M39)
All shops had battery safety leaflets accompanying purchases. One shop assistant commented
that: ‘they will rewrap batteries for free because they want vaping to be as safe as possible’ and ‘they always give
free cases and bags for batteries’. This concern about safety seemed to stem from a genuine desire to make
vaping safe for customers, but also as an effort to protect vaping’s reputation against negative media
reports: ‘the managers are very safety conscious and think that people not taking proper precautions have given
vaping a bad name’ (Ob4).
The taste of e-cigarettes was experienced by nearly all vapers as more pleasurable than tobacco
and was highlighted by many as a key reason for sustained smoking abstinence. This was reiterated
by the shops. For example, one shop assistant said: ‘that most customers came to enjoy the flavours and
got into vaping as being different from smoking, so if relapsed, found they hated the taste of tobacco and would
probably go back to the vape’ (Ob5). The shelves displayed many different flavours that people could try
and a few shops had menus listing different brands. The staff were also able to make flavours seem
exciting providing vivid description: ‘[shop assistant] lets customers try “Kendal mint cake” which he says
“reminds me of forest marches across Dartmoor”’ (Ob4). Vapers described how shops enabled them to try
different flavours which kept vaping exciting promoting continued use:
They had a whole sort of display thing and they said “here’s all the different flavours that we sell,
try some”. It was a case of just going through and trying and I just didn’t like the flavour of the
tobacco ones, I just preferred the fruit flavours. Obviously when you stop smoking you start to get
your taste back, so you could actually taste it more and more as time went on, so you were kind of
“actually this is quite nice” and then you’d start to experiment with all the different flavours.
(M46)
The customer service in the shops observed was attentive and helpful. However, the vaper data
showed that some had experienced poor service and advice. This mainly related to insufficient product
information and shops focused on making a sale:
They didn’t offer much advice or information. They just had the e-cigarettes and the liquids and said
this flavour’s nice, and this flavour’s nice, and there wasn’t really much conversation or information
about it. It was very much like they just kind of wanted a sale on it.
(F25)
3.3.2. Ongoing Support
Ongoing support was highlighted by both shops and vapers as important in ensuring that
e-cigarettes continued to function well over the long-term:
I’m very reliant on going to the shop and going “help something has gone wrong”. They’ll just tut
and go “you just do this like”. So I’ve got that reliance, I’ve almost got like a little help on hand.
(F36a)
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 297
10 of 14
There were plenty of instances where the shops gave support to customers who were having
difficulties. Several customers asked shop staff to change coils and there were examples of hardware
issues being investigated for free. One shop assistant described how he would ‘troubleshoot’ with the
customer if they had relapsed and try and find a solution, such as fixing their device or upping their
nicotine strength:
When they relapse find out why... “usually this is stress or because of drinking alcohol, sometimes
because their coil started burning or liquid started leaking . . . . We can help with all those sorts of
things”. I ask how he advises about stress or a night out, “that can be a good time to use the device
more or maybe go up a level of nicotine”. He also tells me that “most people think their device is
broken and they have relapsed, but if they bring it in and show us then we can fix it”.
(Ob2)
4. Discussion
Vape shops offer ‘expert by experience’ product advice to smokers looking to transition to vaping
and on-going support to vapers. To date there is little UK research on influential shop environmental
factors for supporting quit attempts. This study addressed this by triangulating qualitative data
collected through vape shop observations and quitters’ experiences of vape shops. Quitting smoking
is a difficult and complex process [7]; high levels of relapse are testament to the addictive potential
of tobacco smoking. Given the complexity and challenge, the Royal College of Physicians advises
that smokers quitting by using e-cigarettes are likely to need additional behavioural support [13].
This research indicates that vape shops are well placed to offer this type of support.
At an individual level, shops can provide a supportive environment by helping quitters to
navigate product choice, thereby ensuring a satisfying hit and a device/e-liquid setup tailored to
individual need and based on current smoking behaviour. Shops also provided ongoing support
to reduce risk of smoking lapse due to user error, device malfunction and in some cases, because
of lifestyle or circumstance changes, (e.g., stress, nights out). Shops supported continued use of
e-cigarettes by offering ongoing ‘without sales’ free advice, trouble shooting and support, which in
turn promoted a returning customer base.
At an interpersonal level, shops can offer friendly personable service, creating a relaxing
environment, putting novice users at ease and helping them to feel confident about their purchasing
choices. For some vapers, shops also provided an opportunity for social interaction, acting as a
community group, creating a temporary sense of belonging, reinforcing a vaper identity, motivating
people to return to the shop and continue their e-cigarette use. However, we did receive some reports
that these environments were perceived as intimidating or off-putting, especially by women and some
vapers using e-cigarettes primarily for medicinal use. Nevertheless, there was evidence that the market
was evolving to accommodate these groups, for example, via the high-street style shop observed.
At a structural level, shops provide a competitive environment, responding to legislative changes
such as the TRPR. The challenge for shops in adapting to legislative changes was to ensure continued
easy access to products, whilst maintaining the financial benefits of transitioning to vaping. Consumers
like the non-medicalised environment and the peer support offered in shops by ‘experts by experience’
which may be lost with too much regulation [45].
While we observed some rejection of the medicalisation of products and the streamlining of
advice, informal co-working between shops and SSS could be particularly helpful for smokers unsure
about e-cigarettes or hesitant about using shops. Especially as guidance suggests that combining
e-cigarettes with behavioural support offered by SSS has the potential to increase success rates [16].
Health professionals should consider engaging with the local vaping community to avoid referring
clients to shops offering poor customer service and inappropriate sales driven advice. However, many
quitters do not access SSS support. Furthermore, vape shops provide opportunity to those who do not
wish to stop smoking to try vaping and perhaps eventually stop smoking. Therefore, some smoking
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 297
11 of 14
cessation training for shops (e.g., [46]) could be beneficial [9,47], along with making customers aware
of available research resources (e.g., [44,48]). This would ensure that information given about quitting
smoking (in addition to product advice) was evidence based.
Limitations
The qualitative nature of the study means the findings cannot necessarily be generalised to the
wider vaper or vape shop population. However, the data presented is triangulated from two sources.
Furthermore, the advice witnessed as being given by shops mirrors advice given by experienced vapers
in other research [49]. Further research could investigate if the advice given is quantifiably effective.
Although there was diversity in both the observation and interview samples, the most deprived areas
and populations (e.g., homeless) were not represented. It is important to acknowledge that poorer
communities will be at a disadvantage as they have less access to reputable vape shops and quality
products [50].
5. Conclusions
Vape shops offer an important ‘expert by experience’ role in supporting smokers to quit. Different
shops may appeal to different groups of smokers and vapers, and may encourage those who do
not intend to quit smoking eventually to go on to quit. For many, vape shops are an easy to access,
non-medicalised source of advice and support. However, some vapers using e-cigarettes mainly for
medicinal purposes and some female users found vape shops could be intimidating, and for some
communities access to reputable vape shops may be more limited than in the areas where this research
was carried out. Future research could consider evaluating joint working between Stop Smoking
Services and vape shops to help smokers achieve and maintain smoking cessation.
Acknowledgments: This study is funded by Cancer Research UK Tobacco Advisory Group (TAG) Project Award
(grant reference: C54889/A22732). C.N. receives support for an academic Fellowship from the Society for the
Study of Addiction. We wish to thank the vapers and vape shop staff who participated in the study. Thanks to
Isabel Greaves and Divya Nelson who assisted with the study whilst on placement as medical students. Thanks
also to Louise Ross, Leicester Stop Smoking Service Manager, for assisting with additional references.
Author Contributions: C.N. and E.W. conceived and designed the observations and interviews. C.N. and E.W.
conducted the interviews. C.N., E.W. and S.C. conducted the observations and analysed data. L.D., R.H. and S.J.
assisted with paper revisions. E.W. wrote the paper and prepared the manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1.
Action on Smoking and Health (ASH). Facts at a Glance: Smoking and Disease. Available online: http:
//ash.org.uk/category/information-and-resources/fact-sheets/ (accessed on 22 November 2017).
2.
Etter, J.F.; Stapleton, J.A. Nicotine replacement therapy for long-term smoking cessation: A meta-analysis.
Tobacco Control 2006, 15, 280–285. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
West, R.; Beard, E.; Brown, J. Electronic Cigarettes in England—Latest Trends (2017 Q3). Available online:
http://www.smokinginengland.info/sts-documents (accessed on 22 November 2017).
4.
Beard, E.; West, R.; Michie, S.; Brown, J. Association between electronic cigarette use and changes in quit
attempts, success of quit attempts, use of smoking cessation pharmacotherapy, and use of stop smoking
services in England: Time series analysis of population trends. Br. Med. J. 2016, 354. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Brown, J.; Beard, E.; Kotz, D.; Michie, S.; West, R. Real-world effectiveness of e-cigarettes when used to aid
smoking cessation: A cross-sectional population study. Addiction. 2014, 109, 1531–1540. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.
McRobbie, H.; Bullen, C.; Hartmann-Boyce, J.; Hajek, P. Electronic cigarettes for smoking cessation and
reduction. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2014, 12. [CrossRef]
7.
Hughes, J. Learning to Smoke; Chicago Press: Chicago, IL, USA, 2002; ISBN 10 0226359107.
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 297
12 of 14
8.
Notley, C.; Dawkins, L.; Ward, E.L.; Holland, R. Consumer experiences of quitting, switching, dual using,
and ‘permissive lapse’ on the path to maintaining abstinence. In Proceedings of the 4th Global Forum on
Nicotine, Warsaw, Poland, 15–17 June 2017; Available online: https://gfn.net.co/downloads/Presentations_
2017_/Dr%20Caitlin%20Notley.pdf (accessed on 22 November 2017).
9.
Langley, T.; Bains, M. An insight into vape shops in the East Midlands. In Proceedings of the Cancer Research
UK E-Cigarette Research Forum, London, UK, 23 May 2017.
10.
Farrimond, H. A typology of vaping: Identifying differing beliefs, motivations for use, identity and political
interest amongst e-cigarette users. Int. J. Drug Policy 2017, 48, 81–90. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.
Cox, S.; Jakes, S. Nicotine and e-cigarettes: Rethinking addiction in the context of reduced harm. Int. J.
Drug Policy 2017, 44, 84–85. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.
Jakes, S. Five E-Cigarette Summits on—What Are We Still Fighting about? In Proceedings of the E-Cigarette
Summit, London, UK, 17 November 2017; Available online: https://nnalliance.org/blog/211-sarah-jakes-
keynote-speech-at-the-e-cig-summit-2018 (accessed on 22 November 2017).
13.
Royal College of Physicians. Nicotine without Smoke: Tobacco Harm Reduction; Royal College of Physicians
(RCP): London, UK, 2016; Available online: https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/outputs/nicotine-
without-smoke-tobacco-harm-reduction-0 (accessed on 22 November 2017).
14.
McNeil, A.;
Brose, L.S.;
Calder, R.;
Hitchman, S.C.;
Hajek, P.;
McRobbie, H. E-Cigarettes:
And Evidence Update;
Public Health England:
London,
UK, 2015.
Available online:
https:
//www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/457102/Ecigarettes_
an_evidence_update_A_report_commissioned_by_Public_Health_England_FINAL.pdf
(accessed
on
22 November 2017).
15.
The Tobacco Control Plan for England. Available online: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
the-tobacco-control-plan-for-england (accessed on 22 November 2017).
16.
McEwen, A.; McRobbie, H. Electronic Cigarettes: A Briefing to Stop Smoking Services; National Centre for
Smoking Cessation and Training: London, UK, 2016; Available online: http://www.ncsct.co.uk/usr/pub/
Electronic_cigarettes._A_briefing_for_stop_smoking_services.pdf (accessed on 22 November 2017).
17.
Smoking in Pregnancy Challenge Group. Use of Electronic Cigarettes in Pregnancy: A Guide for Midwives and
Other Healthcare Professionals. Available online: http://smokefreeaction.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2017/
06/eCigSIP.pdf (accessed on 22 November 2017).
18.
Farrimond, H.;
Abraham, C. E-cigarette friendly’ stop smoking services:
The opportunities
and
barriers
to
incorporating
e-cigarettes
into
health-care
systems.
In
Proceedings
of
the
4th Global Forum on Nicotine,
Warsaw,
Poland,
15–17 June 2017;
Available online:
https:
//gfn.net.co/posters-2017/e-cigarette-friendly-stop-smoking-services-the-opportunities-and-barriers-to-
incorporating-e-cigarettes-into-health-care-systems (accessed on 22 November 2017).
19.
Cancer Research UK and Action on Smoking and Health. Feeling the Heat: The Decline of Stop Smoking Services
in England; CRUK: London, UK, 2017; Available online: https://www.cancerresearchuk.org/sites/default/
files/la_survey_report_2017.pdf (accessed on 17 January 2018).
20.
Moore, R.; Ross, L. Stop Smoking Services and e-cigarettes: Lessons from Leicester. Unpublished work. 2018.
21.
Stimson, G. A tale of two epidemics:
Drugs harm reduction and tobacco harm reduction.
In Proceedings of the London Drug & Alcohol Policy Forum, Guildhall, London, 14 April 2017; Available
online: https://nicotinepolicy.net/documents/tale/Gerry%20Stimson%20-%20A%20tale%20of%20two%
20epidemics.pdf (accessed on 22 November 2017).
22.
Action on Smoking and Health. Fact Sheet: Use of e-Cigarettes (Vaporisers) among Adults in Great Britain.
Available online: http://ash.org.uk/media-and-news/press-releases-media-and-news/large-national-
survey-finds-2-9-million-people-now-vape-in-britain-for-the-first-time-over-half-no-longer-smoke/
(accessed on 23 November 2017).
23.
Anastasopoulou, S. Almost 20% rise in vape store: UK Market Report. January 2018; ECigIntelligence.
24.
Independent Vape Trade Association.
Available online:
https://www.ibvta.org.uk/ (accessed on
23 November 2017).
25.
Electronic Cigarette Industry Trade Association. Available online: http://www.ecita.org.uk/ (accessed on
23 November 2017).
26.
Independent Vape Trade Association. Code of Conduct. Available online: https://www.ibvta.org.uk/join-
us/code-of-conduct (accessed on 23 November 2017).
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 297
13 of 14
27.
New Nicotine Alliance.
Assessing and Mitigating Unintended Consequences of Policies for
Vapour Technologies and Other Low Risk Alternatives to Smoking.
2016.
Available online:
https://nnalliance.org/activities/consultations/114-nna-submits-comments-to-doh-on-unintended-
consequences-of-vaping-policy (accessed on 14 December 2017).
28.
Independent British Vape Trade Association. The Battle for a Proportionate Regulatory Regime Continues.
2017.
Available online: https://www.ibvta.org.uk/battle-proportionate-regulatory-regime-continues
(accessed on 13 December 2017).
29.
Etter, J.; Farsalinos, K.; Hajek, P.; Le-Houezec, J.; McRobbie, H.; Bullen, C.; Kozlowski, L.T.; Nides, M.;
Kouretas, D.; Polosa, R.; et al. Scientific Errors in the Tobacco Products Directive: A Letter Sent by Scientists
to the European Union. 16 January 2016. Available online: http://www.ecigarette-research.com/web/index.
php/2013-04-07-09-50-07/149-tpd-errors (accessed on 23 November 2017).
30.
Polosa, R.; Caponnetto, P.; Cibella, F.; Le-Houezec, J. Quit and Smoking Reduction Rates in Vape Shop
Consumers: A Prospective 12-Month Survey. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2015, 12, 3428–3438. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
31.
West, R.; Owen, L. Estimates of 52-Week Continuous Abstinence Rates Following Selected Smoking Cessation
Interventions in England. Version 2. Available online: www.smokinginengland.info (accessed on 2 February
2018).
32.
Sussman, S.; Garcia, R.; Cruz, T.B.; Baezconde-Garbanati, L.; Pentz, M.A.; Unger, J.B. Consumers’ perceptions
of vape shops in Southern California: An analysis of online Yelp reviews. Tobacco Induced Dis. 2014, 12, 22.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.
Notley, C.; Ward, E.; Dawkins, L.; Jakes, S.; Holland, R. Vaping as an alternative to smoking relapse following
brief lapse. Unpublished work. 2018.
34.
Allem, J.P.; Garcia, R.; Unger, J.B.; Baezconde-Garbanati, L.; Sussman, S. Tobacco Attitudes and Behaviors of
Vape Shop Retailers in Los Angeles. Am. J. Health Behav. 2015, 39, 794–798. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.
Cheney, M.K.;
Gowin, M.;
Wann, T.F. Vapor Store Owner Beliefs and Messages to Customers.
Nicotine Tobacco Res. 2016, 18, 694–699. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.
Hart, J.L.; Walker, K.L.; Sears, C.G.; Lee, A.S.; Smith, C.; Siu, A.; Keith, R.; Ridner, L. Vape Shop Employees:
Public Health Advocates? Tobacco Prev. Cessat. 2016, 2. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37.
Burbank, A.D.; Thrul, J.; Ling, P.M. A Pilot Study of Retail ‘Vape Shops’ in the San Francisco Bay Area.
Tobacco Prev. Cessat. 2016, 2. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38.
Sussman, S.; Allem, J.P.; Garcia, J.; Unger, J.B.; Cruz, T.B.; Garcia, R.; Baezconde-Garbanati, L. Who walks
into vape shops in Southern California: A naturalistic observation of customers. Tobacco Induced Dis. 2016,
14, 18. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39.
Kong, G.; Unger, J.; Baezconde-Garbanati, L.; Sussman, S. The associations between yelp online reviews and
vape shops closing or remaining open one year later. Tobacco Prev. Cessat. 2017, 2. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40.
Sussman, S.; Baezconde-Garbanati, L.; Garcia, R.; Barker, D.C.; Samet, J.M.; Leventhal, A.; Unger, J.B.
Commentary: Forces That Drive the Vape Shop Industry and Implications for the Health Professions.
Eval. Health Prof. 2016, 39, 379–388. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41.
E-cigarette Trajectories (ECtra): Real World Experiences of Using E-Cigarettes for Avoiding Relapse to
Smoking: Success or Failure. A Qualitative Study. Ongoing September 2016–February 2018. Funded by
Cancer Research UK. Available online: www.ecigsresearch.uea.ac.uk (accessed on 23 November 2017).
42.
Braun, V.; Clarke, V. Using Thematic analysis in psychology. Qual. Res. Psychol. 2006, 3, 77–101. [CrossRef]
43.
Codes 1–3 in ONS Standard Occupational Classification Hierarchy. Available online: https://onsdigital.
github.io/dp-classification-tools/standard-occupational-classification/ONS_SOC_hierarchy_view.html
(accessed on 10 October 2017).
44.
Cancer Research, UK. Reasons Why Vaping Is Not as Bad for You as Smoking; Promotional Poster; CRUK:
London, UK, 2017; Available online: http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/about-us/cancer-news/press-
release/2017-02-06-e-cigarettes-safer-than-smoking-says-long-term-study (accessed on 12 December 2017).
45.
Farrimond, H. E-cigarette regulation and policy: UK vapers’ perspectives. Addiction 2016, 111, 1077–1083.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.
National Centre for Smoking Cessation and Training. Training and Assessment Programme. Available
online:
http://www.ncsct.co.uk/publication_training-and-assessment-programme.php (accessed on
10 January 2018).
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 297
14 of 14
47.
Le Houezec, J.; Global Forum on Nicotine (GFN) Dialogue Speech. Presentation at the GFN Dialogues
(Autumn 2017), Durham, UK, 2 November 2017; Available online: https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_
continue=17&v=k-W385qXc5I (accessed on 2 February 2018).
48.
National Centre for Smoking Cessation and Training and New Nicotine Alliance. The Switch Films. Available
online: https://www.youtube.com/user/NCSCTfilms/featured (accessed on 15 December 2017).
49.
Russell, C.; Dickson, T.; McKeganey, N. Advice from former-smoking e-cigarette users to current smokers on
how to use e-cigarettes as part of an attempt to quit smoking. Nicotine Tobacco Res. 2017, ntx176. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
50.
Thirlway, F. Global Forum on Nicotine (GFN) Dialogue Speech. Presentation at the GFN Dialogues (Autumn
2017), Durham, UK, 2 November 2017; Available online: https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=
3&v=LjHnkSFZpXY (accessed on 2 February 2017).
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
