 Original research n Neuroradiology
212 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 280: Number 1—July 2016
1 From the Department of Radiology (J.B.W., P.G.N.), Depart-
ment of Rehabilitation Medicine (R.C.B., E.W., K.M.R.), and 
Behavioral Health Service (R.J.R.), Philadelphia VA Medical 
Center, Philadelphia, Pa; and Departments of Radiology 
(J.B.W., P.G.N.) and Psychiatry (R.J.R.), Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pa. From 
the 2014 RSNA Annual Meeting. Received May 3, 2015; 
revision requested July 8; revision received October 25; 
accepted November 10; final version accepted November 
29. Address correspondence to P.G.N., Departments of 
Radiology and Neurology, Loyola University Medical Center, 
Maywood, IL 60153 (e-mail: paolo.nucifora@lumc.edu ).
q RSNA, 2016
Purpose:
To determine whether functional outcomes of veterans 
who sustained combat-related mild traumatic brain injury 
(TBI) are associated with scalar metrics derived from dif-
fusion-tensor (DT) imaging at their initial postdeployment 
evaluation.
Materials and 
Methods:
This HIPAA-compliant retrospective study was approved 
by the institutional review board, and the requirement to 
obtain informed consent was waived. From 2010 to 2013, 
initial postdeployment evaluation, including clinical as-
sessment and brain magnetic resonance (MR) examina-
tion with DT imaging, was performed in combat veterans 
who sustained mild TBI while deployed. Outcomes from 
chart review encompassed initial postdeployment clinical 
assessment as well as later functional status, including 
evaluation of occupational status and health care utiliza-
tion. Scalar diffusion metrics from the initial postdeploy-
ment evaluation were compared with outcomes by using 
multivariate analysis. Veterans who did and did not return 
to work were also compared for differences in clinical var-
iables by using t and x2 tests.
Results:
Postdeployment evaluation was performed a mean of 3.8 
years after injury (range, 0.5–9 years; standard deviation, 
2.5 years). After a mean follow-up of 1.4 years (range, 
0.5–2.5 years; standard deviation, 0.8 year), 34 of 57 vet-
erans (60%) had returned to work. Return to work was 
associated with diffusion metrics in multiple regions of 
white matter, particularly in the left internal capsule and 
the left frontal lobe (P = .02–.05). Overall, veterans had a 
mean of 46 health care visits per year during the follow-up 
period (range, 3–196 visits per year; standard deviation, 
41 visits per year). Cumulative health care visits over time 
were inversely correlated with diffusion anisotropy of the 
splenium of the corpus callosum and adjacent parietal 
white matter (P , .05). Clinical measures obtained dur-
ing initial postdeployment evaluation were not predictive 
of later functional status (P = .12–.8).
Conclusion:
Differences in white matter microstructure may partially 
account for the variance in functional outcomes among 
veterans who sustained combat-related mild TBI.
q 
RSNA, 2016
Jeffrey B. Ware, MD
Rosette C. Biester, PhD
Elizabeth Whipple, MS
Keith M. Robinson, MD
Richard J. Ross, MD, PhD
Paolo G. Nucifora, MD, PhD
combat-related Mild Traumatic 
Brain injury: Association between 
Baseline Diffusion-Tensor Imaging 
Findings and Long-term Outcomes1 
This copy is for personal use only. To order printed copies, contact reprints@rsna.org
 Radiology: Volume 280: Number 1—July 2016 n radiology.rsna.org 
213
NEURORADIOLOGY: Combat-related Mild Traumatic Brain Injury 
Ware et al
who have sustained mild TBI compared 
with control subjects (11,12). On the 
basis of work in animal models of TBI, 
these alterations are hypothesized to 
represent traumatic white matter in-
jury, predominantly involving axonal 
damage (13).
Several recent studies have found 
DT imaging metrics to show correla-
tion with neurocognitive function and 
short-term functional outcomes in TBI 
(10,14–16). It is not clear, however, 
whether DT imaging can help predict 
longer term outcomes. We therefore 
set out to determine whether important 
functional outcomes of combat veterans 
with a clinical diagnosis of mild TBI are 
predicted with DT imaging measure-
ments obtained at initial postdeploy-
ment evaluation.
Materials and Methods
This Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability 
Act–compliant 
retro-
spective study was approved by the 
institutional review board of the home 
institution. The requirement to obtain 
informed consent was waived. All MR 
images included in this study were 
obtained according to the standard of 
care.
operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, the 
prevalence of which is now reported to 
be as high as 20% (2). Mild TBI in Op-
eration Iraqi Freedom and Operation 
Enduring Freedom veterans is primar-
ily caused by blast injuries induced by 
improvised explosive devices, which 
are frequently used in modern combat 
(3). Consequently, mild TBI has be-
come known as the “signature injury” 
of post-9/11 warfare. Although resolu-
tion of posttraumatic symptoms occurs 
within 3 months in most cases, as many 
as 25% of individuals with mild TBI will 
experience chronic physical, cognitive, 
and affective symptoms (4,5). Further-
more, veterans who have sustained mild 
TBI are at increased risk of comorbid 
psychiatric disorders (6), occupational 
impairment (7), and high levels of 
health care resource utilization (8,9).
The clinical evaluation and treat-
ment of veterans with combat-related 
mild TBI remains challenging owing to 
difficulties in establishing the diagnosis, 
predicting outcomes, and separating 
the effects of mild TBI from frequently 
comorbid psychiatric conditions such as 
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). 
Therefore, reliable biomarkers of mild 
TBI have been sought to better under-
stand the pathophysiology of mild TBI 
and improve diagnostic accuracy and 
outcome prediction.
Extensive research conducted dur-
ing the past decade has demonstrated 
the potential of diffusion-based mag-
netic resonance (MR) imaging tech-
niques to detect previously occult ab-
normalities related to mild TBI (10). 
The most widely used technique has 
been diffusion-tensor (DT) imaging, 
which uses measurements of water dif-
fusion in the brain to infer details of mi-
crostructural organization—particularly 
in white matter. Multiple previous stud-
ies have demonstrated alterations of 
diffusion metrics in groups of veterans 
Published online before print
10.1148/radiol.2016151013 Content code: 
Radiology 2016; 280:212–219
Abbreviations:
DT = diffusion tensor
FA = fractional anisotropy
FAFI = FA fiber integral
NSI = Neurobehavioral Symptom Inventory
PTSD = posttraumatic stress disorder
TBI = traumatic brain injury
TBSS = tract-based spatial statistics
Author contributions:
Guarantors of integrity of entire study, J.B.W., K.M.R., 
P.G.N.; study concepts/study design or data acquisition 
or data analysis/interpretation, all authors; manuscript 
drafting or manuscript revision for important intellectual 
content, all authors; manuscript final version approval, 
all authors; agrees to ensure any questions related to the 
work are appropriately resolved, all authors; literature 
research, J.B.W., E.W., P.G.N.; clinical studies, E.W., K.M.R., 
P.G.N.; statistical analysis, J.B.W., P.G.N.; and manuscript 
editing, all authors
Conflicts of interest are listed at the end of this article.
Advances in Knowledge
 
n At their initial postdeployment 
evaluation, veterans who sus-
tained mild traumatic brain injury 
(TBI) had elevated Neurobehav-
ioral Symptom Inventory (NSI) 
scores (mean total score, 39.5); 
NSI scores showed an inverse 
correlation with diffusion-tensor 
(DT) imaging metrics obtained at 
this time, including fractional an-
isotropy (FA) within the white 
matter of the left and right frontal 
lobes and within the genu of the 
corpus callosum (P = .016–.05).
 
n After their initial postdeployment 
evaluation, 34 of the 57 veterans 
who sustained mild TBI during 
combat (60%) returned to work 
(mean follow-up, 1.4 years); vet-
erans who did not return to 
work displayed significantly lower 
FA (P = .02) and significantly 
higher mean diffusivity (P = 
.005) within the posterior limb 
of the left internal capsule com-
pared with those who returned 
to work.
 
n After their initial postdeployment 
evaluation, veterans who sus-
tained mild TBI visited health 
care providers frequently (mean, 
46 visits per year of follow-up); 
health care utilization showed an 
inverse correlation with initial 
postdeployment white matter FA 
fiber integral within the splenium 
of the corpus callosum, as well as 
within multiple adjacent regions 
(P = .026–.05).
Implication for Patient Care
 
n This study suggests that DT im-
aging may be able to help predict 
functional postdeployment out-
comes of veterans who sustained 
mild TBI during combat.
M
ild 
traumatic 
brain 
injury 
(TBI) is a public health prob-
lem of increasingly recognized 
importance, particularly among cur-
rent military veterans. As defined by 
the Department of Defense (1), mild 
TBI in veterans refers to a head injury 
with temporary mental alteration and/
or loss of consciousness, with normal 
findings at conventional neurologic 
imaging. During the past 2 decades 
there has been a dramatic increase in 
the incidence of combat-related mild 
TBI among U.S. veterans of military 
 214 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 280: Number 1—July 2016
NEURORADIOLOGY: Combat-related Mild Traumatic Brain Injury 
Ware et al
on the basis of clinical interview by a 
psychiatrist. Neurobehavioral symptom 
severity was based on the Neurobe-
havioral Symptom Inventory (NSI), a 
standardized 22-item symptom-based 
questionnaire composed of affective, 
vestibular, cognitive, and somatic symp-
tom clusters (17). NSI scores were 
compared with a previously published 
normative reference (18). Within the 
subgroup of subjects with PTSD, an ad-
ditional assessment of PTSD symptom 
severity was made on the basis of the 
PTSD Checklist–Military Version (19).
Longitudinal variables consisted of 
postdeployment occupational status at 
the end of the follow-up period and the 
number of postdeployment health care 
visits over time. These variables were 
assessed on the basis of chart records 
from all medical and psychiatric visits be-
tween the initial postdeployment evalua-
tion and a predefined end point (March 
1, 2014). Veterans documented as work-
ing full or part time, those actively en-
rolled in an educational program, and 
those actively involved in the military 
at the end of the follow-up period were 
considered to have returned to work. 
The number of health care visits over 
time was calculated by dividing the total 
number of documented outpatient and 
inpatient medical and psychiatric visits 
by the length of follow-up (measured in 
years) for each subject.
Brain MR Imaging
All 
veterans 
in 
this 
study 
underwent 
brain 
MR imaging with a 1.5-T unit (Siemens 
Espree; Siemens, Erlangen, Germany), 
 
which included a conventional clinical 
protocol in addition to a single 30-direc-
tion DT sequence with two b values (b = 
0 and 1000 sec/mm2) and the following 
imaging parameters: repetition time, 
5400 msec; echo time, 108 msec; 240-
mm field of view; 5-mm-thick sections, 
and 128 3 128 matrix. Conventional 
MR imaging sequences included axial 
high-spatial-resolution 
T1-weighted, 
axial fast spin-echo T2-weighted, ax-
ial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery, 
and axial susceptibility-weighted se-
quences. All MR images received clin-
ical interpretation by a board-certified 
neuroradiologist.
disease), more than 1 year between 
clinical evaluation and brain MR im-
aging, and severe nonhead injury (eg, 
amputation).
Clinical Data, Injury Characteristics, and 
Symptoms
Chart review was used to assess de-
mographic, military, clinical, and lon-
gitudinal variables for each subject on 
the basis of documentation from ini-
tial postdeployment clinical evaluation, 
which occurred after each subject’s fi-
nal deployment and within 1 year of the 
accompanying brain MR imaging. One 
radiology resident (J.B.W., with 3 years 
of experience in radiology) manually 
collected data from the electronic med-
ical record. Demographic variables in-
cluded age and education level. Self-re-
ported military variables were derived 
from the most severe head injury expe-
rienced by that subject while in combat 
and included date of injury, mechanism 
of injury (blast injury vs nonblast in-
jury), and whether loss of conscious-
ness had occurred. In addition, in cases 
of blast injury, the distance from the 
blast was estimated by each subject for 
the closest blast event. For this study, 
we considered any blast injury of an es-
timated distance of 30 feet or less to be 
a “close blast” injury. Clinical variables 
included medical history, substance use 
history, psychiatric diagnoses, and neu-
robehavioral symptom severity. Psychi-
atric diagnoses included PTSD and ma-
jor depressive disorder and were made 
Study Population
All male combat veterans with mild TBI 
who had undergone brain MR imaging 
between January 1, 2008, and Septem-
ber 30, 2013, were retrospectively iden-
tified within a large Veteran’s Adminis-
tration hospital system. Veterans were 
routinely referred for brain MR imaging 
and evaluation by the multidisciplinary 
Polytrauma Program if they were con-
sidered at risk for TBI during postde-
ployment screening (9). In accordance 
with Veteran’s Administration clinical 
practice guidelines, the presence or 
absence of mild TBI was subsequently 
established at comprehensive evalua-
tion by a physical medicine and rehabil-
itation physician with particular exper-
tise in the diagnosis and management 
of combat-related TBI with use of a 
structured clinical interview. Diagnostic 
criteria for mild TBI include the combi-
nation of an injury to the head and any 
of the following: transient confusion, 
disorientation, impaired consciousness, 
memory dysfunction immediately be-
fore or after the time of injury, or loss 
of consciousness lasting less than 30 
minutes (1).
The inclusion and exclusion criteria 
for this study are outlined in Figure 1. 
 
Exclusion criteria included abnormal 
findings at conventional brain MR imag-
ing, less than 6 months of available fol-
low-up data, age greater than 50 years, 
any major medical comorbidity at the 
time of brain MR imaging (eg, human 
immunodeficiency virus, cardiovascular 
Figure 1
Figure 1: Overview of study population, inclusion criteria, and exclusion criteria. m-TBI = mild TBI.
 Radiology: Volume 280: Number 1—July 2016 n radiology.rsna.org 
215
NEURORADIOLOGY: Combat-related Mild Traumatic Brain Injury 
Ware et al
subject’s FAFI map was first aligned 
into a common space by using the same 
nonlinear registration process as used 
for the FA data and then projected onto 
the mean FA skeleton. Subject-specific 
FAFI skeleton maps were then used for 
voxel-wise cross-subject statistics.
Finally, a posthoc region-of-interest 
analysis was performed. The Johns 
Hopkins University white matter atlas 
(23) was used to extract regions of in-
terest from within each subject’s DT 
imaging parameter maps after registra-
tion to common space as part of the 
standard TBSS preprocessing pipeline. 
Mean values of each DT imaging met-
ric were calculated within the region of 
interest containing a plurality of signif-
icant voxels at the initial TBSS analysis 
and subsequently compared between 
subjects who returned to work and 
those who did not.
Statistical Design
Voxel-wise statistical analysis of diffu-
sion metrics was performed by using 
the randomize tool in the Functional 
MR Imaging of the Brain software li-
brary, which employs nonparametric 
permutation testing based on a stan-
dard general linear model design setup 
(24). Threshold-free cluster enhance-
ment was used to correct for multiple 
comparisons, and the threshold for sta-
tistical significance was chosen as P , 
.05 for a two-tailed test.
Demographic, clinical, and military 
variables were initially assessed by using 
diffusion metrics were subsequently 
prepared by applying the same regis-
tration transformation derived in the 
FA processing steps to each parameter 
map for each subject. Finally, each sub-
ject’s aligned data for each scalar met-
ric were projected onto the mean FA 
skeleton. Subject-specific scalar metric 
skeleton maps were then used for vox-
el-wise cross-subject statistics.
In addition to the traditional diffu-
sion metrics, we performed voxel-wise 
calculation of a FA fiber integral (FAFI). 
The FAFI value of a voxel is dependent 
not only on the FA of that voxel but also 
on FA values elsewhere along white mat-
ter tracts that pass through that voxel 
(22). This method increases the spatial 
coherence of tract-specific white matter 
changes, which increases the sensitivity 
of voxel-wise analysis for tract-specific 
abnormalities. These features may con-
fer greater overall sensitivity for the de-
tection of diffusion changes, which are 
spatially heterogeneous and of greater 
functional importance.
The FAFI was calculated from the 
FA and principal diffusion direction 
maps, which are used to perform deter-
ministic tractography from each of eight 
subseeds within each white matter vox-
el by using in-house software written in 
MATLAB (Mathworks, Natick, Mass). 
FA is then integrated along the extent 
of each of the resultant tracts and the 
total FA sum is deposited into the start-
ing voxel, representing the FAFI value. 
To prepare for statistical analysis, each 
DT Image Postprocessing
All processing of DT imaging data was 
performed offline on a single worksta-
tion by using the freely available soft-
ware package tract-based spatial statis-
tics (TBSS) (20), part of the Functional 
MR Imaging of the Brain software li-
brary (21). Data analysis was performed 
by J.B.W. and P.G.N. (a board-certified 
neuroradiologist with 9 years of neuro-
radiology experience). Preparation of 
DT images for statistical analysis was 
performed according to the standard 
TBSS pipeline and included correction 
of eddy currents, brain extraction, and 
derivation of subject-specific maps of 
scalar diffusion metrics by fitting a ten-
sor model to the diffusion data. Scalar 
diffusion metrics included fractional 
anisotropy (FA), mean diffusivity, axial 
diffusivity, and radial diffusivity. FA im-
ages were then prepared for statistical 
analysis by aligning each subject’s FA 
data to a common space by using the 
nonlinear registration tool FNIRT, part 
of TBSS. A mean FA image was then 
created, followed by derivation of the 
mean FA skeleton, representing centers 
of all tracts common to the group. Each 
subject’s FA map was included in the 
generation of the mean FA skeleton. 
Subject-specific maps of the additional 
Table 1
Summary of Demographic, Injury, and 
Clinical Characteristics
Parameter
Value
Demographic characteristics
 Mean age (y)* 
30.5 (22–46)
 Some college education  
 or higher
25 (44)
Injury characteristics
 Time from injury (y)*
3.8 (1–9)
 Blast mechanism
48 (84)
 Close blast (,30 ft)
35 (61)
 Loss of consciousness
40 (70)
Comorbid disorders
 PTSD
45 (79)
 Depression
19 (33)
 Substance use disorder
23 (40)
Note.—Except where indicated, data are numbers of 
subjects (n = 57), with percentages in parentheses.
* Numbers in parentheses are the range.
Table 2
Lack of Association between Clinical Variables and Return to Work
Parameter
Veterans Who  
Returned to Work
Veterans Who Did  
Not Return to Work
P Value
Mean age (y)
29.8
31.6
.32
Mean time since injury (y)
3.4 
4.3 
.21
Some college education or higher (%)
44 (15/34)
43 (10/23)
.97
PTSD (%)
76 (26/34)
83 (19/23)
.8
Depression (%)
24 (8/34)
48 (11/23)
.12
Substance use disorder (%)
38 (13/34)
43 (10/23)
.76
Close blast (%)
71 (24/34)
48 (11/23)
.28
Loss of consciousness (%)
68 (23/34)
48 (11/23)
.34
Mean NSI
38.9
40.4
.74
Note.—Numbers in parentheses are raw data.
 216 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 280: Number 1—July 2016
NEURORADIOLOGY: Combat-related Mild Traumatic Brain Injury 
Ware et al
a univariate voxel-wise approach. For 
functional outcomes, multivariate re-
gression was used to address potential 
confounders. Voxel-wise comparison to 
occupational status at the end of fol-
low-up and health care visits over time 
included nuisance variables for age, ed-
ucation level, time from injury, and co-
morbid diagnoses. These variables were 
selected for inclusion as nuisance vari-
ables in the regression model because 
they have previously been shown to af-
fect DT imaging measurements in white 
matter (9,25). The regression model for 
health care visits over time included oc-
cupational status at follow-up as an ad-
ditional nuisance variable based on the 
possibility that occupational status could 
affect access to health care. Veterans 
who did and who did not return to work 
were also compared for differences in 
clinical variables by using the t test and 
x2 test where appropriate (implement-
ed in Microsoft Excel [Microsoft, Red-
mond, Wash]).
Results
Study Population
Of 76 veterans with mild TBI who had 
undergone DT imaging, 19 (25%) were 
excluded for the following reasons: less 
than 6 months of available follow-up data 
(n = 6), age greater than 50 years (n = 
5), abnormal brain MR image (n = 5), 
medical comorbidity (n = 2), and more 
than 1 year between brain MR imaging 
and clinical evaluation (n = 1). For the 
remaining 57 subjects who met all study 
criteria, the mean time between injury 
and initial postdeployment evaluation 
and/or brain MR imaging was 3.8 years 
Figure 2
Figure 2: Results of voxel-wise correlation of FA with NSI 
affective cluster subscore (top row) and NSI total score (bottom 
row) across all subjects overlaid on axial structural images of 
template brain. Images show regions of inverse correlation be-
tween FA and affective subscore (P = .042–.05) as well as NSI 
total score (P = .016–.05) within white matter of left and right 
frontal lobes as well as within genu of corpus callosum (regions 
where lower FA is found in those with higher symptom score). 
Colored voxels = significant voxels after correction (dark blue,  
P < .05; light blue, P < .045).
Figure 3
Figure 3: Results of voxel-wise correlation of FAFI with length of time since injury across all 
subjects overlaid on axial (left) and sagittal (right) structural images of template brain. Images 
show regions of direct correlation (P = .03–.05) within white matter of inferior right frontal lobe 
(regions where lower FAFI is found among those with more recent history of TBI). Colored voxels 
= significant voxels after correction (red, P < .05; yellow, P < .04).
 Radiology: Volume 280: Number 1—July 2016 n radiology.rsna.org 
217
NEURORADIOLOGY: Combat-related Mild Traumatic Brain Injury 
Ware et al
decrease in the radial diffusivity within 
white matter of the left temporal lobe 
and left parietal lobe white matter (Fig 
4). FAFI and axial diffusivity were not 
associated with return to work.
Posthoc region-of-interest analysis 
of the posterior limb of the left internal 
capsule also demonstrated significant 
group-wise differences in DT imaging 
metrics. Subjects who returned to work 
with a relative increase in FA within 
white matter of the posterior limb of 
the left internal capsule as well as the 
left frontal lobe (Fig 4). Furthermore, 
return to work was associated with a 
relative decrease in mean diffusivity 
within white matter of the left frontal 
lobe, left temporal lobe, left internal 
capsule, left parietal lobe, and right pa-
rietal lobe (Fig 4) as well as a relative 
(range, 0.5–9 years; standard deviation, 
2.5 years). After initial postdeployment 
evaluation, the mean follow-up was 1.4 
years (range, 0.5–2.5 years; standard 
deviation, 0.8 year).
Demographic, injury, and clinical 
characteristics of the study population 
are summarized in Table 1.There were 
no significant differences in clinical var-
iables between veterans who returned 
to work during the follow-up period and 
those who did not (Table 2). In addi-
tion, the mean follow-up duration did 
not significantly differ between these 
two groups (1.5 years and 1.4 years, 
respectively). The mean NSI total score 
across all subjects was 39.5 (range, 
11–74; standard deviation, 15.6), which 
corresponds to the 98th percentile in 
comparison with normative data ob-
tained from a large sample of National 
Guard members who were deployed 
but did not sustain mild TBI (18).
DT Imaging and Clinical Variables
There was a significant inverse correla-
tion between NSI score and FA within 
white matter of the right and left fron-
tal lobes as well as the genu and body of 
the corpus callosum (Fig 2). A similar 
white matter distribution demonstrated 
an inverse correlation between FA and 
the affective cluster NSI subscore (Fig 
2). FA values did not show correlation 
with other NSI subscores. Diffusivity 
measures and FAFI values did not show 
correlation with NSI scores.
There was a significant direct cor-
relation between length of time from 
injury and FAFI within white matter of 
the inferior right frontal lobe (Fig 3). 
FA and diffusion values were not cor-
related with length of time from injury. 
There were no significant associations 
between DT imaging and clinical di-
agnoses of depression, PTSD, or sub-
stance abuse. Furthermore, there were 
no significant associations between DT 
imaging and injury mechanism, close 
blast injury, or loss of consciousness.
DT Imaging and Functional Outcomes
Of the 57 veterans included in our study, 
34 (60%) had returned to work by the 
end of the follow-up period. Return 
to work was independently associated 
Figure 4
Figure 4: Results of group-wise comparison of diffusion metrics between subjects who returned 
to work by the end of follow-up and those who did not, controlled for age, education level, time 
from injury, and comorbid diagnoses. Results are overlaid on axial structural images of template 
brain. Regions of lower FA (P = .02–.05) are present within white matter of posterior limb of left 
internal capsule among those who did not return to work by the end of follow-up (top row). Re-
gions of higher mean diffusivity (P = .022–.05) are present within white matter of left frontal lobe, 
left temporal lobe, posterior limb of left internal capsule, and splenium of corpus callosum (bottom 
left). Regions of higher radial diffusivity (P = .04–.05) are present within posterior limb of left 
internal capsule and splenium of the corpus callosum (bottom right). Colored voxels = significant 
voxels after correction (red or dark blue, P < .05; yellow or light blue, P < .03).
 218 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 280: Number 1—July 2016
NEURORADIOLOGY: Combat-related Mild Traumatic Brain Injury 
Ware et al
TBI (27). Several previous studies of 
DT imaging in combat-related mild TBI 
have demonstrated evidence of micro-
structural white matter damage mani-
fested by reduced diffusion anisotropy 
and elevated diffusivity measurements 
in several regions, which overlaps with 
our results (12,28). Although previous 
investigations of the relationships be-
tween diffusion measurements, symp-
toms, and injury characteristics have 
resulted in mixed findings (28–30), our 
results are in general agreement with 
those that have demonstrated an asso-
ciation between lower diffusion anisot-
ropy and elevated diffusivity in white 
matter and unfavorable functional out-
comes (28,29). Our study, however, 
offers new information to support a 
similar association with longer term 
functional outcomes, which are of dis-
tinct importance in combat-related 
mild TBI. Our findings also suggest that 
diffusion measurements may hold pre-
dictive value, thereby providing a route 
by which they may become useful in a 
clinical setting.
This study has important limita-
tions. In this cohort study of veterans 
with mild TBI, we did not have access 
to a comparison population of healthy 
subjects. This limits our results in sev-
eral ways. First, our results can only be 
generalized to veterans with mild TBI. 
Therefore, although our data suggest 
that DT imaging has prognostic value 
in the setting of mild TBI, we cannot 
address whether DT imaging has a role 
in other disorders or whether DT im-
aging can depict mild TBI in a general 
population. Furthermore, although the 
relationship between outcomes and 
diffusion measurements in this study 
would be consistent with the effects 
of traumatic microstructural injury on 
the basis of the existing literature, the 
current study design does not allow this 
possibility to be distinguished from in-
nate or other premorbid differences in 
white matter. Finally, as a retrospective 
study, the exclusion of subjects with in-
complete data may introduce bias and 
limit external validity.
In conclusion, our results suggest 
that diffusion measurements hold the 
potential to confer important prognostic 
differences in white matter microstruc-
ture may partially account for the vari-
ance in functional outcomes among this 
population and, in particular, that loss 
of white matter integrity has a direct, 
measurable effect. Clinical measures, 
on the other hand, were not predic-
tive of outcome, which suggests that 
imaging holds the potential to provide 
important and independent prognostic 
information at initial postdeployment 
medical evaluation.
This current study also provides 
new insight into the neurobiologic pro-
cesses underlying combat-related mild 
TBI. Specifically, we report an associa-
tion between return to work and scalar 
DT imaging metrics within the poste-
rior limb of the left internal capsule, a 
region with previously demonstrated 
vulnerability to damage in mild TBI 
(10,11,26). Because this region is 
known to contain important traversing 
fibers that provide motor innervation 
to the typically dominant right side of 
the body, the observed association may 
provide a neural correlate for the clin-
ically observed relationship between 
impairments in fine motor functioning 
and the inability to return to work after 
had significantly higher FA (P = .02), as 
well as significantly lower mean diffu-
sivity (P = .005) and radial diffusivity 
(P = .001) within the posterior limb of 
the left internal capsule. There were no 
significant regional group differences in 
axial diffusivity or FAFI.
The mean number of health care 
visits per year of follow-up in the study 
population was 46 (range, 3–196 visits 
per year; standard deviation, 41 visits 
per year). Health care visits over time 
showed an inverse correlation with 
FAFI in the splenium of the corpus cal-
losum as well as within white matter 
of the left temporal lobe, left parietal 
lobe, and right parietal lobe (Fig 5). 
Other diffusion metrics were not inde-
pendently correlated with health care 
visits over time.
Discussion
Among military veterans who sustained 
mild TBI during combat, we found sig-
nificant associations between postde-
ployment DT imaging measurements 
and neurobehavioral symptoms, timing 
of injury, and subsequent functional 
outcomes. Our findings suggest that 
Figure 5
Figure 5: Results of voxel-wise correlation of FAFI with number of health care visits over time 
across all subjects, controlled for effects of age, education level, time from injury, comorbid 
diagnoses, and occupational status. Results are overlaid on axial structural images of template 
brain and show regions of inverse correlation (P = .026–.05) within white matter of splenium 
of corpus callosum, left and right parietal lobes, and left temporal lobe (regions where lower 
FAFI is found among those with more health care visits over time). Colored voxels = significant 
voxels after correction (dark blue, P < .05; light blue, P < .04).
 Radiology: Volume 280: Number 1—July 2016 n radiology.rsna.org 
219
NEURORADIOLOGY: Combat-related Mild Traumatic Brain Injury 
Ware et al
information in the clinical evaluation of 
combat-related mild TBI. These findings 
should encourage continued research 
efforts to further refine and investigate 
the clinical utility of diffusion measure-
ments in this setting. Future studies can 
build on this work by closely examining 
diffusion properties, particularly within 
motor pathways, and, in particular, 
their relationship to fine motor function 
and occupational outcome. In addition, 
further work is needed to clarify the 
natural history of diffusion measure-
ments in mild TBI and the relationship 
between microstructural changes over 
time and function.
Disclosures of Conflicts of Interest: J.B.W. 
disclosed no relevant relationships. R.C.B. dis-
closed no relevant relationships. E.W. disclosed 
no relevant relationships. K.M.R. disclosed no 
relevant relationships. R.J.R. disclosed no rele-
vant relationships. P.G.N. disclosed no relevant 
relationships.
References
 1. Management of Concussion/mTBI Working 
Group. 
VA/DoD 
clinical 
practice 
guideline 
for 
management of concussion/mild traumatic 
brain injury. J Rehabil Res Dev 2009;46(6): 
CP1–CP68.
 2. Terrio H, Brenner LA, Ivins BJ, et al. Trau-
matic brain injury screening: preliminary 
findings in a US Army Brigade combat team. 
J Head Trauma Rehabil 2009;24(1):14–23.
 3. Gondusky JS, Reiter MP. Protecting military 
convoys in Iraq: an examination of battle in-
juries sustained by a mechanized battalion 
during Operation Iraqi Freedom II. Mil Med 
2005;170(6):546–549.
 4. Lannsjö M, af Geijerstam JL, Johansson U, 
Bring J, Borg J. Prevalence and structure of 
symptoms at 3 months after mild traumatic 
brain injury in a national cohort. Brain Inj 
2009;23(3):213–219.
 5. Sigurdardottir S, Andelic N, Roe C, Jerstad 
T, Schanke AK. Post-concussion symptoms 
after traumatic brain injury at 3 and 12 
months post-injury: a prospective study. 
Brain Inj 2009;23(6):489–497.
 6. Hoge CW, McGurk D, Thomas JL, Cox AL, 
Engel CC, Castro CA. Mild traumatic brain 
injury in U.S. soldiers returning from Iraq. 
N Engl J Med 2008;358(5):453–463.
 7. Drake AI, Gray N, Yoder S, Pramuka M, 
Llewellyn M. Factors predicting return to 
work following mild traumatic brain injury: 
a discriminant analysis. J Head Trauma Re-
habil 2000;15(5):1103–1112.
 8. Hodgkinson A, Veerabangsa A, Drane D, 
McCluskey A. Service utilization following 
traumatic brain injury. J Head Trauma Re-
habil 2000;15(6):1208–1226.
 9. Olson-Madden JH, Homaifar BY, Hostetter 
TA, et al. Validating the traumatic brain in-
jury-4 screening measure for veterans seek-
ing mental health treatment with psychiatric 
inpatient and outpatient service utilization 
data. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2014;95(5): 
925–929.
 
10. Hulkower MB, Poliak DB, Rosenbaum SB, 
Zimmerman ME, Lipton ML. A decade of 
DTI in traumatic brain injury: 10 years and 
100 articles later. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
2013;34(11):2064–2074.
 
11. Mac Donald CL, Johnson AM, Cooper D, 
et al. Detection of blast-related traumatic 
brain injury in U.S. military personnel. N 
Engl J Med 2011;364(22):2091–2100.
 
12. Jorge RE, Acion L, White T, et al. White 
matter abnormalities in veterans with mild 
traumatic brain injury. Am J Psychiatry 
2012;169(12):1284–1291.
 
13. Mac Donald CL, Dikranian K, Song SK, 
Bayly PV, Holtzman DM, Brody DL. Detec-
tion of traumatic axonal injury with diffu-
sion tensor imaging in a mouse model of 
traumatic brain injury. Exp Neurol 2007; 
205(1):116–131.
 
14. Marquez de la Plata CD, Yang FG, Wang JY, 
et 
al. 
Diffusion 
tensor 
imaging 
biomarkers 
for 
traumatic axonal injury: analysis of three an-
alytic methods. J Int Neuropsychol Soc 2011; 
17(1):24–35.
 
15. Newcombe V
, Chatfield D, Outtrim J, et al. 
Mapping traumatic axonal injury using diffu-
sion tensor imaging: correlations with func-
tional outcome. PLoS One 2011;6(5):e19214.
 
16. Sidaros A, Engberg AW, Sidaros K, et al. 
Diffusion tensor imaging during recovery 
from severe traumatic brain injury and re-
lation to clinical outcome: a longitudinal 
study. Brain 2008;131(Pt 2):559–572.
 
17. Cicerone K, Kalmar K. Persistent postcon-
cussion syndrome: the structure of subjective 
complaints after mild traumatic brain injury. 
J Head Trauma Rehabil 1995;10(3):1–17.
 
18. Soble JR, Silva MA, Vanderploeg RD, et 
al. Normative data for the Neurobehavioral 
Symptom Inventory (NSI) and post-concus-
sion symptom profiles among TBI, PTSD, 
and nonclinical samples. Clin Neuropsychol 
2014;28(4):614–632.
 
19. Weathers FW, Litz BT, Herman DS, Huska 
JA, Keane TM. The PTSD checklist (PCL): 
reliability, validity, and diagnostic utility. 
In: Proceedings of the Annual Conference 
of the International Society for Traumatic 
Stress Studies. Oakbrook Terrace, Ill: Inter-
national Society for Traumatic Stress Stud-
ies, 1993.
 
20. Smith SM, Jenkinson M, Johansen-Berg H, 
et al. Tract-based spatial statistics: voxel-
wise analysis of multi-subject diffusion data. 
Neuroimage 2006;31(4):1487–1505.
 
21. Smith SM, Jenkinson M, Woolrich MW, et 
al. Advances in functional and structural MR 
image analysis and implementation as FSL. 
Neuroimage 2004;23(Suppl 1):S208–S219.
 
22. Ware J, Biester R, Whipple E, Robinson K, 
Ross R, Nucifora P. Association of baseline 
neuroimaging with short-term and long-
term clinical outcomes in combat-related 
traumatic brain injury. In: Radiological So-
ciety of North America Scientific Assembly 
and Annual Meeting Program. Oak Brook, 
Ill: Radiological Society of North America, 
2014; 362.
 
23. Oishi K, Faria AV, Mori S. JHU-MNI-ss At-
las. Baltimore, Md: Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity, 2010.
 
24. Winkler AM, Ridgway GR, Webster MA, 
Smith SM, Nichols TE. Permutation infer-
ence for the general linear model. Neuroim-
age 2014;92:381–397.
 
25. Soriano-Raya JJ, Miralbell J, López-Cancio 
E, et al. Tract-specific fractional anisotropy 
predicts cognitive outcome in a community 
sample of middle-aged participants with 
white matter lesions. J Cereb Blood Flow 
Metab 2014;34(5):861–869.
 
26. Inglese M, Makani S, Johnson G, et al. Dif-
fuse axonal injury in mild traumatic brain 
injury: a diffusion tensor imaging study. J 
Neurosurg 2005;103(2):298–303.
 
27. Greenspan AI, Wrigley JM, Kresnow M, 
Branche-Dorsey CM, Fine PR. Factors 
influencing failure to return to work due to 
traumatic brain injury. Brain Inj 1996;10(3): 
207–218.
 
28. Yeh PH, Wang B, Oakes TR, et al. Postcon-
cussional disorder and PTSD symptoms of 
military-related traumatic brain injury as-
sociated with compromised neurocircuitry. 
Hum Brain Mapp 2014;35(6):2652–2673.
 
29. Farbota KD, Bendlin BB, Alexander AL, Row-
ley HA, Dempsey RJ, Johnson SC. Longitu-
dinal diffusion tensor imaging and neuropsy-
chological correlates in traumatic brain injury 
patients. Front Hum Neurosci 2012;6:160.
 
30. Bendlin BB, Ries ML, Lazar M, et al. Lon-
gitudinal changes in patients with traumatic 
brain injury assessed with diffusion-tensor 
and volumetric imaging. Neuroimage 2008; 
42(2):503–514.
