 Therapeutic Efficacy of the Small Molecule GS-5734 against 
Ebola Virus in Rhesus Monkeys
A full list of authors and affiliations appears at the end of the article.
Summary
The most recent Ebola virus outbreak in West Africa – unprecedented in the number of cases and 
fatalities, geographic distribution, and number of nations affected – highlights the need for safe, 
effective, and readily available antiviral agents for treatment and prevention of acute Ebola virus 
(EBOV) disease (EVD) or sequelae1. No antiviral therapeutics have yet received regulatory 
approval or demonstrated clinical efficacy. Here we describe the discovery of a novel anti-EBOV 
small molecule antiviral, GS-5734, a monophosphoramidate prodrug of an adenosine analog. 
GS-5734 exhibits antiviral activity against multiple variants of EBOV in cell-based assays. The 
pharmacologically active nucleoside triphosphate (NTP) is efficiently formed in multiple human 
cell types incubated with GS-5734 in vitro, and the NTP acts as an alternate substrate and RNA-
chain terminator in primer-extension assays utilizing a surrogate respiratory syncytial virus RNA 
polymerase. Intravenous administration of GS-5734 to nonhuman primates resulted in persistent 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#termsReprints and 
permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S. Bavari (sina.bavari.civ@mail.mil) and T. Cihlar 
(tomas.cihlar@gilead.com).
5Currently of Medivector, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
6Currently of Cocrystal Pharma, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
Viral genomic sequences have been deposited in GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/) and accession numbers are 
supplied in Extended Data Table 5. Small molecule X-ray crystallographic coordinates and structure factor files have been deposited in 
the Cambridge Structural Database (http://www.ccdc.cam.ac.uk/) and accession numbers are supplied in the Supplementary 
Information.
Disclaimers:
Opinions, interpretations, conclusions, and recommendations are those of the authors and are not necessarily endorsed by the U.S. 
Army or the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Research was conducted 
under an IACUC approved protocol in compliance with the Animal Welfare Act, PHS Policy, and other Federal statutes and 
regulations relating to animals and experiments involving animals. The facility where this research was conducted is accredited by the 
Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care, International and adheres to principles stated in the Guide 
for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, National Research Council, 2011.
Supplementary information is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.
Author Contributions: R.L.M., D.S., H.C.H., E.D., S.N., E.C., M.O.C., L.Z., W.L., B.S., Q.W., K.C., and L.W. were responsible for 
the synthesis, characterization, and scale-up of small molecules. T.K.W. designed and supervised activities associated with efficacy 
evaluations, and interpreted study results. J.W., K.S.S., N.L.G., G.D., S.A.V.T., and J.E.N. conducted in vivo efficacy studies and 
performed associated sample analyses. A.C.S., L.S.W., and L.G. coordinated efficacy study activities. M.K.L., M.F., L.K.M., designed 
and executed the initial in vitro antiviral testing against EBOV and analyzed data. V.S., C.J.R., D.N.G., and T.K. and B.P.E. designed 
and executed cell-based infection assays and analyzed these data. E.G. conducted quantitative PCR analysis. D.K.N. and C.L.W. 
performed anatomic pathology examinations and analyses of all nonhuman primate subjects. E.R.N., J.R.K., and G.P. conducted viral 
genomic sequence analyses. N.L., I.T., and R.S. developed and tested drug formulations. A.S.R., D.B., Y.P., and K.M.S. designed and 
executed the PK and metabolism studies and summarized results. M.P., O.B., M.R.B., and R.F. designed and conducted biochemical 
enzymatic assays. K.M.S., J.F., and Y.X. conducted cell based assays for cytotoxicity. P.W. conducted statistical analysis and S.S.C. 
oversaw the analysis. A.S.R., R.J., R.L.M., V.S., R.B., S.S., D.L.M., C.F.S., S.T.N., W.L., T.C., and S.B. designed experiments, 
evaluated results, and provided project oversight. T.K.W., A.S.R., R.J., D.S., M.P., and T.C. outlined and wrote the manuscript.
The authors from Gilead Sciences are employees of the company and may own company stock.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2016 March 17; 531(7594): 381–385. doi:10.1038/nature17180.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 NTP levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (half-life = 14 h) and distribution to sanctuary 
sites for viral replication including testes, eye, and brain. In a rhesus monkey model of EVD, once 
daily intravenous administration of 10 mg/kg GS-5734 for 12 days resulted in profound 
suppression of EBOV replication and protected 100% of EBOV-infected animals against lethal 
disease, ameliorating clinical disease signs and pathophysiological markers, even when treatments 
were initiated three days after virus exposure when systemic viral RNA was detected in two of six 
treated animals. These results provide the first substantive, post-exposure protection by a small-
molecule antiviral compound against EBOV in nonhuman primates. The broad-spectrum antiviral 
activity of GS-5734 in vitro against other pathogenic RNA viruses – including filoviruses, 
arenaviruses, and coronaviruses – suggests the potential for expanded indications. GS-5734 is 
amenable to large-scale manufacturing, and clinical studies investigating the drug safety and 
pharmacokinetics are ongoing.
The most recent outbreak of Ebola virus disease (EVD) in West Africa, was the far largest 
and most complex Ebola virus (EBOV) outbreak in the recorded history of the disease with 
>28,000 EVD cases and >11,000 reported deaths1. Medical infrastructures in Guinea, Sierra 
Leone, and Liberia were seriously impacted by a loss of >500 healthcare workers1. 
Additionally, EVD-related sequelae (joint and muscle pain, as well as neurological, 
ophthalmic, and other symptoms) together with viral persistence and recrudescence in 
individuals who survived the acute disease have been documented2–5.
EBOV is a single-stranded, negative-sense, non-segmented RNA virus from the Filoviridae 
family. In addition to EBOV, other related viruses – namely Marburg, Sudan, and 
Bundibugyo – have caused outbreaks with high fatality rates6. Although the efficacy of 
various experimental small molecules and biologics have been assessed in multiple clinical 
trials during the West African outbreak7–18, there are no therapeutics for which clinical 
efficacy and safety have been established for treatment of acute EVD or its sequelae. The 
availability of broadly effective antiviral(s) with a favorable benefit/risk profile would 
address a serious unmet medical need for the treatment of EBOV infection.
A 1′-cyano substituted adenine C-nucleoside ribose analogue (Nuc) exhibits antiviral 
activity against a number of RNA viruses 19. The mechanism of action of Nuc requires 
intracellular anabolism to the active triphosphate metabolite (NTP), which is expected to 
interfere with the activity of viral RNA-dependent RNA-polymerases (RdRp). Structurally, 
the 1′-cyano group provides potency and selectivity towards viral RNA polymerases, but 
because of slow first phosphorylation kinetics, modification of parent nucleosides with 
monophosphate promoieties have potential to greatly enhance intracellular NTP 
concentrations20. GS-5734, the single Sp isomer of the 2-ethylbutyl L-alaninate 
phosphosphoramidate prodrug (Supplementary Information), effectively bypasses the rate-
limiting first phosphorylation step of the Nuc (Fig. 1a). In human monocyte-derived 
macrophages, incubation with GS-5734 rapidly loads cells with high levels of NTP that 
persist with T1/2 = 24 h following removal of GS-5734 (Extended Data Fig. 1a), resulting in 
up to 30-fold higher levels compared to incubation with Nuc (Fig. 1b). In cell-based assays, 
GS-5734 is active against a broad range of filoviruses including Marburg virus and several 
variants of EBOV (Fig. 1c). GS-5734 inhibits EBOV replication in multiple relevant human 
Warren et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cell types including primary macrophages and human endothelial cells with EC50 values of 
0.06 to 0.14 μM (Table 1). As expected, the parent Nuc was less active with EC50 values of 
0.77 to >20 μM. Treatment with GS-5734 of liver Huh-7 cells infected with the EBOV-
Makona variant isolated during the West African outbreak resulted in profound dose-
dependent reductions in viral RNA production and infectious virus yield (Extended Data 
Fig. 2). GS-5734 and the Nuc inhibited replication of other human RNA viral pathogens 
including respiratory syncytial virus, Junin virus, Lassa fever virus, and Middle East 
respiratory syndrome virus, but was inactive against alphaviruses or retroviruses (Table 1). 
Prior studies have reported activity of the Nuc against flaviviruses, parainfluenza type 3, and 
severe acute respiratory syndrome associated coronavirus but little or no activity against 
West Nile virus, influenza A, or Coxsackie A19,21. The antiviral activity of GS-5734 was 
selective as demonstrated by low cytotoxicity in a wide range of human primary cells and 
cell lines (Extended Data Table 1).
Isolation and expression of EBOV RdRp has been elusive, but the computational analysis of 
the catalytic palm subdomain demonstrated high sequence and structure homology with 
RSV RdRp22 (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 3). Consistent with the proposed mechanism 
of action, NTP inhibited RSV RdRp-catalyzed RNA synthesis (Fig. 1e) by incorporating 
into the nascent viral RNA transcript and causing its premature termination (Fig. 1f). In 
contrast, NTP did not inhibit human RNA polymerases (Fig. 1e). These data suggest that 
GS-5734 selectively inhibits EBOV replication by targeting its RdRp and inhibiting viral 
RNA synthesis following efficient intracellular conversion to NTP.
Rodent models were not suitable for GS-5734 in vivo efficacy evaluations because high 
serum esterase activity, present in many rodent species, degrades the GS-5734 pro-moiety 
and adversely impacts its pharmacokinetic profile23. Like humans, rhesus monkeys do not 
express high levels of serum esterase; rhesus lymphoid cells efficiently activated GS-5734 in 
vitro, although NTP levels were somewhat reduced relative to human cells (Extended Data 
Fig. 1b). In rhesus monkeys, intramuscular inoculation with clinically derived wild-type 
EBOV produces a fulminant lethal disease with pathophysiological responses that closely 
resemble human EVD cases24,25, and nonhuman primates (NHP) are considered the most 
relevant EVD models well-suited for evaluating the efficacy of antiviral interventions when 
trials in infected humans are not feasible.
GS-5734 pharmacokinetics, metabolism, and distribution were examined in NHPs. Upon 
intravenous administration of a 10 mg/kg dose in rhesus monkeys, GS-5734 exhibits a short 
plasma half-life (t1/2 = 0.39 h) with fast systemic elimination followed by the sequential 
appearance of transient systemic levels of the key intracellular intermediate alanine 
metabolite (Ala-Met) and more persistent levels of Nuc (Fig. 2a). GS-5734 is rapidly 
distributed into peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), and efficient conversion to 
NTP is apparent within 2 h of dose administration. In PBMCs, NTP represents the 
predominant metabolite and is persistent with a t1/2 = 14 h and levels required for >50% 
virus inhibition for 24 h (Fig. 2a; Extended Data Fig. 1c). In cynomolgus monkeys, 
intravenous administration of a 10 mg/kg dose of [14C]GS-5734 demonstrated that the drug-
derived material distributed to testes, epididymis, eyes, and brain within 4 h of 
administration (Fig. 2b). In brain, levels at 4 h were low relative to other tissues but 
Warren et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 remained detectable above the drug plasma levels 168 h post dose. Taken together, the 
pharmacokinetic analysis indicates that once-daily dosing of GS-5734 provides sustained 
intracellular NTP levels and efficiently delivers drug metabolites to sanctuary sites where 
virus may persist.
To evaluate the in vivo efficacy of GS-5734 we conducted a sequential two-part, adaptive-
design study in EBOV-infected rhesus monkeys (Fig. 2c). In part 1, animals intramuscularly 
inoculated with EBOV were administered a 12-day regimen of vehicle (n = 3) or 3 mg/kg 
GS-5734 beginning on day 0 (D0; 30–90 min following virus challenge) or Day 2 (D2) (n = 
6/treatment group). Regardless of the time of initiation, GS-5734 treatment conferred 
improved survival, 33% (2/6) in the 3 mg/kg D0 group and 66% (4/6) in the 3 mg/kg D2 
group, and an antiviral effect by reducing systemic viremia relative to vehicle (Fig. 2d,e; 
Extended Data Fig. 4; Extended Data Tables 2,3); however, mortalities observed in both 
treatment groups suggested that drug exposure at 3 mg/kg was sub-optimal. In part 2 of the 
efficacy study, GS-5734 was administered once at a loading dose of 10 mg/kg followed by 
once-daily 3 mg/kg doses beginning either 2 days (10/3 mg/kg D2) or 3 days (10/3 mg/kg 
D3) after virus exposure, or 10 mg/kg doses were administered beginning 3 days after virus 
exposure (10 mg/kg D3) with n = 6/group. All animals (12/12) in which GS-5734 treatments 
were initiated 3 days after virus exposure survived to the end of the in-life phase (Fig. 2d). 
However, the antiviral effects were consistently greater in animals administered repeated 10 
mg/kg GS-5734 doses (Fig. 2e,f; Extended Data Fig. 4; Extended Data Tables 2,3). On Day 
4, plasma viral RNA was significantly decreased (P<0.05), with geometric means reduced 
≥1.7 log10 in all GS-5734-treated groups compared with combined vehicle-treated groups 
(Fig. 2e–f; Extended Data Table 3), and on Days 5 and 7, when geometric mean viral RNA 
concentration of the vehicle group exceeded 109 copies/mL, viral RNA was detected at 
levels less than the lower limit of quantitation (8 × 104 RNA copies/mL) in 4 of 6 animals in 
the 10 mg/kg D3 group. Deep sequencing analysis of the EBOV RdRp (L) gene from all 
viral RNA-positive plasma samples showed no evidence of genotypic change(s) potentially 
associated with the emergence of GS-5734-resistant EBOV variants (Extended Data Table 
5). The 10 mg/kg D3 GS-5734 regimen was associated with amelioration of EVD-related 
clinical disease signs (Fig. 2g; Extended Data Fig. 4) and markers of coagulopathy and end 
organ pathophysiology (Fig. 3a–f, Extended Data Table 4 and Extended Data Fig. 5). 
Although greater survival was observed in the 10/3 mg/kg D3 group than the 10/3 mg/kg D2 
group, survival and viral RNA load were not statistically distinguishable (Fig. 2e) and likely 
represent natural endpoint variation associated with suboptimal therapeutic effect.
In summary, GS-5734 is a potent and selective inhibitor of EBOV in multiple relevant 
permissive cell types. In an NHP model of clinical EVD, intravenous administration of 
GS-5734 results in rapid accumulation and persistence of intracellular NTP. Pronounced 
antiviral effects, amelioration of EVD signs, and significant survival benefit was achieved in 
EBOV-infected NHPs despite treatment initiation on day 3, a time when systemic viral RNA 
was detectable. These results represent the first case of substantive postexposure protection 
against EVD by a small-molecule antiviral compound in NHPs. Intravenous GS-5734 is 
currently being evaluated in multiple dose studies in healthy human volunteers to assess 
clinical safety and pharmacokinetics, and to help determine whether GS-5734 may provide 
therapeutic benefit in acute or recrudescent cases of EVD, or in survivors with prolonged 
Warren et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 virus shedding and/or chronic clinical sequelae. The broad-spectrum antiviral activity of 
GS-5734 and its amenability to large-scale production warrants further assessment of its 
therapeutic potential against other significant human viral pathogens for which no treatment 
is available.
METHODS
Small Molecules
GS-5734, Nuc, and NTP were synthesized at Gilead Sciences, Inc. and chemical identity, 
sample purity were established using NMR, HRMS, and HPLC analysis (Supplementary 
Information). The radiolabeled analogue [14C]GS-5734 (specific activity 58.0 mCi/mmol) 
was obtained from Moravek Biochemicals (Brea, CA) and was prepared in a similar manner 
described for GS-5734 using [14C]trimethylsilylcyanide (Supplementary Information). 
Small molecule X-ray crystallographic coordinates and structure factor files have been 
deposited in the Cambridge Structural Database (http://www.ccdc.cam.ac.uk/) and accession 
numbers are supplied in the Supplementary Information.
Viruses
RSV A2 was purchased from Advanced Biotechnologies, Inc. EBOV (Kikwit and Makona 
variants), Sudan virus (SUDV, Gulu), Marburg virus (MARV, Ci67), Junin virus (JUNV, 
Romero), Lassa virus (LASV, Josiah), Middle East respiratory syndrome virus (MERS, 
Jordan N3), Chikungunya virus (CHIV, AF 15561), and Venezuelan equine encephalitis 
virus (VEEV, SH3) were all prepared and characterized at USAMRIID. EBOV containing a 
GFP reporter gene (EBOV-GFP), EBOV Makona (Liberia, 2014), and MARV containing a 
GFP reporter gene (MARV-GFP) were prepared and characterized at the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC)26,27.
Cells
HEp-2 (CCL-23), PC-3 (CCL-1435), HeLa (CCL-2), U2OS (HTB-96), Vero (CCL-81), 
HFF-1 (SCRC-1041), and HepG2 (HB-8065) cell lines were purchased from the American 
Type Culture Collection. Cell lines were not authenticated and were not tested for 
mycoplasma as part of routine use in assays. HEp-2 cells were cultured in Eagle’s Minimum 
Essential Media (MEM) with GlutaMAX™ supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum 
(FBS) and 100 units/mL penicillin and streptomycin. PC-3 cells were cultured in Kaighn’s 
F12 media supplemented with 10% FBS and 100 units/mL penicillin and streptomycin. 
HeLa, U2OS, and Vero cells were cultured in MEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% L-
glutamine, 10 mM HEPES, 1% non-essential amino acids, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. 
HFF-1 cells were cultured in MEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 0.5 mM sodium 
pyruvate. HepG2 cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) with 
GlutaMAX™ supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 units/mL penicillin and streptomycin, and 
0.1 mM non-essential amino acids. The MT-4 cell line was obtained from the NIH AIDS 
Research and Reference Reagent Program and cultured in RPMI-1640 medium 
supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 units/mL penicillin and streptomycin, and 2 mM L-
glutamine. The Huh-7 cell line was obtained from Dr. Charles M. Rice at the Rockefeller 
Warren et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 University and cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 units/mL penicillin 
and streptomycin, and non-essential amino acids.
Primary human hepatocytes were purchased from Invitrogen and cultured in William’s 
Medium E medium containing cell maintenance supplement. Donor profiles were limited to 
18- to 65-year-old nonsmokers with limited alcohol consumption. Upon delivery, the cells 
were allowed to recover for 24 h in complete medium with supplement provided by the 
vendor at 37 °C. Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated from 
human buffy coats obtained from healthy volunteers (Stanford Medical School Blood 
Center, Palo Alto, CA) and maintained in RPMI-1640 with GlutaMAX™ supplemented with 
10% FBS, 100 units/mL penicillin and streptomycin. Rhesus fresh whole blood was 
obtained from Valley Biosystems (Sacramento, CA). PBMCs were isolated from whole 
blood by Ficoll-Hypaque density gradient centrifugation. Briefly, blood was overlaid on 15 
mL Ficoll-Paque™ (GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB, Piscataway, NJ), and centrifuged at 
500 × g for 20 minutes. The top layer containing platelets and plasma was removed, and the 
middle layer containing PBMCs was transferred to a fresh tube, diluted with Tris Buffered 
Saline up to 50 mL, and centrifuged at 500 × g for 5 minutes. The supernatant was removed 
and the cell pellet was resuspended in 5 mL red blood cell lysis buffer (155 mM ammonium 
chloride, 10 mM potassium bicarbonate, 0.1 mM EDTA, pH 7.5). To generate stimulated 
PBMCs, freshly isolated quiescent PBMCs were seeded into a T-150 cm2 tissue culture 
flask containing fresh medium supplemented with 10 units/mL of recombinant human 
interleukin-2 (IL-2) and 1 μg/mL phytohemagglutinin-P at a density of 2 × 106 cells/mL and 
incubated for 72 h at 37°C. Human macrophage cultures were isolated from PBMCs that 
were purified by Ficoll gradient centrifugation from 50 mL of blood from healthy human 
volunteers. PBMCs were cultured for 7 to 8 days in in RPMI cell culture media 
supplemented with 10% FBS, 5 to 50 ng/mL granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating 
factor (GM-CSF) and 50 μM β-mercaptoethanol (BME) to induce macrophage 
differentiation. The cryopreserved human primary renal proximal tubule epithelial cells were 
obtained from LifeLine Cell Technology and isolated from the tissue of human kidney. The 
cells were cultured at 90% confluency with RenaLife complete medium in a T75 flask for 3 
to 4 days before seeding into 96-well assay plates. Immortalized human microvascular 
endothelial cells (HMVEC-TERT) were obtained from Dr. Rong Shao at the Pioneer Valley 
Life Sciences Institute28. HMVEC-TERT cells were cultured in endothelial basal media 
supplemented with 10% FBS, 5 μg of epithelial growth factor, 0.5 mg hydrocortisone, and 
gentamycin/amphotericin-B.
Enzymes
RNA POLII was purchased as part of the “HeLaScribe® Nuclear Extract in vitro 
Transcription System” kit from Promega. The recombinant human POLRMT and 
transcription factors mitochondrial transcription factors A (mtTFA or TFAM) and B2 
(mtTFB2 or TFB2M) were purchased from Enzymax. RSV ribonucleoprotein (RNP) 
complexes were prepared according to a method modified from Mason et al.29.
Warren et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Intracellular metabolism studies
The intracellular metabolism of GS-5734 was assessed in different cell types (HMVEC, 
HeLa, and primary human and rhesus PBMC, monocytes and monocyte derived 
macrophages) following 2-h pulse or 72-h continuous incubations with 10 μM GS-5734. For 
comparison, intracellular metabolism during a 72-h incubation with 10 μM of Nuc was 
completed in human monocyte derived macrophages. For pulse incubations, monocyte 
derived macrophages isolated from rhesus or human were incubated for 2 h in compound 
containing media followed by removal, washing with 37°C drug-free media, and incubated 
for an additional 22 h in media not containing GS-5734. Human monocyte derived 
macrophages, HeLa and HMVEC were grown to confluence (approximately 0.5, 0.2, and 
1.2 × 106 cells/well, respectively) in 500 μL of media in 12 well tissue culture plates. 
Monocyte and PBMC were incubated in suspension (approximately 1 × 106 cells/mL) in 1 
mL of media in micro centrifuge tubes.
For adherent cells (HMVEC, HeLa, and monocyte derived macrophages), media was 
removed at select time points from duplicate wells, cells washed twice with 2 mL of ice cold 
0.9% normal saline. For non-adherent cells (monocytes and PBMC), duplicate incubation 
were centrifuged at 5,000 rpm for 30 seconds to remove media. The cell pellets were re-
suspended with 500 μL cell culture media (RPMI with 10% FBS) and layered on top of a 
500 μL oil layer (Nyosil M25; Nye Lubricants, Fairhaven, MA) in a microcentrifuge tube. 
Samples were then centrifuged at room temperature at 13,000 rpm for 45 seconds. The 
media layer was removed and the oil layer was washed twice with 500 μL water. The oil 
layer was then carefully removed using a Pasteur pipet attached to vacuum. A volume of 0.5 
mL of 70% methanol containing 100 nM of the analytical internal standard 2-chloro-
adenosine-5′-triphosphate (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) was added to isolated cells. 
Samples were stored overnight at −20°C to facilitate extraction, centrifuged at 15,000 × g for 
15 minutes and then supernatant was transferred to clean tubes for drying in a MiVac Duo 
concentrator (Genevac, Gardiner, NY). Dried samples were then reconstituted in mobile 
phase A containing 3 mM ammonium formate (pH5.0) with 10 mM dimethylhexylamine 
(DMH) in water for analysis by liquid chromatography coupled to triple quadrupole mass 
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).
LC-MS/MS was done using low flow, ion pairing chromatography similar to methods 
described previously30. Briefly, analytes were separated using a 50 × 2 mm × 2.5 μm Luna 
C18(2) HST column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) connected to a LC-20ADXR 
(Shimadzu, Columbia, MD) ternary pump system and HTS PAL autosampler (LEAP 
Technologies, Carrboro, NC). A multi-stage linear gradient from 10% to 50% acetonitrile in 
a mobile phase containing 3 mM ammonium formate (pH 5.0) with 10 mM 
dimethylhexylamine over 8 minutes at a flow rate of 150 μL/min was used to separate 
analytes. Detection was performed on an API 4000 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) 
MS/MS operating in positive ion and multiple reaction monitoring modes. Intracellular 
metabolites Ala-Met, Nuc, NMP, NDP, and NTP were quantified using 7 point standard 
curves ranging from 0.274 to 200 pmol (approximately 0.5 to 400 μM) prepared in cell 
extract from untreated cells. Levels of adenosine nucleotides were also quantified to assure 
dephosphorylation had not taken place during sample collection and preparation. In order to 
Warren et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 calculate intracellular concentration of metabolites, the total number of cells per sample 
were counted using a Countess automated cell counter (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA).
EBOV Huh-7 and HMVEC antiviral assay
Antiviral assays were conducted in biosafety level-4 containment (BSL-4) at the CDC. 
EBOV antiviral assays were conducted in primary HMVEC-TERT and in Huh-7 cells. 
Huh-7 cells were not authenticated and were not tested for mycoplasma. Ten concentrations 
of compound were diluted in 4-fold serial dilution increments in media, and 100 μL per well 
of each dilution was transferred in duplicate (Huh-7) or quadruplicate (HMVEC-TERT) onto 
96-well assay plates containing cell monolayers. The plates were transferred to BSL-4 
containment, and the appropriate dilution of virus stock was added to test plates containing 
cells and serially diluted compounds. Each plate included four wells of infected untreated 
cells and four wells of uninfected cells that served as 0% and 100% virus inhibition controls, 
respectively. After the infection, assay plates were incubated for 3 days (Huh-7) or 5 days 
(HMVEC-TERT) in a tissue culture incubator. Virus replication was measured by direct 
fluorescence using a Biotek HTSynergy plate reader. For virus yield assays, Huh-7 cells 
were infected with wild-type EBOV for 1 h at 0.1 pfu per cell. The virus inoculum was 
removed and replaced with 100 μL per well of media containing the appropriate dilution of 
compound. At 3 days post-infection, supernatants were collected, and the amount of virus 
was quantified by endpoint dilution assay. The endpoint dilution assay was conducted by 
preparing serial dilutions of the assay media and adding these dilutions to fresh Vero cell 
monolayers in 96-well plates to determine the tissue culture infectious dose that caused 50% 
cytopathic effects (TCID50). To measure levels of viral RNA from infected cells, total RNA 
was extracted using the MagMAX™-96 Total RNA Isolation Kit and quantified using a 
quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) assay with primers 
and probes specific for the EBOV nucleoprotein gene.
EBOV assay in HeLa and HFF-1 cells
Antiviral assays were conducted in BSL-4 at USAMRIID. HeLa or HFF-1 cells were seeded 
at 2,000 cells per well in 384-well plates. Ten serial dilutions of compound in triplicate were 
added directly to the cell cultures using the HP D300 digital dispenser (Hewlett Packard, 
Palo Alto, CA) in 2-fold dilution increments starting at 10 μM at 2 h prior to infection. The 
DMSO concentration in each well was normalized to 1% using an HP D300 digital 
dispenser. The assay plates were transferred to the BSL-4 suite and infected with EBOV-
Kikwit at a multiplicity of infection of 0.5 pfu per cell for HeLa cells and with EBOV-
Makona at a multiplicity of infection of 5 pfu per cell for HFF-1 cells. The assay plates were 
incubated in a tissue culture incubator for 48 h. Infection was terminated by fixing the 
samples in 10% formalin solution for an additional 48 h prior to immune-staining, as 
described in Supplementary Table 1.
EBOV human macrophage infection assay
Antiviral assays were conducted in BSL-4 at USAMRIID. Primary human macrophage cells 
were seeded in a 96-well plate at 40,000 cells per well. Eight to ten serial dilutions of 
compound in triplicate were added directly to the cell cultures using an HP D300 digital 
dispenser in 3-fold dilution increments 2 h prior to infection. The concentration of DMSO 
Warren et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 was normalized to 1% in all wells. The plates were transferred into the BSL-4 suite, and the 
cells were infected with 1 pfu per cell of EBOV in 100 μL of media and incubated for 1 h. 
The inoculum was removed, and the media was replaced with fresh media containing diluted 
compounds. At 48 h post-infection, virus replication was quantified by immuno-staining as 
described in Supplementary Table 1.
RSV A2 antiviral assay
For antiviral tests, compounds were 3-fold serially diluted in source plates from which 100 
nL of diluted compound was transferred to a 384-well cell culture plate using an Echo 
acoustic transfer apparatus. HEp-2 cells at a density of 5 × 105 cells/mL were then infected 
by adding RSV A2 at a titer of 1 × 104.5 tissue culture infectious doses (TCID50)/mL. 
Immediately following virus addition, 20 μL of the virus/cell mixture was added to the 384-
well cell culture plates using a μFlow liquid dispenser and cultured for 4 days at 37°C. After 
incubation, the cells were allowed to equilibrate to 25°C for 30 minutes. The RSV-induced 
cytopathic effect was determined by adding 20 μL of CellTiter-Glo™ Viability Reagent. 
After a 10-minute incubation at 25°C, cell viability was determined by measuring 
luminescence using an Envision plate reader.
High content imaging assay detecting viral infection
Antiviral assays were conducted in 384-or 96-well plates in BSL-4 at USAMRIID using a 
high-content imaging system to quantify virus antigen production as a measure of virus 
infection. A “no virus” control and a “1% DMSO” control were included to determine the 
0% and 100% virus infection, respectively. The primary and secondary antibodies and dyes 
used for nuclear and cytoplasmic staining are listed in Supplementary Table 1. The primary 
antibody specific for a particular viral protein was diluted 1,000-fold in blocking buffer (1× 
PBS with 3% BSA) and added to each well of the assay plate. The assay plates were 
incubated for 60 minutes at room temperature. The primary antibody was removed, and the 
cells were washed 3 times with 1× PBS. The secondary detection antibody was an anti-
mouse (or rabbit) IgG conjugated with Dylight488 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, 
MA, Cat. No. 405310). The secondary antibody was diluted 1,000-fold in blocking buffer 
and was added to each well in the assay plate. Assay plates were incubated for 60 minutes at 
room temperature. Nuclei were stained using Draq5 (Biostatus, Shepshed Leicestershire, 
UK) or 33342 Hoechst (ThermoFisher Scientific) for Vero and HFF-1 cell lines. Both dyes 
were diluted in 1× PBS. The cytoplasm of HFF-1 (EBOV assay) and Vero E6 (MERS assay) 
cells were counter-stained with CellMask™ Deep Red (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, 
MA). Cell images were acquired using a Perkin Elmer Opera confocal plate reader (Perkin 
Elmer, Waltham, MA) using 10× air objective to collect five images per well. Virus-specific 
antigen was quantified by measuring fluorescence emission at a 488 nm wavelength and the 
stained nuclei were quantified by measuring fluorescence emission at a 640 nm wavelength. 
Acquired images were analyzed using Harmony and Acapella PE software. The Draq5 
signal was used to generate a nuclei mask to define each nuclei in the image for 
quantification of cell number. The CellMask Deep Red dye was used to demarcate the Vero 
and HFF-1 cell borders for cell-number quantitation. The viral-antigen signal was 
compartmentalized within the cell mask. Cells that exhibited antigen signal higher than the 
selected threshold were counted as positive for viral infection. The ratio of virus positive 
Warren et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cells to total number of analyzed cells was used to determine the percent infection for each 
well on the assay plates. Effect of compounds on the viral infection was assessed as percent 
inhibition of infection in comparison to control wells. The resultant cell number and percent 
infection were normalized for each assay plate. The Z′ values for all antiviral assays were 
>0.3. Analysis of dose response curve was performed using GeneData Screener software 
applying Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm (LMA) for curve fitting strategy. The curve-fitting 
process, including individual data point exclusion were pre-specified by default software 
settings. R2-value quantified goodness of fit and fitting strategy was considered acceptable at 
R2 > 0.8.
Marburg virus assay
HeLa cells were seeded at 2,000 cells/well in a 384-well plate, and compounds were added 
to the assay plates. Assay plates were transferred to the BSL-4 suite and infected with 1 pfu 
per cell MARV, which resulted in 50% to 70% of the cells expressing virus antigen in a 48-h 
period. Virus infection was quantified by immuno-staining using antibodies that recognized 
the viral glycoproteins as described in Supplementary Table 1.
Sudan virus assay
HeLa cells were seeded at 2,000 cells/well in a 384-well plate, and compounds were added 
to the assay plates. Assay plates were transferred to the BSL-4 suite and infected with 0.08 
pfu SUDV per cell, which resulted in 50% to 70% of the cells expressing virus antigen in a 
48-h period. Virus infection was quantified by immuno-staining using antibodies that 
recognized the viral glycoproteins as described in Supplementary Table 1.
Junin virus assay
HeLa cells were seeded at 2,000 cells/well in a 384-well plate, and compounds were added 
to the assay plates. Assay plates were transferred to the BSL-4 suite and infected with 0.3 
pfu per cell JUNV, which resulted in ~50% of the cells expressing virus antigen in a 48-h 
period. Virus infection was quantified by immuno-staining using antibodies that recognized 
the viral glycoproteins as described in Supplementary Table 1.
Lassa fever virus assay
HeLa cells were seeded at 2,000 cells/well in a 384-well plate, and compounds were added 
to the assay plates. Assay plates were transferred to the BSL-4 suite and infected with 0.1 
pfu per cell LASV, which resulted in >60% of the cells expressing virus antigen in a 48-h 
period. Virus infection was quantified by immuno-staining using antibodies that recognized 
the viral glycoproteins as described in Supplementary Table 1.
Middle East respiratory syndrome virus assay
African Green Monkey (Chlorocebus sp) kidney epithelial cells (Vero E6) were seeded at 
4,000 cells per well in a 384-well plate, and compounds were added to the assay plates. 
Assay plates were transferred to the BSL-4 suite and infected with 0.5 pfu per cell of MERS 
virus, which resulted in >70% of the cells expressing virus antigen in a 48-h period. Virus 
Warren et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 infection was quantified by immuno-staining using antibodies that recognized the viral 
glycoproteins as described in Supplementary Table 1.
Chikungunya virus assay
U2OS cells were seeded at 3,000 cells per well in a 384-well plate, and compounds were 
added to the assay plates. Assay plates were transferred to the BSL-4 suite and infected with 
0.5 pfu per cell of CHIK, which resulted in >80% of the cells expressing virus antigen in a 
48-h period. Virus infection was quantified by immuno-staining using antibodies that 
recognized the viral glycoproteins as described in Supplementary Table 1.
Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus assay
HeLa cells were seeded at 4,000 cells per well in a 384-well plate, and compounds were 
added to the assay plates. Assay plates were transferred to the BSL-4 suite and infected with 
0.1 pfu per cell VEEV, which resulted in >60% of the cells expressing virus antigen in a 20-
h period. Virus infection was quantified by immuno-staining using antibodies that 
recognized the viral glycoproteins as described in Supplementary Table 1.
Cytotoxicity assays
HEp-2 (1.5 × 103 cells/well) and MT-4 (2 × 103 cells/well) cells were plated in 384-well 
plates and incubated with the appropriate medium containing 3-fold serially diluted 
compound ranging from 15 nM to 100,000 nM. PC-3 (2.5 × 103 cells/well), HepG2 (4 × 103 
cells/well), hepatocytes (1 × 106 cells/well), quiescent PBMCs (1 × 106 cells/well), 
stimulated PBMCs (2 × 105 cells/well), and RPTEC (1 × 103 cells/well) cells were plated in 
96-well plates and incubated with the appropriate medium containing 3-fold serially diluted 
compound ranging from 15 nM to 100,000 nM. Cells were cultured for 4–5 days at 37°C. 
Following the incubation, the cells were allowed to equilibrate to 25°C, and cell viability 
was determined by adding Cell-Titer Glo viability reagent. The mixture was incubated for 
10 minutes, and the luminescence signal was quantified using an Envision plate reader. Cell 
lines were not authenticated and were not tested for mycoplasma as part of routine use in 
cytotoxicity assays.
In vitro RSV RNA synthesis assay
RNA synthesis by the RSV polymerase was reconstituted in vitro using purified RSV L/P 
complexes and an RNA oligonucleotide template (Dharmacon), representing nucleotides 1–
14 of the RSV leader promoter (3′-UGCGCUUUUUUACG-5′)31–33. RNA synthesis 
reactions were performed as described previously, except that the reaction mixture contained 
250 μM rGTP, 10 μM rUTP, 10 μM rCTP, supplemented with 10 μCi [α32P] CTP, and either 
included 10 μM rATP or no ATP. Under these conditions, the polymerase is able to initiate 
synthesis from the position 3 site of the promoter, but not the position 1 site. The NTP 
metabolite of GS-5734 was serially diluted in DMSO and included in each reaction mixture 
at concentrations of 10, 30, or 100 μM as specified in Fig 1f. RNA products were analyzed 
by electrophoresis on a 25% polyacrylamide gel, containing 7M urea, in tris-taurine-EDTA 
buffer, and radiolabelled RNA products were detected by autoradiography.
Warren et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 RSV A2 polymerase inhibition assay
Transcription reactions contained 25 μg of crude RSV RNP complexes in 30 μL of reaction 
buffer (50 mM TRIS-acetate [pH 8.0], 120 mM potassium acetate, 5% glycerol, 4.5 mM 
MgCl2, 3 mM DTT, 2 mM EGTA, 50 μg/mL BSA, 2.5 U RNasin, 20 μM ATP, 100 μM GTP, 
100 μM UTP, 100 μM CTP, and 1.5 μCi [α-32P]ATP [3,000 Ci/mmol]). The radiolabeled 
nucleotide used in the transcription assay was selected to match the nucleotide analog being 
evaluated for inhibition of RSV RNP transcription.
To determine whether nucleotide analogs inhibited RSV RNP transcription, compounds 
were added using a 6-step serial dilution in 5-fold increments. After a 90-minute incubation 
at 30°C, the RNP, reactions were stopped with 350 μL of Qiagen RLT lysis buffer, and the 
RNA was purified using a Qiagen RNeasy 96 kit. Purified RNA was denatured in RNA 
sample loading buffer at 65°C for 10 minutes and run on a 1.2% agarose/MOPS gel 
containing 2M formaldehyde. The agarose gel was dried, exposed to a Storm 
phosphorimaging screen, and developed using a Storm phosphorimager.
Inhibition of human RNA polymerase II
For a 25 μL reaction mixture, 7.5 μL 1× transcription buffer (20 mM HEPES [pH 7.2–7.5], 
100 mM KCl, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM DTT, 20% glycerol), 3 mM MgCl2, 100 ng CMV-(+) 
control DNA, and a natural mixture of NTPs were pre-incubated with various concentrations 
(0 μM to 500 μM) of the inhibitor at 30°C for 5 minutes. The natural mixture of NTPs 
contained 5–25 μM (equal to Km) of the competing 33P-labeled NTP and 400 μM of the 
other three NTPs. The reaction was started by addition of 3.5 μL of HeLa+Extract. After 1 h 
of incubation at 30°C, the polymerase reaction was stopped by addition of 10.6 μL 
Proteinase K mixture that contained final concentrations of 2.5 μg/μL Proteinase K, 5% 
SDS, and 25 mM EDTA. After incubation at 37°C for 3–12 h, 10 μL of the reaction mixture 
was mixed with 10 μL of the loading dye (98% formamide, 0.1% xylene cyanol and 0.1% 
bromophenol blue), heated at 75°C for 5 minutes, and loaded onto a 6% polyacrylamide gel 
(8 M urea). The gel was dried for 45 minutes at 70°C and exposed to a phosphorimager 
screen. The full length product, 363 nucleotide runoff RNA, was quantified using a Typhoon 
Trio Imager and Image Quant TL Software.
Inhibition of human mitochondrial RNA polymerase
Twenty nanomolar POLRMT was incubated with 20 nM template plasmid (pUC18-LSP) 
containing POLRMT light-strand promoter region and transcription factors mtTFA (100 
nM) and mtTFB2 (20 nM) in buffer containing 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 20 mM NaCl, 10 
mM DTT, 0.1 mg/mL BSA, and 10 mM MgCl234. The reaction mixture was pre-incubated 
to 32°C, and the reactions were initiated by addition of 2.5 μM of each of the natural NTPs 
and 1.5 μCi of 32P-GTP. After incubation for 30 minutes at 32°C, reactions were spotted on 
DE81 paper and quantified.
Molecular modeling
A homology model of RSVA2 and EBOV polymerases were built using the HIV-RT X-ray 
crystal structure (PDB:1RTD). (Schrödinger Release 2015-1: Prime, version 3.9, 
Schrödinger, LLC, New York, NY, 2015, default settings with subsequent rigid body 
Warren et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 minimization and side chain optimization. Loop insertions not in 1RTD of greater than 10 
amino acids were not built).
Quantitative real-time PCR for in vivo studies
For quantitative assessment of viral RNA nonhuman primate plasma samples, whole blood 
was collected using a K3 EDTA Greiner Vacuette tube (or equivalent) and sample 
centrifuged at 2500 (± 200) RCF for 10 ± 2 min. To inactivate virus, plasma was treated with 
3 parts (300 μL) TriReagent LS and samples were transferred to frozen storage (−60°C to 
−90°C), until removal for RNA extraction. Carrier RNA and QuantiFast High Concentration 
Internal Control (Qiagen) were spiked into the sample prior to extraction, conducted 
according to manufacturer’s instructions. The viral RNA was eluted in AVE Buffer. Each 
extracted RNA sample was tested with the QuantiFast Internal Control RT-PCR RNA Assay 
(Qiagen) to evaluate the yield of the spiked-in QuantiFast High Concentration Internal 
Control. If the internal control amplified within manufacturer-designated ranges, further 
quantitative analysis of the viral target was performed. RT-PCR was conducted using an ABI 
7500 Fast Dx using primers specific to EBOV glycoprotein. Samples were run in triplicate 
using a 5 μL template volume. For quantitative assessments, the average of the triplicate 
genomic equivalents (ge) per reaction were determined and multiplied by 800 to obtain 
ge/mL of plasma. Standard curves were generated using synthetic RNA. The limits of 
quantification for this assay are 8.0 × 104 – 8.0 × 1010 ge/mL of plasma. Acceptance criteria 
for positive template control (PTC), negative template control (NTC), negative extraction 
control (NEC), and positive extraction control (PEC) are SOP-specified. For qualitative 
assessments, the limit of detection (LOD) was defined as Ct 38.07, based on method 
validation testing. An animal was considered to have tested positive for detection of EBOV 
RNA when a minimum of 2 of 3 replicates were designated as “positive” and PTC, NTC, 
and NEC controls meet specified method-acceptance criteria. A sample was designated as 
“positive” when the Ct value was <LOD Ct.
Pharmacokinetic evaluations
Three uninfected male rhesus monkeys (Macaca maniculata) were used for the 
pharmacokinetic study. GS-5734 was formulated in solution at 5 mg/mL with 12% 
sulfobutylether-β-cyclodextrin in water, pH 3.5–4.0, and 2 mL/kg was administered by slow 
bolus (approximately 1 min) for a final dose of 10 mg/kg. Blood samples for plasma and 
PBMC were collected from a femoral vein/artery and were taken from each monkey over a 
24-h period. Plasma samples were obtained at predose and at 0.083, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, and 
24 h postdose. PBMC samples were obtained at 2, 4, 8, and 24 h. Blood samples for plasma 
were collected into chilled collection tubes containing sodium fluoride/potassium oxalate 
(NaF/K-Ox) as the anticoagulant and were immediately placed on wet ice, followed by 
centrifugation to obtain plasma. Blood samples for PBMC isolation were collected at room 
temperature into CPT vacutainer tubes containing sodium heparin for isolation. Plasma and 
isolated PBMC samples were frozen immediately and stored at ≤60°C until analyzed.
For plasma analysis, an aliquot of 25 μL of each plasma sample was treated with 100 μL of 
90% methanol and acetonitrile mixture (1:1, v:v) and 10% water with 20 nM 5-(2-
aminopropyl)indole as an internal standard. One hundred microliters of samples were 
Warren et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 filtered through an Agilent Captiva 96 well 0.2 μm filter plate. Filtered samples were dried 
down completely for approximately 20 minutes and reconstituted with 1% acetonitrile and 
99% water with 0.01% formic acid. An aliquot of 10 μL was injected for LC-MS/MS using a 
HTC Pal autosampler. Analytes were separated on a Phenomenex Synergi Hydro-RP 30A 
column (75 × 2.0 mm, 4.0 μm) using a Waters Acquity ultra performance LC (Waters 
Corporation, Milford, MA, USA), a flow rate of 0.26 mL/min, and a gradient from Mobile 
phase A containing 0.2% formic acid in 99% water and 1% acetonitrile to mobile phase B 
containing 0.2% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile and 5% water over 4.5 minutes. MS/MS 
analysis used a Waters Xevo TQ-S in positive multiple reaction monitoring mode using an 
electrospray probe. Plasma concentrations of GS-734, Ala-Met and Nuc were determined 
using an 8-point calibration curve spanning a concentration range of over 3 orders of 
magnitude. Quality control samples run at the beginning and end of the run to ensure 
accuracy and precision within 20%. Intracellular metabolites in PBMC were quantified by 
LC-MS/MS as described above for in vitro activation studies.
Radiolabeled tissue distribution
Six cynomolgus monkeys were administered a single dose of [14C]GS-5734 at 10 mg/kg (25 
μCi/kg) by IV administration (slow bolus). Tissues were collected from 3 animals at 4 and 
168 h post dose. The tissues were excised, rinsed with saline, blotted dry, weighed, and 
placed on wet ice. Tissues (testes, epididymis, eyes and brain; following homogenization) 
and plasma were analyzed by liquid scintillation counting. Concentrations were converted to 
ng equivalents of GS-5734 per gram of sample.
In vivo efficacy
Rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) were challenged on day 0 by intramuscular injection 
with a target dose of 1000 pfu of EBOV-Kikwit (Ebola virus H.sapiens-tc/COD/1995/
Kikwit), which was derived from a clinical specimen obtained during an outbreak occurring 
in The Democratic Republic of the Congo (formerly Zaire) in 1995. Challenge virus was 
propagated from the clinical specimen using cultured cells (Vero or Vero E6) for a total of 
four passages. Animals (3–6 years) were randomly assigned to experimental treatment 
groups, stratified by sex (with equal number of males and females per group) and balanced 
by body weight, using SAS® statistical software (Cary, North Carolina, USA). Study 
personnel responsible for assessing animal health (including euthanasia assessment) and 
administering treatments were experimentally blinded to group assignment of animals. The 
primary endpoint for efficacy studies was survival to day 28 following virus challenge. 
GS-5734 was formulated at Gilead Sciences in water with 12% sulfobutylether-β-
cyclodextrin (SBE-β-CD), pH adjusted to 3.0 using HCl. Formulations were administered to 
anesthetized animals by bolus intravenous injection at a rate of approximately 1 min/dose in 
the right or left saphenous vein. The volume of all vehicle or GS-5734 injections was 2.0 
mL/kg body weight. Animals were anesthetized using IM injection of a solution containing 
ketamine (100 mg/mL) and acepromazine (10 mg/mL) at 0.1 mL/kg body weight.
Animals were observed at least twice daily to monitor for disease signs, and animals that 
survived to day 28 were deemed to be protected. Study personnel alleviated unnecessary 
suffering of infected animals by euthanizing clinically moribund animals. The criteria used 
Warren et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 as the basis for euthanasia of moribund animals were defined prior to study initiation and 
included magnitude of responsiveness, reduced body temperature, and/or specified 
alterations to serum chemistry parameters35. Serum chemistry was analyzed using a Vitros 
350 Chemistry System (Ortho Clinical Diagnostics), and coagulation parameters were 
evaluated using a Sysmex CA-1500 coagulation analyzer (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics). 
Hematology analysis was conducted using a Siemens Advia 120 Hematology System with 
multispecies software (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics). On days in which GS-5734 or 
vehicle dosing were scheduled with blood sample collection for clinical pathology or 
viremia analysis, blood samples were collected immediately prior to dose administration.
Viral Genomic Sequence Analysis
Analysis of viral genomic sequence was conducted with the purpose of evaluating genomic 
sequence change patterns consistent with development of resistance against GS-5734. 
Attempts were made to obtain sequence of RNA-dependent RNA polymerase gene (L) of 
Ebola virus from all EBOV-RNA positive rhesus monkey plasma samples obtained during 
the efficacy studies. Deep sequencing screening of the L gene was completed using 
previously described methods36,37. Mutations and large sub clonal events (≥10% of 
population) were reviewed for: non-synonymous substitutions in treated animals that 
succumbed to infection, any substitution enriched in treated populations regardless of 
survival status and clusters of substitutions in any treated animal.
cDNA synthesis was performed using Invitrogen’s Superscript III First-Strand Synthesis 
System. cDNA was amplified with Phusion Hot Start Flex DNA Polymerase (New England 
Biolabs) using overlapping 1,500-kb amplicons (primer information available upon request). 
After pooling and purification with AMPure XP Reagent (Beckman Coulter), PCR products 
were fragmented using the Covaris S2 instrument (Covaris). Libraries were prepared with 
the Illumina TruSeq DNA Sample Preparation kit (Illumina) on the Caliper ScicloneG3 
Liquid Handling Station (PerkinElmer). After measurement by real-time PCR with the 
KAPA qPCR Kit (Kapa Biosystems), libraries were diluted to 4 or 10 nM. Cluster 
amplification was performed on the Illumina cBot, and libraries were sequenced on the 
Illumina Nextseq or Illumina HiSeq 2500 using the 150 or 100 bp paired-end format. Viral 
assemblies were completed in DNAStar Lasergene nGen. Amplification primer removal, 
quality trimming, and trim-to-mer were performed on reads with a minimum similarity to 
the reference of 93% (four-base mismatch). A target depth of 1200 is sought and SNPs at 
positions with fewer than 200 read depth were removed from the analysis. A consensus 
change was defined as a change relative to the deposited EBOV sequence (GenBank 
#AY354458) present in ≥50% of the population. Below that threshold, SNPs were 
considered sub-clonal substitutions and part of a minority subpopulation of the virus. 
Consensus sequence for the region covered in this screening is available in Genbank and the 
accession numbers are provided in Extended Data Table 5.
Animal care
Pharmacokinetic and radiolabeled tissue distribution studies in uninfected cynomolgus and 
rhesus macaques were conducted at Covance, Inc. (Madison, WI). Protocols were reviewed 
by an Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at Covance. Efficacy 
Warren et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 experiments involving EBOV were performed in ABSL-4 at USAMRIID. Research was 
conducted under an Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approved protocol in 
compliance with the Animal Welfare Act, PHS Policy, and other federal statutes and 
regulations relating to animals and experiments involving animals. The facilities where this 
research was conducted are accredited by the Association for Assessment and Accreditation 
of Laboratory Animal Care, International and strictly adhere to principles stated in the Guide 
for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, National Research Council, 2011 (National 
Academies Press, Washington, DC.).
Statistics
Combined vehicle group from Part 1 and 2 (N = 6 animals total) was used as control group 
in all statistical comparisons. The impact of GS-5734 treatment on the survival rates was 
estimated using Kaplan-Meier method and analyzed by log-rank analysis using Dunnett-Hsu 
procedure to adjust for multiple comparisons. The effect on systemic viral RNA levels was 
assessed by the analysis of variance (ANOVA) comparing each GS-5734 treatment group 
with vehicle group using Dunnett’s test to adjust for multiple comparisons. Wilcoxon rank-
sum test without adjustment for multiple comparisons was used to compare the effects of 
GS-5734 treatment on hematology, coagulation and clinical chemistry parameters. All data 
met the statistical assumptions of the test performed.
Warren et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. 
a, Intracellular metabolite profile in human macrophages. Following a 2-h pulse incubation 
(black bar at top of y-axis) of human monocyte-derived macrophages with 1 μM GS-5734 
(mean ± s.d, from three donors.). GS-5734 is rapidly metabolized and not detected in cells. 
Transient exposure to the intermediate metabolite Ala-Met is observed followed by 
persistent Nuc and nucleotide analog exposure. The pharmacologically active NTP is formed 
quickly achieving a Cmax at 4 h and persisted with a half-life of 16 ± 1 h in the three donors. 
Intracellular concentration estimated based on an intracellular volume of 1 pL/cell. b, 
Efficiency of GS-5734 activation in human and rhesus cells in vitro. Intracellular NTP 
concentrations formed in human and rhesus PBMC, monocytes, and monocyte-derived 
macrophages during a 2-h incubation with 1 μM GS-5734 (results are the mean ± SD of two 
(PBMC and monocyte) to six (macrophage) independent experiments done in cells from 
different donors). Intracellular concentrations estimated based on a cell volume of 0.2 pL/
cell for PBMC and monocytes and 1 pL/cell for macrophage. c, Intracellular NTP levels 
required for inhibition of EBOV replication in cell culture. The diastereomeric mixture at 
phosphorous containing GS-5734 was incubated continuously for 72 h at 1 μM and levels of 
intracellular NTP were determined (results are the average of duplicate incubations done in 
Warren et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 each cell type; two independent studies were done in HMVEC isolated from different 
donors). The corresponding EBOV EC50 values for the prodrug diastereomeric mixture were 
100, 184, and 121 nM in human macrophages, HeLa, and HMVEC, respectively, suggesting 
that an average intracellular NTP concentration of approximately 5 μM is required for 50% 
inhibition of EBOV in vitro.
Extended Data Figure 2. Virus yield assay
Huh-7 cells seeded in 96-well plates were infected with wild-type EBOV (Makona) for 1 h 
at 0.1 plaque forming unit (pfu) per cell. The virus inoculum was removed and replaced with 
100 μL per well of media containing the appropriate dilution of compound. At 3 days post-
infection, supernatants were collected, and the amount of virus was quantified by endpoint 
dilution assay. The endpoint dilution assay was conducted by preparing serial dilutions of 
the assay media and adding these dilutions to fresh Vero cell monolayers in 96-well plates to 
determine the tissue culture infectious dose that caused 50% infection (TCID50). To 
measure levels of viral RNA from infected cells, total RNA was extracted using 
MagMAX™-96 Total RNA Isolation Kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and quantified using a 
quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) assay with primers 
and probes specific for the EBOV nucleoprotein gene. Values represent mean ± SD of log10-
transformed values, n=4 replicates.
Warren et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 3. 
Homology model of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) A2 (Cyan) and EBOV (coral) 
polymerase based on HIV-RT (PDB:1RTD) with NTP (green).
Warren et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 4. 
Clinical signs of disease in individual rhesus monkeys exposed to Ebola virus. Animals were 
observed multiple times each day and were subjectively assigned a clinical disease score 
ranging from 0 to 5 based on responsiveness, posture, and activity. Maximum daily scores 
were converted to color code, with darker colors indicative of more severe disease signs. The 
schematic was truncated to emphasize clinical scores during the acute disease phase, and 
none of the animals exhibited clinical disease signs outside of the times that are shown.
Warren et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 5. 
Amelioration of EVD clinical pathology by GS-5734 in rhesus monkeys. Group mean (n=6/
group) values of d-dimer (a), activated partial thromboplastin time (b), and lipase (c). 
Vehicle (black, open symbols), 3 mg/kg D0 (red), 3 mg/kg D2 (green), 10/3 mg/kg D2 
(blue), 10/3 mg/kg D3(orange), 10 mg/kg D3 (black, closed symbols). Error bars omitted for 
clarity; x-axes truncated at day 15. *P<0.05 for comparison of mean change from Day 0 of 
vehicle and 10 mg/kg D3 groups at Day 7.
Extended Data Table 1
In vitro cytotoxicity of GS-5734 and Nuc in human cell lines and primary cells.
CC50 (μM)*
GS-5734
Nuc
Puromycin
Human cell lines
 HEp-2
6.0 ± 1.5
> 100
0.53 ± 0.10
 HepG2
3.7 ± 0.2
> 100
0.73 ± 0.01
 PC-3
8.9 ± 1.6
> 100
0.52 ± 0.11
 MT-4
1.7 ± 0.4
69.3 ± 25.7
0.12 ± 0.03
Human primary cells
 Hepatocytes
2.5 ± 0.6
> 100
1.5 ± 0.6
 Renal proximal tubular epithelial cells (RPTEC)
12.9 ± 6.2
> 100
1.1 ± 0.3
 Quiescent PBMCs
> 20
> 100
6.8 ± 1.4
 Stimulated PBMCs
14.8 ± 5.8
> 100
1.6 ± 0.2
*Drug concentrations reducing the cell viability by 50% (CC50) are presented. All CC50 values represent the mean ± SD 
of at least 2 independent experiments. Puromycin was included in experiments as a positive-control for cytotoxicity.
Extended Data Table 2
Individual plasma viral RNA [log10(copies/mL)]
Treatment Description
Animal #
Plasma Viral RNA on Study Day
0
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
12
14
18
21/22
28/29
Vehicle
1
ND
ND
ND
6.6
9.0
–
10.0
–
9.5
2
ND
ND
ND
5.9
8.9
–
9.8
3
ND
ND
6.5
8.2
8.5
–
8.6
4
ND
ND
DET
6.6
8.4
–
8.4
–
8.1
5
ND
ND
5.8
8.8
10.0
10.3
6
ND
ND
5.4
7.4
9.4
–
9.2
8.7
GS-5734 3 mg/kg D0
1
ND
ND
ND
DET
6.0
–
7.3
–
7.4
7.3
2
ND
ND
ND
ND
4.9
–
6.8
–
9.9
3
ND
ND
ND
DET
5.5
–
6.5
–
5.8
–
DET
ND
–
ND
ND
4
ND
ND
ND
ND
4.9
–
5.8
–
5.6
–
DET
ND
–
ND
ND
5
ND
ND
ND
DET
5.7
–
9.1
–
9.1
8.6
6
ND
ND
DET
7.2
9.3
–
GS-5734 3 mg/kg D2
Warren et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Treatment Description
Animal #
Plasma Viral RNA on Study Day
0
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
12
14
18
21/22
28/29
1
ND
ND
ND
DET
6.0
–
6.6
–
6.8
–
6.9
6.0
–
ND
ND
2
ND
ND
ND
6.4
7.6
–
7.1
–
6.8
–
DET
ND
ND
3
ND
ND
ND
DET
6.6
–
7.5
–
8.2
–
5.2
ND
–
ND
ND
4
ND
ND
ND
5.1
7.0
–
7.4
–
6.6
–
5
ND
ND
4.9
6.9
8.1
–
8.1
–
6.6
–
5.2
ND
–
ND
ND
6
ND
ND
ND
DET
5.5
–
6.7
–
5.9
–
ND
ND
–
ND
ND
GS-5734 10/3 mg/kg D2
1
ND
DET
5.2
5.8
7.9
–
8.2
–
8.0
2
ND
ND
ND
ND
DET
–
DET
–
ND
–
ND
ND
–
ND
ND
3
ND
ND
ND
DET
6.1
–
7.8
–
7.5
4
ND
ND
ND
4.9
5.5
–
6.1
–
DET
–
ND
ND
–
ND
ND
5
ND
ND
ND
ND
DET
–
8.2
–
8.2
6
ND
ND
ND
5.3
7.1
–
6.9
8.1
GS-5734 10/3 mg/kg D3
1
ND
ND
DET
5.4
6.5
–
6.5
–
5.0
–
ND
ND
–
ND
ND
2
ND
ND
5.3
6.2
7.1
–
6.8
–
6.0
–
ND
ND
–
ND
ND
3
ND
ND
DET
5.1
6.9
–
7.0
–
7.0
–
6.7
ND
–
ND
ND
4
ND
ND
ND
DET
7.0
–
8.1
–
8.3
–
6.2
DET
–
ND
ND
5
ND
ND
ND
ND
DET
–
ND
–
5.5
–
ND
ND
–
ND
ND
6
ND
ND
DET
5.8
6.6
–
6.2
–
6.8
–
ND
ND
–
ND
ND
GS-5734 10 mg/kg D3
1
ND
ND
DET
5.7
6.1
–
6.0
–
DET
–
ND
ND
–
ND
ND
2
ND
ND
ND
DET
DET
–
DET
–
5.6
–
ND
ND
–
ND
ND
3
ND
ND
ND
6.7
DET
–
ND
–
ND
–
ND
ND
–
ND
ND
4
ND
ND
ND
ND
DET
–
ND
–
ND
–
ND
ND
–
ND
ND
5
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
–
ND
–
ND
–
ND
ND
–
ND
ND
6
ND
ND
DET
5.6
6.9
–
5.5
–
5.9
–
ND
ND
–
ND
ND
–, sample not collected (days 6, 8, 10, and 18 were unscheduled samplings of succumbed animals only); D, day; DET, 
detectable, but below the lower limit of quantitation (LLOQ, 8.0 × 104 copies/mL); ND, not detected, ie below limit of 
detection (LOD).
Extended Data Table 3
Summary and statistical analysis of plasma viral RNA
Day
Plasma Viral RNA, mean log10 copies/mL (P value*)
Vehicle
GS-5734 3 
mg/kg D0
GS-5734 3 
mg/kg D2
GS-5734 10/3 
mg/kg D2
GS-5734 10/3 
mg/kg D3
GS-5734 10 
mg/kg D3
3
4.77
3.32 (0.019)
3.32 (0.020)
3.36 (0.023)
4.33 (0.454)
3.63 (0.062)
4
7.24
4.66 (0.001)
5.52 (0.024)
4.49 (0.001)
5.06 (0.005)
4.81 (0.002)
5
9.05
6.04 (<0.001)
6.82 (0.002)
6.07 (<0.001)
6.52 (0.001)
5.12 (<0.001)
7
9.19
7.09 (0.013)
7.24 (0.015)
7.00 (0.007)
6.28 (0.001)
4.24 (<0.001)
9
8.76
7.55 (0.351)
6.82 (0.132)
6.30 (0.065)
6.42 (0.072)
4.22 (0.001)
12
–
4.90 (NA)
5.05 (NA)
3.00 (NA)
4.14 (NA)
3.00 (NA)
NA, not applicable due to no survivors in vehicle group.
Warren et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 *P-values are from ANOVA comparing each GS-5734 treatment Group with Vehicle Group using Dunnett’s test to adjust 
for multiple comparisons (n=6 animals/group, PCR sample assays performed in triplicate). EBOV RNA values reported as 
“<LOD” were substituted as 103 RNA copies/mL and values reported as “>LOD, <LLOQ” were substituted as LLOQ of 
8.0 × 104 RNA copies/mL for computation purpose.
Statistically significant P-values (P < 0.05) are highlighted in bold.
Extended Data Table 4
Statistical summary of selected clinical pathology parameters
Parameter
Mean Change from Baseline, Day 7 (P value compared with Group 1+4*)
Vehicle
GS-5734 3 
mg/kg D0
GS-5734 3 
mg/kg D2
GS-5734 
10/3 mg/kg 
D2
GS-5734 10/3 
mg/kg D3
GS-5734 10 
mg/kg D3
Platelet count (103/ 
μL)
−279
−118 (0.012)
−202 (0.055)
−155 (0.055)
−98 (0.014)
−65 (0.008)
PT (sec)
5.0
1.3 (0.01)
3.2 (0.27)
1.6 (0.06)
2.5 (0.02)
1.7 (0.01)
APTT (sec)
47.7
12.6 (0.012)
19.3 (0.014)
14.3 (0.008)
15.2 (0.008)
9.8 (0.008)
Fibrinogen (mg/dL)
2.5
−4.7 (0.012)
−5.5 (0.008)
−5.0 (0.014)
−5.0 (0.014)
−4.4 (0.008)
TT (sec)
50.2
−1.4 (0.012)
2.6 (0.008)
1.4 (0.008)
3.6 (0.008)
−1.5 (0.008)
Antithrombin (%)
−39.6
−6.1 (0.012)
−10.3 (0.008)
−7.9 (0.008)
5.6 (0.008)
3.1 (0.008)
D-dimer (mg/dL)
1.15
0.13 (0.012)
−0.09 (0.008)
0.11 (0.008)
−0.12 (0.005)
0.02 (0.007)
ALT (U/L)
340
14 (0.012)
24 (0.008)
116 (0.083)
28 (0.008)
32 (0.008)
AST (U/L)
1425
273 (0.014)
206 (0.014)
90 (0.020)
157 (0.014)
36 (0.014)
ALP (U/L)
1238
−69 (0.012)
−74 (0.008)
7 (0.008)
8 (0.008)
−66 (0.008)
CRK (U/L)
5420
1277 (0.020)
1002 (0.014)
841 (0.014)
682 (0.014)
96 (0.014)
GGT (U/L)
146
−12 (0.012)
−13 (0.008)
−2 (0.008)
1 (0.008)
−12 (0.008)
LDH (U/L)
8391
1006 (0.020)
2263 (0.014)
2358 (0.014)
2439 (0.014)
352 (0.014)
Bilirubin (mg/dL)
1.3
0 (0.071)
0 (0.048)
0 (0.048)
0 (0.048)
0 (0.048)
BUN (mg/dL)
60
0 (0.021)
1 (0.028)
2 (0.036)
5 (0.055)
1 (0.021)
Creatinine (mg/dL)
1.80
0.12 (0.015)
0.27 (0.017)
0.18 (0.014)
0.27 (0.014)
0.43 (0.066)
Lipase (U/L)
205
17 (0.14)
34 (0.12)
−17 (0.055)
36 (0.12)
−12 (0.036)
Triglycerides (mg/dL)
538
−7 (0.012)
52 (0.008)
63 (0.008)
420 (0.083)
−6 (0.008)
CRP (mg/dL)
48.6
48.8 (0.83)
43.8 (1.0)
41.2 (0.31)
35.3 (0.24)
13.2 (0.008)
Albumin (g/dL)
−1.5
−0.8 (0.012)
−1.2 (0.170)
−0.8 (0.036)
−0.8 (0.022)
−0.7 (0.008)
Total protein (mg/dL)
−1.1
−0.5 (0.034)
−0.9 (0.27)
−0.6 (0.17)
−0.4 (0.035)
−0.4 (0.008)
Chloride (mEq/dL)
−14
−3 (0.011)
−5 (0.008)
−6 (0.013)
−6 (0.067)
0 (0.008)
Phosphate (mEq/dL)
0.2
−2.1 (0.036)
−2.5 (0.021)
−1.5 (0.12)
−1.0 (0.65)
−0.3 (0.93)
Sodium (mg/dL)
−17
−8 (0.019)
−10 (0.042)
−9 (0.054)
−7 (0.042)
−5 (0.014)
ALP, alkaline phosphatase; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; APTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; AST, aspartate 
aminotransferase; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; CRK, creatine kinase; CRP, C-reactive protein; D, day; GGT, gamma 
glutamyl transferase; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; PT, prothrombin time; TT, thrombin time.
*Wilcoxon rank-sum test without adjustment for multiple comparisons using combined Group 1+4 as control group for the 
analysis (n=6 animals/group). Statistically significant P-values (P < 0.05) are highlighted in bold.
Warren et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Table 5
L gene deep sequencing screening sample description and metrics
Treatment Description
Animal #
Day
Survival Outcome
Genbank Accession Number
% L 
Gene 
Coverage
Polymerase 
Amino 
Acid and 
Codon 
Changes
% of 
Population 
with 
Change
iSNV Description
Vehicle
6
7
Deceased
KU321182
100.0
W (TGG) 
@191 (T
+G)
21.9
Volatile sub clonal 
substitution 
observed in most 
samples in all 
treatment groups 
and controls >2% 
of population. 
Causes a 
frameshifting 
insertion at the 
end of a large 
homopolymer.
3 mg/kg D0
2
7
Deceased
KU321189
100.0
E (GAA) 
@2173 E 
(GAg)
99.5
Synonymous 
substitution 
unlikely selection 
pressure.
3 mg/kg D0
6
5
Deceased
KU321084
100.0
G (GGT) 
@1160 G 
(GGc)
44.5
Synonymous 
substitution 
unlikely selection 
pressure.
3 mg/kg D2
1
7
Survived
KU321152
100.0
W (TGG) 
@191 (T
+G)
21.8
Volatile sub clonal 
substitution 
observed in most 
samples in all 
treatment groups 
and controls >2% 
of population. 
Causes a 
frameshifting 
insertion at the 
end of a large 
homopolymer.
Q (CAA) 
@805 
(+AA)
26.6
Volatile sub clonal 
substitution 
observed in most 
samples in all 
treatment groups 
and controls >2% 
of population. 
Causes a 
frameshifting 
insertion at the 
end of a large 
homopolymer.
3 mg/kg D2
1
9
Survived
KU321162
100.0
W (TGG) 
@191 (T
+G)
13.8
Volatile sub clonal 
substitution 
observed in most 
samples in all 
treatment groups 
and controls > 2% 
of population. 
Causes a 
frameshifting 
insertion at the 
end of a large 
homopolymer.
3 mg/kg D2
3
5
Survived
KU321165
100.0
W (TGG) 
@191 (T
+G)
23.4
Volatile sub clonal 
substitution 
observed in most 
samples in all 
treatment groups 
and controls >2% 
of population. 
Causes a 
frameshifting 
insertion at the 
end of a large 
homopolymer.
Q (CAA) 
@1755 Q 
(CAG)
99.0
Synonymous 
mutation unlikely 
selection pressure.
3 mg/kg D2
4
9
Deceased
KU321088
100.0
W (TGG) 
@191 (T
+G)
13.9
Volatile sub clonal 
substitution 
observed in most 
samples in all 
Warren et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Treatment Description
Animal #
Day
Survival Outcome
Genbank Accession Number
% L 
Gene 
Coverage
Polymerase 
Amino 
Acid and 
Codon 
Changes
% of 
Population 
with 
Change
iSNV Description
treatment groups 
and controls >2% 
of population. 
Causes a 
frameshifting 
insertion at the 
end of a large 
homopolymer.
10/3 mg/kg D2
3
5
Deceased
KU321098
81.2
—
24.2
Non-coding 
substitution, 
unlikely selection 
pressure.
10/3 mg/kg D3
2
9
Survived
KU321149
100.0
K (AAG) 
@341 K 
(AAa)
26.7
Synonymous 
substitution 
unlikely selection 
pressure.
I (ATC) 
@348 S 
(AgC)
22.3
Non-synonymous 
substitution 
tolerated by 
survivor.
10/3 mg/kg D3
3
7
Survived
KU321172
99.3
K (AAA) 
@ 1387 K 
(AAg)
28.3
Synonymous 
substitution 
unlikely selection 
pressure.
F (TTT) 
@1827 (TT
−)
20.6
Indel causes a 
frameshifting 
deletion at the end 
of a large 
homopolymer 
region.
10 mg/kg D3
1
5
Survived
KU321154
86.5
K (AAG) 
@659 N 
(AAt)
28.0
Non-synonymous 
substitution 
tolerated by 
survivor.
Q (CAA) 
@805 
(+AA)
40.2
Volatile sub clonal 
substitution 
observed in most 
samples in all 
treatment groups 
and controls >2% 
of population. 
Causes a 
frameshifting 
insertion at the 
end of a large 
homopolymer.
iSNV, intra-host Single Nucleotide Variant.
Genomic sequence analysis was conducted on all samples containing quantifiable concentrations of viral RNA (i.e. >LLOQ 
as assessed by quantitative real-time PCR). Sequences for which no change (defined as >2% of the population) was noted 
from the reference sequence are not shown.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Authors 
Travis K. Warren1,§, Robert Jordan2, Michael K. Lo3, Adrian S. Ray2, Richard L. 
Mackman2, Veronica Soloveva1,§, Dustin Siegel2, Michel Perron2, Roy Bannister2, 
Hon C. Hui2, Nate Larson2, Robert Strickley2, Jay Wells1, Kelly S. Stuthman1, Sean 
A. Van Tongeren1, Nicole L. Garza1, Ginger Donnelly1, Amy C. Shurtleff1, Cary J. 
Retterer1, Dima Gharaibeh1, Rouzbeh Zamani1, Tara Kenny1, Brett P
. Eaton1, 
Elizabeth Grimes1, Lisa S. Welch1,5, Laura Gomba1,§, Catherine L. Wilhelmsen1, 
Donald K. Nichols1, Jonathan E. Nuss1,§, Elyse R. Nagle1, Jeffrey R. Kugelman1, 
Warren et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Gustavo Palacios1, Edward Doerffler2, Sean Neville2, Ernest Carra2, Michael O. 
Clarke2, Lijun Zhang2, Willard Lew2, Bruce Ross2, Queenie Wang2, Kwon Chun2, 
Lydia Wolfe2, Darius Babusis2, Yeojin Park2, Kirsten M. Stray2, Iva Trancheva2, Joy 
Y. Feng2, Ona Baraskaus2, Yili Xu2, Pamela Wong2, Molly R. Braun4, Mike Flint3, 
Laura K. McMullan3, Shan-Shan Chen2, Rachel Fearns4, Swami Swaminathan2, 
Douglas L. Mayers1,6, Christina F
. Spiropoulou3, William A. Lee2, Stuart T. Nichol3, 
Tomas Cihlar2, and Sina Bavari1,§
Affiliations
1United States Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases 
(USAMRIID), Frederick, Maryland, USA
§USAMRIID Therapeutic Development Center (TDC), Frederick, Maryland, USA
2Gilead Sciences, Inc. Foster City, California, USA
3Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA
4Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Acknowledgments
T. Bocan, A. Duplantier, R. Panchal, and C. Kane of USAMRIID Therapeutic Development Center, provided 
scientific input. B. Norquist assisted with manuscript preparation. C. Cooper of USAMRIID provided scientific 
input with human macrophage cultures for high-content image assessments. S. Tritsch and G. Gomba of 
USAMRIID assisted with GS-5734 dose preparations for efficacy studies. C. Rice of USAMRIID provided animal 
husbandry support services. X. Wei, W. Garner, and L. Zhong of Gilead Sciences provided additional support for 
statistical analyses. Also of Gilead Sciences, K. Wang, K. Brendza, T. Alfredson, and L. Serafini assisted with 
analytical methods, S. Bondy and R. Seemayer procured key raw materials, L. Heumann, R. Polniaszeck, E. 
Rueden, A. Chtchemelinine, K. Brak, and B. Hoang contributed to synthesis, Y. Zherebina helped with chiral 
separations. G. Lee supported the RSV antiviral assay, and G. Stepan, S. Ahmadyar, and H. Yu conducted part of 
the cytotoxicity testing. J. Knox contributed to polymerase modeling. A. L. Rheingold of the University of 
California, San Diego performed the X-ray crystallographic analysis (Supplementary Information). Studies at 
USAMRIID were in part supported by The Joint Science and Technology Office for Chemical and Biological 
Defense (JSTO-CBD) of the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) under plan #CB10218. Work in the Fearns 
laboratory was supported by NIH R01AI113321.
References
1. World Health Organization. Ebola Situation Report - 21 October 2015. 2015. http://apps.who.int/
ebola/current-situation/ebola-situation-report-21-october-2015
2. Nanyonga M, Saidu J, Ramsay A, Shindo N, Bausch DG. Sequelae of Ebola Virus Disease, Kenema 
District, Sierra Leone. Clinical infectious diseases : an official publication of the Infectious Diseases 
Society of America. 2015
3. Varkey JB, et al. Persistence of Ebola virus in ocular fluid during convalescence. N Engl J Med. 
2015; 372:2423–2427. [PubMed: 25950269] 
4. Mate SE, et al. Molecular evidence of sexual transmission of Ebola virus. N Engl J Med. 2015; 
373:2448–2454. [PubMed: 26465384] 
5. Deen GF, et al. Ebola RNA persistence in semen of Ebola virus disease survivors - preliminary 
report. N Engl J Med. 2015 Oct 14. Epub ahead of print. 
6. Kuhn, JH. Filoviruses: A Compendium of 40 Years of Epidemiological, Clinical, and Laboratory 
Studies. SpringWien; New York: 2008. 
7. Kupferschmidt K, Cohen J. Infectious diseases. Ebola drug trials lurch ahead. Science. 2015; 
347:701–702. [PubMed: 25678637] 
Warren et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 8. Smither SJ, et al. Post-exposure efficacy of oral T-705 (Favipiravir) against inhalational Ebola virus 
infection in a mouse model. Antiviral Res. 2014; 104:153–155. [PubMed: 24462697] 
9. Oestereich L, et al. Successful treatment of advanced Ebola virus infection with T-705 (favipiravir) 
in a small animal model. Antiviral Res. 2014; 105:17–21. [PubMed: 24583123] 
10. McMullan LK, et al. The lipid moiety of brincidofovir is required for in vitro antiviral activity 
against Ebola virus. Antiviral Res. 2016; 125:71–78. [PubMed: 26526586] 
11. Sissoko, D., et al. Favipiravir in patients with Ebola virus disease: Early results of the JIKI trial in 
Guinea [Abstract 103-ALB]. Conference of Reterviruses and Opportunistic Infections (CROI); 
Seattle, WA. 2015; 
12. Chimerix, Inc. Brincidofovir Will Not Be Considered in Further Clinical Trials in Ebola Virus 
Disease. 2015. http://ir.chimerix.com/releasedetail.cfm?ReleaseID=893927
13. Warren TK, et al. Protection against filovirus diseases by a novel broad-spectrum nucleoside 
analogue BCX4430. Nature. 2014; 508:402–405. [PubMed: 24590073] 
14. BioCryst Pharmaceuticals, Inc. BioCryst Announces Study Results for BCX4430 in a Non-Human 
Primate Model of Ebola Virus Infection. 2014. http://investor.shareholder.com/biocryst/
releasedetail.cfm?ReleaseID=888802
15. Thi EP, et al. Lipid nanoparticle siRNA treatment of Ebola-virus-Makona-infected nonhuman 
primates. Nature. 2015; 521:362–365. [PubMed: 25901685] 
16. Qiu X, et al. Reversion of advanced Ebola virus disease in nonhuman primates with ZMapp. 
Nature. 2014; 514:47–53. [PubMed: 25171469] 
17. Olinger GG Jr, et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:18030–18035. [PubMed: 23071322] 
18. Tekmira Pharmaceuticals Corporation. Tekmira Provides Update on TKM-Ebola-Guinea. 2015. 
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1447028/000117184315003522/newsrelease.htm
19. Cho A, et al. Synthesis and antiviral activity of a series of 1′-substituted 4-aza-7,9-
dideazaadenosine C-nucleosides. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2012; 22:2705–2707. [PubMed: 
22446091] 
20. Murakami E, et al. The mechanism of action of beta-D-2′-deoxy-2′-fluoro-2′-C-methylcytidine 
involves a second metabolic pathway leading to beta-D-2′-deoxy-2′-fluoro-2′-C-methyluridine 
5′-triphosphate, a potent inhibitor of the hepatitis C virus RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2008; 52:458–464. [PubMed: 17999967] 
21. Mackman, RL., Parrish, JP., Ray, AS., Theodore, DA. Methods and compounds for treating 
respiratory syncytial virus infections. US Patent. 2011045102. Filed 22 Jul 2011
22. Jacome R, Becerra A, Ponce de Leon S, Lazcano A. Structural analysis of monomeric RNA-
dependent polymerases: Evolutionary and therapeutic implications. PloS One. 2015; 10:e0139001. 
[PubMed: 26397100] 
23. Bahar FG, Ohura K, Ogihara T, Imai T. Species difference of esterase expression and hydrolase 
activity in plasma. J Pharm Sci. 2012; 101:3979–3988. [PubMed: 22833171] 
24. Hunt L, et al. Clinical presentation, biochemical, and haematological parameters and their 
association with outcome in patients with Ebola virus disease: an observational cohort study. 
Lancet Infect Dis. 2015; 15:1292–1299. [PubMed: 26271406] 
25. Martins K, et al. Characterization of clinical and immunological parameters during Ebola virus 
infection of rhesus macaques. Viral Immunol. 2015; 28:32–41. [PubMed: 25514385] 
26. Uebelhoer LS, et al. High-throughput, luciferase-based reverse genetics systems for identifying 
inhibitors of Marburg and Ebola viruses. Antiviral Res. 2014; 106:86–94. DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.
2014.03.018 [PubMed: 24713118] 
27. Towner JS, et al. Generation of eGFP expressing recombinant Zaire ebolavirus for analysis of early 
pathogenesis events and high-throughput antiviral drug screening. Virology. 2005; 332:20–27. 
[PubMed: 15661137] 
28. Shao R, Guo X. Human microvascular endothelial cells immortalized with human telomerase 
catalytic protein: a model for the study of in vitro angiogenesis. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 
2004; 321:788–794. DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.07.033 [PubMed: 15358096] 
29. Mason SW, et al. Polyadenylation-dependent screening assay for respiratory syncytial virus RNA 
transcriptase activity and identification of an inhibitor. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004; 32:4758–4767. 
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkh809 [PubMed: 15356293] 
Warren et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 30. Durand-Gasselin L, et al. Nucleotide analogue prodrug tenofovir disoproxil enhances lymphoid 
cell loading following oral administration in monkeys. Mol Pharm. 2009; 6:1145–1151. DOI: 
10.1021/mp900036s [PubMed: 19545170] 
31. Noton SL, Deflube LR, Tremaglio CZ, Fearns R. The respiratory syncytial virus polymerase has 
multiple RNA synthesis activities at the promoter. PLoS Pathogens. 2012; 8:e1002980. [PubMed: 
23093940] 
32. Noton SL, et al. Respiratory syncytial virus inhibitor AZ-27 differentially inhibits different 
polymerase activities at the promoter. J Virol. 2015; 89:7786–7798. DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00530-15 
[PubMed: 25995255] 
33. Tremaglio CZ, Noton SL, Deflube LR, Fearns R. Respiratory syncytial virus polymerase can 
initiate transcription from position 3 of the leader promoter. J Virol. 2013; 87:3196–3207. DOI: 
10.1128/JVI.02862-12 [PubMed: 23283954] 
34. Lodeiro MF, et al. Identification of multiple rate-limiting steps during the human mitochondrial 
transcription cycle in vitro. J Biol Chem. 2010; 285:16387–16402. DOI: 10.1074/
jbc.M109.092676 [PubMed: 20351113] 
35. Warren TK, et al. Euthanasia assessment in ebola virus infected nonhuman primates. Viruses. 
2014; 6:4666–4682. DOI: 10.3390/v6114666 [PubMed: 25421892] 
36. Kugelman JR, et al. Emergence of Ebola Virus escape variants in infected nonhuman primates 
treated with the MB-003 antibody cocktail. Cell Rep. 2015; 12:2111–2120. DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.
2015.08.038 [PubMed: 26365189] 
37. Kugelman JR, et al. Ebola virus genome plasticity as a marker of its passaging history: a 
comparison of in vitro passaging to non-human primate infection. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e50316. 
[PubMed: 23209706] 
Warren et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Metabolism and mechanism of antiviral activity of GS-5734. a, Chemical structures of 
GS-5734 and metabolic conversion to NTP. b, NTP formation in human monocyte-derived 
macrophages following 72-h incubation with 1 μM GS-5734 (black) or Nuc (red); mean ± 
SD, from 3 donors. c, Antiviral activity of GS-5734 in HeLa cells against EBOV-Makona 
(black symbols), EBOV-Kikwit (open symbols), MARV (red), BDBV (orange), SUDV 
(blue); mean ± SD from triplicates. d, Amino acid sequence homology of EBOV and RSV 
RdRp active site. *, residues predicted to contact NTP. e, Inhibition of RSV RdRp (blue), but 
not human RNA Pol II (black) or mitochondrial (mt) RNA (red) polymerases by NTP ; mean 
± SD, n=3 biological replicates. f, NTP-induced RNA chain termination in RSV RdRp 
primer-extension assay. For gel source data, see Supplementary Figure 1.
Warren et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
GS-5734 pharmacokinetics and post-exposure protection against EBOV in rhesus monkeys. 
a, pharmacokinetics following intravenous administration of 10 mg/kg GS-5734 dose in 
healthy rhesus macaques (mean ± SD, n=3). Plasma GS-5734 (black), Ala-Met (red), and 
Nuc (blue); NTP in PBMCs (green). b, Tissue distribution of [14C]GS-5734 and metabolites 
at 4 h (blue) and 168 h (red) following intravenous 10 mg/kg GS-5734 dose in healthy 
cynomolgus macaques (mean ± SD, n=3). c, Experimental design for GS-5734 efficacy 
evaluations in rhesus monkeys. d, Kaplan-Meier survival curves. *P<0.05 for treatment 
versus vehicle groups. e, Group geometric mean of plasma viral RNA concentrations; 
Warren et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 LLOQ, lower limit of quantitation; LOD, limit of detection. f, Individual plasma viral RNA 
in vehicle (blue) or 10 mg/kg GS-5734 (black) groups. g, Group average clinical disease 
score. d,e,g, vehicle (black, open symbols), 3 mg/kg D0 (red), 3 mg/kg D2 (green), 10/3 
mg/kg D2 (blue), 10/3 mg/kg D3(orange), 10 mg/kg D4 (black, closed symbols). Error bars 
omitted for clarity (e,g); x-axes truncated to emphasize acute disease phase (f,g).
Warren et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Amelioration of EVD clinical pathology by GS-5734 in rhesus monkeys. Group mean (n=6/
group) values of platelets (a), thrombin time (b), aspartate aminotransferase (AST, c), 
alanine aminotransferase (ALT, d), blood urea nitrogen (BUN, e), creatinine (f). Vehicle 
(black, open symbols), 3 mg/kg D0 (red), 3 mg/kg D2 (green), 10/3 mg/kg D2 (blue), 10/3 
mg/kg D3(orange), 10 mg/kg D3 (black, closed symbols). Error bars omitted for clarity; x-
axes truncated at day 15. *P<0.05 for comparison of mean change from Day 0 of vehicle and 
10 mg/kg D3 groups at Day 7.
Warren et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Warren et al.
Page 33
Table 1
Antiviral Activity of GS-5734 and Nuc
Antiviral activity; EC50 / EC90 [μM]
GS-5734
Nuc
EBOV
 Primary macrophages*
0.086 / 0.18
>20 / >20
 HeLa cells†
0.14 / 0.41
>20 / >20
 HFF-1*
0.13 / 0.26
>20 / >20
 HMVEC-TERT cells†
0.06 / 0.22
0.77 / 3.12
 Huh-7 cells†
0.07 / 0.22
1.49 / 6.04
Other human RNA viruses
 RSV‡
0.019 / 0.051
0.75 / 2.84
 JUNV§
0.47 / 1.33
 LASV§
1.48 / 2.80
 MERS§
0.34 / 4.24
 CHIV§
>20 / >20
 VEEV§
>20 / >20
 HIV-1§
>20 / >20
CC50 values for all compounds in primary human cells and human cell lines were greater than the highest concentration tested (> 20 μM).
*Mean values from duplicated titrations conducted in differentiated macrophages or HFF-1 cells in a single experiment (n = 1). Cells were infected 
with EBOV (Makona) for antiviral activity determination.
†Mean values from quadruplicate (HMVEC-TERT) or duplicate (Huh-7) titrations generated from two experiments (n = 2) or from multiple 
experiments (n = 6) for HeLa cells. Cells were infected with a replication competent reporter virus (EBOV-GFP) or wild type EBOV strain Zaire 
(HeLa) for antiviral activity determination.
‡Mean values from two (GS-5734) or four (Nuc) independent experiments with each drug dilution tested in triplicate against the respiratory 
syncytial virus (RSV).
§Mean values from duplicate titrations with each drug concentration tested in quadruplicate from a single experiment (n = 1). Junin virus (JUNV), 
Lassa fever virus (LASV), Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS), Chikungunya virus (CHIK), Venezuelan equine encephalitis 
virus (VEEV) and human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1).
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 10.
