 PD-1 is a haploinsufficient suppressor of T cell 
lymphomagenesis
Tim Wartewig1, Zsuzsanna Kurgyis1, Selina Keppler1, Konstanze Pechloff1,5, Erik 
Hameister1, Rupert Öllinger2, Roman Maresch2, Thorsten Buch3, Katja Steiger4, Christof 
Winter1, Roland Rad2,5, and Jürgen Ruland1,5,6
1Institut für Klinische Chemie und Pathobiochemie, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische 
Universität München, 81675 München, Germany
2Department of Medicine II, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, 81675 
München, Germany
3Institute of Laboratory Animal Science, University of Zurich, Zurich
4Institute of Pathology, Technische Universität München, 81675 München, Germany
5German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
6German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), partner site Munich, Germany
Abstract
T cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas (T-NHLs) represent a heterogeneous group of highly aggressive 
malignancies with poor clinical outcomes1. T-NHLs originate from peripheral T lymphocytes and 
are frequently characterized by genetic gain-of-function variants in T cell antigen receptor (TCR) 
signalling molecules1–4. Although these oncogenic alterations are thought to drive TCR pathways 
to induce chronic proliferation and survival programmes, it remains unclear whether T cells 
harbour tumour suppressors that can counteract these events. Using a murine model of human T 
cell lymphoma, we demonstrate that the acute enforcement of oncogenic TCR signalling in 
lymphocytes drives the strong expansion of these cells in vivo. However, this response is short-
lived and robustly counteracted by cell-intrinsic mechanisms. A subsequent genome-wide in vivo 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.R. (j.ruland@tum.de). 
Author Contributions. T.W. and J.R. designed the study. T.W. performed most of the experiments. Z.K. generated the data for the in 
vivo experiments with checkpoint inhibitors. S.K. performed intracellular flow cytometric and Phosflow analyses. K.P. contributed to 
in vivo experiments. E.H. performed experiments involving human cell lines and primary human cells. R.R. provided mouse lines and 
guided the transposon screen. R.Ö. and R.M. carried out the QIseq and TAPDANCE analysis. K.S. performed the pathohistological 
analyses. C.W. performed the bioinformatical analysis on human WGS and WES data. T.W., K.P. and C.W. generated the figures. J.R., 
T.W. and C.W. wrote the manuscript. All authors discussed the results and contributed to the manuscript.
Author Information. The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Data Availability. The sequencing data generated in this study have been deposited in the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA) under 
accession PRJNA362826. The publicly available WGS/WES and RNAseq data from human patients are accessible in the European 
Genome-phenome Archive under accession EGAS00001001296 and in the SRA under accession PRJNA285408. RNAseq data from 
the publicly available dataset GSE8331534 in the Gene Expression Omnibus data repository was used as stated in the methods section. 
Source Data is provided for Figures 1a and c, 4a, b, c, d, f and h, and for the Extended Data Figures 1a and e, 2a and d, 6b and g, 7f 
and g, and 8d. All other data are available as Supplementary Information, Source Data, or upon reasonable request from the 
corresponding author (J.R.).
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2017 December 07; 552(7683): 121–125. doi:10.1038/nature24649.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 screen using T cell-specific transposon mutagenesis identified PDCD1, which encodes the 
inhibitory receptor Programmed Death-1 (PD-1), as a master gene suppressing oncogenic T cell 
signalling. Mono- and bi-allelic PDCD1 deletions are also recurrently observed in human T cell 
lymphomas with frequencies that can exceed 30%, indicating high clinical relevance. 
Mechanistically, PD-1 activity enhances PTEN levels and attenuates AKT and PKC signalling in 
pre-malignant cells. In contrast, a homo- or heterozygous deletion of PD-1 allows unrestricted T 
cell growth after an oncogenic insult and leads to the rapid development of highly aggressive 
lymphomas in vivo that are readily transplantable to recipients. Altogether, these results indicate 
that the inhibitory PD-1 receptor is a potent haploinsufficient tumour suppressor in T-NHLs that is 
frequently altered in human disease. These findings extend the known physiological functions of 
PD-1 beyond the prevention of immunopathology after antigen-induced T cell activation and have 
implications for T cell lymphoma therapies and for current strategies that target PD-1 in the 
broader context of immuno-oncology.
Recent integrated molecular studies of human T cell lymphomas have identified activating 
mutations in signalling molecules that regulate T cell antigen receptor (TCR) pathways as a 
hallmark of most T cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (T-NHL) subtypes1–6. These alterations 
affect antigen receptor proximal regulators, PI3K elements that engage the AKT pathway, 
mediators of antigen-induced NF-κB activation, such as PKCs and CARD11, and various 
other factors1–6. A specific chromosomal translocation that is recurrently detected in human 
peripheral T cell lymphoma cases is t(5;9)(q33;q22)7,8, which fuses the antigen receptor 
kinase genes ITK and SYK. The chimeric ITK-SYK protein exhibits constitutive tyrosine 
kinase activity and enforces the oncogenic activations of TCR pathways via the activation of 
PLCγ, PI3K/AKT signalling and PKC/NF-κB8. We used this fusion protein to 
experimentally explore the pathomechanisms of T cell lymphomagenesis, a paradigm that 
has been successfully exploited in several other haematopoietic malignancies with recurrent 
chromosomal translocations9. To generate a genetically tractable model of human T-NHL, 
we had introduced a patient-derived ITK-SYK together with a eGFP cDNA into the murine 
Rosa26 locus preceded by a loxP-flanked STOP cassette (LSL; Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK mice)8. 
Crossing Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK mice to CD4-Cre transgenic mice for the T cell-specific ITK-
SYK/eGFP expression induced fully penetrant aggressive T cell lymphomas in the offspring 
(ITK-SYKCD4-Cre mice) that exhibited molecular, clinical and pathological features of the 
human disease8 (Extended Data Fig. 1a, b, c). Although the constitutively active CD4-Cre 
transgene drives continuous ITK-SYK expression in millions of polyclonal T cells, the final 
lymphomas are typically clonal (Extended Data Fig. 1d)8. In contrast to polyclonal T cells 
from young ITK-SYKCD4-Cre mice these clonal lymphoma cells transmit the disease to 
recipient mice (Extended Data Fig. 1e) indicating that they possess genetic alterations in 
addition to ITK-SYK expression, which promote malignancy.
To assess the evolution of these cancers in a controlled manner, we crossed 
Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK mice with animals that allow tamoxifen-inducible Cre activation in 
CD4+ T cells (CD4-CreERT2 mice)10. We triggered single pulses of Cre activity in subsets 
of lymphocytes in the progeny (ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2 mice) (Fig. 1a, b, c). ITK-SYK and 
eGFP expression in individual lymphocytes led to a rapid expansion of these cells in vivo 
(Fig. 1a). The maximal frequencies of ITK-SYK+CD4+ T cells increased with increasing 
Wartewig et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 doses of tamoxifen (r=0.99). However, after this expansion phase, the ITK-SYK+ 
compartments again contracted (Fig. 1a). To characterize these two phases, we again 
induced ITK-SYK/eGFP expression in T cells in vivo and then FACS-sorted recombined 
CD4+ T cells for an in vitro RNAseq analysis (Fig. 1b). Gene set enrichment analysis 
(GSEA) revealed enrichment in the signatures Ishida_E2F_targets11, 
Hallmark_G2M_checkpoint12 and Whitfield_cell_cycle_literature13 in the ITK-SYK-
expressing cells at day 4 compared with that of naïve CD4+ T cells demonstrating a highly 
proliferative phenotype. However, at day 7, the proliferative signatures were significantly 
downregulated (p<0.01) along with the declining ITK-SYK+ T cell numbers in vivo, 
indicating that T cells possess tumour-suppressive mechanisms that can counteract 
oncogenic T cell signalling within days. Nevertheless, within one year, two of three mice 
that received the highest dose of tamoxifen (1 mg) developed ITK-SYK/eGFP-expressing 
CD4+ T cell lymphomas (Fig. 1c), with organ infiltration by malignant lymphoblasts 
(Extended Data Fig. 1f, g), which demonstrated that the tumour-suppressive pathways can 
be disrupted. Because the onset of these lymphomas was correlated with the initial 
frequency of the ITK-SYK-expressing T cells (Fig. 1c; p=0.005), these tumour-enabling 
secondary events are presumably stochastic in nature.
To reveal the mechanisms that enable full T cell transformation after oncogenically enforced 
TCR signalling we designed a genome-wide forward genetic screen (Fig. 2a) using the 
piggyBac (PB) transposition system for in vivo mutagenesis14,15. To achieve spatially 
restricted transposition in only the ITK-SYK-sensitized T cells, we crossed 
Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK to CD4-Cre mice and animals conditionally expressing the PB 
transposase from the Rosa26 locus (Rosa26LSL-PB) and to ATP2-H32 transgenic mice 
harbouring mutagenic ATP transposon cassettes that could be mobilized by PB15,16. The 
quadruple-transgenic progeny developed accelerated T cell lymphomas after transposon 
mobilization (Extended Data Fig. 2a, b, c). The integration sites were recovered from FACS-
sorted eGFP+ cancer cells by multiplexed insertion site sequencing (QISeq)15 followed by 
statistical analyses17 to identify the genomic regions that were more frequently hit by 
transposons than expected by chance (Fig. 2a). Remarkably, the top ranking common 
insertion site (CIS) (genomic region with the highest transposon insertion density) with the 
highest significance (p=0.87x10-31) across the genome was located at the Pdcd1 locus that 
encodes the inhibitory receptor Programmed Death-1 (PD-1)18 (Fig. 2b and Extended Data 
Fig. 2e). These insertions did not co-exist with common insertions in other loci and resulted 
in Pdcd1-transposon fusion transcripts (Extended Data Fig. 2f). Some cancers had multiple 
Pdcd1 insertions that most likely reflected bi-allelic inactivation and/or local transposon 
hopping with gene trapping in subclones. Lymphomas with Pdcd1 transposon insertions 
exhibited reduction in or lack of PD-1 protein and Pdcd1 mRNA expression (Fig. 2c and 
Extended Data Fig. 2d).
PD-1 functions to restrict antigen-induced TCR responses at tolerance checkpoints with 
persistent antigenic stimulation for the prevention of autoimmunity18 and has received 
considerable attention because it limits antigen-driven T cell proliferation and survival in 
suppressive microenvironments in cancer and chronic infection19. Our genetic screen 
indicated that PD-1 might also possess unrecognized functions as a tumour suppressor in T 
cell lymphoma. To study potential PDCD1 alterations in human T cell lymphoma, we 
Wartewig et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 performed a meta-analysis of five published studies2–6. Strikingly, we found genomic 
PDCD1 alterations in 36 of 158 cases (23%) (Extended Data Table 1). The predominant 
mutation type was copy number aberration (33 cases). Among these, focal deletions with 
mono- or bi-allelic PDCD1 loss were prominent (Fig. 2d, Extended Data Table 1 and 
Extended Data Fig. 3a, b). The highest proportion of homo- or heterozygous PDCD1-deleted 
cases (36%, 13 out of 36) was found in a group of patients with advanced stage IV 
cutaneous T cell lymphoma3 (Extended Data Table 1). A single case with PDCD1 genomic 
gain exhibited defective PDCD1 mRNA expression (Extended Data Fig. 3a). In light of our 
genetic screen, these frequent homo- or heterozygous PDCD1 deletions in human T-NHL 
strongly suggest that PD-1 is functionally relevant in lymphoma pathogenesis.
In normal T cells, the PD-1 expression is upregulated upon TCR ligation19 and PD-1 
subsequently provides feedback for the prevention of autoimmunity. To investigate whether 
oncogenic T cell signals can also induce PD-1 expression, we introduced ITK-SYK variants 
into Jurkat T cells8. ITK-SYK signalling drives PD-1 expression in a kinase-dependent 
manner (Extended Data Fig. 4a). In transduced primary human CD4+ T cells, we also 
detected the ITK-SYK kinase-mediated upregulation of PD-1 expression (Extended Data 
Fig. 4b). Likewise, acute ITK-SYK expression in primary CD4+ T cells from tamoxifen-
treated ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2 mice drives also robust PD-1 protein and mRNA expression 
(Fig. 3a, b and Extended Data Fig. 4c). Moreover, the analysis of human T-NHL samples 
(n=50)2,6, which did or did not exhibit the activation of the gene signature 
GO_antigen_receptor_mediated_signaling_pathway (195 genes) demonstrated that the 
aberrant activation of TCR signalling pathways was correlated with significantly upregulated 
PDCD1 mRNA expression (Fig. 3c, d) in these tumours. In addition, within this patient 
group, loss of one or two PDCD1 alleles led to a significantly reduced or completely absent 
PDCD1 mRNA expression (Fig. 3e). Thus, PDCD1 expression is upregulated after 
oncogenic T cell signalling in murine and human cells, and the loss of the PDCD1 locus in 
human T-NHL impairs PDCD1 mRNA expression.
PD-1 ligation dampens physiological antigen-mediated T cell activation by enhancing the 
tumour suppressor phosphatase PTEN20 and attenuating the PI3K/AKT21 and PKCθ/NF-
κB pathways22. Because these two cascades are critical for lymphomagenesis, we tested 
whether they were sensitive to PD-1 ligation after oncogene induction. We activated ITK-
SYK in vivo by injecting tamoxifen into ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2 mice, isolated CD4+ cells, 
stimulated them with PD-L1 and subsequently performed an intracellular Phosflow analysis. 
The engagement of PD-1 increased PTEN protein levels and attenuated the AKT and PKCθ 
activities in pre-malignant ITK-SYK expressing cells (Fig. 3f). Thus, oncogenic T cell 
signalling upregulates PD-1 expression and PD-1 functions to suppress oncogenic effector 
pathways.
To study the oncogene-PD-1 loop in tumour suppression in vivo, we crossed the 
Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK and CD4-CreERT2 alleles on a PD-1-deficient background23 and 
triggered ITK-SYK expression via tamoxifen in the offspring. As previously observed, the 
marked expansion of ITK-SYK+/eGFP+ T cells was robustly counter-regulated in the 
presence of PD-1 (Fig. 4a). In sharp contrast, without PD-1, the ITK-SYK+ T cells expanded 
without restriction, and all tamoxifen-treated ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2;PD-1-/- animals had to 
Wartewig et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 be euthanized after only one week because of a strong accumulation of lymphoblastoid ITK-
SYK+PD-1-/- CD4+ T cells in the lymphoid tissues and invasive growth with a noncohesive 
pattern into the solid organs (Fig. 4a and Extended Data Fig. 5a, b, c). Upon transplantation 
these ITK-SYK+/eGFP+PD-1-/- CD4+ T cells continued to expand invasively and transmitted 
the lethal disease to recipients demonstrating that these cells were fully transformed 
malignant lymphocytes (Fig. 4b and Extended Data Fig. 5d, e, f, g). In parallel, we 
incubated CD4+ T cells from Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK and Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK;PD-1-/- mice 
without Cre transgenes with the recombinant TAT-CRE fusion recombinase24 in vitro and 
injected 5x105 treated cells into syngeneic C57BL/6 wild-type mice, which had not received 
any pre-conditioning treatment (Extended Fig. 6a, b, c, d, e, f). The TAT-CRE-treated ITK-
SYK-expressing CD4+ T cells from PD-1-competent donors (Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK) 
disappeared over time (Extended Data Fig. 6c). In contrast, those from PD-1-deficient 
donors (Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK;PD-1-/-) robustly expanded and induced lethal infiltrative 
lymphomas that could be serially transplanted into syngeneic animals (Extended Data Fig. 
6g, h, i, j). Thus, the absence of PD-1 in peripheral T cells enables an appropriate oncogenic 
signal to directly create an aggressive cancer.
Because mono-allelic deletions are the most common type of PDCD1 alteration in human T-
NHL (see Fig. 2d, Extended Data Table 1 and Extended Data Fig. 3b), we also treated 
heterozygous ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2;PD-1+/- mice with tamoxifen. Intriguingly, all 
heterozygous ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2;PD-1+/- mice succumbed to invasive transplantable 
lymphomas after tamoxifen injection (Fig. 4c and Extended Data Fig. 7a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, 
j), establishing PD-1 as a haploinsufficient tumour suppressor.
The inhibition of the PD-1/PD-L1 interaction with antibodies against PD-1 or PD-L1 is 
heavily exploited in the clinic to activate T cell immunity against multiple cancer cell 
types25. Therefore, we next treated ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2 mice with checkpoint inhibitors 
(anti-PD-L1 or anti-PD-1) after tamoxifen induction (Fig. 4d, e, f and Extended Data Fig. 
8a, b, c, e). Strikingly, similar to a genetic PD-1 deletion, anti-PD-L1 treatment beginning 
one day after tamoxifen induction lead to an immediate invasive ITK-SYK+ T cell 
proliferation (Fig. 4d, e and Extended Data Fig. 8a, b, c). Likewise, treatment of ITK-
SYKCD4-CreERT2 mice with anti-PD-L1 or anti-PD-1 antibodies during the contraction phase 
of the ITK-SYK+ cell compartment (ten days after tamoxifen treatment) also induced lethal 
lymphoproliferation (Fig. 4f and Extended Data Fig. 8e). However, these cells were unable 
to transmit the disease when transplanted into non-antibody-treated recipients (Extended 
Data Fig. 8d). Thus, although these checkpoint inhibitors accelerate the growth of T cells 
with oncogenically sensitized TCR pathways, their pharmacological effects are only 
transient in contrast to the effect of T cell intrinsic Pdcd1 gene deletion.
We demonstrated above that the ligation of PD-1 enhances PTEN levels and attenuates 
PI3K/AKT and PKCθ function after ITK-SYK signalling (see Fig. 3f). PD-1 signalling in a 
PD-1-transduced human lymphoma cell line also enhances PTEN and attenuates PI3K/AKT 
and PKCθ (Extended Data Fig. 9a, b, c). Consistently, in murine PD-1-deficient ITK-SYK+ 
lymphomas, PTEN levels are reduced and AKT and PKCθ activity is enhanced (Fig. 4g), 
suggesting that PDCD1 deletions promote tumourigenesis, at least in part, via these 
mechanisms. To study the functional relevance of PI3K/AKT enforcement, we incubated 
Wartewig et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 PD-1-deficient lymphoma cells in vitro with the PI3K inhibitor idelalisib, which is currently 
undergoing clinical development for selected B cell malignancies26. PI3K inhibition 
downregulated AKT activity and induced death of ITK-SYK+PD-1-/- lymphoma cells 
(Extended Data Fig. 9d). Finally, we treated mice that harbour ITK-SYK+PD-1-/- 
lymphomas with idelalisib in vivo. PI3K inhibition significantly extended the lifespan of 
these mice, demonstrating that the activity of PI3K/AKT signalling is critical for lymphomas 
with Pdcd1 deletion (Fig. 4h and Extended Data Fig. 9e).
In conclusion, our studies establish PD-1 as a powerful haploinsufficient tumour suppressor 
in T cell lymphoma. Thus, PD-1 not only functions to prevent autoimmunity after chronic 
antigen exposure and physiological TCR ligation but also unexpectedly counteracts 
oncogenic T cell signalling pathways within precancerous cells. The deficiency in PD-1 in T 
cell lymphoma promotes PI3K/AKT activity, and our preclinical data suggest PI3K 
inhibitors as candidate drugs for the treatment of these tumours. Checkpoint blockade with 
anti-PD-1 or anti-PD-L1 to relieve T cell inhibition in tumour microenvironment27 is a 
revolutionary treatment of multiple malignancies25 and is currently being explored in T-
NHL. Our findings that these checkpoint inhibitors can accelerate and/or reactivate T cell 
clones with oncogenically activated TCR pathways indicate the need for special 
consideration when using these in T-NHL patients. In addition, new clinical trials using 
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene editing to bi-allelically disrupt the PDCD1 locus in peripheral 
T cells of cancer patients are being initiated with the goal of enhancing anti-tumour immune 
responses28. Reports have suggested that these treatments could trigger autoimmune 
reactions28. Our data demonstrating that a suitable oncogenic hit on PD-1-deficient T cells 
is sufficient for their direct malignant transformation puts additional caution on these gene 
editing approaches.
Methods
Mice
Mice of both sexes aged 6-12 weeks were used for all experiments. Littermate controls were 
used whenever possible. Randomization and blinding were not performed. 
Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK mice8 were backcrossed for more than 12 generations on a C57BL/6 
genetic background. CD4Cre-ERT2 10 mice were crossed to the Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK strain 
to generate the ITK-SYKCD4Cre-ERT2 mice. Rosa26LSL-PB mice16 were crossed to 
Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK mice to generate the Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK;Rosa26LSL-PB strain, and 
ATP2-H3214 mice were crossed to CD4-Cre mice to generate the ATP2;CD4-Cre transgenic 
animals. Both resulting lines were crossed again to generate the quadruple-transgenic 
Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK;Rosa26LSL-PB;ATP2;CD4-Cre mice and control cohorts. C57BL/6, 
NOD/SCID Il2rg-/- (NSG, 005557), CD4-Cre (02207129) and PD-1-/- (02827623) mice 
were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, USA. CD4-Cre and 
PD-1-/- mice were backcrossed on a C57BL/6 genetic background. All animal experiments 
were performed according to local guidelines (Regierung von Oberbayern, Munich, 
Germany). Mice were euthanized if they exhibited signs of lymphoma (lymph node 
enlargement, palpable tumour, laboured breathing, ascites) or if they lost 20% or more of 
their body weight. None of the approved thresholds were exceeded at any time.
Wartewig et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Flow cytometry
Flow cytometric analyses were performed using standard protocols. Primary cell 
suspensions from the spleen, lymph nodes, or peripheral blood were directly labelled. 
Single-cell suspensions from the liver, kidney, or lung were first purified by Percoll 
(17089101, GE Healthcare, Chicago, Illinois, USA) gradient centrifugation. Fluorescently 
labelled antibodies against the following surface proteins were used for staining mouse cells: 
TCRβ (APC/Cy7-labeled anti-mouse TCR β chain antibody, 10922), CD4 (Pacific blue-
labelled anti-mouse CD4 antibody, 100428), CD44 (PE-labelled anti-mouse/human CD44 
antibody, 103008), and PD-1 (APC-labelled anti-mouse CD279 (PD-1) antibody, 135210). 
For the human cells, the following antibodies were used: PD-1 (APC-labelled anti-human 
CD279 (PD-1) antibody, 329908), CD3 (PE/Cy7-labelled anti-human CD3 antibody, 
300420) and PD-L1 (PE-labelled anti-human CD274 (B7-H1, PD-L1) antibody, 329706). Fc 
receptor blocking was performed with anti-CD16/32 antibodies (101320 or 422302). All 
antibodies were purchased from BioLegend, San Diego, California, USA. The data were 
acquired using a FACSCanto II flow cytometer (Becton, Dickinson and Company, Franklin 
Lakes, New Jersey, USA). FlowJo software (FlowJo LLC, Ashland, Oregon, USA) was used 
for data analyses.
GeneScan analysis of TCR gene rearrangements
Genomic DNA was extracted (DNeasy, Qiagen, Venlo, The Netherlands) from magnetically 
purified (130104454, Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany) CD4+ T cells from 
C57BL/6 mice (Control), young ITK-SYKCD4-Cre mice and lymphoma-bearing ITK-
SYKCD4-Cre mice. GeneScan analysis to detect TCR gene rearrangements was performed as 
previously described8. In summary, VDJ rearrangements of the TCRβ and TCRγ loci were 
amplified via five PCR reactions with 26 primers in total, with three primers labelled with 
5’-FAM fluorochromes. Fluorochrome-labelled PCR products were then size-separated and 
scanned via capillary electrophoresis.
Induction of spontaneous ITK-SYK expression in peripheral T cells
Tamoxifen (T5648, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, USA) was dissolved in pure ethanol 
(with heating) and subsequently diluted in migliol (3274, Caesar & Loretz, Hilden, 
Germany) to a final concentration of 10 mg/ml. To induce the expression of ITK-SYK in a 
small fraction of peripheral CD4+ T cells, ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2, ITK-
SYKCD4-CreERT2;PD-1+/- or ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2;PD-1-/- mice were given tamoxifen at the 
indicated doses via intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection.
RNA
For the RNAseq experiments, ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2 mice were given single i.p. injections of 
1 mg tamoxifen per mouse (T5648, Sigma-Aldrich). Forty-eight hours after injection, the 
spleens were harvested; the single-cell suspensions were subjected to CD4+ T cell 
purification by magnetic depletion (130104454, Miltenyi Biotec), and the cells were then 
cultured in vitro. At the indicated time points, the T cells were FACS-sorted (FACSAria, 
Becton, Dickinson and Company) again for viability and eGFP expression. Total RNA was 
extracted from approximately 100,000 cells using spin columns (RNeasy Micro Plus Kit, 
Wartewig et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Qiagen). Library preparation was performed from 1 ng total RNA with the SMART-Seq v2 
Ultra Low Input RNA Kit (Takara Bio Inc., Kusatsu, Shiga, Japan), and SE-50 bp 
sequencing was performed on Illumina HiSeq2000 machines (Illumina, San Diego, 
California, USA). Read alignment to the mm10 genome and transcriptome assembly were 
performed using HISAT230 and StringTie31, respectively. Differential expression was 
assessed with Ballgown32. GSEA was performed with BubbleGUM33; to assess 
proliferation, the following signatures were selected: Whitfield_cell_cycle_literature13, 
Ishida_E2F_targets11 and Hallmark_G2M_checkpoint12. RNAseq data for naïve murine 
CD4+ T cells were retrieved from the Gene Expression Omnibus data repository series 
GSE8331534 (samples 83-85), re-aligned to the mm10 genome using HISAT2 and then 
processed in a manner similar to that used for the other samples.
For Pdcd1 mRNA quantification within lymphoma cells from 
Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK;Rosa26LSL-PB;ATP2;CD4-Cre mice, total RNA was extracted from 
eGFP+ FACS-sorted spleen-derived lymphocytes using spin-columns and then reverse 
transcribed (M0368L, NEB, Ipswich, Massachusetts, USA). The Pdcd1 and eGFP cDNA 
was simultaneously quantified using transcript-specific probes (4331182, Mm01285676_m1, 
FAM-MGB and 4448484, Mr03989638_mr, VIC-MGB_PL, Thermo Fisher Scientific, 
Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) on a droplet digital PCR system (QX200 Droplet Digital 
PCR System, 1864001, Bio-Rad, Hercules, California, USA). Subsequently, the amount of 
eGFP-normalized Pdcd1 cDNA was categorized based on the presence of transposon 
cassettes within the Pdcd1 locus.
The primers for the identification of the Pdcd1-transposon mRNA splice junctions are listed 
in Supplementary Table 1.
Quantitative insertion-site sequencing and identification of common integration sites
Lymphoma cells from Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK;Rosa26LSL-BP;ATP2;CD4-Cre mice were 
harvested by generating single-cell suspensions from the spleens and lymph nodes and then 
sorting for 5x106 viable eGFP+CD4+ T cells. Genomic DNA was extracted using spin 
columns. The transposon insertion-sites were recovered using QiSeq, a splinkerette-PCR-
based method for semi-quantitative insertion-site sequencing36. Bioinformatics data 
processing, mapping of sequence reads and statistical analyses to identify CIS using 
TAPDANCE were performed as described earlier36. The CISs that were also detected in the 
data from control animals without the ITK-SYK transgene were excluded from analysis.
Genomic PDCD1 alterations in human T cell lymphoma
PubMed and Google Scholar were searched for published studies on human T cell 
malignancies that included WGS, WES, or targeted sequencing data. The supplementary 
data from the identified studies were searched for single nucleotide variants, small indels, 
and copy number aberrations (CNAs) that affect the PDCD1 locus. Whole-genome 
sequencing data (aligned BAM files, 47 tumour-normal pairs)2 were downloaded from the 
European Genome-phenome Archive with permission. Whole exome sequencing data 
(aligned BAM files, 34 tumour-normal pairs)6 were downloaded from the Sequence Read 
Archive (accession PRJNA285408). The BAM files were subjected to a copy number 
Wartewig et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 analysis using Control-FREEC36. The copy numbers were calculated for each sample in 
windows of 3 kb with steps of 1 kb using tumour and corresponding normal samples as 
inputs. Breakpoint analysis, segmentation and absolute copy number calling were performed 
with Control-FREEC. The resulting segments and copy number ratios (tumour/normal) were 
transformed to a log2 scale and plotted for all tumours along chromosome 2 for visual 
inspection.
GSVA and PDCD1 FPKM analyses in human T cell lymphoma
RNAseq data of human T-NHL patients were downloaded from the Sequence Read Archive 
(accession PRJNA285408)6 and the European Genome-phenome Archive2. Reads were 
extracted in fasta format from sra or bam files and aligned to the hg19 genome with 
HISAT230 and processed with StringTie31 and Ballgown32. All samples with available 
genomic data (WES or WGS) were included in the analysis. Using GSVA37 for each 
sample, an enrichment score was calculated based on the gene set 
GO_antigen_receptor_mediated_signaling_pathway (195 genes) from the MSigDB 
database: Twenty-eight of fifty samples that were identified as positive for the signature 
were included in the subsequent analysis. FPKM values for PDCD1 were extracted and 
statistically compared based on the enrichment score and the PDCD1 copy number status as 
indicated in the figure legend.
Cloning
To generate the PD-1 vector, first, the 3' LTR of the lentiGuide-Puro Plasmid (52963, 
Addgene, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA) was replaced by an HIV/MSCV hybrid LTR as 
described38. The LTR-modified backbone and the central polypurine tract (cPPT) sequence 
was then amplified with the BsmBI restriction site-containing oligos BBf, BBr or CPPTf and 
CPPTr. Finally, the PDCD1 cDNA was cloned together with an IRES-GFP and a cPPT 
sequence into the modified backbone via Golden Gate Assembly using the PDCD1f and 
PDCD1r primers for the cDNA and the IRESGFPf and IRESGFPr primers for the IRES-
GFP sequence. The PD-1 YFYF plasmid was subsequently generated using sequential site-
directed mutagenesis with the Y223F and Y248F primer pairs. The oligo sequences are 
listed in Supplementary Table 2.
Cell culture
T cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium containing 20% FCS in the case of primary 
cells, 10% FCS in the case of HuT 78 T-NHL cells39 or 5% FCS in the case of Jurkat-Eco T 
cells. To culture the Phoenix-Eco and Phoenix-Ampho packaging cells, we used DMEM 
with 10% FCS. HEK293FT cells were cultured in 5% FCS containing DMEM. The HuT 78 
cell line was authenticated at the DSMZ via STR profiling (Leibniz Institute DSMZ-German 
Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany). Otherwise, no 
authentication of the cell lines was performed. All cell lines were routinely tested for 
mycoplasma infection.
For the generation of dendritic cells, Ficoll (Ficoll-Paque PLUS, 17144002, GE Healthcare) 
gradient-separated PBMCs from healthy donors were magnetically enriched for monocytes 
(130050201, Miltenyi Biotec). Next, the cells were cultured for six days in the presence of 
Wartewig et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 recombinant IL-4 (20 ng/ml, 20004, Peprotech, Rocky Hill, New Jersey, USA) and GM-CSF 
(100 ng/ml, 30003, Peprotech). Finally, differentiated dendritic cells were induced to express 
PD-L1 with a 24-hours Interferon-γ stimulation (100 ng/ml, 30002, Peprotech).
All human PBMCs were collected from healthy donors with informed consent according to 
the protocols approved by the Institutional Review Boards. The study protocol was approved 
by the local ethics committee (Ethics Committee of the Medical Faculty, Klinikum rechts 
der Isar, Technical University of Munich, Germany).
For the in vitro experiments using idelalisib (CAL-101, GS-1101, PI3Kδ inhibitor; S2226, 
Selleckchem, Houston, Texas, USA), the inhibitor was dissolved in DMSO, and the cell 
culture medium was supplemented with the indicated concentration of the compound or 
DMSO (as a control).
Retroviral infections
Generation of ecotropic viral particles containing GFP, ITK-SYK or ITK-SYKKD constructs 
and infection of Jurkat-Eco cells were performed as previously described8. To generate 
amphotropic retrovirus, Phoenix-Ampho cells were grown in 15 cm dishes and transfected 
using FuGENE (Promega, Madison, Wisconsin, USA) with 10 μg ITK-SYK or ITK-SYKKD 
8. The media was changed 8 hours after transfection. The viral supernatant was collected 36 
hours after transfection, passed through a 0.45 μm filter and used fresh or snap-frozen for 
later. Activated primary human CD4 T-cells were spinfected with RetroNectin-coated 
(Takara Bio Inc.) 6-well plates (5 mg/ml). For the production of lentiviral particles, we used 
HEK293FT cells. FuGENE-based transfection was performed with 17 μg pCMV delta R8.2, 
10 μg pHCMV-10A1 and 10 μg PD-1 or PD-1 YFYF. HH cells were spinfected with the 
lentivirus on RetroNectin-coated 6-well plates (5 mg/ml).
Primary human T-cell isolation
Human PBMCs were isolated by Ficoll gradient centrifugation of fresh blood obtained from 
healthy donors. CD4 T-cells were enriched by magnetic depletion (130096533, Miltenyi 
Biotec) and stimulated with immobilized anti-CD3 antibody (10 μg/ml, purified anti-human 
CD3 antibody, 300332, BioLegend), soluble anti-CD28 antibodies (2 μg/ml, purified anti-
human CD28 antibody, 302934, BioLegend) and 10 ng/ml IL-2 (20002, Peprotech). After 48 
hours, the cells were infected with retroviruses. Five days later, the T-cells were stimulated 
again with 2 μg/ml soluble anti-CD28 (302934, BioLegend) antibodies and analysed for 
PD-1 expression by flow cytometry.
Transplantation experiments
For ITK-SYKCD4-Cre transplantation experiments, splenocytes from donor mice were 
harvested and single-cell suspensions were FACS-sorted for eGFP expression. Subsequently, 
3x106 sorted cells were intravenously injected into C57BL/6 recipient mice.
For transplantation experiments into NSG mice, splenocytes from donor mice were 
harvested on day 5 or 7 after tamoxifen induction, subjected to CD8 T cell depletion 
(11447D, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then i.v.-injected into NSG mice.
Wartewig et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 For transplantation experiments without Cre transgenes, splenocytes from 
Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK and Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK;PD-1-/- mice were harvested, and the CD4+ T 
cells were purified and subsequently incubated for one hour in serum-free media (31985062, 
Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 1 μM recombinant TAT-CRE protein 
(EG1001, Excellgen Inc., Rockville, Maryland, USA). After extensive washing, the cells 
were intravenously injected into C57BL/6 recipients. For transplantation into secondary 
C57BL/6 recipient mice, the spleens from diseased primary recipients were harvested, 
FACS-sorted for eGFP expression, washed and intravenously injected (1x105 cells/recipient) 
into wild-type C57BL/6 mice.
In vivo PI3K inhibitor treatment
For PI3K inhibitor treatment, recipient NSG mice were injected with 5x104 eGFP+ T-cells 
together with CD8-depleted (11447D, Thermo Fisher Scientific) splenocytes from ITK-
SYKCD4-CreERRT2;PD-1-/- mice that had been treated with tamoxifen (0.25 mg) five days 
earlier. Five days after transplantation, the NSG mice were given idelalisib (S2226, 
Selleckchem) or vehicle (0.5% carboxymethylcellulose, 0.05% Tween 80 in ultra-pure 
water, C5678 and P4780, Sigma-Aldrich) by oral gavage (10 mg per kg per day) for 5 days a 
week.
Phosflow
ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2 mice were intraperitoneally injected with single doses of 2 mg 
tamoxifen (TAM) per mouse. Forty-eight hours post-injection, single-cell suspensions were 
generated from the spleens and lymph nodes; then, CD4+ T cells were magnetically purified 
(130104454, Miltenyi Biotec), and eGFP expression was assessed by flow cytometry. The 
cells were stimulated with recombinant PD-L1-Fc chimera protein-coated (758208, 
BioLegend) microspheres (CS01N, Bangs Laboratories Inc., Fishers, Indiana, USA). In 
brief, streptavidin-coated microspheres were first incubated with a saturating amount of 
biotinylated anti-human IgG antibody (409302, BioLegend) for one hour at 37 °C according 
to the manufacturer’s instructions. After extensive washing, these pre-coated microspheres 
were loaded with either PD-L1-Fc chimeric protein or control recombinant human Fc 
fragments (AG714, Merck Group, Darmstadt, Germany). Efficient coating was ensured by 
flow cytometry. After 48 hours, the cells were fixed in 4% PFA followed by methanol 
permeabilization, stained for p-AKT (S473, 48-9715-42, Thermo Fisher Scientific), p-PKCθ 
(700043, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and PTEN (9550, Cell Signaling Technology Inc., 
Danvers, Massachusetts, USA) and assessed by flow cytometry. The following antibodies 
were used as secondary antibodies: PE Donkey anti-rabbit IgG (406421, BioLegend) or PE 
Goat anti-mouse IgG (405307, BioLegend).
To assess PTEN, p-AKT and p-PKCθ levels in ITK-SYK+PD-1-/- lymphoma cells, TAT-
CRE-treated Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK and Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK;PD-1-/- cells were isolated from 
C57BL/6 recipient mice (see Extended Data Fig. 6b). The single-cell suspensions were then 
stained for PTEN, p-AKT and p-PKCθ and analysed as above.
To analyse PTEN, p-AKT and p-PKCθ levels in the PD-1- or PD-1 YFYF-transduced T-
NHL cells, the GFP+ FACS-sorted cells were incubated with equal amounts of PD-L1-
Wartewig et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 expressing dendritic cells for 24 hours. Afterwards, the cells were fixed and permeabilized, 
stained for CD3, PTEN, p-AKT and p-PKCθ and then analysed as before.
To analyse the effects of idelalisib (S2226, Selleckchem) on AKT phosphorylation in vivo, 
5x104 lymphoma cells from TAM-treated (0.25 mg) ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2;PD-1-/- animals 
were transferred into NSG recipient mice at day five after TAM injection. Five days later, the 
NSG mice were orally given a single dose of 10 mg/kg idelalisib or vehicle (0.5% 
carboxymethylcellulose, 0.05% Tween 80 in ultra-pure water). Four hours later, splenic cells 
were extracted from the NSG mice, fixed and permeabilized in methanol, stained for p-AKT 
and analysed as above.
In vivo checkpoint inhibition
ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2 mice were given single injections of tamoxifen (0.25 mg). Beginning 
twenty-four hours later, the mice were given 200 µg of anti-PD-L1 antibody (BE0101, 
Bioxell, West Lebanon, New Hampshire, USA) or 200 µg anti-IgG2b (BE0090, Bioxcell) 
control antibody diluted to 200 μl with PBS every second day. For the experiments in which 
the antibody treatment was started during the contraction phase, the ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2 
mice were given 200 µg of anti-PD-L1 or anti-PD-1 (BE0146, Bioxcell) antibody or anti-
IgG2b (BE0090, Bioxcell) control antibody diluted to 200 μl with PBS every third day. In all 
experiments, the mice were monitored by flow cytometry of the peripheral blood.
Histology
All tissues were fixed in 4% formaldehyde and paraffin embedded. Approximately 3–5 μm-
thick sections were cut and stained with H&E. Immunohistochemistry was performed on an 
automated immunostainer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, California, USA) using 
antibodies against CD3 (CI597C002, DCS, Hamburg, Germany) and Ki-67 (ab15580, 
Abcam, Cambridge, UK). The stained slides were evaluated by an experienced certified 
pathologist (K.S.) using a BX53 stereomicroscope (Olympus Corp., Shinjuku, Tokyo, 
Japan), classified according to the classification of lymphoid neoplasms in mice40 with 
respect to the most recent immunohistochemical phenotyping of rodent lymphoid tissues41 
and scanned using a slide scanner (AT-2, Leica Biosystems, Wetzlar, Germany). 
Representative images were collected using Aperio Imagescope software (version 12.3, 
Leica Biosystems).
Statistics
All statistical tests were performed using R3.1.3 software (R Foundation for Statistical 
Computing). In each experiment, the appropriate statistical tests, including non-parametric 
tests, were used as indicated in the figure legends. Multiple comparisons were performed 
with ANOVA, Tukey's post-hoc test and corrected p-values. To assess the correlation 
between the eGFP maxima and the initial tamoxifen doses (Fig. 1a), the local maxima 
(reached on day 4 for the 1 mg and 0.25 mg doses and on day 8 for the 0.05 mg dose of 
tamoxifen) of the mean eGFP+ cell frequencies were used for Pearson coefficient 
calculations. The association between lymphoma development and initial eGFP+ cell 
frequency (Fig. 1c) was calculated based on the pooled data from two experiments. Fisher’s 
exact test was performed on a 2x2 contingency table that was created based on two 
Wartewig et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 categorical variables: “lymphoma development” and “eGFP maximum>5% during initial 
expansion phase”. The variances within the groups in Fig. 1c were significantly different as 
determined by F-test. The normalized enrichment score (NES), false discovery rate (FDR) 
and p values for the GSEA were calculated with BubbleGUM33. The p-values for the 
common integration sites (CISs) of the PB transposon cassettes were calculated with 
TAPDANCE17; the p-values of “insertions” were used for CIS ranking. The upper tail of the 
probability density function in Fig. 2b was calculated based on the Poisson rate parameter λ 
derived from TAPDANCE and the Poisson cumulative distribution function (ppois) in R. No 
statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size estimates. P<0.05 was considered 
statistically significant; for the log-rank test using more than two groups, the α-level was 
adjusted with Bonferroni’s correction.
Wartewig et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Phenotypic characterization of ITK-SYK-induced lymphomas.
a, Survival curves for the ITK-SYKCD4-Cre mice and littermate controls (CD4-Cre). The p-
value was determined using the two-sided log-rank test, and the median survival was 281 
days vs. not reached.
b, Histologies of lymph node and liver after H&E staining of tissues from a sick ITK-
SYKCD4-Cre mouse on a C57BL/6 genetic background. The architecture of the lymph node 
Wartewig et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 is disrupted by a diffuse infiltration of lymphoblastoid cells. Multinodal perivascular 
infiltrations of lymphoblasts are also detectable in the liver. Scale bars represent 200 µm and 
20 µm (insets).
c, Flow cytometric analyses of forward scatter area (FSC-A), which was used as a parameter 
to detect cell size, and TCRβ, CD4 and eGFP expression in lymphoma tissues from a sick 
ITK-SYKCD4-Cre mouse. Peripheral lymphocytes from a CD4-Cre littermate mouse served 
as the control.
d, GeneScan analysis of TCR gene rearrangements. Fragment size distributions of 
fluorochrome-labelled PCR products of the Vβ1-20;Jβ2 junction demonstrating polyclonal 
repertoires of a healthy CD4-Cre mouse (Control), a 3-week-old ITK-SYKCD4-Cre mouse 
and clonality of the ITK-SYKCD4-Cre lymphoma sample. RFU, relative fluorescence unit
e, Survival curves for C57BL/6 mice (n=4 recipients for each donor group) which had 
received polyclonal ITK-SYKCD4-Cre cells (3x106) from 3-week old ITK-SYKCD4-Cre mice 
or clonal ITK-SYKCD4-Cre cells from diseased ITK-SYKCD4-Cre mice with lymphoma (n=4 
donors for each group). P=two-sided log-rank test
f, Histological analysis of lymphoma samples in tamoxifen-induced ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2 
animals. Lymph node with a loss of histomorphological architecture. Multifocal nodular 
infiltrations of lymphoblasts into kidney and lung are shown. Scale bars represent 100 µm 
and 20 µm (inset).
g, Flow cytometric analyses of TCRβ-, CD4- and CD44-stained splenic cells in a tamoxifen-
induced ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2 mouse and wild-type littermate (Control).
b, c, d, f, g, Representative data from at least ten analysed mice.
Wartewig et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 2. Lymphomas with transposon insertions within Pdcd1.
a, Overall survival of the Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK;Rosa26LSL-PB;ATP2;CD4-Cre mice (red) and 
littermate ITK-SYKCD4-Cre mice (blue). The Rosa26LSL-PB;ATP2;CD4-Cre mice (black) did 
not display any signs of disease. The p-value was determined using two-sided log-rank test, 
and the median survival was 255 days vs. 289 days.
b, Flow cytometric analyses of TCRβ, CD4 and eGFP expression in a typical lymphoma 
sample from a Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK;Rosa26LSL-PB;ATP2;CD4-Cre mouse.
Wartewig et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 c, Histological analysis of the mouse shown in b with multinodal perivascular infiltrations of 
lymphoblasts into the liver (left) and lung (right). Scale bars represent 200 µm and 20 µm 
(inset).
d, Pdcd1 mRNA transcript levels in eGFP+ FACS-sorted peripheral lymphocytes from 
Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK;Rosa26LSL-PB;ATP2;CD4-Cre lymphoma samples without any 
detectable transposon cassettes within the Pdcd1 locus (None, n=4) or with a single insertion 
(Single, n=4) or multiple Pdcd1-located transposon cassettes (Multiple, n=4). Pdcd1 
expression levels were normalized to eGFP transcript levels. P=Tukey’s post hoc test. 
Shown are the mean±s.e.m and individual data points.
e, Twenty unique transposon integration sites mapped to the murine Pdcd1 locus. The 
vertical black bars indicate the genomic positions of the insertion. The red arrows indicate 
the orientations of the transposon cassettes.
f, Nucleotide sequences of the Pdcd1-piggyBac mRNA splice junctions as determined by 
Sanger sequencing of amplified cDNA from Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK;Rosa26LSL-PB;ATP2;CD4-
Cre lymphoma samples. The cDNA was generated from sorted eGFP+ lymphoma cells in 
which at least one Pdcd1 transposon cassette could be detected. Note that the 5’ piggyBac 
transposon-specific inverted terminal repeat nucleotide sequence (PB5) can function as a 
cryptic splice acceptor and a splice donor site. Hence, PB5 may act as a gene trapping 
sequence by itself14. En2SA, exon 2 located murine Engrailed 2 splice acceptor; pA, SV40 
polyadenylation signal; MSCV, murine stem cell virus long terminal repeat; LunSD, splice 
donor from exon 1 of murine Foxf2.
b, c, Representative data from at least ten analysed mice. f, The splice junctions were 
amplified from the cDNA of at least eight lymphomas.
Wartewig et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 3. PDCD1 alterations in human lymphomas.
a, The dashed box indicates the genomic region q37.3 on human chromosome 2 that is 
shown in more detail in the middle of the panel (top). The grey horizontal bar indicates the 
genomic region that was affected by a PDCD1 copy number gain in T-NHL patient 
ATL0742 (middle). Histograms showing the number of human genome-aligned RNAseq 
reads from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of two healthy donors and 
lymphoma cells of patient ATL074 at the PDCD1 locus and a non-coding region near the 
PDCD1 3’ UTR (bottom).
Wartewig et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 b, The dashed box indicates the genomic region on human chromosome 2 that is shown in 
detail in the lower part of the panel (top). CNAs in PDCD1 that were detected in CTCL 
patients6 are shown (bottom). The vertical dashed lines indicate the genomic position of the 
PDCD1 locus. Black dots represent the logarithmic tumour/normal copy number ratio; each 
dot represents 1 kbp. The grey lines indicate logarithmic value of the median tumour/normal 
copy number ratio. The arrow indicates a bi-allelic PDCD1 loss in sample CTCL08.
CNA, copy number aberration; kbp, kilo base pairs; Mbp, million base pairs
Extended Data Figure 4. Oncogenic T cell signalling induces a PD-1 inhibitory loop.
Wartewig et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 a, b, Jurkat T cells (a) or primary human CD4+ T cells (b) were infected with retroviruses 
carrying ITK-SYK or kinase-defective ITK-SYKKD together with GFP or GFP alone 
(control; GFP). PD-1 surface expression was determined by flow cytometry.
c, PD-1 expression after acute ITK-SYK signalling in primary T cells from tamoxifen-
treated ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2 mice was assessed by a flow cytometric analysis. ITK-
SYKCD4-CreERT2 mice received 1 mg tamoxifen, and the cells were harvested 48 hours later, 
cultured in vitro and analysed at the indicated time points.
a, b The data from three experiments with similar results. c Representative results from three 
analysed mice.
Extended Data Figure 5. Phenotypic characterization of PD-1 deficient lymphomas.
Wartewig et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 a, b, Flow cytometric analyses of TCRβ, CD4, PD-1 and eGFP expression in single-cell 
suspensions from the spleen (a) or kidney, liver and lung (b) from an ITK-
SYKCD4-CreERT2;PD-1-/- mouse at one week after tamoxifen (TAM) injection. Flow 
cytometric analysis of forward scatter area (FSC-A) was used as a parameter to detect cell 
size.
c, Lymph node and lung histology by H&E staining of tissues from a diseased ITK-
SYKCD4-CreERT2;PD-1-/- mouse one week after tamoxifen induction. The lymph node 
architecture was disrupted by a diffuse neoplastic lymphoid infiltration. In the lung, 
neoplastic lymphoid cells were located in intra- and perivascular regions with a multifocal 
nodal infiltration pattern. Scale bars represent 100 µm and 20 µm (inset). Scale bars 
represent 100 µm and 20 µm (insets).
d, Histology by H&E staining of lymph node and liver tissues of an NSG recipient mouse 13 
days after the transplantation of 5x107 lymphomatous ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2;PD-1-/- 
splenocytes. Abnormal infiltration of lymphoblastoid cells is visible. Scale bars represent 
100 µm and 20 µm (insets).
e, f, g Flow cytometric analysis of FSC-A and TCRβ, CD4 and eGPF expression in 
lymphoma cells in the spleen (e, f), kidney, liver and lung (g) from the same mouse as in d.
a, b, c Representative data from three independent experiments, each with three biological 
replicates. d, e, f, g Representative results from one of six NSG recipient mice from two 
independent experiments.
Wartewig et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 6. Serial transplantation of PD-1-deficient lymphomas.
a, Representation of the experimental strategy for inducing ITK-SYK expression via TAT-
CRE in PD-1-competent (Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK) or PD-1-deficient 
(Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK;PD-1-/-) cells for subsequent transfer into wild-type C57BL/6 recipient 
mice.
b, Survival curves of the C57BL/6 recipients (n=6 recipients per genotype) transplanted with 
5x105 TAT-CRE-treated Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK or Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK;PD-1-/-CD4+ T cells 
(n=6 donor mice per genotype). P=two-sided log-rank test
Wartewig et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 c, Flow cytometric analysis of ITK-SYK/eGFP expression in peripheral blood lymphocytes 
from C57BL/6 mice that received TAT-CRE-treated PD-1-competent (Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK) 
or PD-1-deficient (Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK;PD-1-/-) cells on days 7 and 21 after transplantation. 
The genotypes of the donor mice are indicated.
d, Histology and immunohistochemistry of the indicated organs from a sick primary 
recipient mouse after the transfer of TAT-CRE-treated Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK;PD-1-/- T cells 
showing the expansion of a malignant T-lymphocyte population. Scale bars represent 100 
µm (top row) and 20 µm (bottom row).
e, f, Flow cytometric analysis of CD4-stained lymphocytes derived from the spleen (e) or 
indicated organs (f) of the mouse shown in d. FSC-A, forward scatter area, which was used 
as a parameter to detect cell size of splenic Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK;PD-1-/- T cells compared to 
the TAT-CRE treated C57BL/6 CD4+ T cells (Control).
g, Survival of secondary C57BL/6 recipient mice (n=6) that received 1x105 TAT-CRE-
induced Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK;PD-1-/- lymphoma T-cells from diseased primary C57BL/6 
recipients (n=6 biological replicates).
h, H&E-stained histologic sections from lymph node and liver tissues from a diseased 
C57BL/6 mouse that had received 1x105 TAT-CRE-treated Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK;PD-1-/- T 
cells as the secondary recipient from a sick C57BL/6 primary recipient. Scale bars represent 
100 µm and 20 µm (insets).
i, j, Flow cytometric analysis as in e, f but for the secondary recipient from h.
c, Characteristic flow cytometric profiles measured in two independent experiments.
d, e, f, h, i, j, Representative results from one out of six analysed mice.
Wartewig et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 7. Characterization of Pdcd1- heterozygous lymphomas.
a, Flow cytometric analysis of forward scatter area (FSC-A), which was used as a parameter 
to detect cell size, and TCRβ, PD-1 and eGPF expression in splenic lymphoma cells from a 
diseased ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2;PD-1+/- mouse at two weeks after tamoxifen injection (0.25 
mg). CD4+ T cells from an untreated wild-type C57BL/6 mouse (Control) served as control.
b, c, Flow cytometric analysis of CD4, eGFP and PD-1 expression in single-cell suspensions 
of the indicated dissociated organs from the same mouse as in a.
Wartewig et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 d, Histology after H&E staining and immunohistochemical staining with anti-CD3 or anti-
Ki-67 antibody of the liver tissue from the same animal as in a, b, c. Abnormal infiltration of 
lymphoblastoid cells is visible. Scale bars represent 100 µm and 20 µm (insets).
e, Flow cytometric analyses of PD-1 receptor expression on ITK-SYK+/eGFP+ T cells from 
ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2, ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2;PD-1+/- and ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2;PD-1-/- 
mice are shown.
f, Flow cytometric analysis of PD-1 expression on ITK-SYK+/eGFP+ T lymphocytes. Cells 
isolated from the kidney, liver and lung of diseased ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2;PD-1+/- (labelled 
with PD-1+/-) or ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2;PD-1-/- (labelled with PD-1-/-) mice from the 
experiment presented in Fig. 4c. Shown are the mean±s.d. and individual data points; n.d., 
not detectable.
g, Fifty million splenic cells from diseased ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2;PD-1+/- mice (n=3 donors) 
were intravenously transferred to NSG mice (n=3 recipients). The fold changes of ITK-
SYK-expressing eGFP+ lymphocytes in the peripheral blood of the recipients are indicated. 
† indicates animals that had to be euthanized because of lymphomas.
h, i, Flow cytometric analysis of the FSC-A, TCRβ, PD-1, CD4 and eGFP expression in 
spleen cell suspension (h) or lymphoma cells isolated from the lung, kidney and liver (i) of 
an NSG mouse that received 5x107 splenic cells from a TAM-induced ITK-
SYKCD4-CreERT2;PD-1+/- mouse. CD4+ T cells from an untreated wild-type C57BL/6 mouse 
served as control.
j, Spleen and liver histology after H&E staining of organ sections of the NSG recipient 
mouse presented in h, i. Infiltration of a lymphoblastoid cell population in the spleen 
resulting in a complete loss of the normal architecture. Mixed periportal and intrasinusoidal 
infiltrations of neutrophilic granulocytes, lymphocytes and lymphoblasts into the liver with 
multifocal periportal hepatocellular necroses. Scale bars represent 100 µm and 20 µm 
(insets).
a, b, c, d, Representative data from three independent experiments, each with at least three 
biological replicates. e, Histograms representing one out of three analysed mice per 
genotype. f, PD-1 expression on eGFP+ T cells isolated from the lung, kidney, and liver was 
measured in three biological replicates per genotype. g, The data from a single experiment 
that was independently repeated once with similar results. h, i, Representative results from 
one of six analysed mice from two independent experiments. j, The results are characteristic 
for three mice that were analysed in two independent experiments.
Wartewig et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 8. Anti-PD-L1 triggers lethal ITK-SYK+ lymphoproliferation.
a, b, c, Analyses of the antibody-treated mice from the experiment shown in Fig. 4d. Flow 
cytometric data of forward scatter area (FSC-A), which was used as a parameter to detect 
cell size, and TCRβ, CD4, PD-1 and eGPF expression in lymphomatous cells isolated from 
the spleen (a), kidney, liver and lung (b).
c, Histology and immunohistochemistry of liver sections from the same mouse 
demonstrating the expansion of blastoid T-cells. Scale bars represent 100 µm and 20 µm 
(inset).
d, Fifty million splenic cells from anti-PD-L1-treated, sick ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2 mice (n=3 
biological replicates) were intravenously transferred to NSG recipient mice (n=3). The fold 
change of eGFP+ lymphocytes in the peripheral blood of recipients over time is shown.
e, Liver and lymph node histology after H&E staining of tissue sections from a diseased 
ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2 mouse from the experiment presented in Fig. 4f. The mouse received 
an anti-PD-1 antibody treatment that started ten days after tamoxifen administration.
a, b, c, Representative data from one out of nine analysed mice in four independent 
experiments. d, The data from a single experiment that was repeated once with similar 
results. e, Histologies are characteristic for four mice that were analysed in two independent 
experiments.
Wartewig et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 9. PD-1 regulates PI3K signalling.
a, Human T-NHL HuT 78 cells were infected with retroviruses carrying wild-type PD-1 
(PD-1) or a signalling-incompetent variant of PD-1 (PD-1 YFYF; ITIM/ITSM motifs 
mutated in the PD-1 cytoplasmic tail) together with GFP or GFP alone (control; GFP). PD-1 
surface expression was determined by flow cytometry.
b, Intracellular flow cytometric analyses of PTEN, p-AKT and p-PKCθ levels in wild-type 
PD-1- (PD-1) or GFP only-transduced (GFP) HuT 78 cells that had been co-cultured with 
PD-L1-expressing human dendritic cells for 24 hours.
Wartewig et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 c, Intracellular flow cytometric analyses from a similar experiment as in b but with wild-
type-PD-1 (PD-1) and Y223F/Y248F-mutated-PD-1 (PD-1 YFYF) transduced HuT 78 cells.
d, TAT-CRE-induced Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK;PD-1-/- cells isolated from diseased C57BL/6 
recipient mice (see Extended Data Fig. 6b) were cultured in vitro in the presence of the 
indicated concentration of the PI3Kδ inhibitor idelalisib or DMSO. Cell viability was 
determined over time.
e, Ex vivo phosphorylation status of the AKT kinase after the oral administration of 
idelalisib (10 mg/kg) or vehicle into mice. ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2;PD-1-/- T cells were 
induced in vivo with tamoxifen (0.25 mg). On day five after induction, 5x104 eGFP+ T cells 
were transplanted into NSG recipient mice. Five days later, the mice received a single 
gavage of idelalisib (10 mg/kg) or vehicle control. Four hours later, spleen-derived single-
cell suspensions were analysed by flow cytometry via Phosflow.
a, Results from two independent experiments with comparable outcomes. b, c Experiments 
were performed three times, each with similar results. d, Experiment was performed with 
four biological replicates; one representative replicate is shown. e, Experiment was 
performed twice with similar results.
Wartewig et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Table 1
PDCD1 alterations in human lymphomas.
Meta-analysis of five published studies containing whole-genome and whole-exome sequencing data from patients with peripheral T cell lymphoma and 
cutaneous T cell lymphoma. PDCD1 alterations were observed in 36 out of 158 cases (23%) across the five studies. CNA, copy number aberration; SNV, 
single nucleotide variant; WES, whole-exome sequencing; WGS, whole-genome sequencing; TS, targeted sequencing; *, all CNAs were focal deletions; 
†, for CNAs see Fig. 2d.
Title
Journal
Year
Method
Cases
CNV
SNV
Total
Percent
Genomic profiling of Sézary syndrome identifies alterations of key T cell signaling and differentiation genes.
Nature Genetics
2015
WES
36
13*
0
13
36%
Integrated molecular analysis of adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma.
Nature Genetics
2015
WGS
47
11†
1
12
26%
Genomic landscape of cutaneous T cell lymphoma.
Nature Genetics
2015
WES
40
8
0
8
20%
PLCG1 mutations in cutaneous T cell lymphomas.
Blood
2014
TS
11
N/A
1
1
9%
The mutational landscape of cutaneous T cell lymphoma and Sézary syndrome.
Nature Genetics
2015
WES
24
1
1
2
8%
Wartewig et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We thank Nicole Prause and Kerstin Burmeister for providing excellent technical assistance and S. Ogawa, K. 
Kataoka, R. P. Lifton and J. Choi for providing access to NGS data from the T cell lymphoma patients. This study 
used data generated by the Department of Pathology and Tumor Biology of Kyoto University. This work was 
supported by research grants from the DFG (SFB 1054/B01 and RU 695/6-1) and ERC (FP7, grant agreement No. 
322865) awarded to J.R.
References
1. Casulo C, et al. T-Cell Lymphoma: Recent Advances in Characterization and New Opportunities for 
Treatment. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 2017; 109doi: 10.1093/jnci/djw248
2. Kataoka K, et al. Integrated molecular analysis of adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma. Nat Genet. 
2015; 47:1304–1315. DOI: 10.1038/ng.3415 [PubMed: 26437031] 
3. Wang L, et al. Genomic profiling of Sezary syndrome identifies alterations of key T cell signalling 
and differentiation genes. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:1426–1434. DOI: 10.1038/ng.3444 [PubMed: 
26551670] 
4. da Silva Almeida AC, et al. The mutational landscape of cutaneous T cell lymphoma and Sezary 
syndrome. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:1465–1470. DOI: 10.1038/ng.3442 [PubMed: 26551667] 
5. Vaque JP, et al. PLCG1 mutations in cutaneous T-cell lymphomas. Blood. 2014; 123:2034–2043. 
DOI: 10.1182/blood-2013-05-504308 [PubMed: 24497536] 
6. Choi J, et al. Genomic landscape of cutaneous T cell lymphoma. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:1011–1019. 
DOI: 10.1038/ng.3356 [PubMed: 26192916] 
7. Streubel B, Vinatzer U, Willheim M, Raderer M, Chott A. Novel t(5; 9)(q33;q22) fuses ITK to SYK 
in unspecified peripheral T-cell lymphoma. Leukemia. 2006; 20:313–318. DOI: 10.1038/sj.leu.
2404045 [PubMed: 16341044] 
8. Pechloff K, et al. The fusion kinase ITK-SYK mimics a T cell receptor signal and drives 
oncogenesis in conditional mouse models of peripheral T cell lymphoma. The Journal of 
experimental medicine. 2010; 207:1031–1044. DOI: 10.1084/jem.20092042 [PubMed: 20439541] 
9. Mulloy JC. Peripheral T cell lymphoma: new model + new insight. The Journal of experimental 
medicine. 2010; 207:911–913. DOI: 10.1084/jem.20100608 [PubMed: 20439538] 
10. Sledzinska A, et al. TGF-beta signalling is required for CD4(+) T cell homeostasis but dispensable 
for regulatory T cell function. PLoS biology. 2013; 11:e1001674.doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.
1001674 [PubMed: 24115907] 
11. Ishida S, et al. Role for E2F in control of both DNA replication and mitotic functions as revealed 
from DNA microarray analysis. Molecular and cellular biology. 2001; 21:4684–4699. DOI: 
10.1128/MCB.21.14.4684-4699.2001 [PubMed: 11416145] 
12. Liberzon A, et al. The Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) hallmark gene set collection. Cell 
systems. 2015; 1:417–425. DOI: 10.1016/j.cels.2015.12.004 [PubMed: 26771021] 
13. Whitfield ML, et al. Identification of genes periodically expressed in the human cell cycle and their 
expression in tumours. Molecular biology of the cell. 2002; 13:1977–2000. DOI: 10.1091/mbc.
02-02-0030 [PubMed: 12058064] 
14. Rad R, et al. PiggyBac transposon mutagenesis: a tool for cancer gene discovery in mice. Science. 
2010; 330:1104–1107. DOI: 10.1126/science.1193004 [PubMed: 20947725] 
15. Friedrich MJ, et al. Genome-wide transposon screening and quantitative insertion site sequencing 
for cancer gene discovery in mice. Nature protocols. 2017; 12:289–309. DOI: 10.1038/nprot.
2016.164 [PubMed: 28079877] 
16. Rad R, et al. A conditional piggyBac transposition system for genetic screening in mice identifies 
oncogenic networks in pancreatic cancer. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:47–56. DOI: 10.1038/ng.3164 
[PubMed: 25485836] 
Wartewig et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 17. Sarver AL, Erdman J, Starr T, Largaespada DA, Silverstein KA. TAPDANCE: an automated tool to 
identify and annotate transposon insertion CISs and associations between CISs from next 
generation sequence data. BMC Bioinformatics. 2012; 13:154.doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-13-154 
[PubMed: 22748055] 
18. Riley JL. PD-1 signalling in primary T cells. Immunological reviews. 2009; 229:114–125. DOI: 
10.1111/j.1600-065X.2009.00767.x [PubMed: 19426218] 
19. Francisco LM, Sage PT, Sharpe AH. The PD-1 pathway in tolerance and autoimmunity. 
Immunological reviews. 2010; 236:219–242. DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2010.00923.x [PubMed: 
20636820] 
20. Patsoukis N, Li L, Sari D, Petkova V, Boussiotis VA. PD-1 increases PTEN phosphatase activity 
while decreasing PTEN protein stability by inhibiting casein kinase 2. Molecular and cellular 
biology. 2013; 33:3091–3098. DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00319-13 [PubMed: 23732914] 
21. Chemnitz JM, Parry RV, Nichols KE, June CH, Riley JL. SHP-1 and SHP-2 associate with 
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based switch motif of programmed death 1 upon primary human T cell 
stimulation, but only receptor ligation prevents T cell activation. J Immunol. 2004; 173:945–954. 
[PubMed: 15240681] 
22. Sheppard KA, et al. PD-1 inhibits T-cell receptor induced phosphorylation of the ZAP70/CD3zeta 
signalosome and downstream signaling to PKCtheta. FEBS letters. 2004; 574:37–41. DOI: 
10.1016/j.febslet.2004.07.083 [PubMed: 15358536] 
23. Keir ME, Freeman GJ, Sharpe AH. PD-1 regulates self-reactive CD8+ T cell responses to antigen 
in lymph nodes and tissues. J Immunol. 2007; 179:5064–5070. [PubMed: 17911591] 
24. Nolden L, et al. Site-specific recombination in human embryonic stem cells induced by cell-
permeant Cre recombinase. Nat Methods. 2006; 3:461–467. DOI: 10.1038/nmeth884 [PubMed: 
16721380] 
25. Brahmer JR, et al. Safety and activity of anti-PD-L1 antibody in patients with advanced cancer. 
The New England journal of medicine. 2012; 366:2455–2465. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1200694 
[PubMed: 22658128] 
26. Gopal AK, et al. PI3Kdelta inhibition by idelalisib in patients with relapsed indolent lymphoma. 
The New England journal of medicine. 2014; 370:1008–1018. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1314583 
[PubMed: 24450858] 
27. Kulpa DA, et al. PD-1 coinhibitory signals: the link between pathogenesis and protection. Seminars 
in immunology. 2013; 25:219–227. DOI: 10.1016/j.smim.2013.02.002 [PubMed: 23548749] 
28. Jordan B. [First use of CRISPR for gene therapy]. Medecine sciences : M/S. 2016; 32:1035–1037. 
DOI: 10.1051/medsci/20163211024 [PubMed: 28008849] 
29. Lee PP, et al. A critical role for Dnmt1 and DNA methylation in T cell development, function, and 
survival. Immunity. 2001; 15:763–774. [PubMed: 11728338] 
30. Kim D, Langmead B, Salzberg SL. HISAT: a fast spliced aligner with low memory requirements. 
Nat Methods. 2015; 12:357–360. DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.3317 [PubMed: 25751142] 
31. Pertea M, et al. StringTie enables improved reconstruction of a transcriptome from RNA-seq reads. 
Nat Biotechnol. 2015; 33:290–295. DOI: 10.1038/nbt.3122 [PubMed: 25690850] 
32. Frazee AC, et al. Ballgown bridges the gap between transcriptome assembly and expression 
analysis. Nat Biotechnol. 2015; 33:243–246. DOI: 10.1038/nbt.3172 [PubMed: 25748911] 
33. Spinelli L, Carpentier S, Montanana Sanchis F, Dalod M, Vu Manh TP. BubbleGUM: automatic 
extraction of phenotype molecular signatures and comprehensive visualization of multiple Gene 
Set Enrichment Analyses. BMC Genomics. 2015; 16:814.doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-2012-4 
[PubMed: 26481321] 
34. van der Veeken J, et al. Memory of Inflammation in Regulatory T Cells. Cell. 2016; 166:977–990. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.07.006 [PubMed: 27499023] 
35. Dupuy AJ, Akagi K, Largaespada DA, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA. Mammalian mutagenesis using 
a highly mobile somatic Sleeping Beauty transposon system. Nature. 2005; 436:221–226. DOI: 
10.1038/nature03691 [PubMed: 16015321] 
36. Boeva V, et al. Control-FREEC: a tool for assessing copy number and allelic content using next-
generation sequencing data. Bioinformatics. 2012; 28:423–425. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/
btr670 [PubMed: 22155870] 
Wartewig et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 37. Hanzelmann S, Castelo R, Guinney J. GSVA: gene set variation analysis for microarray and RNA-
seq data. BMC Bioinformatics. 2013; 14:7.doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-14-7 [PubMed: 23323831] 
38. Choi JK, et al. Hybrid HIV/MSCV LTR enhances transgene expression of lentiviral vectors in 
human CD34(+) hematopoietic cells. Stem cells. 2001; 19:236–246. DOI: 10.1634/stemcells.
19-3-236 [PubMed: 11359949] 
39. Gazdar AF, Carney DN, Russell EK, Schechter GP, Bunn PA Jr. In vitro growth of cutaneous T-cell 
lymphomas. Cancer treatment reports. 1979; 63:587–590. [PubMed: 221120] 
40. Morse HC 3rd, et al. Bethesda proposals for classification of lymphoid neoplasms in mice. Blood. 
2002; 100:246–258. [PubMed: 12070034] 
41. Rehg JE, Bush D, Ward JM. The utility of immunohistochemistry for the identification of 
hematopoietic and lymphoid cells in normal tissues and interpretation of proliferative and 
inflammatory lesions of mice and rats. Toxicologic pathology. 2012; 40:345–374. DOI: 
10.1177/0192623311430695 [PubMed: 22434870] 
Wartewig et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. Counter-regulation of oncogenic T cell signalling in vivo.
a, Frequencies of ITK-SYK-expressing eGFP+ lymphocytes in the blood of the ITK-
SYKCD4-CreERT2 mice following single injections of tamoxifen (n=3 mice per dose). 
r=Pearson’s correlation coefficient
b, Gene set enrichment analyses of wild-type naïve CD4+ T cells (CD4 naïve) and ITK-
SYKCD4-CreERT2 T cells at 4 (ITK-SYK 4d) and 7 days (ITK-SYK 7d) after tamoxifen 
injection. FDR=colour intensity of the circle. NES=circle diameter. Blue/red indicates the 
group in which a signature was positively enriched; n=3 biological replicates for each group. 
NES, normalised enrichment score; FDR, false discovery rate
c, Cohorts shown in a were followed over one year (n=3 biological replicates per dose). The 
data in the dashed box correspond to the data in a. † indicates animals that had to be 
euthanized because of lymphoma. P=Fisher’s exact test. The test was performed on pooled 
data from two independent experiments. Representative data from one experiment are 
shown.
Wartewig et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. Identification of PDCD1 alterations in T cell lymphoma.
a, Schematic representation of the transposon screen to discover T cell lymphoma genes. 
Transposons from the ATP2 transgene were mobilized by piggyBac in ITK-SYK-expressing 
T cells. The tumour cells were then FACS-sorted based on eGFP expression, and the 
transposon insertion sites were identified by next-generation sequencing and bioinformatics 
analysis.
b, Transposon insertion densities within pooled lymphomas (n=30 mice) for the murine 
chromosome 1, total: 2732 insertions and Pdcd1 locus: 23 insertions. The p-value was 
calculated with a one-sided Poisson distribution based test, which assumes transposon 
insertions occurring at a constant rate.
c, Flow cytometric analysis of PD-1 expression on lymphoma cells from diseased 
Rosa26LSL-ITK-SYK;Rosa26LSL-PB;ATP2;CD4-Cre mice. Lymphoma sample without any 
transposon cassette within the Pdcd1 gene (No insertion), with a single transposon cassette 
located in the Pdcd1 locus (Single insertion) or with multiple transposon cassettes within 
Pdcd1 (Multiple insertions).
d, The dashed box indicates the genomic region q37.3 on human chromosome 2 that is 
shown in detail in the lower part of the panel (top). Mono- or bi-allelic deletions of the 
PDCD1 gene detected in human T cell lymphoma patients are shown (bottom). The 
horizontal bars indicate the regions that were affected by the CNAs. The colour of the bar 
indicates the type of CNA. CNA, copy number aberration; Mbp, million base pairs
c, Representative results from at least 15 mice. d, Results of an analysis that included all 
available WGS data within one published dataset.
Wartewig et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. Oncogenic T cell signalling induces a PD-1 inhibitory loop.
a, PD-1 expression on the peripheral blood lymphocytes from an ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2 
mouse as measured by flow cytometry 96 hours after tamoxifen injection.
b, Normalized transcript read counts of reads that were mapped to the Pdcd1 locus and 
detected in the RNAseq dataset from naïve CD4+ T cells (Naive) or ITK-SYK-expressing 
eGFP+CD4+ T cells from ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2 mice 4 days after the tamoxifen injection 
(ITK-SYK). Shown are the mean±s.e.m and individual data points. FPKM, fragments per 
kilobase of exon per million fragments mapped; n.d., not detectable indicates FPKM<0.1; 
n=3 mice per group.
Wartewig et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 c, Gene Set Variation Analysis (GSVA) of fifty primary human T-NHL RNAseq samples is 
shown. The analysis was performed based on the geneset 
GO_antigen_receptor_mediated_signaling_pathway.
d, PDCD1 FPKM distributions from the samples in a are shown. The T-NHL patients 
(n=50) were classified according to their enrichment score. P=one-sided unequal variances 
Student’s t-test. The FPKM distributions are shown as box plots. The 0.25-, 0.5- and 0.75-
quantile is depicted by the box, minimum and maximum by the whiskers.
e, PDCD1 FPKM distributions from the positive samples in d are shown. The lymphomas 
were classified according to their PDCD1 copy number status. All T-NHLs with positive 
enrichment score were included (n=28). P=one-sided unequal variances Student’s t-test. The 
FPKM distributions are shown as box plots. The 0.25-, 0.5- and 0.75-quantile is depicted by 
the box, minimum and maximum by the whiskers; n.d., not detectable indicates FPKM<0.1.
f, Intracellular flow cytometric analyses of PTEN, p-AKT and p-PKCθ levels in primary 
ITK-SYK-expressing T cells stimulated with PD-L1 or Fc-fragment-coated microspheres.
a, Representative results from three analysed mice. f, Representative data from three 
independent experiments with two biological replicates per experiment.
Wartewig et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 4. PD-1 is a haploinsufficient tumour suppressor in vivo.
a, ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2 and ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2;PD-1-/- mice (n=3 mice per genotype) 
received single tamoxifen injections (0.25 mg). The percentages of ITK-SYK-expressing 
eGFP+ blood lymphocytes were determined using flow cytometry.
b, Fifty million splenic cells from diseased ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2;PD-1-/- mice (n=3 donors) 
were intravenously transferred to NSG mice (n=3 recipients). The percentage of eGFP+ 
lymphocytes in the recipient’s blood is indicated. NSG, NOD SCID Il2rg−/−
c, Survival of ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2, ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2;PD-1+/- and ITK-
SYKCD4-CreERT2;PD-1-/- mice (n=6, n=12 and n=14). All mice received a single tamoxifen 
dose on day zero. P=two-sided log-rank test
d, The percentages of ITK-SYK-expressing eGFP+ peripheral blood lymphocytes of 
checkpoint inhibitor-treated ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2 mice were determined by FACS. ITK-
Wartewig et al.
Page 37
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 SYKCD4-CreERT2 mice received single tamoxifen injections. Beginning twenty-four hours 
later, the mice received 200 µg of anti-PD-L1 or control antibody (n=3 mice per condition) 
every second day.
e, Anti-CD3 antibody-stained liver section from a diseased anti-PD-L1-treated ITK-
SYKCD4-CreERT2 mouse from the experiment shown in d, Scale bars represent 100 µm and 
20 µm (inset).
f, Survival of ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2 mice that received checkpoint inhibitor treatment 
starting ten days after tamoxifen administration. ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2 mice received single 
injections of tamoxifen on day zero (0.25 mg). Starting ten days after injection, mice were 
administered 200 µg of anti-PD-L1 or anti-PD-1 antibody or control antibody (n=4 mice per 
condition) every third day. P=two-sided log-rank test
g, Phosflow analyses of PTEN, p-AKT and p-PKCθ levels in ITK-SYK-expressing T cells 
isolated from the C57BL/6 recipients presented in Extended Data Figure 6b. The genotype 
of the transplanted cells is indicated.
h, Survival of the PI3Kδ inhibitor- or vehicle-treated recipient mice. Tamoxifen-induced 
ITK-SYKCD4-CreERT2;PD-1-/- T cells (n=5 biological replicates, 5x104 cells per transplant) 
were transplanted into NSG mice (n=5 recipients per group). P=two-sided log-rank test.
† indicates animals that were euthanized because of lymphomas. a, Representative data from 
three independent experiments, each with three biological replicates. b, The data from a 
single experiment that was independently repeated once with comparable results. c, Pooled 
data from two independent experiments. d, Representative data from four independent 
experiments, each with three biological replicates per antibody. e, Representative histology 
from one out of nine analysed mice. f, Data from a single experiment, which was repeated 
once with similar results. g, Representative results from two out of eight analysed mice in 
two independent experiments. h, Pooled survival data from two experiments.
Wartewig et al.
Page 38
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 15.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
