 www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   June 2018 
785
Articles
Lancet Oncol 2018; 19: 785–98
Published Online 
May 9, 2018 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S1470-2045(18)30242-0
See Comment page 722
*Contributed equally as joint 
first authors
†Contributed equally as joint 
senior authors
Department of Paediatric 
Oncology, Lady Cilento 
Children’s Hospital, South 
Brisbane, QLD, Australia 
(T Hassall MBBS); Department 
of Paediatric Oncology, Sydney 
Children’s Hospital, Sydney, 
NSW, Australia 
(Prof R Cohn MBBCh); 
Department of Paediatric 
Oncology, The Children’s 
Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, 
NSW, Australia 
(G McCowage MBBS); 
Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, 
Cumming School of Medicine 
(A S Morrissy PhD), 
and Department of Pathology 
and Laboratory Medicine, 
Department of Oncology, 
and Department of Clinical 
Neurosciences (J A Chan MD), 
University of Calgary, Calgary, 
AB, Canada; Developmental 
and Stem Cell Biology Program 
(A S Morrissy), Division of 
Haematology/Oncology 
(V Ramaswamy MD, 
D Malkin MD), and Division of 
Neurosurgery 
(Prof M D Taylor MD), 
The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Spectrum and prevalence of genetic predisposition in 
medulloblastoma: a retrospective genetic study and 
prospective validation in a clinical trial cohort
Sebastian M Waszak*, Paul A Northcott*, Ivo Buchhalter, Giles W Robinson, Christian Sutter, Susanne Groebner, Kerstin B Grund, 
Laurence Brugières, David T W Jones, Kristian W Pajtler, A Sorana Morrissy, Marcel Kool, Dominik Sturm, Lukas Chavez, Aurelie Ernst, 
Sebastian Brabetz, Michael Hain, Thomas Zichner, Maia Segura-Wang, Joachim Weischenfeldt, Tobias Rausch, Balca R Mardin, Xin Zhou, 
Cristina Baciu, Christian Lawerenz, Jennifer A Chan, Pascale Varlet, Lea Guerrini-Rousseau, Daniel W Fults, Wiesława Grajkowska, 
Peter Hauser, Nada Jabado, Young-Shin Ra, Karel Zitterbart, Suyash S Shringarpure, Francisco M De La Vega, Carlos D Bustamante, 
Ho-Keung Ng, Arie Perry, Tobey J MacDonald, Pablo Hernáiz Driever, Anne E Bendel, Daniel C Bowers, Geoffrey McCowage, 
Murali M Chintagumpala, Richard Cohn, Timothy Hassall, Gudrun Fleischhack, Tone Eggen, Finn Wesenberg, Maria Feychting, 
Birgitta Lannering, Joachim Schüz, Christoffer Johansen, Tina V Andersen, Martin Röösli, Claudia E Kuehni, Michael Grotzer, 
Kristina Kjaerheim, Camelia M Monoranu, Tenley C Archer, Elizabeth Duke, Scott L Pomeroy, Redmond Shelagh, Stephan Frank, 
David Sumerauer, Wolfram Scheurlen, Marina V Ryzhova, Till Milde, Christian P Kratz, David Samuel, Jinghui Zhang, David A Solomon, 
Marco Marra, Roland Eils, Claus R Bartram, Katja von Hoff, Stefan Rutkowski, Vijay Ramaswamy, Richard J Gilbertson, Andrey Korshunov, 
Michael D Taylor, Peter Lichter, David Malkin†, Amar Gajjar†, Jan O Korbel†, Stefan M Pfister†
Summary
Background Medulloblastoma is associated with rare hereditary cancer predisposition syndromes; however, consensus 
medulloblastoma predisposition genes have not been defined and screening guidelines for genetic counselling and 
testing for paediatric patients are not available. We aimed to assess and define these genes to provide evidence for 
future screening guidelines.
Methods In this international, multicentre study, we analysed patients with medulloblastoma from retrospective 
cohorts (International Cancer Genome Consortium [ICGC] PedBrain, Medulloblastoma Advanced Genomics 
International Consortium [MAGIC], and the CEFALO series) and from prospective cohorts from four clinical studies 
(SJMB03, SJMB12, SJYC07, and I-HIT-MED). Whole-genome sequences and exome sequences from blood and 
tumour samples were analysed for rare damaging germline mutations in cancer predisposition genes. DNA 
methylation profiling was done to determine consensus molecular subgroups: WNT (MBWNT), SHH (MBSHH), group 3 
(MBGroup3), and group 4 (MBGroup4). Medulloblastoma predisposition genes were predicted on the basis of rare variant 
burden tests against controls without a cancer diagnosis from the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC). Previously 
defined somatic mutational signatures were used to further classify medulloblastoma genomes into two groups, 
a clock-like group (signatures 1 and 5) and a homologous recombination repair deficiency-like group (signatures 3 
and 8), and chromothripsis was investigated using previously established criteria. Progression-free survival and 
overall survival were modelled for patients with a genetic predisposition to medulloblastoma.
Findings We included a total of 1022 patients with medulloblastoma from the retrospective cohorts (n=673) and the 
four prospective studies (n=349), from whom blood samples (n=1022) and tumour samples (n=800) were analysed for 
germline mutations in 110 cancer predisposition genes. In our rare variant burden analysis, we compared these 
against 53 105 sequenced controls from ExAC and identified APC, BRCA2, PALB2, PTCH1, SUFU, and TP53 as 
consensus medulloblastoma predisposition genes according to our rare variant burden analysis and estimated that 
germline mutations accounted for 6% of medulloblastoma diagnoses in the retrospective cohort. The prevalence of 
genetic predispositions differed between molecular subgroups in the retrospective cohort and was highest for patients 
in the MBSHH subgroup (20% in the retrospective cohort). These estimates were replicated in the prospective clinical 
cohort (germline mutations accounted for 5% of medulloblastoma diagnoses, with the highest prevalence [14%] in 
the MBSHH subgroup). Patients with germline APC mutations developed MBWNT and accounted for most (five [71%] of 
seven) cases of MBWNT that had no somatic CTNNB1 exon 3 mutations. Patients with germline mutations in SUFU 
and PTCH1 mostly developed infant MBSHH. Germline TP53 mutations presented only in childhood patients in the 
MBSHH subgroup and explained more than half (eight [57%] of 14) of all chromothripsis events in this subgroup. 
Germline mutations in PALB2 and BRCA2 were observed across the MBSHH, MBGroup3, and MBGroup4 molecular subgroups 
and were associated with mutational signatures typical of homologous recombination repair deficiency. In patients 
with a genetic predisposition to medulloblastoma, 5-year progression-free survival was 52% (95% CI 40–69) and 
5-year overall survival was 65% (95% CI 52–81); these survival estimates differed significantly across patients with 
germline mutations in different medulloblastoma predisposition genes.
 Articles
786 
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   June 2018
Toronto, ON, Canada; 
Department of Pediatrics, 
McGill University, Montreal, 
QC, Canada (Prof N Jabado MD); 
Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, 
ON, Canada (V Ramaswamy, 
D Malkin); Michael Smith 
Genome Sciences Centre, BC 
Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada (M Marra PhD); 
University Health Network-
Toronto General Hospital, 
Toronto, ON, Canada 
(C Baciu PhD); Department of 
Anatomical and Cellular 
Pathology, The Chinese 
University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong Special Administrative 
Region, China (H-K Ng MD); 
Department of Paediatric 
Oncology, University Hospital 
Brno and Faculty of Medicine, 
Masaryk University, Brno, 
Czech Republic 
(K Zitterbart MD); Department 
of Pediatric Hematology and 
Oncology, 2nd Faculty of 
Medicine, University Hospital 
Motol, Charles University, 
Prague, Czech Republic 
(D Sumerauer MD); Regional 
Centre for Applied Molecular 
Oncology, Masaryk Memorial 
Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech 
Republic (K Zitterbart); Biotech 
Research and Innovation 
Centre, Copenhagen, Denmark 
(J Weischenfeldt PhD); Oncology 
Clinic, Finsen Centre 
(Prof C Johansen MD) and 
Finsen Laboratory 
(J Weischenfeldt PhD), 
Rigshospitalet, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark; Unit of Survivorship 
(Prof C Johansen MD), Danish 
Cancer Society Research Center, 
Copenhagen, Denmark 
(T V Andersen MS); Department 
of Children and Adolescents 
Oncology, Gustave Roussy 
Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France 
(L Brugières MD, 
L Guerrini-Rousseau MD); 
Department of 
Neuropathology, Sainte-Anne 
Hospital, Paris, France 
(P Varlet MD); Section of 
Environment and Radiation, 
International Agency for 
Research on Cancer, Lyon, 
France (J Schüz PhD); 
Cnopf’sche Kinderklinik, 
Nuremberg, Germany 
(Prof W Scheurlen MD); 
Comprehensive Cancer Center 
Mainfranken, Würzburg, 
Germany (C M Monoranu MD); 
Department of 
Neuropathology, Institute of
Introduction
Medulloblastoma is an embryonal brain tumour of the 
cerebellum, with an annual age-adjusted incidence 
ranging from 2·0 cases per 1 000 000 to 5·8 cases per 
1 000 000 worldwide.1 The cause of medulloblastoma is 
largely unclear and most cases are presumed to arise 
sporadically.2 Medulloblastoma has been observed in 
conjunction with several rare disorders, including Gorlin 
syndrome (associated with mutations in SUFU and 
PTCH1),3,4 Li-Fraumeni syndrome (TP53),5 APC-associated 
polyposis conditions,6 and Fanconi anaemia (BRCA2).7 
However, the full spectrum and prevalence of genetic 
predisposition involving damaging germline mutations in 
paediatric-onset and adult-onset cancer predisposition 
genes8 remains unknown. Following the recognition9 of 
four consensus molecular subgroups (WNT [MBWNT], 
SHH [MBSHH], group 3 [MBGroup3], and group 4 [MBGroup4]) 
with distinct demographics and clinical outcomes,10 
patients with germline TP53, SUFU, and PTCH1 
mutations have been reported to be predisposed to develop 
MBSHH.11,12 Although several case studies have reported 
medullo 
blastomas arising in patients with Fanconi 
anaemia, 
whether 
these 
predispose 
to 
specific 
medulloblastoma subgroups, and whether heterozygous 
germline mutations13 also confer an increased risk 
of developing medulloblastoma, remain unknown. 
Furthermore, whether and to what extent the presence of 
predisposing germline mutations affects clinical outcome 
is unclear. A comprehensive study14 of damaging germline 
mutations in cancer predisposition genes across a diverse 
set of paediatric cancers identified variants likely to 
predispose to the disease in three (8%) of 37 patients with 
medulloblastoma—a cohort size that is too small to allow 
these issues to be thoroughly addressed. Owing to these 
uncertainties, and since knowledge about germline 
mutations can be useful for clinical practice,8 assessment 
of larger patient series is crucial for the identification of 
consensus medullo 
blastoma predisposition genes to 
estimate the con 
tribution of genetic predisposition 
towards consensus molecular sub 
groups, and to 
investigate whether affected patients have distinct clinical 
outcomes. A comprehensive under 
standing of molecular 
alterations in affected patients would further help in the 
development of clinical screening guidelines for genetic 
risk assessment in paediatric patients.
In this study, we provide a comprehensive description 
of genetic risk factors across 1022 patients with medullo-
blastoma based on a retrospective discovery cohort and 
validation in a prospective clinical cohort. We validated 
a set of six consensus medulloblastoma predisposition 
genes, and report associations between germline muta-
tions and patient characteristics, molecular sub 
groups, 
somatic mutation landscapes, and clinical outcomes.
Methods
Study design and participants
This series was based on 1022 patients with medullo-
blastoma (491 published12,15–18 and 531 as yet unpublished 
cases), and comprised whole-genome and whole-exome 
sequencing data for the whole set of donor samples 
available to use from the International Cancer Genome 
Consortium (ICGC), the Medulloblastoma Advanced 
Genomics International Consortium (MAGIC), and 
the CEFALO series,19 and from four prospective 
clinical studies (SJMB03 [NCT00085202], SJMB12 
[NCT01878617], SJYC07 [NCT00602667], and I-HIT-MED 
Interpretation Genetic counselling and testing should be used as a standard-of-care procedure in patients with MBWNT 
and MBSHH because these patients have the highest prevalence of damaging germline mutations in known cancer 
predisposition genes. We propose criteria for routine genetic screening for patients with medulloblastoma based on 
clinical and molecular tumour characteristics. 
Funding German Cancer Aid; German Federal Ministry of Education and Research; German Childhood Cancer 
Foundation (Deutsche Kinderkrebsstiftung); European Research Council; National Institutes of Health; Canadian 
Institutes for Health Research; German Cancer Research Center; St Jude Comprehensive Cancer Center; American 
Lebanese Syrian Associated Charities; Swiss National Science Foundation; European Molecular Biology Organization; 
Cancer Research UK; Hertie Foundation; Alexander and Margaret Stewart Trust; V Foundation for Cancer Research; 
Sontag Foundation; Musicians Against Childhood Cancer; BC Cancer Foundation; Swedish Council for Health, 
Working Life and Welfare; Swedish Research Council; Swedish Cancer Society; the Swedish Radiation Protection 
Authority; Danish Strategic Research Council; Swiss Federal Office of Public Health; Swiss Research Foundation on 
Mobile Communication; Masaryk University; Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic; Research Council of Norway; 
Genome Canada; Genome BC; Terry Fox Research Institute; Ontario Institute for Cancer Research; Pediatric Oncology 
Group of Ontario; The Family of Kathleen Lorette and the Clark H Smith Brain Tumour Centre; Montreal Children’s 
Hospital Foundation; The Hospital for Sick Children: Sonia and Arthur Labatt Brain Tumour Research Centre, Chief 
of Research Fund, Cancer Genetics Program, Garron Family Cancer Centre, MDT’s Garron Family Endowment; BC 
Childhood Cancer Parents Association; Cure Search Foundation; Pediatric Brain Tumor Foundation; Brainchild; and 
the Government of Ontario.
Copyright © 2018 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open Access article under the CC BY-NC-ND 
4.0 license.
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   June 2018 
787
Pathology, University of 
Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany 
(C M Monoranu); Department 
of Pediatric Hematology and 
Oncology, University Medical 
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany 
(K von Hoff MD, 
Prof S Rutkowski MD); Klinik für 
Pädiatrie mS Onkologie und 
Hämatologie, Charité, 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
corporate member of Freie 
Universität Berlin, Humboldt-
Universität zu Berlin and Berlin 
Institute of Health, Berlin, 
Germany (P Hernáiz Driever, 
K von Hoff); Pediatric 
Hematology and Oncology, 
Hannover Medical School, 
Hannover, Germany 
(Prof C P Kratz MD); Pediatric 
Oncology and Hematology, 
Pediatrics III, University 
Hospital of Essen, Essen, 
Germany (G Fleischhack MD); 
European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory, Genome Biology 
Unit, Heidelberg, Germany 
(S M Waszak PhD, T Zichner PhD, 
M Segura-Wang PhD, 
J Weischenfeldt, T Rausch PhD, 
B R Mardin PhD, J O Korbel PhD); 
Institute of Human Genetics, 
Heidelberg University, 
Heidelberg, Germany 
(C Sutter PhD, K B Grund MD, 
Prof C R Bartram MD); 
Department of Pediatric 
Hematology and Oncology 
(K W Pajtler MD, D Sturm MD, 
S Brabetz MSc, T Milde MD, 
Prof S M Pfister MD) and 
Department of 
Neuropathology 
(A Korshunov MD), Heidelberg 
University Hospital, 
Heidelberg, Germany; Division 
of Pediatric Neurooncology 
(P A Northcott PhD, 
S Groebner PhD, 
D T W Jones PhD, K W Pajtler, 
M Kool PhD, D Sturm, 
L Chavez PhD, S Brabetz, 
Prof S M Pfister), Division of 
Molecular Genetics 
(Prof P Lichter PhD), and Clinical 
Cooperation Unit Pediatric 
Oncology (T Milde), German 
Cancer Consortium (DKTK), 
German Cancer Research Center 
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany; 
Division of Theoretical 
Bioinformatics 
(I Buchhalter PhD, 
Prof R Eils PhD), Division of 
Molecular Genetics 
(A Ernst PhD, M Hain CITBM), 
Division of Applied 
Bioinformatics (I Buchhalter), 
Data Management Facility 
[NCT02417324]). We obtained biological samples from 
all patients, who all provided written informed consent, 
in accordance with institutional review board guidelines.
Patient accrual for our retrospective cohort was done 
from 2003 until 2016. Patient accrual for the SJMB03 trial 
was done from Sept 9, 2003, until March 7, 2013 and for 
the SJYC07 trial was done from Dec 17, 2007, until 
March 31, 2017
. The SJMB12 and I-HIT-MED trials are 
still accruing. The age limit for eligibility in the 
prospective studies was 5 years or younger (SJYC07), 
3–21 years (SJMB03), and 3–39 years (SJMB12). Patients 
of all ages were eligible for the I-HIT-MED study. The 
retrospective cohort had no age limit for inclusion. 
Patients in the I-HIT-MED study were excluded if they 
were registered in another clinical trial for the same 
diagnosis (relapse is defined as a second diagnosis) or if 
a valid ethical committee approval was lacking.
Procedures
Whole-genome and whole-exome sequencing data for 
germline and tumour samples were generated at the 
German Cancer Research Centre (ICGC PedBrain; 
Heidelberg, Germany), Canada’s Michael Smith Genome 
Sciences Centre (MAGIC; Vancouver, BC, Canada), 
Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
and Harvard (Cambridge, MA, USA), and St Jude 
Children’s Research Hospital (Pediatric Cancer Genome 
Project; Memphis, TN, USA).
To ensure standardisation of genomic data processing, 
we used the same uniform computational analysis 
workflows for all germline and tumour samples. We first 
unaligned samples that were provided to us as genomic 
alignment format (BAM) files. Subsequently, we aligned 
all samples using the same set of algorithms and the same 
human reference genome build (GRCH37, also known as 
hg19), based on data-processing standards defined by the 
Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes (PCAWG) project.
For germline variant discovery, we used freebayes 
(version 1.1.0) in single-sample and paired-sample calling 
modes for discovery of single-nucleotide variants (SNVs), 
multiple nucleotide variants (MNVs), and insertions or 
deletions (indels) smaller than 50 base-pairs (bp; used 
Research in context
Evidence before this study
We searched PubMed for journal articles and case reports from 
Aug 1, 1925, up to Dec 31, 2017, with the terms 
“medulloblastoma” and “germline OR familial OR syndrome OR 
heritable OR susceptibility”, and the names of 110 genes in which 
germline mutations confer increased risk of paediatric and adult 
cancers. About 100 studies identified damaging germline 
mutations in nearly 20 genes, primarily in APC, BRCA2, PTCH1, 
SUFU, and TP53. Several studies were based on case reports and 
small-scale series. Additionally, which patients would benefit 
from genetic counselling in the context of molecular 
subgrouping—nowadays routinely applied in clinical trials and 
implemented into the revised WHO classification of CNS 
tumours in 2016—and whether genetic predisposition can be 
recognised based on familial patterns were unclear. Additionally, 
several paediatric cancer centres have implemented routine 
multigene panel analysis and whole-exome analysis of 
medulloblastomas; however, these centres encounter several 
germline mutations with uncertain clinical significance. No study 
has previously aimed to define a consensus set of 
medulloblastoma predisposition genes or has investigated under 
which circumstances genetic counselling and testing should be 
offered to patients with medulloblastoma.
Added value of this study
This study is based on an international cohort of 1022 patients 
with medulloblastoma, and includes detailed information about 
medulloblastoma subgroups (WNT [MBWNT], SHH [MBSHH], 
group 3 [MBGroup3], and group 4 [MBGroup4]), somatic mutation 
landscapes, and clinical outcomes. We defined and characterised 
six consensus, clinically relevant medulloblastoma predisposition 
genes on the basis of rare variant burden analysis (APC, BRCA2, 
PALB2, PTCH1, SUFU, and TP53). Half of all patients with 
damaging germline mutations were not recognised based on 
familial history of cancer; however, these patients exhibited 
distinct phenotypes with respect to age at diagnosis, molecular 
subgroups, somatic mutation patterns, and clinical outcomes. 
Paediatric patients with heterozygous germline PALB2 
mutations exhibited mutational signatures consistent with 
homologous recombination repair deficiency and all patients 
with medulloblastoma showed no signs characteristic of Fanconi 
anaemia. About one in five patients in the MBSHH subgroup 
developed medulloblastoma in the context of a genetic 
predisposition, underscoring the need for a dedicated genetic 
screening programme and surveillance programme in this 
patient group. Patients in the MBWNT subgroup had an 
intermediate risk of damaging germline mutations, and clear 
genotype–phenotype associations that guide the ordering of 
genetic tests. Damaging germline mutations in known cancer 
predisposition genes were rare in paediatric patients in the 
MBGroup3 and MBGroup4 subgroups, which indicates conservative 
ordering of genetic tests in these groups. We propose clinical 
guidelines for genetic screening in medulloblastoma based on 
routinely acquired clinical and molecular tumour phenotypes.
Implications of all the available evidence
A significant prevalence of clinically important germline 
mutations in two of four molecular subgroups reveals that 
genetic counselling and testing should be established as a 
standard-of-care procedure in the management of patients with 
medulloblastoma. The proposed testing algorithm has been 
implemented in the International Society of Paediatric Oncology 
clinical trial PNET 5 MB (NCT02066220), which is currently 
recruiting patients.
 Articles
788 
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   June 2018
(C Lawerenz PhD), and Clinical 
Cooperation Unit 
Neuropathology (A Korshunov), 
German Cancer Research 
Center, Heidelberg, Germany; 
Hopp Children’s Cancer Center 
at the NCT Heidelberg, 
Heidelberg, Germany 
(D T W Jones, K W Pajtler, M Kool, 
D Sturm, S Brabetz, T Milde, 
Prof S M Pfister); 
2nd Department of Pediatrics, 
Semmelweis University, 
Budapest, Hungary 
(P Hauser PhD); Department of 
Neurosurgery, Asan Medical 
Center, Seoul, South Korea 
(Y-S Ra MD); Department of 
Pediatric Medicine, Oslo 
University Hospital, Oslo, 
Norway (Prof F Wesenberg MD); 
Institute of Clinical Medicine, 
University of Oslo, Oslo, 
Norway (Prof F Wesenberg); 
Cancer Registry of Norway, 
Oslo, Norway (K Kjaerheim PhD, 
T Eggen MSc, Prof F Wesenberg); 
Department of Pathology, 
Children’s Memorial Health 
Institute, Warsaw, Poland 
(Prof W Grajkowska MD); 
Department of 
Neuropathology, Burdenko 
Neurosurgical Institute, 
Moscow, Russia 
(M V Ryzhova MD); Department 
of Pediatrics, University of 
Gothenburg, The Queen Silvia 
Children’s Hospital, 
Gothenburg, Sweden 
(Prof B Lannering MD); Institute 
of Environmental Medicine, 
Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden 
(Prof M Feychting PhD); 
Department of Epidemiology 
and Public Health, Swiss 
Tropical and Public Health 
Institute, Basel, Switzerland 
(Prof M Röösli PhD); 
Department of Pediatric 
Oncology, University Children’s 
Hospital Zurich, University of 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland 
(Prof M Grotzer MD); Institute 
of Neuropathology, University 
Hospital Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland (Prof S Frank MD); 
Swiss Childhood Cancer 
Registry, Institute of Social and 
Preventive Medicine, 
University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland 
(Prof C E Kuehni MD, 
R Shelagh PhD); Swiss Tropical 
and Public Health Institute, 
University of Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland (Prof M Röösli)
Broad Institute of Harvard and 
Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA,
parameters were --min-repeat-entropy 1, --report-genotype-
likelihood-max, --alternate-fraction 0·2, and --no-partial-
observations). Raw variant predictions were further 
filtered for quality (QUAL >20, QUAL/AO >2; where 
QUAL is −10 log10 Pr[alternative allele is wrong], and AO is 
alternative allele observation count), strand bias artifacts 
(SAF >1, SAR >1; where SAF is the number of alternate 
observations on the forward strand, and SAR is number of 
alternate observations on the reverse strand), read position 
artifacts (RPR >1, RPL >1; where RPR is the number of 
reads supporting the alternate balanced to the right [3ʹ] of 
the alternate allele, and RPL is the number of reads 
supporting the alternate balanced to the left [5ʹ] of the 
alternate allele), and normalised for consistent re-
presentation across patients with the variant analysis 
software vt (version 0.5). We used delly for germline 
genomic structural variant discovery with default settings 
for whole-genome sequencing samples and a custom 
read-depth-based copy-number variation (CNV)-calling 
pipeline for whole-exome sequencing samples. We based 
this custom pipeline on read quantification by bedtools in 
exome capture regions (MAQ >30), followed by variance 
stabilising transformation of count data with the vst 
function from the DESeq2 R package (version 1.8.2), 
unsupervised estimation of hidden confounders using the 
R package PEER (30 hidden confounders), and copy-
number segmentation based on standardised residuals 
using circular binary segmentation (R package DNAcopy, 
version 1.50, default settings). Raw CNV calls were filtered 
further for size (to include only those >10 kb), minimum 
number of exons (>2), and CNV signal intensity (>4 SDs). 
Mosaic mutation discovery was based on freebayes and for 
donors with paired blood and tumour sequencing data. 
Any SNV, short indel, and MNV that was observed at low 
variant allele frequency in blood (3–15%) and high variant 
allele frequency in tumours (>50%) was considered a 
putative mosaic mutation. We restricted the analysis to 
reads with mapping quality of more than 30 (−10 log10 
Pr[mapping position is wrong]), base quality of more than 
20 (−10 log10 Pr[mapping position is wrong]), and sites 
with more than 30 times sequencing coverage (ie, number 
of reads). We made no assumptions regarding the 
pathogenicity of putative mosaic mutations. We excluded 
any variant that was present in public genetic archives and 
discovered in germline genomes of other patients with 
medulloblastoma.
For classification of damaging germline mutations, 
germline variants were annotated with the Ensembl 
Variant Effect Predictor (VEP; r81). High-impact (ie, 
damaging) germline mutations were defined as 
frameshift, stop gain, start lost, canonical splice site, 
exon or gene deletions, known (ClinVar; accessed 
Feb 16, 2017) damaging non-canonical splice site variants, 
and somatic mosaic mutations (defined as mutations 
present in a subset of normal cells). Putative damaging 
germline mutations were removed if the estimated 
minor allele frequency in at least one continental 
population was more than 0·1%, which we judged on the 
basis of 53 105 sequenced individuals that were assigned 
to known (control) populations and without a cancer 
diagnosis from the Exome Aggregation Consortium 
(ExAC) resource, the 1000 Genomes Project, and the 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute GO Exome 
Sequencing Project. Putative gain-of-function missense 
variants in TP53 were further evaluated by use of 
information in the International Agency for Research on 
Cancer TP53 database and annotated as pathogenic if 
TP53 mutations were classified as non-functional in 
experimental transcriptional activity assays. Finally, all 
germline mutations were excluded from the analysis if 
annotated as (likely) benign in ClinVar. Damaging 
germline structural variants were defined if they 
overlapped at least one exon and were absent in samples 
from the 1000 Genomes Project. We estimated the 
primary population ancestry (European, African, east 
Asian, south Asian, and Native American) for all patients 
with medulloblastoma with a supervised decomposition 
approach20 and ancestry-informative markers that are 
within ExAC-defined exome capture target regions.
Identification of somatic mutations (SNVs, small 
indels, and copy-number alterations) was pursued in a 
standardised manner across all samples (matched 
tumour or normal genome as well as exome pairs) with 
the German Cancer Research Center (known as DKFZ) 
and European Molecular Biology Laboratory cancer 
genome analysis workflow of the PCAWG consortium. 
Somatic SNVs and indels were further stringently filtered 
for germline contamination using information from 
dbSNP and the 1000 Genomes Project. Somatic structural 
variant discovery was pursued in a standardised way by 
use of an optimised version of delly. We used a high-
stringency structural variant set by additionally filtering 
somatic structural variants detected in at least 1% of a set 
of 1105 germline samples from healthy individuals 
belonging to phase 1 of the 1000 Genomes Project, and 
by requiring absence of somatic structural variants in all 
medulloblastoma germline samples of this study. For 
inference of high-stringency structural variants, we 
additionally required at least four supporting read pairs21 
with a minimum mapping quality of 20 (−10 log10 
Pr[mapping position is wrong]) and restricted valid 
somatic structural variant sizes from 100 bp to 500 Mb.
We quantified previously defined somatic mutational 
signatures22 (termed 1, 3, 5, and 8) using tumour-specific 
somatic point-mutation spectra and published signature 
probabilities. These signatures comprise combinations 
of somatic mutations and represent consequences of 
mutagenic exposures and defective DNA repair pathways. 
Signatures 1 and 5 (“clock-like” signatures) are associated 
with ageing (a clock-like accumulation of mutations) and 
occur in normal, non-malignant cells,22 whereas 
signatures 3 and 8 are associated with homologous 
recombination repair deficiency (HRD) and have been 
reported in cancer tissues. We used these mutational 
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   June 2018 
789
USA (T C Archer PhD, 
Prof S L Pomeroy MD); 
Department of Neurology, 
Boston Children’s Hospital and 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA, USA (T C Archer, E Duke MD, 
Prof S L Pomeroy); Department 
of Neurosurgery, University of 
Utah School of Medicine, 
Salt Lake City, UT, USA 
(D W Fults MD); Department of 
Pediatric Hematology and 
Oncology, Children’s Hospitals 
and Clinics of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN, USA 
(A E Bendel MD); Department of 
Pediatric Hematology and 
Oncology, Texas Children’s 
Hospital, Houston, TX, USA 
(Prof M M Chintagumpala MD); 
Department of Pediatrics, Aflac 
Cancer and Blood Disorders 
Center, Emory University School 
of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA 
(Prof T J MacDonald MD); 
Departments of Genetics and 
Biomedical Data Science, 
Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA 
(S S Shringarpure PhD, 
F M De La Vega DSc, 
C D Bustamante PhD); Division of 
Neuropathology, Department 
of Pathology and Helen Diller 
Family Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of California, 
San Francisco, CA, USA 
(Prof A Perry MD, 
D A Solomon MD); Division of 
Pediatric Hematology-
Oncology, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical School, 
Dallas, TX, USA (D C Bowers MD); 
Valley Children’s Hospital, 
Madera, CA, USA (D Samuel MD); 
Department of Computational 
Biology (X Zhou PhD, 
J Zhang PhD), Department of 
Developmental Neurobiology 
(P A Northcott), and Department 
of Oncology (G W Robinson MD, 
Prof A Gajjar MD), 
St Jude Children’s Research 
Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA; 
and Department of Oncology 
and Cancer Research UK 
Cambridge Institute, University 
of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 
(Prof R J Gilbertson PhD)
Correspondence to: 
Dr Stefan M Pfister, Hopp 
Children’s Cancer Center at the 
NCT Heidelberg, Division of 
Pediatric Neurooncology, 
German Cancer Research Center, 
Heidelberg 69120, Germany 
s.pfister@kitz-heidelberg.de
For more on the PCAWG project 
see https://dcc.icgc.org/pcawg
signatures to further classify medulloblastoma genomes 
into two groups, a clock-like group (signatures 1 and 5) 
and a HRD-like group (signatures 3 and 8). Somatic 
mutation spectra were quantified with the R package 
SomaticSignatures (version 2.6) and decomposed into 
contributions of known mutational signatures based on 
the Lawson–Hanson algorithm for non-negative least 
squares (nnls version 1.1, R package). The quantification 
error (residual sum of squares) was correlated with the 
total somatic mutation burden (Spearman’s r=0·74; 
p<0·0001) and it was highest in tumours with fewer than 
100 somatic SNVs. We have retained 375 whole-genome 
sequencing samples with more than 100 SNVs and low 
quantification error (<0·02) for signature analysis. 
Medulloblastomas were classified as homo 
logous 
recombination repair deficient if most (>50%) somatic 
SNVs were assigned to mutational signatures 3 or 8.
To assess the burden of rare germline SNVs and indels 
in cancer predisposition genes, we performed case–
control association testing in a subgroup-specific manner 
as well as across all subgroups based on a collection 
of 
110 
autosomal 
cancer 
predisposition 
genes8,23 
(appendix p 2). All patients with medulloblastoma in our 
retrospective discovery cohort were eligible for rare 
variant burden analysis. We used 53 105 sequenced 
individuals without a known cancer diagnosis from ExAC 
(release 0.3) as controls. Age and sex were not matched 
between cases and controls because of missing infor-
mation from ExAC. To ensure comparability with variants 
found in patients with medulloblastoma, ExAC germline 
mutations were normalised with vt normalize, annotated 
with VEP (r81), and filtered for sites that passed quality 
controls, as defined by ExAC. Moreover, we excluded any 
germline mutations that were present outside ExAC-
defined target regions to reduce any possible advantages 
derived from improved variant calling in whole-genome 
sequences (eg, exons not being covered in ExAC). 
Furthermore, we also did not include pathogenic struc-
tural variants in our rare variant burden analysis. We 
assumed equal effect sizes for frameshift, nonsense, 
splice site, and gain-of-function missense variants, as well 
as for variants located at any position along a gene. The 
total number of damaging (a) and wild-type (A) alleles 
were counted for each gene in cases and controls, 
recorded in a 2 × 2 contingency table, and evaluated for 
statistical independence of rows (case and control) and 
columns (allele a and allele A) with Fisher’s exact test 
(to 1 df) implemented in R version 3.4 using the fisher.
exact function. Unadjusted p values were recorded for 
each gene and adjusted for multiple testing correction 
with the Bonferroni method. We only considered genes 
for which more than four pathogenic alleles were 
observed in cases and controls. Allelic relative risks were 
estimated by the odds ratio (OR), which describes the 
association between medullo 
blastoma and damaging 
alleles by comparing the odds of medullo 
blastoma in an 
individual carrying a wild-type allele to the odds of 
medulloblastoma in an individual carrying one damaging 
allele. We assumed that the penetrance of monoallelic 
germline mutations was lower than that of biallelic 
germline mutations (ie, homozygous and compound 
heterozygous mutations).
We assessed secondary somatic gene hits in tumours 
on three levels: point mutations, loss-of-heterozygosity, 
and allele-specific gene expression. Somatic point 
mutations were assumed to occur in trans (ie, on a 
different haplotype). Loss of heterozygosity was quan-
tified by use of genotyping germline alleles in available 
tumour genomes or exomes with freebayes and requiring 
a minimum coverage of ten reads, minimum base 
quality of 10 (−10 log10 Pr[base is wrong]), and minimum 
mapping quality of 10 (−10 log10 Pr[mapping position is 
wrong]). Loss of heterozygosity was inferred if the variant 
allele frequency was above 80% in tumour sequences. 
Allele-specific gene expression was quantified at 
heterozygous SNVs and indels and mRNA sequencing 
data by use of freebayes (minimum mapping quality of 
10 [−10 log10 Pr(mapping position is wrong)] and 
minimum base quality of 10 [−10 log10 Pr(base is wrong)]) 
and was predicted on the basis of binomial tests, an 
expected ratio of 0·5, and p values lower than 0·05. 
When possible, multiple sites within the same gene were 
phased with paired-end RNA sequencing data and 
individual sites were merged to calculate haplotype-
specific expression ratios.
We investigated chromothripsis using previously 
established criteria.24 These criteria distinguish chromo-
thripsis from DNA rearrangements occurring in a 
stepwise fashion. First, we analysed breakpoint 
clustering in the entire genome based on high-
confidence somatic structural variant calls and did 
statistical analysis for non-randomness of breakpoint 
distributions, under the assumption of an exponential 
distribution (null hypothesis). Breakpoint clustering 
generates highly clustered DNA breaks that might be 
followed by long tracts of intact DNA segments. For each 
sample and chromosome, a Kolmogorov–Smirnov test 
was used to test against the null hypothesis. Then we 
assessed the randomness of DNA rearrangements using 
a multi 
nomial test (implemented in the R package EMT) 
for chromosomes with putative chromothripsis patterns. 
For chromosomes undergoing chromothripsis, the 
shattered fragments were randomly stitched together 
according to the original chromothripsis model. This 
model implies that for each DNA break, the orientation 
of the two joined DNA fragment ends will be random. 
We tested the observed distribution of rearrangement 
joins (tail-to-head, head-to-tail, head-to-head, and tail-to-
tail) against a background model of occurrence with 
equal probability (ie, a probability of 0·25 for each 
rearrangement).
Molecular classification of medulloblastomas into 
consensus subgroups9 (MBWNT, MBSHH, MBGroup3, and 
MBGroup4) was determined by DNA methylation profiling.25
 Articles
790 
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   June 2018
For more on freebayes see 
https://github.com/ekg/
freebayes
For more on vt see https://
genome.sph.umich.edu/wiki/Vt
For more on delly see https://
github.com/dellytools/delly
For more on bedtools see 
https://github.com/arq5x/
bedtools2
For more on VEP see https://
www.ensembl.org/info/docs/
tools/vep/index.htm
For the ClinVar database see 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
clinvar/
For more on ExAC see http://
exac.broadinstitute.org
For more on the 1000 Genomes 
Project see http://www.
internationalgenome.org
For more on the National Heart, 
Lung, and Blood Institute GO 
Exome Sequencing Project see 
http://evs.gs.washington.edu/
EVS/
For more on the International 
Agency for Research on Cancer 
TP53 database see http://p53.
iarc.fr/
For the dbSNP database see 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
projects/SNP/
For more on the published 
signature probabilities see 
http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/
cosmic/signatures
See Online for appendix
For more on LOVD, see http://
www.lovd.nl/3.0/home 
Statistical analysis
No formal sample size and power calculations were done 
in this study, since we made use of all germline genomes 
and exomes available to us. Samples with missing data 
were excluded from specific analysis. We used Fisher’s 
exact and χ² tests for associations with binary and 
categorical variables, and Mann-Whitney U and Kruskal-
Wallis tests for associations with quantitative values. 
Survival analysis was based on the Kaplan-Meier 
estimator and log-rank tests using the R package suvival 
(version 2.41), and survival curves were visualised using 
the R package survminer (version 0.4.2). Overall survival 
and progression-free survival were based on definitions 
consistent with how they were evaluated within each 
respective patient cohort from each prospective trial: 
SJMB03, SJMB12, and SJYC07
. The prospective obser-
vational patient registry I-HIT-MED had no formal 
endpoints and so no statistical analyses were defined. 
Detailed outcome measures for all four studies are 
available on ClinicalTrials.gov. One-sided binomial tests 
were used for replication analysis with the alternative 
hypothesis defined as a lower probability of observing 
germline mutations in the replication cohort.
Role of the funding source
The funders of the study had no role in study design, 
data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or 
writing of the report. The corresponding authors had full 
access to all the data and had the final responsibility to 
submit for publication.
Results
We analysed germline genome-sequencing and exome-
sequencing data (appendix pp 8–9) from 1022 patients 
with medulloblastoma, of whom 673 were in the retro-
spective discovery cohort and 349 were in the prospective 
clinical study cohort (figure 1A, appendix p 3). Patient-
matched 
tumour 
genomes 
were 
sequenced 
for 
800 samples from both cohorts (n=451 retrospective and 
n=349 prospective) from whole-genome sequencing 
(n=397) and whole-exome sequencing (n=403; figure 1A). 
Molecular classification of medulloblastomas into 
subgroups was done for 844 patients (n=496 retrospective 
cohort and n=348 prospective cohort). SNVs, MNVs, 
small (<30 bp) indels, and large structural variants were 
predicted across 110 paediatric-onset and adult-onset 
cancer predisposition genes8,23 and classified as patho-
genic based on stringent criteria. 
We identified damaging germline mutations in 
76 (11%) of 673 patients in our retrospective cohort and 
across 32 genes (appendix pp 10–12). Most damaging 
germline mutations have been previously described in 
the literature (in 55 [71%] of 77 mutations) and already 
classified as (likely) pathogenic (42 [55%] of 77) in public 
archives (ClinVar, LOVD; appendix pp 10–12). Discovery 
of consensus medulloblastoma predisposition genes was 
based on rare variant burden analysis using 673 patients 
with medulloblastoma and 53 105 ExAC controls. In total, 
six genes showed a significant excess of damaging 
germline mutations for patients with medulloblastoma—
namely, APC, BRCA2, PALB2, PTCH1, SUFU, and TP53 
(adjusted p value for multiple testing <0·05; figure 1B, 
appendix p 4). Restricting the analysis to patients and 
controls with European population ancestry revealed no 
additional candidate medulloblastoma predisposition 
genes (appendix p 4). Moreover, we did not identify 
patients with biallelic germline mutations in mismatch 
repair genes (ie, MSH2, MSH6, MLH1, and PMS2). 
However, a single patient in our discovery cohort 
harboured a heterozygous germline mutation in MSH6 
(appendix pp 10–12).
The overall prevalence of genetic predisposition based 
on these six genes in the retrospective discovery cohort 
was 6% (40/673), with a highest prevalence of 20% (28/141) 
in patients in the MBSHH subgroup (figure 1C). Replication 
of these estimates was based on 349 patients who were 
enrolled in the prospective clinical studies. Key patient 
characteristics, such as sex, age at diagnosis, and 
molecular tumour subgroups, were similar between both 
cohorts (psex=0·68, page=0·17, psubgroup=0·12; figure 1A). The 
overall prevalence of genetic predisposition in our 
prospective cohort (17 [5%] of 349) was consistent with 
estimates from our retrospective cohort (p=0·24; 
figure 1D, appendix pp 10–12). We further replicated the 
high prevalence of genetic predisposition in patients in 
the MBSHH subgroup (figure 1D). Notably, patients in the 
MBWNT subgroup also had an increased prevalence of 
germline predisposition in both the discovery and 
replication cohort, albeit more modest than for patients in 
the MBSHH subgroup (figure 1C, D).
We closely analysed key demographic, clinical, and 
molecular characteristics of patients with a genetic 
predisposition in these six genes. Most patients with 
available subgroup information developed MBSHH (41 [76%] 
of 54; figure 2A) and age at diagnosis also differed 
significantly between patients with germline mutations in 
medulloblastoma 
predisposition 
genes 
(p<0·0001; 
figure 2B). Patients with germline SUFU or PTCH1 
mutations were typically diagnosed as infants at a median 
age of 2·0 years (IQR 1·3–2·3), whereas patients with 
APC or TP53 mutations were diagnosed as children at a 
median age of 9·8 years (IQR 8·0–11). Analysis of 
histological subtypes in relation to genetic predisposition 
is presented in the appendix (p 2). Clinical signs of a 
genetic predisposition were noted in 16 (41%) of 39 patients 
and familial history of cancer in 17 (46%) of 37 patients, 
and both were different between patients with germline 
mutations in medulloblastoma pre 
disposition genes 
(p=0·017 and p=0·046, respectively; figure 2C, 2D). For 
example, only one (9%) of all 11 PTCH1 and SUFU 
mutation carriers with available medical records had 
a family history of cancer; however, eight (67%) of 
12 
patients 
with 
available 
medical 
records 
had 
clinical symptoms consistent with Gorlin’s syndrome 
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   June 2018 
791
(eg, macrocephaly, jaw cysts, and frontal bossing; appendix 
pp 10–12). By contrast, all four APC mutation carriers with 
available medical records had a familial history of familial 
adenomatous polyposis and associated cancers (eg, 
adrenocortical carcinoma). Of note, additional malig-
nancies were observed in six (12%) of 50 patients with 
medulloblastoma and all were restricted to patients with 
germline APC (n=3) or TP53 (n=3) mutations (appendix 
pp 10–12).
At a median follow-up of 48 months (IQR 28–78), 
5-year progression-free survival for 49 patients with a 
genetic predisposition who were evaluable for this 
outcome was 52% (95% CI 40–69). 5-year overall survival 
in 47 evaluable patients with a genetic predisposition 
was 65% (95% CI 52–81). Progression-free survival (log-
rank p=0·0056) and overall survival (log-rank p=0·00032) 
differed significantly across patients with germline 
mutations in different medullo 
blastoma predisposition 
genes (figure 3).
Germline APC mutations were found in seven (1%) of 
all 1022 patients with medulloblastoma and included one 
infant, five children, and one adult patient. Two of these 
seven patients harboured partial or full gene deletions 
(appendix p 5) and the remaining five patients had 
frameshift and nonsense mutations between codons 554 
and 1113, a region associated with classical familial 
adenomatous polyposis phenotypes. Molecular subgroup 
information was available for six cases and showed that 
all five children developed MBWNT. One infant developed 
MBSHH (appendix p 1). All five WNT-driven medullo-
blastomas lost the wild-type APC allele and the SHH-
driven medulloblastoma showed retention of the 
wild-type allele (figure 4A). Furthermore, germline APC 
mutations in MBWNT patients were mutually exclusive 
with somatic CTNNB1 exon 3 mutations (p<0·0001), the 
primary26 somatic driver event in MBWNT (figure 4B). 
Overall, germline APC mutations were identified in 
five (71%) of seven CTNNB1-wild-type MBWNT cases and, 
together with somatic CTNNB1 mutations, explained 
97% (64/66) of all WNT-driven medulloblastomas. By 
contrast, monosomy 6—a frequent somatic chromosome 
aberration in MBWNT (in 55 [83%] of 66 cases)—was 
not mutually exclusive with germline APC mutation 
status (p=0·19); although we observed two patients with 
Figure 1: Discovery and replication of medulloblastoma predisposition genes
(A) Study design and patient characteristics. (B) Rare variant burden analysis based on 673 patients with medulloblastoma and 53 105 controls from the Exome Aggregation Consortium. Diagnosis of 
medulloblastoma was the outcome variable. Proportion of patients with a genetic predisposition in our (C) retrospective cohort and (D) prospective cohort. (D) p values indicate statistical differences in the 
proportion of germline mutation carriers in the retrospective compared with prospective cohort. Infant=age 3 years or younger. Child=age 4–17 years. Adult=age 18 years or older. RR=relative risk. *p<0·001. 
†p<0·01. ‡p<0·05. §Patients with damaging germline mutations in APC, PTCH1, SUFU, TP53, PALB2, and BRCA2.
5%§
8%§
14%§
1%§
0§
WNT
SHH
Group 3
Group 4
Prospective cohort
n=349
p=0·24
n=36
p=0·81
n=95
p=0·080
n=78
p=0·48
n=139
p=0·051
D
 RR (95% CI)
PTCH1
*
*
SUFU
*
*
TP53
*
*
PALB2
†
*
APC
†
*
BRCA2
*
*
‡
0·1
1
10
100
1000
All subgroups of
medulloblastoma
WNT
SHH
Group 3
Group 4
B
Retrospective cohort
6%§
WNT
20%§
2%§
2%§
SHH
Group 3
Group 4
6%§
n=673
n=32
n=141
n=134
n=189
C
Whole-genome and
whole-exome squencing
Germline: n=1022
Tumour: n=800
Molecular
subgroup
844 tumours
Medulloblastoma
cohort
Retrospective: n=673
Prospective: n=349
110 cancer
predisposition
genes
Female
(37%)
Male
(63%)
Group 3
(27%)
Group 4
(38%)
SHH
(28%)
WNT 
(6%)
Female
(36%)
Male
(64%)
Child 
(79%)
Adult 
(5%)
Infant 
(16%)
Infant 
(17%)
Child 
(70%)
Adult
(13%)
Retrospective
cohort
Sex
Age at diagnosis
Molecular subgroup
Group 3 
(22%)
Group 4 
(40%)
SHH
(27%)
WNT 
(10%)
Prospective
cohort
A
Genes
 Articles
792 
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   June 2018
APC mutations and balanced chromosome 6 (figure 4B). 
We recorded no difference in age at diagnosis between 
patients with germline APC mutations and somatic 
CTNNB1 mutations (p=0·92; figure 4B). Overall and 
progression-free survival for patients with APC-MBWNT 
was 100% (95% CI 100–100).
Germline TP53 mutations were found in 14 (1%) of all 
1022 patients with medulloblastoma and were only present 
in patients with MBSHH (13/13; data missing for one 
patient). Notably, germline TP53 mutations were identified 
in 13 (8%) of 170 paediatric MBSHH patients and 13 (20%) of 
63 children aged between 5 years and 16 years with MBSHH. 
Only five (4%) of 11 patients with germline TP53 mutations 
had a family history of cancer (figure 2B). Most germline 
TP53 mutations (13/14) clustered within the DNA-binding 
domain (appendix p 6) and somatic inactivation of the 
wild-type TP53 allele was detected in all 13 available 
medullo 
blastoma genomes via loss of heterozygosity 
(figure 4A). All eight whole-genome-sequenced TP53-
deficient MBSHH exhibited complex somatic genomic 
rearrangements consistent with chromothripsis21 and 
accounted for eight (57%) of all 14 chromothripsis events 
in the MBSHH subgroup. The remaining six patients with 
chromothripsis-positive MBSHH harboured somatic TP53 
mutations. 5-year overall survival for patients with 
germline TP53 mutations was 27% (95% CI 10–72; 
figure 3).
Germline SUFU and PTCH1 mutations were detected 
in 20 (2%) of all 1022 patients with medulloblastoma, 
exclusively in the MBSHH subgroup (19/19; data 
missing for one patient), and accounted for 11% (18/170) 
of all paediatric patients with MBSHH and 21% (17/80) of 
all infant patients with MBSHH. We observed somatic loss 
of the SUFU or PTCH1 wild-type allele in all (n=18) 
sequenced MBSHH that were diagnosed in patients with 
germline SUFU or PTCH1 mutations. Most (15/18) 
SUFU-deficient or PTCH1-deficient MBSHH lost the wild-
type allele via loss of heterozygosity (figure 4A). Only six 
of 20 germline SUFU and PTCH1 mutations have been 
previously described in the literature (appendix pp 10–12), 
suggesting either appreciable amounts of de-novo 
mutagenesis or poor reporting to public archives. In 
support of the de-novo mutagenesis theory, a de-novo 
germline PTCH1 mutation was observed in a patient 
with MBSHH from our retrospective cohort, for whom 
whole-exome sequences were also available for both 
parents. We also identified putative protein-truncating 
mosaic PTCH1 mutations in three patients with MBSHH 
(in whom variant allele frequency ranged from 
4·7% to 6·7% in the blood). Clinical information was 
Figure 2: Clinical characteristics of patients with a genetic predisposition
(A) Molecular tumour subgroups. (B) Age at diagnosis. (C) Family history of cancer. (D) Clinical signs of a genetic predisposition. p values indicate whether there is a 
difference between patients with different types of genetic predisposition. *Patients with compound heterozygous germline BRCA2 mutations. †Data are median 
(IQR). Circle sizes indicate the proportion of patients with a genetic predisposition. 
PTCH1
SUFU
TP53
PALB2
BRCA2
BRCA2*
APC
No
Yes
Familial history
of cancer
PALB2
TP53
BRCA2
APC
SUFU
PTCH1
BRCA2*
No
Yes
Clinical signs of
genetic predisposition
n=37; p=0·046
n=39; p=0·017
SUFU
PTCH1
BRCA2*
PALB2
BRCA2
TP53
APC
Infant
(≤3)
1·5
(1–2)
Age at diagnosis
(years)†
2·3
(2–3)
3·6
(3–5)
9·2
(7–11)
5·3
(5–30)
6·7
(4–10)
9·2
(9–11)
Age at diagnosis 
(years)
n=57; p<0·0001
Child
(4-17)
Adult
(≥18)
APC
BRCA2*
PTCH1
SUFU
TP53
PALB2
BRCA2
WNT
SHH
Group 3
Group 4
Molecular subgroup
B
C
D
Patients (%)
50%
100%
n=54; p<0·0001
A
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   June 2018 
793
available for one patient with a mosaic PTCH1 mutation, 
which showed that the patient was clinically diagnosed 
with Gorlin’s syndrome and the patient had no family 
history of cancer and no family history of Gorlin’s 
syndrome. Moreover, comparison of clinical outcomes 
between patients with germline mutations in SUFU and 
PTCH1 showed no differences in progression-free 
survival (p=0·50, 16 patients with germline mutations) 
and overall survival (p=0·91, 17 patients with germline 
mutations). Notably, patients with germline mutations in 
either SUFU or PTCH1 had a better overall survival than 
progression-free survival (combined 5-year progression-
free survival 56% for SUFU and PTCH1 mutations, 
95% CI 37–87; combined 5-year overall survival 85%, 
95% CI 67–100; figure 3).
Germline BRCA2 mutations were present in 11 (1%) of 
all 1022 patients with medulloblastoma and included 
ten paediatric patients and one adult (survival data not 
available for all patients with these mutations). The 
median age at diagnosis was 5·7 years (IQR 3·0–8·3). 
Most of these mutations (16 [89%] of 18) were previously 
classified as pathogenic according to ClinVar (appendix 
pp 10–12). We observed compound heterozygosity at 
BRCA2 in four (36%) of 11 patients. Clinical signs of a 
genetic predisposition or family history of cancer were 
noted in all four compound heterozygous patients and in 
four (80%) of five heterozygous patients with available 
medical records. Patients with compound heterozygous 
mutations at BRCA2 developed exclusively MBSHH 
(p=0·0060 when compared with any other subgroup; 
figure 2A) and exhibited worse progression-free survival 
(p=0·025) and overall survival (p=0·022) relative to 
patients with heterozygous germline BRCA2 mutations 
(figure 3). When compared with 53 105 controls, the 
burden of rare germline mutations in BRCA2 was 
associated with increased risk of MBSHH (relative risk [RR] 
13·8 [5·4–29·4]; p<0·0001) and MBGroup3/4 (RR 4·2 
[1·4–10·1]; p=0·0077). Overall and progression-free 
survival of heterozygous germline BRCA2 mutation 
carriers was 100% (95% CI 100–100) and none developed 
secondary malignancies. Analysis of medulloblastoma 
genomes revealed that all seven heterozygous BRCA2 
mutation carriers retained the wild-type BRCA2 allele. 
Additional details about family history of cancer, parental 
genetic testing, and somatic mutation profiles in 
heterozygous and compound heterozygous BRCA2 
mutation carriers are provided in the appendix (p 1).
Germline PALB2 mutations were found in five (<1%) of 
all 1022 patients with medulloblastoma. We identified 
three patients with MBSHH, one patient with MBGroup3 and 
one patient with MBGroup4. All five damaging germline 
mutations were heterozygous in patients affected with 
medullo 
blastoma and were previously reported in familial 
pancreatic and breast cancer studies.27 All five germline 
mutations were classified as pathogenic according to 
ClinVar (appendix pp 10–12). Although heterozygous 
PALB2 mutations are known8 to increase the risk of 
adult-onset cancers (eg, breast cancer), predisposition to 
paediatric malignancies has so far only been described in 
the context of Fanconi anaemia.28 We excluded the pre-
disposition to Fanconi anaemia in all five cases because of 
an absence of additional rare germline mutations 
(including protein-truncating variants, missense muta-
tions, and inframe indels). Furthermore, clinical signs of 
a genetic disorder were absent in both paediatric cases 
with available medical records (figure 2D). Analysis of 
Figure 3: Kaplan-Meier curves for survival outcomes of patients with a genetic predisposition
(A) Progression-free survival. (B) Overall survival. Log-rank p values indicate differences across all patient groups.
B
A
Time (years)
++
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
log-rank p=0·0056
0
5
0
Progression-free survival (%)
25
50
75
10
100
15
Number at risk
(number censored)
APC
BRCA2
Compound heterozygous BRCA2
PALB2
PTCH1
SUFU
TP53
7 (0)
5 (0)
4 (0)
4 (0)
8 (0)
9 (0)
12 (0)
3 (4)
2 (3)
1 (0)
1 (2)
1 (3)
1 (4)
1 (1)
1 (5)
1 (4)
1 (0)
0 (3)
0 (5)
0 (5)
0 (2)
0 (5)
0 (5)
0 (1)
0 (3)
0 (5)
0 (5)
0 (2)
Number at risk
(number censored)
APC
BRCA2
Compound heterozygous BRCA2
PALB2
PTCH1
SUFU
TP53
7 (0)
5 (0)
4 (0)
4 (0)
8 (0)
8 (0)
11 (0)
3 (4)
3 (2)
1 (0)
1 (2)
3 (4)
2 (5)
1 (2)
1 (5)
2 (3)
1 (0)
0 (3)
0 (7)
1 (6)
0 (2)
0 (6)
1 (4)
0 (1)
0 (3)
0 (7)
1 (6)
0 (2)
0 (6)
1 (5)
0 (1)
0 (3)
0 (7)
0 (7)
0 (2)
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+ +
+
+
+
+
+
+ +
+
+
+
+
+
log-rank p=0·00032
50
75
100
0
5
0
25
Overall survival (%)
10
15
20
TP53
BRCA2
APC
PALB2
PTCH1
SUFU
Compound heterozygous BRCA2
 Articles
794 
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   June 2018
medulloblastoma genomes revealed somatic inactiv 
ation 
of the wild-type PALB2 allele in all three paediatric cases 
and retention of heterozygosity in both adult cases 
(figure 4A). 5-year overall and progression-free survival 
for patients with germline PALB2 mutations was 75% 
(95% CI 43–100). Additional details about family history 
of cancer, parental genetic testing, and somatic mutation 
profiles available for one affected patient are presented in 
the appendix (p 1).
Since the clinical relevance of heterozygous germline 
mutations in PALB2 and BRCA2 is uncertain, we aimed to 
corroborate our findings through investigation of somatic 
mutation patterns (mutational signatures) in medullo-
blastoma genomes. Quantification of four previously 
implicated mutational signatures (signatures 1, 3, 5, and 8) 
across 375 medulloblastoma genomes showed a significant 
association between both HRD signatures (signatures 3 
and 8) and germline BRCA2 and PALB2 mutation status 
(figure 4C, appendix p 7). Moreover, although the overall 
prevalence of an HRD-like mutation spectrum was modest 
in medulloblastoma (58 [15%] of 375), it was enriched in 
BRCA2-deficient 
and 
PALB2-deficient 
tumours 
as 
compared with tumours with other genetic mutations 
(OR 19·0 [95% CI 4·5–113], p<0·0001). In total, nine (75%) 
of 12 BRCA2-deficient and PALB2-deficient tumours 
showed evidence for an HRD-like mutation spectrum. 
Strikingly, eight (89%) of nine patients with MBSHH and an 
HRD-like 
mutation 
spectrum 
harboured 
germline 
mutations in consensus medulloblastoma predisposition 
genes (BRCA2 n=4, PALB2 n=2, and TP53 n=2), suggesting 
that HRD might serve as a biomarker for genetic 
predisposition in this patient group. We also observed five 
patients in the MBWNT subgroup with an HRD-like mutation 
spectrum and noticed that four (89%) of five cases were 
diagnosed as adults (p=0·0003 for paediatric vs adult cases). 
The only paediatric patient in the MBWNT subgroup with an 
HRD-like mutation spectrum harboured a pathogenic 
heterozygous germline mutation in ATM along with 
somatic inactivation of the wild-type ATM allele (appendix 
pp 10–12). Finally, we also identified heterozygous germline 
mutations in FANCA (n=1) and FANCQ (n=1) in patients 
with MBGroup3 and MBGroup4, respectively, and an HRD-like 
mutation spectrum. Taken together, these results cor-
roborate our genetic findings and indicate that genetic 
Figure 4: Molecular medulloblastoma characteristics for patients with a genetic predisposition
(A) Patterns of somatic inactivation of wild-type alleles for all patients with a germline mutation in one of the consensus medulloblastoma predisposition genes. 
Circle sizes indicate the proportion of patients with a genetic predisposition. (B) Somatic driver events in patients with medulloblastoma in the WNT subgroup (top 
panel) and age at diagnosis for all patients with germline APC mutations and patients in the WNT subgroup with somatic CTNNB1 mutations (bottom panel). 
(C) Association between germline PALB2 (n=5) and BRCA2 (n=7) mutation status and somatic mutational signatures 1, 3, 5, and 8. EXP=allele-specific gene 
expression. MUT=somatic inactivation via single nucleotide variation, insertion, or deletion. LOH=loss of heterozygosity. ND=no somatic alteration detected. NS=not 
significant. HRD=homologous recombination repair deficiency. *Present study and Hamilton and colleagues.5 †p<0·001. ‡p<0·01. §p<0·05.
A
TP53
SUFU
PTCH1
APC
PALB2
BRCA2
ND
LOH
MUT
EXP
Somatic alteration
100%
50%
n=49
Patients (%)
B
89·4%
Somatic CTNNB1 mutation
7·6%
Germline APC mutation
83·3%
Somatic monosomy 6
n=66; 
p=0·92
Age at diagnosis (years)
Germline APC mutation*
Somatic CTNNB1 mutation
MBWNT
0
10
20
30
40
50
NS
†
C
n=375
Signature 1
Associated with ageing
Seen in  healthy cells and 
tumour cells
†
‡
Signature (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
BRCA2
PALB2
Wild-type
Signature 3
Associated with HRD
Seen in breast cancer
‡
§
Signature 5
Associated with ageing
Seen in healthy cells and
tumour cells
Signature 8
Associated with HRD
Seen in medulloblastoma and 
breast cancer
§
§
NS
NS
BRCA2
PALB2
Wild-type
BRCA2
PALB2
Wild-type
BRCA2
PALB2
Wild-type
Mutant cases
Wild-type cases 
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   June 2018 
795
alteration of homologous recom 
bination genes is associated 
with an HRD-like mutation spectrum in medul 
loblastoma. 
Discussion
To the best of our knowledge, this study is the largest so 
far on genetic predisposition in a single paediatric brain 
tumour entity. Our rare variant burden analyses revealed 
that genetic predisposition has a major role in the cause 
of medulloblastoma after accounting for molecular 
subgroups, with a high prevalence in MBWNT and MBSHH 
patient subgroups. Moreover, we identified that less 
than half of all germline cases were suspected based 
on medical records and that patients with genetic 
predispositions exhibit distinct clinical outcomes. Our 
data show the urgent need to establish genetic 
counselling and genetic testing as a standard-of-care 
procedure in patients with MBWNT and MBSHH. We 
therefore provide clinical screening guidelines based on 
routinely acquired patient and tumour characteristics 
(figure 5). Recommendations for surveillance and clinical 
management of individual childhood cancer pre-
disposition syndromes have been summarised in a series 
of articles29 from the American Association for Cancer 
Research Childhood Cancer Predisposition Workshop. 
Our study complements these recommendations by 
providing additional diagnostic criteria based on clinical 
and molecular characteristics.
Here, we identified heterozygous germline APC 
mutations in 6–8% of patients in the MBWNT molecular 
subgroup and showed that genetic cases were indistin-
guishable from sporadic cases based on age at diagnosis. 
Importantly, all patients with APC-deficient MBWNT did not 
have the hallmark somatic driver event of MBWNT—namely, 
somatic missense mutations in CTNNB1 (the gene 
encoding β-catenin). Overall, germline APC and somatic 
CTNNB1 mutations accounted for nearly all (97%) MBWNT 
diagnoses. We therefore recommend genetic counselling 
only for germline APC mutations in patients with MBWNT. 
In our series, patients with MBWNT and germline APC 
mutations showed favourable clinical outcomes, which 
mirrors the favourable outcome for patients with MBWNT 
with nuclear accumulation of β-catenin.30 Nevertheless, 
several patients with germline APC mutations had an 
additional malignancy, which emphasises the need to 
provide genetic counselling for patients with MBWNT in the 
future, irrespective of clinical outcomes. Notably, we also 
observed a patient with atypical APC who was diagnosed 
during infancy with MBSHH and retained the wild-type 
APC allele. Additional studies will be needed to assess 
whether or not germline APC mutations are a genetic risk 
factor for MBSHH.
Given the particularly high prevalence of damaging 
germline mutations in patients with MBSHH, we 
recommend that all patients with MBSHH should be 
counselled for genetic testing. We recommend ordering of 
these tests by age at diagnosis and molecular phenotypes 
(eg, chromothripsis or HRD signatures). Patients younger 
than 3 years of age should initially be tested for germline 
mutations in SUFU and PTCH1 (especially in view of the 
high prevalence of SUFU mutations in infant patients 
with MBSHH in our study, which is consistent with previous 
reports31), and children older than 3 years for germline 
TP53 mutations. By contrast, germline mutations in 
PALB2 and BRCA2 showed no strict associations with age 
at diagnosis (observed in infants, children, and adults). 
We thus recommend that patients with MBSHH should be 
screened for germline mutations in PALB2 and BRCA2 
following a negative test result for the afore 
mentioned 
genes. We further observed germline PALB2 and BRCA2 
mutations in 1–2% of patients with MBGroup3/4. Based on 
these findings we recommend conservative ordering of 
genetic tests in these patient groups (eg, those with 
familial history of BRCA-associated cancers or if 
mutational signatures are suggestive of HR deficiency—
specifically signatures 3 and 8, the latter of which has 
previously been reported to be associated with breast 
cancer).32
Genetic counselling and testing for germline PALB2 
and BRCA2 mutations in paediatric patients has so far 
been pursued only in case of suspected Fanconi anaemia. 
By use of integrative genomic analyses, we showed that 
heterozygous mutations in BRCA2 and PALB2 are 
associated with an increased risk of medulloblastoma and 
of HR-deficient tumours. All identified heterozygous 
germline mutations are rare in the general population 
(minor allele frequency <0·01%) and were classified in 
most patients as (likely) pathogenic in ClinVar. Magnusson 
and colleagues33 reported that families with germline 
mutations in BRCA2 had an increased prevalence of 
Figure 5: Proposed clinical guidelines for genetic counselling and testing in 
medulloblastoma based on clinical and molecular tumour characteristics
APC
SUFU, PTCH1
TP53, PALB2, 
and BRCA2
PALB2 and BRCA2
Group 4
Medulloblastoma subgroup
WNT
SHH
Genetic testing
of absence of 
somatic 
CTNNB1 
exon 3
mutation
Prioritisation 
of genetic 
testing based
on age or
genomic 
instability, or
both
Genetic testing of family history of 
BRCA-associated cancers, or 
homologous recombination repair 
deficiency, or both
Group 3
 Articles
796 
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   June 2018
childhood tumours compared with population-based 
control families. Medulloblastoma genomes from patients 
with heterozygous germline mutations in BRCA2 and 
PALB2 described in our study show strong signs of HRD. 
Many studies have sought to elucidate the mechanisms of 
genomic instability in heterozygous BRCA2 and PALB2 
mutation carriers. For example, it was shown that cells 
from heterozygous PALB2 mutation carriers exhibited an 
aberrant DNA replication stress response and increased 
amounts of spontaneous genomic instability,34 and 
analysis of double-strand break repair outcomes35 revealed 
a shift towards error-prone DNA repair pathways. 
Furthermore, one study36 presented evidence showing that 
naturally occurring concentrations of formaldehyde, a 
product of cellular metabolism, can selectively deplete 
BRCA2 via proteasomal degradation and induce genomic 
instability. Although wild-type cells retained adequate 
protein concentrations in that study, cells heterozygous 
for truncating BRCA2 mutations showed enhanced 
susceptibility to formaldehyde-induced genomic insta-
bility. Future research is needed to understand whether 
and to what extent BRCA2 and PALB2-deficient medullo-
blastomas might be sensitive to aldehyde-induced DNA 
damage. Moreover, consequent identification of paediatric 
patients with heterozygous germline mutations in PALB2 
and BRCA2 will be valuable to further evaluate whether 
HR-deficient tumours show a particularly favourable 
response to standard platinum-based chemotherapy and 
whether they might benefit from combination therapies 
with PARP inhibitors.
Germline mutations in TP53 accounted for the 
highest proportion of genetic cases among paediatric 
patients in the MBSHH subgroup. This patient group 
showed especially poor clinical outcomes as well as 
secondary malignancies. This finding underscores the 
need for a dedicated treatment protocol, which is being 
prepared by the International Society of Paediatric 
Oncology PNET 5 Medulloblastoma study group and by 
an international registry for this high-risk patient 
group.37 Additionally, clinical surveillance of germline 
TP53 mutation carriers has been shown to result in 
earlier detection of tumours and therefore improved 
long-term survival.38
We also observed rare and damaging germline 
mutations with potential clinical relevance in additional 
genes based on loss of heterozygosity analysis and 
somatic mutation patterns (eg, ATM and PTEN). The 
molecular and clinical evidence reported in this study 
was, however, not fully conclusive for these additional 
genes. Long-term follow-up studies and more detailed 
molecular analysis will be necessary to provide 
unambiguous recommendations for routine genetic 
screening of these genes. Of note, we did not identify 
patients with biallelic germline mutations in mismatch 
repair genes (MSH2, MSH6, MLH1, and PMS2). A single 
patient harboured a heterozygous germline MSH6 
mutation in our discovery cohort; however, the meaning 
of this observation remains uncertain owing to the 
absence of tumour material for molecular analyses.
Our study does have some limitations. Because of the 
multiple (and in part heterogeneous) cohorts used in our 
study, familial history of cancer could not be obtained in 
a standardised form for all patients carrying a genetic 
predisposition. Furthermore, we did not make any effort 
to pursue retrospective collection of clinical information 
from patients without a detected genetic predisposition. 
Larger cohort sizes in further studies will be necessary to 
assess the impact of germline mutations on clinical 
outcomes within molecular subgroups as well as relative 
to patients who develop sporadic medulloblastoma due 
to somatic mutations in the same set of genes (eg, PTCH1, 
SUFU, and TP53). These larger molecular cohorts will 
further enable pinpointing of shared somatic driver 
events in patients with a genetic predisposition. 
Furthermore, we note that our rare variant burden 
analysis against ExAC was restricted to regions covered 
by whole-exome sequencing, was restricted to genes 
previously involved in cancer predisposition, and 
excluded pathogenic germline structural variants. 
Although these steps aimed to reduce potential biases 
from analysing heterogeneous sequencing cohorts, we 
cannot rule out that particular classes of germline 
variation might have been under-represented. Finally, it 
is also possible that additional genes are involved in 
medulloblastoma 
predisposition, 
which 
were 
not 
previously associated with hereditary cancer syndromes.
Contributors
JOK, PAN, SMP, and SMW contributed to manuscript preparation and 
to study design. PAN and SMP contributed to study conception. JOK 
contributed to study supervision. PL and RE contributed to supervision 
of the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) PedBrain Tumor 
Project. AE, ASM, BRM, CL, DSt, DTWJ, GWR, IB, JOK, JW, JZ, LC, 
MK, MS-W, PAN, SB, SG, SMP, SMW, TR, TZ, and XZ contributed to 
data analysis. MH contributed to information technology infrastructure. 
AEB, AG, AK, AP, BL, CEK, CJ, CMM, DAS, DCB, DM, DSa, DSt, DSu, 
DWF, ED, FW, GF, GM, GWR, H-KN, JAC, JOK, JS, KK, KZ, KvH, LB, 
LG-R, MDT, MF, MG, MM, MMC, MR, MVR, NJ, PH, PHD, PV, RC, 
RJG, RS, SF, SLP, SMP, SR, TCA, TE, TH, TJM, TM, TVA, VR, WG, 
WS, and Y-SR contributed to data collection. AG, CB, CDB, CPK, CRB, 
CS, DM, FMDLV, KBG, KWP, and SSS contributed to data 
interpretation.
Declaration of interests
SMW reports grants from the European Molecular Biology Organization 
(EMBO) and from the Swiss National Science Foundation, during the 
conduct of the study. GM reports grants from the St Jude Children’s 
Research Hospital, during the conduct of the study. KvH reports grants 
from the German Childhood Cancer Foundation, during the conduct of 
the study. MF reports grants from the Swedish Research Council, the 
Swedish Council for Health, Working Life and Welfare, the Swedish 
Cancer Society, the Swedish Childhood Cancer Foundation, and the 
Swedish Radiation Protection Authority, during the conduct of the study. 
SLP reports grants from the National Institutes of Health, during the 
conduct of the study. FMDLV reports financial activities from Annai 
Systems Inc and financial activities from TOMA Biosciences Inc, outside 
the submitted work. CDB reports grants from the National Institutes of 
Health (NIH), during the conduct of the study; grants from the 
University of Miami, financial activities from the University of Chicago; 
University of California, Los Angeles; HUGO; New York Genome 
Center; University of Iowa; Rockefeller University; Alexandria; FH 
Foundation; Concert Genetics; National Autonomous University of 
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   June 2018 
797
Mexico; Mexican Institute of Social Security; Colorado State University; 
MacArthur Foundation; and Gordon Conference; and personal fees from 
CDB Consulting Ltd, Personalis, Inc, 23andme “Roots into the Future 
Project”, Ancestry.com, Liberty Biosecurity, Med-Tek, IdentifyGenomics 
LLC, Mars Inc, Etalon Inc, Fish & Richardson PC, Eden Roc, Hypatia, 
the Nicklaus Children’s Hospital Research Institute, Knox Medical, Arc 
Bio LLC, Embark Veterinary, Digitalis Ventures, Humancode, Web 
Shield, and Luna DNA, outside the submitted work. All other authors 
declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgments
This project was supported by the PedBrain Tumor Project contributing to 
the ICGC, funded by German Cancer Aid (109252), the German Federal 
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF; 01KU1201A and 01KU1201C), 
and additionally through BMBF grants BioTop (01EK1502A and 
01EK1502B), ICGC-Data Mining (01KU1505F), MedSys (0315416C) and 
NGFNplus (01GS0883). Additional support came from the German Cancer 
Research Center-Heidelberg Center for Personalized Oncology (German 
Cancer Research Centre [DKFZ]-HIPO), the St Jude Comprehensive 
Cancer Center Core Grant (CA 21765), the American Lebanese Syrian 
Associated Charities, German Cancer Aid (111234), and the German 
Childhood Cancer Foundation (Deutsche Kinderkrebsstiftung; A2013/46 
DKS2014.12). JOK was supported by a European Research Council Starting 
Grant (336045) and EurocanPlatform (260791) funding from the European 
Commission. DM was supported by the Canadian Institutes for Health 
Research (143234). PAN is the recipient of a Roman-Herzog Postdoctoral 
Fellowship (Hertie Foundation), V Foundation V Scholar Award, Sontag 
Foundation Distinguished Scientist Award, and is a Pew-Stewart Scholar 
for Cancer Research (Alexander and Margaret Stewart Trust). AG 
acknowledges funding from Musicians Against Childhood Cancer. MM 
acknowledges support from the BC Cancer Foundation and Canadian 
Institutes for Health Research (FDN 143288). MDT is supported by the 
Garron Family Chair in Childhood Cancer Research, and grants from the 
Cure Search Foundation, the National Institutes of Health (R01CA148699 
and R01CA159859), the Pediatric Brain Tumor Foundation, the Terry Fox 
Research Institute, and Brainchild. This study was done with the support 
of the Ontario Institute for Cancer Research through funding provided by 
the Government of Ontario. SMW was supported by a Swiss National 
Science Foundation Early Postdoc.Mobility Fellowship (P2ELP3_155365) 
and an EMBO Long-Term Fellowship (ALTF 755-2014). SLP was supported 
by the NIH (2R01 CA109467, U01 CA184898, and U54 HD090255). TCA 
was supported by the NIH (T32 HL007901). RJG was supported by the 
Cancer Research UK (A17197) and the NIH (P01CA96832 and 
R0CA1129541). Tissue banking was supported by funds from the Faculty of 
Medicine, Masaryk University (Brno, Czech Republic) and KZ was 
supported by the project AZV 15-30657A from the Ministry of Health of 
the Czech Republic. CEFALO was supported by grants from the Swedish 
Council for Health, Working Life and Welfare (2004-0504, 2007-0224), 
the Swedish Research Council (K2008-70X-15366-04-3), the Swedish 
Cancer Society (09 0666), the Swedish Childhood Cancer Foundation 
(PROJ06/050, PROJ09/086), the Swedish Radiation Protection Authority 
(SSI P 1572), the Danish Strategic Research Council (2103-05-0006, 
2064-04-0010), the Swiss Federal Office of Public Health (05.001626), 
the Swiss Research Foundation on Mobile Communication (A2006.18), 
the Swiss National Science Foundation (PDFMP3_122873), and the 
Research Council of Norway (175163/V40). The Medulloblastoma 
Advanced Genomics International Consortium (or MAGIC) project is 
financially supported by Genome Canada, Genome BC, Terry Fox Research 
Institute, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Pediatric Oncology Group 
Ontario, Funds from The Family of Kathleen Lorette and the Clark H 
Smith Brain Tumour Centre, Montreal Children’s Hospital Foundation, 
Hospital for Sick Children: Sonia and Arthur Labatt Brain Tumour 
Research Centre, Chief of Research Fund, Cancer Genetics Program, 
Garron Family Cancer Centre, BRAIN Child, MDT’s Garron Family 
Endowment, and BC Childhood Cancer Parents Association. We thank the 
DKFZ Genomics and Proteomics Core Facility, Andrea Wittmann 
(Pediatric Glioma Research Group, DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany), Laura 
Sieber (Division of Pediatric Neurooncology, DKFZ), Rolf Kabbe (Division 
of Theoretical Bioinformatics, DKFZ; Department for Bioinformatics and 
Functional Genomics, Institute for Pharmacy and Molecular 
Biotechnology, and BioQuant, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, 
Germany), Matthias Bieg (Division of Theoretical Bioinformatics, 
Heidelberg Center for Personalised Oncology, DKFZ), Matthias Schlesner 
(Bioinformatics and Omics Data Analytics, DKFZ), and Bernd Klaus 
(Genome Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory [EMBL], 
Heidelberg, Germany) for technical support. We also acknowledge the 
IT facilities at EMBL and DKFZ for invaluable support. We thank Brandon 
Stelter (Biomedical Communications, St Jude Children’s Research 
Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA) for assistance with artwork. This work is 
dedicated to Prof Dr Enno Kleihauer, who introduced molecular genetics 
to the field of neuro-oncology in the early 1980s, and who was one of the 
most influential paediatric haematologist-oncologists in Germany and 
beyond.
References
1 
Johnson KJ, Cullen J, Barnholtz-Sloan JS, et al. Childhood brain 
tumor epidemiology: a Brain Tumor Epidemiology Consortium 
review. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2014; 23: 2716–36.
2 
Northcott PA, Jones DTW, Kool M, et al. Medulloblastomics: 
the end of the beginning. Nat Rev Cancer 2012; 12: 818–34.
3 
Wolter M, Reifenberger J, Sommer C, Ruzicka T, Reifenberger G. 
Mutations in the human homologue of the drosophila segment 
polarity gene patched (PTCH) in sporadic basal cell carcinomas of 
the skin and primitive neuroectodermal tumors of the central 
nervous system. Cancer Res 1997; 57: 2581–85.
4 
Taylor MD, Liu L, Raffel C, et al. Mutations in SUFU predispose to 
medulloblastoma. Nat Genet 2002; 31: 306–10.
5 
Li FP, Fraumeni JF. Rhabdomyosarcoma in children: epidemiologic 
study and identification of a familial cancer syndrome. 
J Natl Cancer Inst 1969; 43: 1365–73.
6 
Hamilton SR, Liu B, Parsons RE, et al. The molecular basis of 
Turcot’s syndrome. N Engl J Med 1995; 332: 839–47
.
7 
Offit K, Levran O, Mullaney B, et al. Shared genetic susceptibility to 
breast cancer, brain tumors, and Fanconi anemia. J Natl Cancer Inst 
2003; 95: 1548–51.
8 
Rahman N. Realizing the promise of cancer predisposition genes. 
Nature 2014; 505: 302–08.
9 
Taylor MD, Northcott PA, Korshunov A, et al. Molecular subgroups 
of medulloblastoma: the current consensus. Acta Neuropathol 2012; 
123: 465–72.
10 
Northcott PA, Korshunov A, Pfister SM, Taylor MD. The clinical 
implications of medulloblastoma subgroups. Nat Rev Neurol 2012; 
8: 340–51.
11 
Zhukova N, Ramaswamy V, Remke M, et al. Subgroup-specific 
prognostic implications of TP53 mutation in medulloblastoma. 
J Clin Oncol 2013; 31: 2927–35.
12 
Kool M, Jones DT, Jager N, et al. Genome sequencing of SHH 
medulloblastoma predicts genotype-related response to smoothened 
inhibition. Cancer Cell 2014; 25: 393–405.
13 
Xu J, Margol AS, Shukla A, et al. Disseminated medulloblastoma in 
a child with germline BRCA2 6174delT mutation and without 
Fanconi anemia. Front Oncol 2015; 5: 191.
14 
Zhang J, Walsh MF, Wu G, et al. Germline mutations in 
predisposition genes in pediatric cancer. N Engl J Med 2015; 
373: 2336–46.
15 
Jones DTW, Jager N, Kool M, et al. Dissecting the genomic 
complexity underlying medulloblastoma. Nature 2012; 488: 100–05.
16 
Pugh TJ, Weeraratne SD, Archer TC, et al. Medulloblastoma exome 
sequencing uncovers subtype-specific somatic mutations. 
Nature 2012; 488: 106–10.
17 
Robinson G, Parker M, Kranenburg TA, et al. Novel mutations target 
distinct subgroups of medulloblastoma. Nature 2012; 488: 43–48.
18 
Northcott PA, Buchhalter I, Morrissy AS, et al. The whole-genome 
landscape of medulloblastoma subtypes. Nature 2017; 547: 311–17
.
19 
Aydin D, Feychting M, Schüz J, et al. Mobile phone use and brain 
tumors in children and adolescents: a multicenter case–control 
study. J Natl Cancer Inst 2011; 103: 1264–76.
20 Waszak SM, Tiao G, Zhu B, et al. Germline determinants of the 
somatic mutation landscape in 2,642 cancer genomes. bioRxiv 2017; 
published online Nov 1. DOI:10.1101/208330.
21 
Rausch T, Jones DT, Zapatka M, et al. Genome sequencing of 
pediatric medulloblastoma links catastrophic DNA rearrangements 
with TP53 mutations. Cell 2012; 148: 59–71.
22 Alexandrov LB, Nik-Zainal S, Wedge DC, et al. Signatures of 
mutational processes in human cancer. Nature 2013; 500: 415–21.
 Articles
798 
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   June 2018
23 Bourdeaut F, Miquel C, Richer W, et al. Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome 
predisposing to non-WNT, non-SHH, group 3 medulloblastoma. 
Pediatr Blood Cancer 2014; 61: 383–86.
24 
Mardin BR, Drainas AP, Waszak SM, et al. A cell-based model 
system links chromothripsis with hyperploidy. Mol Syst Biol 2015; 
11: 828.
25 Hovestadt V, Remke M, Kool M, et al. Robust molecular subgrouping 
and copy-number profiling of medulloblastoma from small amounts 
of archival tumour material using high-density DNA methylation 
arrays. Acta Neuropathol 2013; 125: 913–16.
26 Thompson MC, Fuller C, Hogg TL, et al. Genomics identifies 
medulloblastoma subgroups that are enriched for specific genetic 
alterations. J Clin Oncol 2006; 24: 1924–31.
27 
Antoniou AC, Casadei S, Heikkinen T, et al. Breast-cancer risk in 
families with mutations in PALB2. N Engl J Med 2014; 371: 497–506.
28 Reid S, Schindler D, Hanenberg H, et al. Biallelic mutations in 
PALB2 cause Fanconi anemia subtype FA-N and predispose to 
childhood cancer. Nat Genet 2007; 39: 162–64.
29 Clinical Cancer Research. Clinical Cancer Research Pediatric 
Oncology Series. http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org/
pediatricseries?utm_source=landingpage&utm_
medium=snippet2&utm_campaign=pediatricseries (accessed 
April 27, 2018). 
30 Ellison DW, Kocak M, Dalton J, et al. Definition of disease-risk 
stratification groups in childhood medulloblastoma using 
combined clinical, pathologic, and molecular variables. J Clin Oncol 
2011; 29: 1400–07
.
31 
Brugières L, Remenieras A, Pierron G, et al. High frequency of 
germline SUFU mutations in children with desmoplastic/nodular 
medulloblastoma younger than 3 years of age. J Clin Oncol 2012; 
30: 2087–93.
32 Nik-Zainal S, Davies H, Staaf J, et al. Landscape of somatic mutations 
in 560 breast cancer whole-genome sequences. Nature 2016; 
534: 47–54.
33 Magnusson S, Wiebe T, Kristoffersson U, Jernström H, Olsson H. 
Increased incidence of childhood, prostate and breast cancers in 
relatives of childhood cancer patients. Fam Cancer 2012; 11: 145–55.
34 
Nikkilä J, Christin Parplys A, Pylkäs K, et al. Heterozygous 
mutations in PALB2 cause DNA replication and damage response 
defects. Nat Commun 2013; 4: 2578.
35 Obermeier K, Sachsenweger J, Friedl TWP, Pospiech H, Winqvist R, 
Wiesmuller L. Heterozygous PALB2 c.1592delT mutation channels 
DNA double-strand break repair into error-prone pathways in breast 
cancer patients. Oncogene 2016; 35: 3796–806.
36 Tan SLW, Chadha S, Liu Y, et al. A class of environmental and 
endogenous toxins induces BRCA2 haploinsufficiency and genome 
instability. Cell 2017; 169: 1105–18.e15.
37 
Kratz CP, Achatz MI, Brugieres L, et al. Cancer screening 
recommendations for individuals with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. 
Clin Cancer Res 2017; : e38–45.
38 Villani A, Shore A, Wasserman JD, et al. Biochemical and imaging 
surveillance in germline TP53 mutation carriers with Li-Fraumeni 
syndrome: 11 year follow-up of a prospective observational study. 
Lancet Oncol 2016; 17: 1295–305.
