 RESEARCH LETTER
Phage therapy is highly
effective against chronic lung
infections with Pseudomonas
aeruginosa
With an increase in cases of multidrug-
resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa, alternative
and adjunct treatments are needed, leading to
renewed interest in bacteriophage therapy.
There have been few clinically relevant studies
of phage therapy against chronic lung
infections. Using a novel murine model that
uses a natural respiratory inhalation route of
infection, we show that phage therapy is an
effective treatment against chronic
P. aeruginosa lung infections. We also show
efficacy against P. aeruginosa in a biofilm-
associated cystic fibrosis lung-like environment.
These studies demonstrate the potential for
phage therapy in the treatment of established
and recalcitrant chronic respiratory tract
infections.
Chronic lung infections with Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, associated with diseases such
as cystic fibrosis (CF), non-CF bronchiec-
tasis and COPD are often recalcitrant to
treatment with antibiotics. With the rise of
multidrug-resistant
bacterial
pathogens,
there has been increased interest in the
therapeutic
potential
of
bacteriophages
(phage) as an alternative or supplement to
conventional antibiotics.1 Although pro-
gress has been made with the use of phage
therapy against P
. aeruginosa infections in
chronic otitis2 and burn wounds,3 studies
in chronic lung infections are restricted to
a limited number of preclinical evalua-
tions.4 Previous studies in animal models
have demonstrated potential, but these
have targeted short-term acute respiratory
infections,5 6 or have involved very short
time intervals between initial start of infec-
tion and therapeutic application.7 8 In add-
ition, most models of chronic respiratory
infection use agar beads impregnated with
bacteria,
which
do
not
represent
the
natural infection process. Because of these
limitations,
previous
studies
were
not
designed to test phage efficacy against
established chronic respiratory infections
with P
. aeruginosa.
W
e have recently developed a novel
murine model of P
. aeruginosa chronic lung
infection9 that uses a natural respiratory
inhalation route of infection. In this model,
P
. aeruginosa LESB65 (a representative of
the most common clone of P
. aeruginosa
isolated from patients with CF in the UK,
the Liverpool epidemic strain) adapts to its
host niche in the nasopharynx, leading to
migration and subsequent establishment in
the lungs (as occurs in human chronic lung
infection), and allows experiments to be
conducted for much longer time periods
(beyond 21–28 days).9 Infection is asso-
ciated
with
the
expression
of
biofilm-associated genes (as in CF), and
‘host-adapted’ bacteria recovered from the
model are better able to establish lung infec-
tions when reintroduced to naïve mice.9 T
o
provide a more stringent test of the poten-
tial of phage therapy in a clinically relevant
model of chronic P
. aeruginosa lung infec-
tion, we used a previously reported phage10
to challenge established populations of
strain LESB65 (or the host-adapted deriva-
tive strain NP22_29), varying the length of
time between establishment of initial infec-
tion and the application of the therapeutic
agent.
The methodology associated with the
murine model (using BALB/c mice 6–
8 weeks old) has been described previ-
ously
.9 The study was performed with the
approval of, and in strict accordance with,
the standards of the UK Home Office and
the University of Liverpool Research Ethics
Committee. Mice were infected intranasally
with a fresh mid-log phase dose of 2×106
colony-forming units (CFU) of P
. aerugi-
nosa in 50 μL phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS). An amount of 2×107 phage (phage
PELP2010) or PBS control was administered
by the same route at indicated times. Mice
were culled at predetermined times post
infection by cervical dislocation. Lungs
were collected, homogenised, serial-diluted
and plated on Pseudomonas-selective plates
(Oxoid, UK) to obtain CFU counts of bac-
teria
recovered.
Each
experiment
was
repeated twice with five mice per group to
give a total of ten per group per time point.
Statistical analysis was performed using
two-way ANOV
A.
W
e first confirmed the efficacy of phage
against
strain
LESB65
in
an
artificial
sputum medium biofilm model9 devel-
oped to resemble the key physicochemical
features of the lung of a patient with CF,
including the presence of amino acids,
mucin and extracellular DNA (figure 1).
There was a 3-log reduction in P
. aerugi-
nosa CFU recovered from the phage-
treated biofilm (after 24 hours), indicating
that PELP20 can penetrate and kill bac-
teria within a biofilm-associated CF lung-
like environment (figure 1).
In our initial murine model experiments,
after infection of the mice with P
. aeruginosa
LESB65, phage were administered either (a)
at 24 and 36 hours post infection, with bac-
terial CFUs counted at 48 hours (treatment
1) or (b) phage administration at 48 and
60 hours post infection, with bacterial CFUs
counted at 72 hours (treatment 2). In both
cases, complete clearance of P
. aeruginosa
from the lungs was achieved (figure 2). No
reduction
in
CFUs
was
seen
when
ultraviolet-inactivated phage with no lytic
activity was used (data not shown). W
e
further extended the treatment gap between
infection and application of phage to 6 days
post
infection,
using
the
adapted
LESB65-derived
strain
NP22_2,
which
readily establishes chronic infection in the
murine lung.9 Here, the phage were admi-
nistered
at
144 hours
(6 days)
and
156 hours (6.5 days) post infection, with
CFU counts at 168 hours (7 days) post infec-
tion (treatment 3). Phage therapy was again
highly effective against the established 6-day
lung infection, completely clearing bacteria
from the lungs of 70% of mice, and signifi-
cantly reducing CFU counts in the other
30% compared with controls (figure 2).
Figure 1
Phage activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa (LESB65 wild type (WT) and adapted
strain NP22_2) in an artificial sputum medium (ASM) model. Phage PELP20 (1×108
plaque-forming units) was administered 72 hours after establishment of P. aeruginosa mature
biofilm in the ASM model; the figure shows colony-forming units (CFU)/mL at 24 hours post
phage administration. Significant differences were determined using a two-way analysis of
variance (**p≤0.01). Error bars indicate standard error of the mean SEM (n=6 biological
replicates, mean values obtained from triplicate samples). There was no significant difference in
fold reduction after phage treatment between LESB65 WT and NP22_2.
666  
Thorax July 2017 Vol 72 No 7
Research letter
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://thorax.bmj.com/
Thorax: first published as 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209265 on 6 March 2017. Downloaded from 
 This is the first study reporting the effi-
cacy of phage therapy up to 7 days post
infection in a model where P
. aeruginosa
establishes a natural long-term chronic lung
infection. Hence, we believe that it repre-
sents the sternest challenge yet for the effi-
cacy of phage therapy in a respiratory
infection model system. W
e show that
phage
administered
intranasally
up
to
6 days after establishment of chronic lung
infection were efficient in reducing bacter-
ial numbers in the lungs of mice infected
with
P
.
aeruginosa,
demonstrating
the
potential for phage therapy in the treat-
ment of established and recalcitrant chronic
respiratory tract infections. There are well-
discussed potential limitations with respect
to phage therapy
, in terms of host range,
potential toxicity and the development of
resistance. However, the key unanswered
issue still remains, whether phage can gain
access to and kill the bacteria in the spa-
tially
complex
biofilm-associated
mixed
communities present in, for example, the
CF
lung.
W
e
have
found
that
in
a
biofilm-associated murine model of chronic
lung infection, and in an artificial sputum
medium biofilm model, phage can effect-
ively kill P
. aeruginosa. While there is still
more work to be done in developing phage
cocktails with sufficient range, these data
suggest that phage therapy could be an
effective
therapeutic
approach
against
chronic respiratory infections, either alone
against antibiotic-resistant bacteria or in
combination
with
conventional
antimicrobials.
Elaine M Waters,1 Daniel R Neill,1
Basak Kaman,1 Jaspreet S Sahota,2
Martha R J Clokie,2 Craig Winstanley,1
Aras Kadioglu1
1Department of Clinical Infection, Microbiology and
Immunology, Institute of Infection and Global Health,
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
2Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation,
University of Leicester, Leicester, UK
Correspondence to Professor Aras Kadioglu,
Department of Clinical Infection, Microbiology and
Immunology, Institute of Infection and Global Health,
Ronald Ross Building, University of Liverpool, 8 West
Derby Street, Liverpool, L69 7BE, UK; A.Kadioglu@liv.
ac.uk
CW and AK are co-senior authors
Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge
Marina Goderdzishvili and Nina Chanishvili Eliava
(Institute of Bacteriophages, Microbiology and Virology,
Tbilisi, Georgia) for providing the phage mixture from
which phage PELP20 was isolated.
Contributors EMW and DRN designed and performed
the in vivo experiments. EMW, BK and JSS performed
the in vitro experiments. EMW, DRN, MRJC, CW and
AK analysed the data. EMW, CW and AK wrote the
manuscript. CW and AK conceived, designed and
supervised the study and contributed equally
throughout.
Funding Institute of Infection and Global Health,
University of Liverpool.
Competing interests None declared.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned;
externally peer reviewed.
Open Access This is an Open Access article
distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons
Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license,
which permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build
upon this work non-commercially, and license their
derivative works on different terms, provided the
original work is properly cited and the use is non-
commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/4.0/
REFERENCES
1
Pirnay JP, De Vos D, Verbeken G, et al. The phage
therapy paradigm: pret-a-porter or sur-mesure?
Pharm Res 2011;28:934–7
2
Wright A, Hawkins CH, Anggard EE, et al.
A controlled clinical trial of a therapeutic bacteriophage
preparation in chronic otitis due to antibiotic-resistant
Pseudomonas aeruginosa; a preliminary report of
efficacy. Clin Otolaryngol 2009;34:349–57
3
Rose T, Verbeken G, Vos DD, et al. Experimental
phage therapy of burn wound infection: difficult first
steps. Int J Burns Trauma 2014;4:66–73.
4
Danis-Wlodarczyk K, Vandenheuvel D, Jang HB,
et al. A proposed integrated approach for the
preclinical evaluation of phage therapy in
Pseudomonas infections. Sci Rep 2016;6:28115
5
Debarbieux L, Leduc D, Maura D, et al.
Bacteriophages can treat and prevent Pseudomonas
aeruginosa lung infections. J Infect Dis
2010;201:1096–104
6
Morello E, Saussereau E, Maura D, et al. Pulmonary
bacteriophage therapy on Pseudomonas aeruginosa
cystic fibrosis strains: first steps towards treatment
and prevention. PLoS ONE 2011;6:e16963
7
Henry M, Lavigne R, Debarbieux L. Predicting in vivo
efficacy of therapeutic bacteriophages used to treat
pulmonary infections. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
2013;57:5961–8
8
Alemayehu D, Casey PG, McAuliffe O, et al.
Bacteriophages phiMR299-2 and phiNH-4 can
eliminate Pseudomonas aeruginosa in the murine
lung and on cystic fibrosis lung airway cells. MBio
2012;3:e00029–12.
9
Fothergill JL, Neill DR, Loman N, et al. Pseudomonas
aeruginosa adaptation in the nasopharyngeal
reservoir leads to migration and persistence in the
lungs. Nat Commun 2014;5:4780
10
Sahota JS, Smith CM, Radhakrishnan P, et al.
bacteriophage delivery by nebulization and efficacy
against phenotypically diverse pseudomonas
aeruginosa from cystic fibrosis patients. J Aerosol
Med Pulm Drug Deliv 2015;28:353–60.
Figure 2
Phage activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa (LESB65 wild type and adapted strain
NP22_2) infection in the murine lung. The figure shows colony-forming units (log CFU per lung)
present in the lungs of mice following intranasal infection with LESB65 (treatments 1 and 2) and
NP22_2 (treatment 3). The mice were randomly assigned to a group and subsequently treated
with phage PELP20 or phosphate-buffered saline control using three different treatment protocols:
(1) phage administration at 24 and 36 hours post infection, with bacterial CFUs counted at
48 hours; (2) phage administration at 48 and 60 hours post infection, with bacterial CFUs
counted at 72 hours; (3) phage administered at 144 and 156 hours post infection, with CFU
counted at 168 hours. Significant differences determined using a two-way analysis of variance
and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test as post hoc analysis are denoted using asterisks
(***p≤0.001). The selected time points for sampling were based on our previous study.9
667
Thorax July 2017 Vol 72 No 7
Research letter
To cite Waters EM, Neill DR, Kaman B, et al. Thorax 
2017;72:666–667.
Received 1 August 2016
Revised 25 November 2016
Accepted 16 December 2016 
Published Online First 6 March 2017
Thorax 2017;72:666–667. 
doi:10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209265
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://thorax.bmj.com/
Thorax: first published as 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209265 on 6 March 2017. Downloaded from 
