 Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Archives of Sexual Behavior (2018) 47:2191–2205 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10508-018-1232-5
ORIGINAL PAPER
From Coercion to Physical Force: Aggressive Strategies Used 
by Women Against Men in “Forced‑to‑Penetrate” Cases in the UK
Siobhan Weare1 
Received: 10 November 2017 / Revised: 3 May 2018 / Accepted: 9 May 2018 / Published online: 2 August 2018 
© The Author(s) 2018
Abstract
“Forced-to-penetrate” cases involve a man being forced-to-penetrate, with his penis and without his consent, a woman’s 
vagina, anus, or mouth. This article presents the first quantitative and qualitative research findings regarding such cases in 
the UK, exploring aggressive strategies used by women, as reported by 154 men who experienced them. The most frequently 
used strategies include coercion, taking advantage of men’s intoxication, and the use of force and threats of physical harm. 
Novel evidence is presented of women combining multiple strategies within the same incident. The article also argues that 
some of the strategies used by women are particularly “gendered,” with them taking advantage of their roles as women. The 
findings presented here raise questions for criminal justice professionals working in the area of sexual violence, as well as 
highlighting the need for future research.
Keywords Forced-to-penetrate · Sexual violence · Male victims · Female perpetrators · Gender
Introduction
Sexual aggression encompasses a broad range of tactics 
“designed to result in sexual interaction with an individual 
against [their] will” (Oswald & Holmgreen, 2013, p. 77). 
It includes verbally and physically coercive behavior, the 
exploitation of an individual under the influence of drugs 
or alcohol, and the active use of alcohol or drugs to engage 
in non-consensual sexual activity (Oswald & Holmgreen, 
2013). Existing research highlights that sexual aggression 
and violence are overwhelmingly and disproportionately 
perpetrated by men against women, resulting in, understand-
ably and quite correctly, a large body of research considering 
male sexual aggression. However, female sexual aggression, 
specifically toward adult men, and particularly more seri-
ous forms of such aggression (e.g., forced intercourse), have 
been excluded almost entirely from the research agenda. No 
studies of women’s sexually aggressive strategies in relation 
to compelled penetration have been conducted in the UK, 
and therefore, there is no indication of the prevalence of this 
form of sexual violence, nor the experiences of male victims. 
This is despite evidence from other jurisdictions of forced 
intercourse being an issue (see, e.g., Krahé, Waizenhöfer, 
& Möller, 2003; Struckman-Johnson & Struckman-Johnson, 
1998; Tomaszewska & Krahé, 2018).
This article makes a novel and significant contribution to 
knowledge by sharing quantitative and qualitative data collected 
from the first study in the UK exploring experiences of men 
who have been forced-to-penetrate (FTP) women. These cases 
involve a man being FTP a woman’s vagina, anus, or mouth 
using his penis and without his consent (Weare, 2018). The 
existing legal definitions of rape within the UK exclude FTP 
cases. Indeed, within England and Wales1 for example, in s1 of 
the Sexual Offences Act 2003, rape is defined as the non-con-
sensual and intentional penile penetration of the vagina, anus, 
or mouth of the victim without a reasonable belief in consent. 
The requirement of penile penetration of the victim excludes 
FTP cases from prosecution as rape. Instead, FTP cases can be 
prosecuted under the offenses of “sexual assault” (The Sexual 
Offences Act 2003, s3) or “causing a person to engage in sexual 
activity without consent” (The Sexual Offences Act 2003, s4), 
both of which are “less serious” offenses, typically attracting 
shorter sentences, within the legal framework.
 
* Siobhan Weare 
 
s.weare@lancaster.ac.uk
1 
The Law School, Bowland North, Lancaster University, 
Lancaster LA1 4YN, UK
1 There are different legal definitions of rape in Scotland and Northern 
Ireland, but both are still defined in a way that means only men can be 
recognized as principal offenders. References to law in the article will 
be to that within England and Wales.
 2192
 
Archives of Sexual Behavior (2018) 47:2191–2205
1 3
By exploring women’s sexual aggression in the UK in 
relation to a previously unexplored form of sexual violence 
(compelled penetration), this article goes someway to fill-
ing a significant gap in the existing literature and helping 
to develop understandings of FTP cases as a specific form 
of sexual violence. As well as reporting on the frequencies 
with which aggressive strategies are used by women in FTP 
cases, evidence is presented that demonstrates how some 
women combine multiple aggressive strategies in the same 
incident. It is also argued that some women use especially 
“gendered” strategies that take advantage of their roles as 
women, namely threats of false rape allegations and interfer-
ence in the father–child relationship in their roles as mothers.
Before proceeding, it is worth noting that despite ongoing 
assumptions that a man physically cannot be FTP a woman 
without his consent, it is in fact biologically possible for this 
to occur. Indeed, research has consistently reported that men 
can obtain and sustain erections even where they are not sexu-
ally aroused and/or are experiencing negative emotions such 
as anxiety, fear, or terror (see, e.g., Sarrel & Masters, 1982). 
Indeed, it is evident that “an erection can be induced by 
fear and is not necessarily indicative of pleasure or consent. 
Such heightened emotions can created unwanted arousal in 
men and if stimulated, in some cases, ejaculation can occur” 
(Fisher & Pina, 2013, p. 57). Therefore, sexually respond-
ing to a woman’s advances or touch does not automatically 
denote arousal or consent on the part of a man.
The terminology used within this article should also be 
noted, with the terms “sexual aggression” and “aggressive 
strategies” being purposely used, despite arguably being con-
troversial, and, for some, problematic. This is for two reasons: 
firstly, within England and Wales the offense of Coercive 
Control has been introduced into law by s76 Serious Crime 
Act 2015, meaning that coercion now has a more specific 
legal meaning in the main jurisdiction to which the findings 
presented here are relevant. Secondly, coercion is one of the 
specific strategies used by women as identified by men in 
their narratives. Therefore, in this article “sexual aggression” 
is used to denote sexual conduct which is unwanted and per-
formed against a person’s will, but that is not limited to the 
use of force. “Aggression” denotes the non-consensual nature 
of the experience.
While the focus of this article is on aggressive strategies 
used by women in FTP cases, claims are not being made as 
to the potential prevalence of this form of sexual violence 
within the UK. This is because no data currently exist within 
the UK on the prevalence of FTP cases, and the use of a pur-
posive, rather than random or stratified sample in this study, 
means that prevalence rates cannot be assessed. However, it is 
noteworthy that recent prevalence rates on men’s experiences 
of sexual aggression from women (including compelled pen-
etration) have been noted elsewhere. For example, Tomasze-
wska and Krahé’s (2018) study on sexual victimization and 
perpetration among Polish university students found a self-
reported victimization rate of 28.4% for men (Tomaszewska 
& Krahé, 2018). Similarly, Krahé and Berger’s (2013) study 
on sexual perpetration and victimization among university 
students in Germany reported that 17.1% of men self-reported 
victimization from a woman (Krahé & Berger, 2013). Look-
ing specifically at the prevalence of compelled penetration, in 
the U.S., data from the large-scale National Intimate Partner 
and Sexual Violence Survey 2010 found a lifetime prevalence 
rate for men of 4.8%, with 79.2% involving a female perpetra-
tor (Black et al., 2011, pp. 2 and 24).
Finally, it should be noted that the discussion and analy-
sis of women’s aggressive strategies in this article are not 
undertaken comparatively to those reported as being used by 
male perpetrators in sexual violence and rape cases. This is 
because the article is not aiming to ascertain gender (a)sym-
metry in relation to strategies used by perpetrators or experi-
enced by victims. Rather the aim is to explore FTP cases as a 
specific type of sexual violence, exploring female perpetra-
tors’ aggressive strategies as experienced by male victims. 
Consideration is also not given to the consequences for men 
of the aggressive strategies used by women, e.g., physical or 
emotional harms. While such data have been collected in this 
study, exploration of it will be a focus of future work.
Literature Review
Existing Research on Female Perpetrated Sexual Violence 
Against Adult Men
Although research studies have focused on aggressive strat-
egies used by women perpetrating sexual violence against 
men, none of the existing research has looked specifically at 
FTP cases. These cases have often been excluded from con-
sideration altogether (see, e.g., Anderson & Aymami, 1993), 
but where they have been considered it has either been along-
side an exploration of a range of other non-consensual sexual 
acts perpetrated by women (see, e.g., Struckman-Johnson & 
Struckman-Johnson, 1998), in the context of a comparative 
approach also looking at forced sex experiences of women 
(Struckman-Johnson, 1988), or in some cases, combinations 
of the above (see, e.g., Tomaszewska & Krahé, 2018). As 
such, it is almost impossible to paint any sort of accurate 
picture around sexually aggressive strategies used by women 
specifically in FTP cases.
Studies which do consider FTP cases are, unfortunately, 
limited in number and scope. Most studies have been con-
ducted in the U.S. and are largely outdated, with the major-
ity from the 1980s and 1990s (see, e.g., Muehlenhard & 
Cook, 1988; O’Sullivan, Byers, & Finkelman, 1998). A few, 
more recent studies have been conducted in Europe, but, as 
noted above, they explore the issue of compelled penetra-
tion alongside other forms of sexual violence experienced 
 2193
Archives of Sexual Behavior (2018) 47:2191–2205 
1 3
and perpetrated by both men and women (see, e.g., Krahé 
& Berger, 2013; Krahé et al., 2015; Tomaszewska & Krahé, 
2018). Further limitations with the existing research include 
the use of different definitions of sexual aggression and vio-
lence (Fisher & Pina, 2013), methodological inconsisten-
cies (Byers & O’Sullivan, 1998), and the examination of 
specific male populations, typically college/university stu-
dents (Davies & Rogers, 2006). It is also notable that exist-
ing research in this area is overwhelmingly quantitative in 
nature, thus limiting the more detailed understanding that is 
often revealed only when qualitative data are also included.
Despite the dearth of research in this area and the limita-
tions associated with existing studies, it is possible to identify 
some general trends in relation to the aggressive strategies 
used by women by exploring the broader sexual violence 
literature (see, e.g., Bouffard, Bouffard, & Miller, 2016). 
The majority of these studies have looked at other forms of 
sexual violence perpetrated by women toward men, not just 
compelled penetration. These trends are based upon studies 
reporting the experiences of men, as well as self-reporting 
by women who have used aggressive strategies. Among 
the most frequently reported strategy experienced by men 
is verbal pressure, persuasion, or coercion (Muehlenhard 
& Cook, 1988; Struckman-Johnson, Struckman-Johnson, 
& Anderson, 2003). Women have also self-reported using 
coercive strategies with high frequency (Anderson, 1998; 
Struckman-Johnson et al., 2003). Alcohol and/or drugs also 
feature highly in the aggressive strategies reported by male 
victims and by female aggressors (Anderson, 1998; Struck-
man-Johnson et al., 2003). This most often takes the form of 
women exploiting already intoxicated men to engage them in 
sexual activity (see, e.g., Tomaszewska & Krahé, 2018), but 
there is also evidence of women actively intoxicating men 
to carry out sexual activity (see, e.g., Anderson & Aymami, 
1993). Regardless of the form taken, “the role of alcohol in 
the context of sexual aggression is clearly demonstrated” 
(Krahé & Berger, 2013) in existing studies. In contrast, the 
use of physical force or weapons (including threats of) has 
most frequently featured as among the least common strat-
egy in both reports by men and self-reporting by women 
(Struckman-Johnson et al., 2003).
In summary, although some general trends in the aggres-
sive strategies of women perpetrating sexual violence against 
men have emerged, the limitations of the research conducted 
in this area mean that knowledge and understanding are lim-
ited, particularly regarding FTP cases. The shortcomings 
of the existing research have been acknowledged by several 
academics, and numerous calls have been made for more 
studies in this area to be conducted (Fisher & Pina, 2013; 
Stemple, Flores, & Meyer, 2016; Weare, 2018). As such, 
this study and the findings presented here begin to address 
several current gaps in knowledge and understanding relating 
to: (1) the experiences of men FTP women in the UK and (2) 
the aggressive strategies used by women in such cases in the 
UK. It is notable that the inclusion of both qualitative and 
quantitative data to explore the issue of compelled penetra-
tion is also novel, thus addressing a further gap within the 
existing literature, where a more detailed understanding of 
this form of sexual violence is required. The mixed-methods 
approach taken in this study allows for critique of existing 
debates around the use of specific aggressive strategies by 
women, as well as an exploration of previously unconsidered 
issues raised within participants’ narratives.
Method
Participants, Procedure, and Measures
This study investigated the experiences of men, through their 
own narratives, who had been FTP women. Data were col-
lected for 8 weeks between December 2016 and the end of 
January 2017 using an online survey, hosted by SurveyMon-
key. This was chosen as the most appropriate method of data 
collection for two key reasons: to preserve participant ano-
nymity and to maximize the number of participants. Using 
an online survey was the easiest way to preserve anonymity 
as participants did not need to meet with the researcher or 
disclose identifying information. While anonymity meant 
that participant identities and the veracity of answers could 
not be confirmed, the sensitive nature of the issues under 
consideration meant that the ability to disclose experiences 
anonymously increased not only the likelihood of men par-
ticipating, but also them providing truthful and detailed 
accounts of their experiences that lacked embellishment. 
Indeed, the “hidden–hidden” nature of FTP cases and the 
complex gender dynamics involved were important methodo-
logical considerations. It is also noteworthy that anonymity 
in relation to sexual violence is reflected in law in the UK, 
with lifetime anonymity being guaranteed to victims of rape 
or serious sexual assault under s1 of the Sexual Offences 
(Amendment) Act 1992. Anonymity for participants in the 
study extended not only to participation, but also to with-
drawal. Participants were able to provide non-identifying 
“safe words” which could be emailed to the researcher should 
they wish to anonymously withdraw from the survey. Instruc-
tions on setting up temporary email addresses were provided 
as a further safeguard to preserve anonymity.
The use of an online survey also maximized participa-
tion. Hosting the survey online allowed participants to be 
recruited via media publicity, both online and in print form, 
from across the UK (e.g., in local and national newspapers 
and on news websites). The survey was shared widely on 
social media (e.g., Twitter). Details of the survey were also 
distributed via email to organizations working with men who 
had experienced sexual violence (e.g., Survivors Manchester 
 2194
 
Archives of Sexual Behavior (2018) 47:2191–2205
1 3
and ManKind Initiative), who then forwarded the details on 
to potential participants as appropriate. A project website 
was set up to provide information to potential participants. 
Prior to completion of the survey, participants were provided 
with an information page containing detailed information 
about the scope of the survey. In advertising and describ-
ing the survey, the term “forced-to-penetrate” was defined 
as encompassing any, and all, cases where a man engages 
in penile penetration of a woman without his consent and 
could include non-consensual penile penetration of a wom-
an’s vagina, mouth, or anus. To try and prevent response 
(and non-response) biases, several different examples of such 
circumstances were provided, with it being made clear that 
these formed only part of a non-exhaustive list. Potential 
participant numbers were unknown due to the absence of 
previous research on this issue within the UK, and so an 
online survey provided the flexibility needed to engage with 
this unknown factor.
A mixed-methods approach to data analysis was taken 
with the collection of both quantitative and qualitative data 
in relation to the aggressive strategies used by female perpe-
trators. Participants were presented with a series of options 
relating to strategies (see Table 6) and were asked to select 
the one which most closely reflected that used by the woman 
in their most recent experience. The list of options was 
adapted from the Sexual Experiences Survey—Short Forms 
Victimization (SES-SFV) (Koss et al., 2006). Participants 
were then presented with an open-ended follow-up question 
asking them to describe, in as much detail as possible, what 
happened during their most recent experience.
The quantitative data underwent frequency and descriptive 
analysis to determine which aggressive strategies were most 
often reported by participants (see Table 6). Cross-tabula-
tions were used to determine whether there were significant 
relationships between participant demographics (e.g., age at 
the time of their most recent FTP experience, relationship 
with the perpetrator) and the aggressive strategies reported. 
No significant relationships were found between any of these 
variables.
The qualitative data gathered from the open-ended fol-
low-up question were open-coded using NVivo.2 Content 
analysis was undertaken to allow sub-categorizations to be 
developed in relation to each of the individual aggressive 
strategy options. Once the data had been organized in this 
way, thematic analysis was used to identify key patterns and 
thematic structures in respect of the aggressive strategies and 
to draw out emerging narratives as detailed by participants. 
The themes identified under each strategy were then com-
pared to ascertain whether any overlaps appeared in the the-
matic structures identified. Where overlaps were identified, 
this has been reflected in the merging together of relevant 
strategies in the research findings section below.
The study was reviewed and approved by the research 
ethics board at the author’s university. Guidance and sup-
port were offered to participants with contact information 
for specialist support organizations provided before and 
after completing the survey. The questions in the survey 
were qualitative and quantitative in nature and consisted of 
closed questions (e.g., discrete options or a range of choices) 
and open-ended ones, focusing principally on the men’s most 
recent FTP experiences. Focusing on most recent experi-
ences, rather than, for example, “worst” experiences, was 
a conscious decision in an attempt to represent a “typical” 
experience of sexual aggression from a woman (O’Sullivan 
et al., 1998). Participants could skip questions they did not 
want to answer to minimize distress from recounting pos-
sibly traumatic and intensely personal experiences. The sur-
vey asked the same substantive questions of all participants; 
however, they could take slightly different “routes” through 
the survey, depending on both the questions answered and 
the answers given to certain questions. These two factors 
meant answers to every question were not provided by every 
participant. Consequently, details are provided regarding the 
number of responses given to the questions discussed below. 
Participants were asked a range of questions in relation to 
their most recent FTP experience; however, this article is only 
going to focus on those relating to the aggressive strategies 
used by women.
Participants were self-selected, identifying themselves as 
having been FTP a woman. As a result, the sample is not 
representative of all men who have experienced compelled 
penetration, nor their experiences. It is, however, as repre-
sentative a group as might conceivably be collected when 
considering the research methods used, the sensitive nature 
of the issues under consideration, and the “hidden–hidden” 
nature of this form of sexual violence. This should also be 
considered in the context of the research aims which were to 
explore and understand the experiences of men, including the 
aggressive strategies used by women, in FTP cases, and to do 
so through men’s own narratives. A total of 159 men partici-
pated in the study, resulting in a usable dataset involving 154 
participants. Five of the surveys were removed because they 
were clearly completed as hoaxes based on the “infantile,” 
and sometimes incoherent, answers provided. For example, 
in response to the question asking participants to describe 
what happened during their most recent FTP experience, one 
response was, “Very Sexy Women.”
Participants were asked to provide demographic informa-
tion on their age at the time of completing the survey, their 
age at the time of their most recent FTP experience, their 
2 NVivo is a software package that is purpose-built for qualitative and 
mixed-methods research. It provides a platform by which the data can 
be stored, organized, and analyzed—http://www.qsrin 
terna 
tiona 
l.com/
nvivo 
/what-is-nvivo 
.
 2195
Archives of Sexual Behavior (2018) 47:2191–2205 
1 3
sexual orientation, and country and region of residence. A 
total of 148 men provided their age at the time of completing 
the survey, with the average being 38 years. The youngest 
participant was 18 years old (the minimum age to participate 
in the survey), and the oldest was 70 (see Table 1). Based on 
153 responses, the average age of participants during their 
most recent FTP experience was 27 years, with a range of 
between two and 61 years (see Table 2). In terms of sexual-
ity, 134 of the 154 (87%) men who answered this question 
described themselves as heterosexual, 17 (11%) as bisexual/
bicurious, and three (2%) as homosexual. All 154 participants 
disclosed their country of residence, coming from across all 
four countries within the UK, but with the highest number 
from England (72.1%) (see Table 3). Of the 129 who dis-
closed an area or region of residence, the South East featured 
most frequently (28.7%). This is perhaps unsurprising as the 
area of the UK with the highest population density. The only 
areas in the UK not identified as areas of residence were East 
Wales and North Scotland (see Table 4).
Participants were also asked about their relationship with 
the woman at the time of the compelled penetration inci-
dent they were reporting (see Table 5). All 154 participants 
answered this question with the majority disclosing that 
they knew the woman in some capacity. Seventy-nine men 
Table 1  Age at the time of completing survey—grouped participant 
age ranges (frequency)
From S. Weare, Forced-to-penetrate cases: Lived experiences of men. 
Copyright 2017 by Siobhan Weare
Current age (years)
Frequency
Percentage
18–25
24
16.2
26–35
48
32.4
36–45
39
26.3
46–55
25
16.9
56–65
10
6.8
66 +
2
1.4
Total
148
100
Table 2  Age during most recent FTP experience—grouped partici-
pant age ranges (frequency)
From S. Weare, Forced-to-penetrate cases: Lived experiences of men. 
Copyright 2017 by Siobhan Weare
Age during most recent FTP 
experience (years)
Frequency
Percentage
≤ 15
16
10.5
16–25
67
43.8
26–35
36
23.5
36–45
21
13.7
46–55
11
7.2
56 +
2
1.3
Total
153
100
Table 3  Country of residence (frequency)
From S. Weare, Forced-to-penetrate cases: Lived experiences of men. 
Copyright 2017 by Siobhan Weare
Country of residence in the 
UK
Frequency
Percentage
England
111
72.1
Wales
7
4.5
Scotland
30
19.5
Northern Ireland
6
3.9
Total
154
100
Table 4  Region of residence (frequency)
From S. Weare, Forced-to-penetrate cases: Lived experiences of men. 
Copyright 2017 by Siobhan Weare
Region of residence in the UK
Frequency
Percentage
North West England
20
15.5
North East England
10
7.8
South East England
37
28.7
South West England
11
8.5
East Midlands England
7
5.4
West Midlands England
12
9.3
North Wales
3
2.3
South Wales
3
2.3
East Wales
0
0
West Wales
1
0.8
North Scotland
0
0
South Scotland
7
5.4
East Scotland
10
7.8
West Scotland
4
3.1
Northern Ireland
4
3.1
Total
129
100
Table 5  Relationship with female perpetrator during most recent FTP 
experience (frequency)
From S. Weare, Forced-to-penetrate cases: Lived experiences of men. 
Copyright 2017 by Siobhan Weare
Relationship with female perpe-
trator
Frequency
Percentage
Wife/ex-wife
25
16.2
Ex-girlfriend/ex-fiancée
16
10.4
Girlfriend/fiancée
38
24.7
Relative
7
4.5
Acquaintance/friend
43
27.9
Stranger
7
4.5
Other
18
11.8
Total
154
100
 2196
 
Archives of Sexual Behavior (2018) 47:2191–2205
1 3
(51.3%) were in or had been in an intimate relationship (e.g., 
girlfriend/fiancée/wife) with the woman, and 43 (27.9%) 
indicated that they knew her as an acquaintance or friend.
Results
A total of 153 participants answered the quantitative question 
asking them to indicate which of the “options” presented (see 
Table 6) most closely matched their most recent FTP experi-
ence. The results are presented in Table 6 in order of descend-
ing frequency, rather than the order presented in the survey.
Ninety-seven men answered the open-ended follow-up 
question describing their experience. Varying amounts of 
detail were provided, from a couple of lines to several para-
graphs. These quantitative and qualitative findings are dis-
cussed below. When presenting the research findings, the 
aggressive strategy “options” in Table 6 that are related or 
have overlap have been grouped together, for example the 
consensual consumption of alcohol and drugs (rows 5 and 
6 in Table 6). It is recognized that the strategy “options” in 
Table 6 are discrete ones chosen by participants; however, the 
content and thematic analysis of the qualitative data produced 
some key patterns. Therefore, they are presented as grouped 
where appropriate to reflect this. The discrete “options” 
which have been grouped will be highlighted for clarity, and 
presented in order of descending frequency.
Blackmail, Threats, Coercion, and Continual Verbal 
Pressure
This was the most frequent aggressive strategy used by 
women as reported by participants. Fifty-one (33.3%) of 
153 men indicated this strategy was used across two discrete 
“options” in the survey—rows 1 and 4 in Table 6. Thirty-
nine participants who selected the two “options” relating to 
coercive strategies provided additional details on their expe-
riences. At its most extreme, this strategy involved women 
blackmailing and threatening men to force them into penetra-
tion. This took several forms. Two of the men were involved 
in consensual sexual affairs with the women outside of an 
existing relationship, but when they attempted to end them, 
the women threatened to tell friends and family about their 
infidelity unless they kept the sexual relationship going. For 
example:
After a few weeks I tried to end things as the relation-
ship was toxic. She told me she didn’t want to end 
things as it was just sex and that if I did she would go 
to my wife and show her all our messages and describe 
to her in detail what went on. She then said she’d post 
pictures and more messages to all my work colleagues.
Another man reported that an ex-girlfriend threatened to 
lie to his current partner that they had had sex if he did not 
have intercourse with her:
Table 6  Aggressive strategies used by female perpetrators (frequency)
From S. Weare, Forced-to-penetrate cases: Lived experiences of men. Copyright 2017 by Siobhan Weare
Row
A woman forced you to penetrate her without your consent by:
Freq.
%
1
Telling lies, threatening to end the relationship, threatening to spread rumors about you, making promises you knew were 
untrue, or continually verbally pressuring you after you said you didn’t want to
34
22.2
2
Using force, for example, holding you down with their body weight, pinning your arms, restraining you, or having a weapon
22
14.4
3
None of the options present
22
14.4
4
Showing displeasure, criticizing your sexuality or attractiveness, getting angry but not using physical force, after you said 
you didn’t want to
17
11.1
5
Forcing you to penetrate her when you were asleep or unconscious from consensually drinking alcohol, and when you came 
to (regained consciousness) you could not give consent to or stop what was happening
17
11.1
6
Forcing you to penetrate her when you were asleep or unconscious from using drugs consensually and when you came to 
(regained consciousness) you could not stop what was happening
13
8.5
7
Forcing you to penetrate her after you had been drinking alcohol and were conscious but too intoxicated (drunk) to give 
your consent to or stop what was happening
11
7.2
8
Threatening to physically harm you or someone close to you
8
5.2
9
Acting together with two or more people to force you to penetrate her where you had made it clear that you did not give 
your consent to what was happening or were unable
4
2.6
10
Encouraging or pressuring you to drink alcohol until you were too intoxicated (drunk) to give consent to or stop what was 
happening
3
2
11
Giving you a drug without your knowledge that made you too incapacitated (out of it) to consent or stop what was happen-
ing
2
1.3
Total
153
100
 2197
Archives of Sexual Behavior (2018) 47:2191–2205 
1 3
I kept saying no, but she wouldn’t listen and threatened 
to tell my new girlfriend that we had had sex anyway 
and she threatened other things if I didn’t have sex with 
her. In the end she basically raped me.
Blackmail and threats also took other forms, with two par-
ticipants reporting that they had been threatened with false 
rape allegations and two disclosing that suicide blackmail had 
been used by their current and former partners. For example:
Once inside [my apartment] she told me that if I didn’t 
have sex with her then she’d call the police and claim 
that I was trying to assault or rape her. She got her 
phone out and dialled 999 (but didn’t press “call”) to 
show me she was serious.
I had told the girl in question that I wished to end 
our relationship. She became extremely emotional 
and began saying that she was going to commit sui-
cide because she couldn’t handle it. I have never seen 
someone so hysterical and distraught. I had had an ex-
girlfriend try to commit suicide previously, and this 
girl knew that…
Another participant disclosed how a friend threatened self-
harm and “to kill [her] unborn foetus if [he] didn’t comply.”
Threatening to stop a man seeing his children was also 
used by one woman. This was particularly coercive for the 
man who reported it as his ex-wife had previously stopped 
him seeing his children, and he had only just started seeing 
them again: “I didn’t want to have sex with her but feel I was 
made to by threats of not seeing my kids after so long. She 
was threatening to move her and the children…if she and I 
‘couldn’t get along’.”
Threats to “out” particular sexual preferences occurred 
more than once, in particular, telling friends and family of 
sexual practices that could be viewed as deviant. For exam-
ple, being on swinging websites or that the man cross-dressed 
(despite him reporting that this was for the woman’s sexual 
pleasure). One man also disclosed that his female employer 
threatened him with losing his job if he did not have sex 
with her.
Continual verbal pressure was also reported on several 
occasions and took multiple forms:
The psychological pressure she put me under, coupled 
with her constant communication by text, email and 
telephone, during which she told me that if I were a 
“proper man” I’d “prove it” and that I was “spiteful and 
selfish” for not giving her what she wanted, became 
so unbearable that I relented in the hope that “one last 
time” would indeed be that.
She wouldn’t take “no” for an answer. She wouldn’t 
stop. She wouldn’t leave me alone.
Emotional abuse and coercion were also reported by sev-
eral of the men. For example:
I had to be ready for her whenever she wanted sexual 
intercourse, and was subjected to emotional abuse and 
blackmail if I didn’t give her what she wanted…[She] 
decided she wanted to have sex again, and used emo-
tional blackmail and coercive tactics to make me com-
ply, along the lines of telling me that I wasn’t satisfying 
her and I had to do it otherwise I wasn’t worth her time. 
I suffer from depression, and these tactics were very 
effective.
Finally, two participants reported that while no “active” 
coercion, in the form of spoken words, took place, there was 
a sense that there would be “consequences” for failure to 
comply; “I had no choice: if I did not penetrate her I would 
be punished for denying her,” “If I didn’t have sex I would be 
in ‘trouble’ and get silent treatment.”
Taking Advantage of Men’s Intoxication via Drugs 
or Alcohol
Forty-one (26.8%) of 153 men reported this across three dif-
ferent strategy “options”—rows 5–7 in Table 6—making it 
the second most frequently experienced aggressive strategy. 
Twenty-five men who selected the three options grouped here 
provided further qualitative details about their experiences. 
Most frequently, participants reported that they were asleep 
or unconscious following alcohol or drug consumption and 
woke up to find themselves having non-consensual sex. Sev-
eral participants only reported their own intoxication and did 
not suggest that the women were similarly under the influence 
of alcohol. For example:
My friend and I were clubbing and met two women. My 
friend got together with one of them but I didn’t fancy 
her friend and so wasn’t interested. Throughout the 
night she repeatedly kept trying to kiss me and touch 
me to which I kept saying no. We all ended up back 
at my flat…I was so out of it…my friend had to carry 
me into my bed which I don’t remember. I then woke 
up with her on top of me and I was inside her. I don’t 
remember much just flashes of memory of her bounc-
ing on top of me.
In other men’s reports, it was clear that both they and the 
female aggressor were intoxicated when the incident took 
place. However, on all occasions it seemed as if the men were 
more intoxicated, so much so that they had fallen asleep or 
were unconscious due to their alcohol or drug consumption. 
For example:
We got drunk…I could barely see, but needed to sleep 
it off. When we got to hers, I collapsed on the bed, 
 2198
 
Archives of Sexual Behavior (2018) 47:2191–2205
1 3
she started kissing me and putting her hands down my 
trousers, I gently said no and then passed out. I woke 
up naked, with her down on me, bleary eyed I gently 
pushed her away and said no…I fell asleep again, but 
curled up. I woke up again but this time she was on top 
of me holding my arms down and I realised I was inside 
her…I turned around and found 3 condoms (used) were 
on the floor next to me.
Other men reported being conscious but too intoxicated 
to consent to, or stop, what was happening. For example, one 
man noted how his friend took advantage of his intoxication:
Following a night drinking around town with a larger 
group of friends…I was certainly drunk. After leav-
ing a club she carried me to a taxi and went back to 
her house, she put me on the bed and whilst she was 
undressing herself I vomited onto my shirt. She helped 
to take my shirt off, before unzipping my trousers and 
firstly giving me oral sex.
Another participant explained how his partner took advan-
tage of him already being drunk to ply him with more alcohol 
so he was unable to reject her advances:
We were drinking. I got really drunk. She wanted to 
have sex. I said no but she persisted. She gave me more 
alcohol until I couldn’t talk properly anymore. Once I 
was at that point she took my pants off and played with 
it until I was erect. She then got on top of me and put 
it inside of her.
Use of Force and Threats of Physical Harm
When combining the “options” of use of force and threats of 
physical harm (including to a close friend or relative) (rows 
2 and 8 in Table 6), this is the third most frequently cited 
aggressive strategy, with 30/153 (19.6%) participants report-
ing this strategy. Seventeen participants elaborated on their 
experiences, highlighting how the use of force by women 
varied. The use of physical weight or strength as a means 
for women to overpower men featured most frequently. For 
example, “She used her size and weight to stop me leaving 
and then physically forced me to have intercourse with her” 
and:
I pretended to be asleep and hoped she would leave me 
alone. She got undressed and into bed then angrily got 
on top of me and held me down—she was the same 
height and weighed a lot more. I said no but she con-
tinued and was angry and drunk.
Another participant explained how his partner took advan-
tage of his reduced physical strength following back surgery 
to use her physical strength to compel penetration.
Specific forms of force were also highlighted, for exam-
ple, choking, as well as more general physical violence. Two 
men mentioned the use of weapons by women. For example, 
one participant who had experienced ongoing domestic and 
sexual violence from his partner noted how she used a variety 
of “household items as weapons, [including pinning him] to 
the stairs with a knife to [his] throat.”
Aside from use of force, threats of physical harm were 
also reported, typically toward the men themselves. These 
involved general threats of violence as well as threats to 
inflict specific types of violence. For example, “She referred 
to threats previously made in similar situations, these were 
both towards inflicting injuries/pain on myself from general 
“I will hurt you” threats to specific threats about causing 
injuries.” One man disclosed that threats were made by his 
partner toward his children; “[she] threatened to abandon 
[the] children or hurt them…when I refused sex.”
None of the Options Present
Twenty-two (14.4%) of 153 participants indicated that their 
experiences did not match with any of the options listed (row 
3 in Table 6) and of these, 15 provided further details about 
their experiences. Content analysis highlighted that some 
men could have categorized their experiences differently, 
selecting another of the more “specific” options available. 
However, in taking an approach of centralizing the men’s nar-
ratives, importance was attached to maintaining the catego-
rization that they had given to their experiences. Thematic 
analysis of these narratives highlighted additional strategies 
that had not yet emerged. The first related to issues of power 
imbalance within familial relationships, as well as with fam-
ily friends. This was the case for three men, who were all 
pubescent boys (Blanchard et al., 2009) when their most 
recent FTP experience occurred and who were FTP either a 
family member or family friend.
Mother came into bedroom, pulled back covers. I was 
on my back and she straddled me. Took my penis and 
after touching it to get an erection guided it into her.
My sister 4 years my elder made me…said it was nor-
mal and told me she would tell dad I tried to do it to 
her if I didn’t.
The woman was a family friend who was staying over-
night in our home. She came into my bed and started, 
as I now know fondling and kissing me, she then had 
sex with me…She was my mum’s friend. I could never 
tell my mum.
There is no suggestion of physical force being used in any 
of these experiences, and minimal, if any, verbal coercion. 
However, it is suggested that a form of “indirect” coercion 
 2199
Archives of Sexual Behavior (2018) 47:2191–2205 
1 3
was experienced by these pubescent boys (Blanchard et al., 
2009), who lacked power in the context of complex familial 
relationships to resist the women’s actions.
For two men, the aggressive strategy used by their ex-
partners involved negatively interfering in the relationships 
that they had with their children. For example:
The mother of my son (ex-partner) would cause me 
difficulty with my relationship with my son if she was 
unhappy about my attitude or something I had done. 
In order for me to stop the arguments or fighting was 
for me to initiate letting her give me oral…I certainly 
didn’t always want it but felt it was the easiest way to 
stop fighting for the sake of my son.
These experiences differ slightly to one noted earlier 
where a man was threatened more specifically that he would 
not be able to see his children.
Two participants explained how they had fallen asleep and 
woken up to find a woman having sex with them. For one man 
this was his long-term partner; “Was at home in bed with my 
partner of 7 years…We went to bed as normal and about an 
hour later I awoke to find her naked on top of me ‘helping 
herself’ to vaginal sex.” For another it was a sexual partner; 
“I awoke to find someone with whom I had had consensual 
sex with the night before, had penetrated herself anally with 
my penis whilst I was asleep.” In both instances there was 
no mention of intoxication and thus these experiences can be 
distinguished from those discussed earlier and below where 
alcohol or drugs were involved.
Two more specific aggressive strategies were disclosed 
by participants. One man explained how his ex-partner “lied 
about being pregnant and said she’d get an abortion if [he] 
didn’t have sex with her.” Another described how he was 
engaging in a consensual act with his partner which then 
became non-consensual; “Engaged in consensual sexual 
activity and as I ejaculate she grabs my penis and forces it 
into her vaginally because she wants to ‘feel me cum’ even 
though I have explicitly said I don’t want to do so without a 
condom.”
Actively Involved in Encouraging Intoxication 
via Alcohol or Drugs
This was one of the least frequently reported strategies, 
with 5/153 (3.3%) participants reporting this across two 
“options”—rows 10–11 in Table 6. Only two participants 
provided qualitative detail on their experiences, with both 
reporting that the female perpetrator was a teacher at their 
school. One of the men was given a drug by his teacher with-
out his knowledge before being FTP her. He noted that this 
had happened at school, but did not provide further details. 
Another, who was 15 at the time, visited his teacher’s flat 
with friends and was encouraged to drink until he was too 
intoxicated to stop what was happening:
She offered cigs and alcoholic drinks and weed. She 
offered us a drink and I accepted it…She had been talk-
ing to us and encouraging us to drink more, I don’t 
know how much time had passed but the rest [of the 
kids] had gone and I was sitting on her sofa next to 
her. She kissed me and then instantly put my penis in 
her mouth, my jeans had already been undone which I 
didn’t remember doing or her doing. I was drunk and 
although I was not completely out of it, I was not able 
to react quick enough to do anything. She then came 
back up pushed me down on to the sofa and straddled 
herself on top of me and put my penis into her vagina.
Multiple Perpetrators
This was the least frequently cited aggressive strategy used 
by women, accounting for the experience of 4/153 (2.6%) 
participants (row 9 in Table 6). None of the men who selected 
this option provided further detail on their experiences, and 
thus further analysis could not be undertaken.
Discussion
Developing Understanding and Challenging 
Stereotypes
The findings from this project “[a]dd to a body of research 
that is designed to ‘dismiss the myth of the nonaggressive 
woman on empirical grounds’” (Krahé et al., 2003, p. 228). 
By demonstrating empirically for the first time in the UK that 
this form of female perpetrated sexual violence occurs, the 
findings of this project directly contravene “the traditional 
belief that a woman cannot force a man to have sex” (Davies, 
2013, pp. 93–94). This is important because despite some 
recognition within academic research of women’s ability to 
compel men into penetration, there is still a widespread soci-
etal belief, informed by gender stereotypes and the traditional 
sexual script, that:
specific [sex] roles are assigned to men and others 
are assigned to women. [This] excludes the image 
of women as sexual aggressors, initiating sex with 
men…and, at times, coercing their partners to engage 
in unwanted sexual activities…[as well as excluding] 
the image of men as sexually reluctant or as victims of 
sexual coercion (Byers & O’Sullivan, 1998, p. 146).
 2200
 
Archives of Sexual Behavior (2018) 47:2191–2205
1 3
The widespread and pervasive nature of the gender sche-
matized traditional sex script has been remarked upon by 
Davies (2002), who notes that “most people, including many 
psychologists, view the sexual assault of men by women as 
somewhat implausible.” Thus, this study, though not sug-
gesting prevalence rates, provides empirical evidence of the 
existence of this issue for the first time within the UK, which 
in turn challenges gender stereotypes that suggest that this 
form of sexual violence cannot or does not happen.
The findings from this research support some of the 
existing findings on women’s sexually aggressive strategies 
toward men. It is difficult to directly compare the quantita-
tive findings presented here with those from other studies, 
largely because of the different definitions used to refer to 
similar behavior. For example, the terms “verbal pressure” 
(Krahé & Berger, 2013), “persuasion” (Struckman-Johnson 
& Struckman-Johnson, 1994) and “psychological pressure” 
(Struckman-Johnson, 1988) are all seemingly used to refer to 
verbally coercive strategies. Moreover, differing methodolog-
ical approaches have been taken across studies, making accu-
rate comparisons challenging. Nevertheless, the frequency 
with which some of the aggressive strategies are used broadly 
reflects prevalence rates found in existing studies.
In relation to verbally coercive strategies, while there 
are differences in the reporting rates of men experiencing 
this strategy—varying between 20 and 70% across exist-
ing studies—this strategy consistently features as either the 
most or second most reported within the majority of stud-
ies (see, e.g., Struckman-Johnson & Struckman-Johnson, 
1998; Struckman-Johnson et al., 2003). Similarly, although 
the rates for women’s self-reporting of this strategy are gener-
ally lower, at between 0.8 and 43%, coercive strategies still 
feature as among the most frequently used (see, e.g., Ander-
son, 1998). In this way, and to this extent, the finding that ver-
bally coercive strategies were experienced most frequently 
by participants is broadly in line with existing research in 
this area. The exceptions to the above are the findings from 
Tomaszewska and Krahé’s (2018) study involving male and 
female university students in Poland and Krahé et al.’s (2015) 
study across 10 European countries (excluding the UK). In 
both studies “verbal pressure” was less frequently reported, 
being the least frequently reported strategy experienced by 
male victims in Tomaszewska and Krahé’s (2018) study, or 
the second least frequently reported in Krahé et al.’s (2015) 
study. An explanation for the divergence here is difficult to 
pinpoint, but again it may reflect the differences in methodo-
logical approaches, differences in participant demographics, 
or other variable factors. Acknowledging some divergence in 
findings where they arise is important when considering the 
potential for future research in the area.
In relation to alcohol, the findings presented here reflect 
its prominence within both the aggressive strategies used by 
female perpetrators and the experiences of victims of sexual 
violence (Krahé & Berger, 2013). Indeed, the quantitative 
findings from the present study on the strategy of taking 
advantage of an already intoxicated man broadly accord with 
those found in existing literature, in that this was typically 
the most, or second most frequently reported strategy, both 
by men (see, e.g., Struckman-Johnson et al., 2003; Tomasze-
wska & Krahé, 2018) and in self-reporting by women aggres-
sors (see, e.g., Anderson, 1998). However, in relation to 
active alcohol or drug use (i.e., where the female perpetrator 
is actively involved in the intoxication of the male victim), 
within existing research, higher rates have been reported. 
Indeed, it has often featured as one of the more frequent 
strategies where cited (see, e.g., Anderson & Aymami, 1993; 
Struckman-Johnson & Struckman-Johnson, 1998). One 
explanation for the discrepancy could be the definitions and 
explanations used in the studies. Indeed, it is difficult to make 
comparisons where broad terms like “intoxication” (see, e.g., 
Struckman-Johnson, 1988) are used without the provision of 
wider context as to how the intoxication occurred. Moreover, 
most of the existing research has involved college students 
who are living in an environment where “alcohol and drug 
use are common parts of social activity” (O’Sullivan et al., 
1998, p. 179) and thus this may explain the higher rates of 
its use within these studies.
While many of the findings from this study broadly align 
with existing research in the area, this research also presents 
challenges to existing understandings of FTP cases, as well 
as women’s sexual aggression toward men more broadly. This 
principally relates to women’s use of physical force or vio-
lence. The findings presented here in relation to the use of 
force contradict most earlier empirical studies, which suggest 
that women are unlikely to use physical force or violence as 
an aggressive strategy. Indeed, as noted above, most exist-
ing studies have put the rate at which physical force is used 
by women at between 2 and 10% (Weare, 2018) and it has 
typically featured as the least frequently used strategy. These 
findings can be contrasted with this study where 14.4% of the 
men reported the use of force and 19.6% reported use of force 
and threats of physical harm combined (see Table 6). There 
are, however, some exceptions, where reporting of this strat-
egy has been at higher percentage rates that are closer to those 
seen in this study. For example, Struckman-Johnson et al. 
(2003) reported that 24.7% of the 275 college men in their 
study had experienced one or more forms of physical force 
in relation to sexual contact, and Anderson (1998) found that 
20% of 461 college women self-reported using physical force 
to obtain sexual contact with a man. Nevertheless, in most 
existing studies, even those where reporting of physical force 
was above 20%, “[p]hysical force was the least commonly uti-
lised tactic” (Bouffard et al., 2016, p. 2363). The exception to 
this being more recent European studies, where use or threats 
of physical force have featured as among the most frequent 
aggressive strategies reported by male victims of women’s 
 2201
Archives of Sexual Behavior (2018) 47:2191–2205 
1 3
sexual violence (see, e.g., Krahé et al., 2015; Tomaszewska 
& Krahé, 2018).
As noted above, the findings presented here, where physi-
cal force was the third most frequently reported strategy, con-
tradict much of the existing research which suggests it is less 
common. There could be several explanations for the higher 
reporting rate of this strategy here, the first of which is that 
this study solely explored men’s experiences of compelled 
penetration. Therefore, the higher frequency with which force 
is used may be specific to this form of sexual violence. Simi-
larly, as this is the first study to look at this issue in the UK, 
there may be cultural and social differences that impact upon 
women’s use of force. The design of the study could also have 
impacted the increased reporting of this aggressive strategy. 
The study was promoted as being about FTP cases, and the 
use of the term “force” here may have led to a response bias. 
That is to say that despite efforts to prevent such a response 
bias (as noted earlier in the article), men who were victims of 
a use of “force” by a female perpetrator may have been more 
likely to respond to the survey, than men who experienced 
other aggressive strategies (e.g., where their intoxication was 
taken advantage of). Finally, the participants in this study 
were self-selected, rather than a convenience sample (e.g., 
college students) as seen in most existing studies. Therefore, 
the demographics of those who participated could account for 
the higher reporting rate of this aggressive strategy. Regard-
less of the explanation offered, the findings highlight that 
more effort needs to be put into dispelling the stereotype that 
women cannot and do not use force when compelling men 
into penetration and, more broadly, the myth that women do 
not “have the size, strength, or ability to physically force a 
man to have sexual contact” (Struckman-Johnson & Ander-
son, 1998, p. 11). This is a damaging stereotype that is likely 
to negatively impact upon reporting rates and criminal justice 
and societal responses to this form of sexual violence.
It is clear both from these findings, and those presented 
elsewhere, that women use a variety of sexually aggressive 
strategies. However, the inclusion of qualitative data in this 
study has also allowed previously unobserved information 
to be uncovered about the strategies used by women in FTP 
cases. In particular, two original findings have emerged: first, 
some women use multiple aggressive strategies within the 
same incident and, secondly, some women use particularly 
“gendered” strategies. These findings will go some way to 
developing clearer understandings around women’s aggres-
sive strategies when perpetrating sexual violence against 
adult men.
Women’s Use of Multiple Aggressive Strategies
While quantitatively the men were asked to select the 
“option” that most closely matched their most recent FTP 
experience, thus suggesting the use of only one aggressive 
strategy per incident, content analysis of the answers pro-
vided to the open-ended follow-up question suggests oth-
erwise. Indeed, the qualitative data highlights the use of 
multiple aggressive strategies by some women within the 
same incident. This is not something that has previously been 
noted within existing research on women’s sexual aggression, 
except in passing by Struckman-Johnson et al. (2003). The 
research findings from this study indicate that some women 
combine aggressive strategies when compelling penetration. 
For example, one participant described how his partner was 
both verbally and physically abusive:
My partner of the time came home from a night out 
with some female friends, she had been drinking and 
also taken cocaine. She demanded sex, I refused, she 
became initially verbally abusive and then went on to 
physically hit me landing a number of blows to the side 
of my head until I complied.
Two participants also explained how women took advan-
tage of them as they slept and then used force or restraint to 
compel penetration. For example: “I woke from my sleep to 
find me handcuffed to the bed and her giving me oral sex, I 
told her to stop but she wouldn’t.” While it is interesting in 
and of itself to note the combinations of strategies used by 
women, the value of this discovery lies in revealing more 
detail than previously known about women’s aggressive strat-
egies and thus the experiences of the men subject to it. This 
level of understanding is crucial to developing appropriate 
responses to such cases, which remain underreported and 
under-discussed.
Women’s Use of “Gendered” Aggressive Strategies
The second key finding from this study relates to women’s 
use of what is termed “gendered” strategies; that is, strate-
gies where women are aware of, and take advantage of, 
their gendered roles and experiences, qua women. In the 
findings, these strategies took two forms: threats regarding 
false rape allegations and exploitation of women’s roles as 
mothers to interfere in the father–child relationship.
Threats of False Rape Allegations
As noted earlier, two instances of women threatening to 
make false allegations of rape against men were reported, 
for example:
A threat of a false rape accusation…she kept on telling 
me that she would tell the police that I had raped her 
and ruin my family and my life.
It is important not to make generalizations about this spe-
cific strategy, not least because only two participants reported 
it as part of their experiences. Moreover, in discussing this as 
 2202
 
Archives of Sexual Behavior (2018) 47:2191–2205
1 3
a particular strategy, it is in no way suggesting that the issue 
of false rape allegations (and threats of) should dominate, 
or in any way undermine, the issue of women as victims 
of rape and other forms of sexual violence. Rather what is 
being raised is the fact that this particular strategy has not 
previously been identified within research in this area, and 
therefore recognizing it as a potential issue for men who 
experience this in compelled penetration cases is important. 
Indeed, the similarities in the men’s stories suggest that this 
“gendered” strategy would benefit from further exploration 
to develop understandings around its use. It is also important 
to consider this strategy in relation to the impact that false 
reporting of rape (and threats of) has on the treatment of 
rape, and rape victims, within the criminal justice system 
(Rumney, 2006), and in society more broadly.
Although it is difficult to accurately determine the preva-
lence of false allegations of rape (Rumney, 2006), a 2013 
Crown Prosecution Service study in the UK highlighted the 
small number of prosecutions for making false allegations of 
rape, especially when compared with prosecutions for rape 
(Levitt & Crown Prosecution Service Equality and Diversity 
Unit, 2013). However, it is suggested that a strategy involv-
ing the threat of a false allegation is one that is likely to have 
maximum impact when used by a woman because of existing 
legal and social definitions and understandings of sexual vio-
lence, i.e., men as perpetrators and women as victims. There-
fore, while the same threats of a false rape allegation could be 
made by a man in respect of a woman, the woman concerned 
may not believe there would be real consequences for her as 
a result. For men, however, the potential for such a threat to 
become a reality may be particularly coercive because of the 
damaging consequences that could occur.
It is true that there are undoubtedly still issues around 
women who report sexual violence being believed (see, e.g., 
Bahadur, 2016; Jordan, 2004). However, a report of rape is 
(quite rightly) expected to at least involve a police inves-
tigation and, depending on the available evidence, poten-
tially a criminal trial. There is also likely to be a substantial 
amount of emotional distress experienced by a man under 
investigation in the context of a false allegation due to the 
potential stigma and reputational ruin associated with being 
considered a “rapist” (Levitt & Crown Prosecution Service 
Equality and Diversity Unit, 2013; Wells, 2015). Societal 
perceptions around sexual violence perpetrators are only 
likely to enhance this further, with recognition of men as 
perpetrators and women as victims much more common than 
any other victim–perpetrator paradigm (Weare, 2018). This 
is understandable, with evidence consistently highlighting 
women as disproportionately experiencing sexual violence 
from men. Nevertheless, when taking all of this into account 
it is clear why women threatening false allegations of rape 
is a “gendered” coercive strategy, as well as being one that 
may be particularly powerful. While this strategy was only 
reported by two men, the complex nature of cases involving 
threats of/false rape allegations (Levitt & Crown Prosecution 
Service Equality and Diversity Unit, 2013) means that this is 
an issue that would benefit from further research in the con-
text of it as a strategy used by sexually aggressive women. In 
exploring this issue further, it should not, however, be used to 
dismiss or undermine the experiences of women who experi-
ence sexual violence.
Exploitation of Women’s Roles as Mothers
More frequently, men reported women exploiting their roles 
as mothers or mothers-to-be, for example by threatening 
to negatively interfere in the men’s relationships with their 
children, harming the fetus while pregnant, or terminating 
the pregnancy. Seven men reported this strategy being used 
against them; for example: “[s]aid that she would stop all 
access to see my children” and “said she’d get an abortion if 
I didn’t have sex with her.”
As an institution, motherhood has been argued to be patri-
archal and oppressive (Rich, 1995), requiring women to meet 
stereotypes around “good” mothering, and viewing as deviant 
those who do not (see, e.g., Roberts, 1993). Women’s role 
as mothers has also been documented as being used against 
them in the context of domestic abuse and coercive control 
perpetrated by men (Weissman, 2009). However, the indi-
vidual experiences of women as mothers are not homogenous 
and include instances where women use their role as mothers, 
and primary caregivers, to “manage” their children and act 
as gatekeepers or influencers in the father–child relationship 
(see, e.g., Allen & Hawkins, 1999). In the context of the 
findings presented here, there is evidence that some women 
use their roles as mothers as a coercive strategy in relation to 
compelled penetration. In doing so, it appears that they are 
creating and exploiting a power hierarchy where they use 
their gendered role as mothers to solidify control over men’s 
behavior and coerce them into intercourse. While this specific 
strategy was reported relatively infrequently, the reoccurring 
and similar nature of the men’s experiences makes future 
consideration of this “gendered” strategy necessary.
Conclusions
Based on quantitative and qualitative data provided by men 
who have experienced compelled penetration, the study 
reported on in this article evidences for the first time in the 
UK the experiences of men who have been FTP a woman. 
In doing so, the study demonstrates the range and frequency 
of aggressive strategies used by women, finding that women 
most frequently use coercive strategies, take advantage 
of men’s intoxication, and use force and threats of physi-
cal harm. Most significantly, for the first time, the findings 
highlight that some women use multiple aggressive strategies 
 2203
Archives of Sexual Behavior (2018) 47:2191–2205 
1 3
within one incident of compelled penetration, and that some 
women use particularly “gendered” strategies of threatening 
to make false rape accusations and exploiting their roles as 
mothers to threaten negative interference in the father–child 
relationship.
While being both novel and significant as the first study 
in the UK to specifically explore FTP cases, this research 
does have limitations. The participants self-reported their 
experiences, and thus there is a risk of reporting bias. Indeed, 
it was not possible, for example, to ascertain whether there 
had been bidirectional violence. In addition, the self-select-
ing nature of participants meant that the participant group 
was not representative, and, for example, ethnicity, religion, 
and socioeconomic background were not considered. Thus, 
future research would benefit from considering issues around 
intersectionality. Furthermore, due to the method of data col-
lection, i.e., an online survey, the issues of data subjectivity, 
reliability and validity could be raised, with the possibility 
that some participants did not in fact experience compelled 
penetration, but instead completed the survey for “entertain-
ment purposes.” This limitation, while perhaps more likely 
to occur in the context of an online survey, is not confined to 
this method of data collection and can plague any method, 
including face-to-face interviews. The justifications for using 
this data collection method (noted earlier) overrode this par-
ticular limitation and where it was clear that participants were 
“hoaxers” these surveys were removed. Despite these limita-
tions, the findings presented here can usefully be considered 
by practitioners within the criminal justice system in relation 
to developing education, understanding, and responses to this 
under-reported form of sexual violence.
It is clear that future research is necessary in relation to 
FTP cases to maximize understanding and to develop a larger 
evidence base in this area. More research on the aggressive 
strategies of female perpetrators, especially in relation to the 
novel “gendered” strategies identified here, would be helpful 
to develop better understanding around their use. It would 
be helpful for future studies to explore predictors of use in 
relation to the aggressive strategies discussed in this arti-
cle. Potentially interesting predictors could relate to female 
perpetrators’ experiences of non-consensual sexual activity 
themselves, their attitudes about gender roles, and their cul-
tural, religious, and socioeconomic backgrounds. Interviews 
with male victims and with female aggressors would also 
allow fuller understanding of the complexities of this form 
of sexual violence.
As noted at the beginning of the article, FTP cases can-
not be prosecuted under the offense of rape within the UK, 
instead being prosecuted under other “less serious” offenses. 
Justification for this approach has been based on the premise 
that compelled penetration is less harmful or detrimental to 
men than rape (see, e.g., Cowan, 2010; Home Office, 2000; 
Weare, 2018). Therefore, future research on the consequences 
of compelled penetration for men who experience it would be 
helpful in considering the need for legal reform. Similarly, 
consideration of the legal implications of, and challenges 
posed by, FTP cases, while outside of the scope of this article, 
could helpfully form the basis of the future research agenda 
in this area. Finally, future studies involving representative 
sampling would be useful for determining valid prevalence 
rates in the UK for this form of sexual violence.
This, and any future research around FTP cases, should 
not be viewed “as an attempt to upend a women’s rights 
agenda focused on male-perpetrated sexual victimization. 
[Nor should it] negate concern about other forms of abuse” 
(Stemple et al., 2016, p. 2). Indeed, it is clear that women are 
disproportionately affected by sexual violence perpetrated 
by men. However, this study highlights a need for women’s 
sexual aggression to be incorporated into the mainstream 
of research on sexual violence, as well as feminist crimino-
logical and legal research. In doing so, gender as a variable 
in cases of sexual violence should not be ignored, not least 
because “sexual aggression is not gender-neutral in its preva-
lence…or in its meanings and consequences” (Muehlenhard, 
1998, p. 43). Rather, “feminist imperatives to undertake inter-
sectional analyses, to take into account power relations, and 
to question gender-based stereotypes” (Stemple et al., 2016, 
p. 2) are needed, as well as analyses that go “beyond gen-
der alone and look at other variables that may interact with 
gender” (Muehlenhard, 1998, p. 43). This will allow a mul-
tifaceted analysis of FTP cases as a specific form of sexual 
violence to be undertaken, in a way that does not undermine 
the experiences of women as victims of sexual violence.
Acknowledgements Thanks to Eleanor Evans and Joel Porter for their 
work as research assistants on this project and to Dr. Sara Fovargue, Dr. 
Tom Webb, and Professor Majid Yar for their comments on earlier drafts 
of this article. Thanks also to the anonymous reviewers and the Associ-
ate Editor for their constructive feedback during the review process.
Funding This research was funded by a Lancaster University Faculty 
of Arts and Social Sciences Impact and Knowledge Exchange Grant 
(2016–2017).
Compliance with Ethical Standards 
Conflict of interest The author has received funding from and is em-
ployed by Lancaster University.
Ethical Approval All procedures performed in studies involving human 
participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the insti-
tutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki 
Declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards.
Informed Consent Informed consent was obtained from all individual 
participants included in the study.
 2204
 
Archives of Sexual Behavior (2018) 47:2191–2205
1 3
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Crea-
tive Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creat 
iveco 
mmons 
.org/licen 
ses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribu-
tion, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate 
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the 
Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
Allen, S., & Hawkins, A. (1999). Maternal gatekeeping: Mothers’ 
beliefs and behaviours that inhibit greater father involvement in 
family work. Journal of Marriage and Family, 61(1), 199–212.
Anderson, P. (1998). Women’s motives for sexual initiation and aggres-
sion. In P. Anderson (Eds.), Sexually aggressive women: Current 
perspectives and controversies (pp. 79–93). New York: Guilford 
Press.
Anderson, P., & Aymami, R. (1993). Reports of female initiation of 
sexual contact: Male and female differences. Archives of Sexual 
Behavior, 22(4), 335–343.
Bahadur, N. (2016). Want to know why women don’t report sexual 
assault? Retrieved from http://www.self.com/story 
/why-women 
-dont-repor 
t-sexua 
l-assau 
lt. Accessed 10 Nov 2017.
Black, M., Basile, K., Breiding, M., Smith, S., Walters, M., Merrick, M, 
… Stevens, M. (2011). The national intimate partner and sexual 
violence survey: 2010 summary report. Retrieved from http://
www.cdc.gov/viole 
ncepr 
event 
ion/pdf/nisvs 
_repor 
t2010 
-a.pdf. 
Accessed 10 Nov 2017.
Blanchard, R., Lykins, A., Wherret, D., Kuban, M., Cantor, J., Blak, T., 
… Klassen, P. E. (2009). Pedophilia, hebephilia, and the DSM-V. 
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 38, 350–355.
Bouffard, J., Bouffard, L., & Miller, H. (2016). Examining the corre-
lates of women’s use of sexual coercion: Proposing an explanatory 
model. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 31(13), 2360–2382.
Byers, E. S., & O’Sullivan, L. F. (1998). Similar but different: Men’s and 
women’s experiences of sexual coercion. In P. Anderson (Eds.), 
Sexually aggressive women: Current perspectives and controver-
sies (pp. 114–168). New York: Guilford Press.
Cowan, S. (2010). All change or business as usual? Reforming the 
law of rape in Scotland. In C. McGlynn (Eds.), Rethinking rape 
law: International and comparative perspectives (pp. 154–168). 
Oxford, UK: Routledge-Cavendish.
Davies, M. (2002). Male sexual assault victims: A selective review of 
the literature and implications for support services. Aggression and 
Violent Behavior, 7, 203–214.
Davies, M. (2013). Effects of victim gender, age, and sexuality on per-
ceptions of sexual assaults committed by women. In B. Russell 
(Ed.), Perceptions of female offenders: How stereotypes and social 
norms affect criminal justice responses (pp. 93–100). New York: 
Springer.
Davies, M., & Rogers, P. (2006). Perceptions of male victims in depicted 
sexual assaults: A review of the literature. Aggression and Violent 
Behavior, 11, 367–377.
Fisher, N. L., & Pina, A. (2013). An overview of the literature on female-
perpetrated adult male sexual victimisation. Aggression and Vio-
lent Behavior, 18(1), 54–61.
Home Office. (2000). Setting the boundaries: Reforming the law on sex 
offences (Vol. 1). Retrieved from http://webar 
chive 
.natio 
nalar 
chive 
s.gov.uk/+/http://:/www.homeo 
ffice 
.gov.uk/docum 
ents/vol1m 
ain.
pdf?view=Binar 
y. Accessed 10 Nov 2017.
Jordan, J. (2004). Beyond belief? Police, rape and women’s credibility. 
Criminal Justice, 4, 29–59.
Koss, M., Abbey, A., Campbell, R., Cook, S., Norris, J., Testa, 
M., … White, J. (2006). The Sexual Experiences Short Form 
Victimization (SES-SFV). Tucson: University of Arizona. https 
://
doi.org/10.13072 
/midss 
.279.
Krahé, B., & Berger, A. (2013). Men and women as perpetrators and 
victims of sexual aggression in heterosexual and same-sex encoun-
ters: A study of first-year college students in Germany. Aggressive 
Behavior, 39, 391–404.
Krahé, B., Berger, A., Vanwesenbeeck, I., Bianchi, G., Chliaoutakis, 
J., Fernández-Fuertes, A., … Zygadło, A. (2015). Prevalence 
and correlates of young people’s sexual aggression perpetration 
and victimisation in 10 European countries: A multi-level analy-
sis. Culture, Health and Sexuality, 17(6), 682–699. https 
://doi.
org/10.1080/13691 
058.2014.98926 
5.
Krahé, B., Waizenhöfer, E., & Möller, I. (2003). Women’s sexual 
aggression against men: Prevalence and predictors. Sex Roles, 
49(5), 219–232.
Levitt, A., & Crown Prosecution Service Equality and Diversity Unit. 
(2013). Charging perverting the course of justice and wasting 
police time in cases involving allegedly false rape and domestic 
violence allegations. Retrieved from http://www.cps.gov.uk/publi 
catio 
ns/resea 
rch/perve 
rting 
_cours 
e_of_justi 
ce_march 
_2013.pdf. 
Accessed 10 Nov 2017.
Muehlenhard, C. (1998). The importance and danger of studying sexu-
ally aggressive women. In P. Anderson (Eds.), Sexually aggressive 
women: Current perspectives and controversies (pp. 19–48). New 
York: Guilford Press.
Muehlenhard, C., & Cook, S. (1988). Men’s self-reports of unwanted 
sexual activity. Journal of Sex Research, 24, 58–72.
O’Sullivan, L. F., Byers, E. S., & Finkelman, L. (1998). A comparison of 
male and female college students’ experiences of sexual coercion. 
Psychology of Women Quarterly, 22, 177–195.
Oswald, D., & Holmgreen, L. (2013). Female sexual aggression on 
college campuses: Prevalence, correlates, and perceptions. In B. 
Russell (Ed.), Perceptions of female offenders: How stereotypes 
and social norms affect criminal justice responses (pp. 77–91). 
New York: Springer.
Rich, A. (1995). Of woman born: Motherhood as experience and institu-
tion. London: Norton.
Roberts, D. (1993). Motherhood and crime. Iowa Law Review, 79, 
95–141.
Rumney, P. (2006). False allegations of rape. Cambridge Law Journal, 
65(1), 128–158.
Sarrel, P., & Masters, W. H. (1982). Sexual molestation of men by 
women. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 11(2), 117–131.
Stemple, L., Flores, A., & Meyer, I. (2016). Sexual victimisation per-
petrated by women: Federal data reveal surprising prevalence. 
Aggression and Violent Behavior, 34, 302–311.
Struckman-Johnson, C. (1988). Forced sex on dates: It happens to men, 
too. Journal of Sex Research, 24, 234–241.
Struckman-Johnson, C., & Anderson, P. (1998). “Men do and women 
don’t”: Difficulties in researching sexually aggressive women. In P. 
Anderson (Eds.), Sexually aggressive women: Current perspectives 
and controversies (pp. 9–18). New York: Guilford Press.
Struckman-Johnson, C., & Struckman-Johnson, D. (1994). Men pres-
sured and forced into sexual experience. Archives of Sexual Behav-
ior, 23(1), 93–114.
Struckman-Johnson, C., & Struckman-Johnson, D. (1998). The dynam-
ics and impact of sexual coercion of men by women. In P. Anderson 
(Eds.), Sexually aggressive women: Current perspectives and con-
troversies (pp. 121–143). New York: Guilford Press.
Struckman-Johnson, C., Struckman-Johnson, D., & Anderson, P. 
(2003). Tactics of sexual coercion: When men and women won’t 
take no for an answer. Journal of Sex Research, 40(1), 76–86.
Tomaszewska, P., & Krahé, B. (2018). Sexual aggression victimization 
and perpetration among female and male university students in 
Poland. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 33, 571–594.
 2205
Archives of Sexual Behavior (2018) 47:2191–2205 
1 3
Weare, S. (2018). ‘Oh you’re a guy how could you be raped by a woman, 
that makes no sense’—Towards a case for legally recognising and 
labelling ‘forced to penetrate’ cases as rape. International Journal 
of Law in Context, 14(1), 110–131.
Weissman, D. (2009). Domestic violence and the postindustrial house-
hold. In E. Stark (Eds.), Violence against women in families and 
relationships (pp. 111–128). Santa Barbara, CA: ABC–CLIO.
Wells, J. (2015). “Guilty until proven innocent”: Life after a false rape 
accusation. Retrieved from http://www.teleg 
raph.co.uk/men/think 
ing-man/11912 
748/Guilt 
y-until 
-prove 
n-innoc 
ent-life-after 
-a-false 
-rape-accus 
ation 
.html. Accessed 10 Nov 2017.
