 Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=fsas20
Download by: [University of Newcastle, Australia]
Date: 06 January 2017, At: 11:32
Soccer & Society
ISSN: 1466-0970 (Print) 1743-9590 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/fsas20
The impact of referee training: reflections on
the reduction of home advantage in association
football
Tom Webb, Matt Dicks, Richard Thelwell & Alan Nevill
To cite this article: Tom Webb, Matt Dicks, Richard Thelwell & Alan Nevill (2016): The impact of
referee training: reflections on the reduction of home advantage in association football, Soccer
& Society, DOI: 10.1080/14660970.2016.1267626
To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14660970.2016.1267626
Published online: 26 Dec 2016.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 36
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
 The impact of referee training: reflections on the reduction of
home advantage in association football
Tom Webba*, Matt Dicksa, Richard Thelwella and Alan Nevillb
aDepartment of Sport and Exercise Science, University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth, UK;
bSchool of Sport, Performing Arts and Leisure, University of Wolverhampton, Walsall, UK
The effect of increased development and professionalization in elite Association
Football referee training and the relationship with reduced home advantage in
the English professional leagues were examined. The central aim was to chart
the evolution of referee training, and how these developments in referee training
have assisted in reducing home advantage. Interviews were conducted with elite
and ex-elite referees, as well as those involved in the management, training and
administration of elite referees in order to identify more recent adaptations to
elite referee training and further explain the relationship between training and
the reduction in home advantage. Findings indicate training and support is
pronounced within elite refereeing has developed appreciably over time, and has
contributed
significantly
to
an
increase
in
performance,
decision-making
correctness and subsequent decline in home advantage.
Introduction
There is a body of research that has examined the existence of home advantage
(HA) in various team sports such as baseball, ice hockey, American football and also
Association Football (soccer).1 The standard model2 offers a framework for the
study of HA with an emphasis placed on the examination of the causal processes
that connect game locations factors to performance outcomes.3 The standard model
proposes that there are four factors that may influence HA, namely travel fatigue,4
familiarity with playing surroundings,5 competition rules that may favour the home
team, and crowd effects on players, officials or both.6 Specific to the latter factor,
research
has
previously
suggested
that
audience
support
and
associated
psychological pressure can influence the decision-making process of officials.7
Recent research observations have begun to highlight a decline of HA at lower
levels of competition (divisions with smaller crowds). Nevill et al.8 argued that
crowd support in particular may have less influence over referee decisions. More-
over, these researchers identified that physiological and psychological elements
included in the training of referees may have resulted in the greater resilience of ref-
erees to crowd influence. To this end, Nevill and colleagues postulated that the
importance associated with the improvements in referee training were more influen-
tial in terms of the reduction of HA than had previously been accepted. Therefore,
further to previously established influences on HA,9 the aim of this article is to
*Corresponding author. Email: thomas.webb@port.ac.uk
© 2016 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
Soccer & Society, 2016
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14660970.2016.1267626
 examine the impact that improvements and advancements in the training of referees
may have had on a decrease in HA. In order to address this aim, we implement a
novel methodological approach for the study of referee training by bringing together
complementary lines of inquiry drawn from social science, historical enquiry and
sport psychology.10
Review of referee training literature
In order to further explain the decline in HA, consideration of the way referees have
been trained and prepared over time can assist in contextualizing this concept. The
pertinent events, milestones and occurrences derived from a variety of literature
(including scientific publications, meeting minutes, industry publications and news-
paper reports) provides a unique body of evidence to examine the changes that have
taken place in the way that referees have been trained over a prolonged period of
time. In the following sections, we begin by considering published literature across
three different periods of referee training: (i) 1886–1945; (ii) post-world war (WW)
2 until the 1980s; and (iii) 1980s until the present day.
Referee training: 1886–1945
The first guidance for umpires and referees was issued by the football association
(FA) via a memorandum in 188611 with the second generation of the rules and
instructions for referees following in 1896 through the production of ‘the Referees’
Chart’.12 FA Referees’ Committee minutes in 1913 asked for a uniform approach
towards the training of referees with the Conference of County and District Associa-
tion Referees, Secretaries and Representatives unanimously resolving that there was,
‘… the necessity of investigating and considering the present methods adopted by
the various affiliated Bodies for the training and promotion of Referees with a view
to formulating a definite scheme for adoption’.13 The Referees’ Committee rejected
the notion, arguing that ‘… it was not desirable to formulate a definite scheme’.14
Further to consideration of training procedures within the UK, the 10th annual
Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) congress held in Copen-
hagen from 31 May to 1 June 1913 featured discussions on refereeing, including a
motion proposing a refereeing specific conference. This was met with disagreement,
in particularly from the English representative who believed that ‘… in England a
referees union had been formed [but] the conditions were no better than 25 years
earlier, many referees don’t even carefully read the Laws of the Game’.15 Referees,
and their training, were an afterthought in the game at this point, yet there was a
clear understanding, within the international game, if not in England, that refereeing
was something with which governing bodies should be concerned. As the game
moved into the 1920s, 1930s and 1940s the literature is particularly sparse regarding
the training of referees. Despite the paucity of literature, there were still some perti-
nent developments that occurred during this time period, such as FIFA establishing
a Rules and Regulations committee in 1927.16
At the onset of WW2 in 1939, arguments were being made for adaptations to the
rules of the game, such as amendments to the off-side law, with the aim of increas-
ing the number of breakaways, and attacks from opposing teams. This consequently
meant that referees were being left 30 to 40 yards away from goals that they were
2
T. Webb et al.
 either allowing or disallowing17 and in turn, led to questions over the fitness of the
referees and their training.
Refereeing training, development and assessment post-WW2
After WW2 the FA was urging the Referees’ Association (RA) to focus on the
recruitment of referees and also stated that it was the ‘… duty of the Association to
find [these referees] and train them’.18 The FA organized the first of a series of con-
ferences which were designed to study the question of refereeing19 producing an
illustrated version of the Laws of the Game by 1948. Furthermore, FIFA had begun
to organize International Conferences and a Conference on Refereeing was held in
London in 1948, organized by the FA in conjunction with FIFA.20
Towards the end of the 1950s, there had been significant developments regarding
referee training. A FIFA organized Referee Instructor course took place in Macolin,
attended by an FA delegate21 and an inaugural mention is evident in the FA min-
utes22 regarding the first of what were to become annual courses for referee instruc-
tors, beginning in 1958. These courses meant that referees were being guided by
instructors that were themselves being trained for the first time to deliver educational
content to referees and by the late 1950s, the FA was giving explicit direction to ref-
erees, in respect of their game management, through these trained instructors.23
A report on referees’ courses/conferences in 1957 evidenced that there were FA
Regional Referees’ Conferences, an FA Referees’ Course at Bisham Abbey from 28
July to 2 August, a French FA Summer School for Referees from 5 to 7 July and a
FIFA Referees’ Course at Macolin from 5 to 7 August.24 A further referee’s course
was organized at Bisham Abbey in 1958, utilizing BBC film footage of matches to
assist instruction, and was intended for those that wanted to instruct new referee
candidates.25 Alongside these courses, the RA was emphasizing the importance of
attendance at physical training and instructional meetings.26
Despite these instructional courses, in 1968, referees were still undergoing mini-
mal formal training.27 The publication of the ‘Chester Report’ in 1968 recommended
that the Football League should appoint a director of referees, ‘responsible for the
training and selection of match officials’.28 The summer of 1969 saw a further
course for referee instructors administered by the FA.29 Also taking place in 1969
was the first UEFA training course for referees in Florence.30
As refereeing entered the 1970s, there was evidence that physical training was
becoming a greater consideration with sections of ‘The Football Referee’ in 1973
directly related to the fitness of referees.31
This guidance that was beginning to become more evident can be linked to the
start of a steeper decline in HA at around the same time in the 1970s (Figure 1).
Referees were starting to understand the need to be physically fit and able to keep
up with the game, but the information that would enable them to do this was not as
readily available.32
There was still work that needed to be undertaken related to referee training. The
FA, through their Referee Secretary, Reg Paine argued ‘… that the methods of train-
ing referees, and the updating of their outlook, have not progressed as they should
have done’.33 Nevertheless, there were further developments internationally relating
to the fitness of referees, at the elite level, such as the introduction of the FIFA fit-
ness test and minimum standards of fitness for FIFA referees in 1974 after concerns
over the level of fitness of the referees that officiated at the 1974 World Cup.34
Soccer & Society
3
 In addition to the improvements that have been identified in referee training,
there were further indications, through the assessment of referees in professional
football and in particular the matches that they officiated in the Football League, that
demonstrated a desire for training to develop and also for some consideration of the
impact and perceived advantage to the team that was playing at home. For example,
referee assessment reports from Preston North End matches demonstrate that there
were comments from clubs which stated that referees favoured the home team.
A report from a Preston North End match in 1958 (Figure 2) states that the ‘…
official along with his two linesmen showed marked tendencies to favour the home
team.’ At this point referee assessments were still reliant on club marks predomi-
nantly, although there was little chance for referees at the time to act or implement
any of the feedback that they were given from the clubs. In an attempt to improve
club feedback on the performance of the referee the marking sheets were changed
from the 0–4 scale which had been in operation for almost 40 years, to the 0–10
marking scale in the 1970–1971 season.
It was hoped that the introduction of the 10 point marking scale would increase
the quality of referee feedback and also the comments that were included as part of
the marking sheet. Figure 3 shows a referee assessment report from a Preston North
End match in 1971, with the report identifying that Preston North End viewed the
referee as something of a ‘homer’ who also ‘lacked control’. Whether the quality of
information for referees, and those in managerial roles at this time improved is
debateable, although it is clear that through the assessment system referees were
seen to be favouring the home side, and therefore it is reasonable to suggest that an
Figure 1.
Home advantage in goals per game (hi) by season for English Premier League
(PL), English Championship, English Division 1, English Division 2 and Scottish Premier
League (PL). Source: Adapted from Nevill et al., ‘Improved Training’, 223.
4
T. Webb et al.
 increase in the quality of physical and technical training would begin to target and
address these perceptions.
Developments in refereeing from the 1980s
The requirement for referees to be physically ready for matches was being shared
with a wider refereeing population by 1985. Instruction through ‘The Football Ref-
eree’ directing referees towards competent and specific warm-ups prior to matches
from UEFA instructors was printed following a UEFA course for ‘Top-class refer-
ees’ in Hungary in August 1982.35 1988 saw guidance published regarding fitness
and nutrition,36 with 1990 also seeing information released concerning marking
Figure 3.
Preston North End Referee Assessment Report 1971.
Figure 2.
Preston North End Referee Assessment Report 1958.
Soccer & Society
5
 guidelines to which assessors adhered related to the fitness of a Football League ref-
eree, and also some of the recommendations that FIFA expected to be followed.37
Despite this increase in fitness related information available for referees, by 1991
elite referee training was still something that was self-governed, and therefore was reli-
ant on the diligence and dedication of the individual referee to an extent.38 In the UK,
further developments in referee training were particularly prevalent as the twenty-first
century began. The appointment of sports scientists, sports psychologists and referee
coaches by the Professional Game Match Officials Limited (PGMOL) in 2001, as well
as the introduction of Prozone, which provided technical information on referees train-
ing and performance in 2002. Leading to present day, a Training and Development
Manager now works for the PGMOL to co-ordinate the development programme for all
elite match officials, demonstrate the intention to embrace and adopt scientific and tech-
nological advancements in order to keep pace with the wider game.39
With the above in mind, the purpose of this study is to further evidence the
increased provision and professionalization of training as a crucial factor in the
reduction of HA in the English professional football leagues, specifically the Premier
League. Complementary to the contextualization of the historical foundation of
referee training described that is grounded in ‘sociology’, we implement a
qualitative content analysis methodological framework based upon semi-structured
interviews of current elite level referees, trainers and administrators.
Methods
Participants
Participants were recruited via purposive sampling, involving the selection and
involvement of a particular societal group or sample because of their unique position
related to the research.40 The 18 participants were all from England. All participants
were working in the field of professional football and elite level (Premier League)
refereeing as current elite level referees, ex-elite level referees, referee assessors,
referee coaches, managers and administrators from bodies that manage and are asso-
ciated to refereeing. All participants consented to participate in the research follow-
ing favourable institutional ethical opinion after protocol submission to the requisite
ethics committee. Respondents were assured of anonymity when they were con-
tacted and therefore pseudonyms have been utilized to protect the identity of the
respondents, participant ages and the amount of time they have officiated and
worked in refereeing are also not disclosed in order to fully protect anonymity.
Interview guide
A semi-structured interview approach was adopted where an identical set of ques-
tions was employed. This ensured that there was an element of structure to each of
the interviews conducted; however, the ordering of the questions was dependent on
the responses that were given by each participant, where issues raised were explored
by the interviewer (the lead author). Discussions naturally varied during each inter-
view, due to the semi-structured nature of the interviews and the differing responses
from the respondents.
Interviews were conducted face-to-face and over the phone, this was decided by the
participant. The interviews were recorded in their entirety (no more than 75 minutes in
6
T. Webb et al.
 duration) and transcribed verbatim. Participants were given information regarding the
research, by hard copy, email or verbally, prior to being interviewed.
Data analysis
Having transcribed each of the interviews, inductive content analysis was employed
as a means of analysing the themes generated through the large amount of data that
was gathered.41 Furthermore, content analysis affords the researcher a coherent man-
ner of being presented to colleagues for peer dissemination; this type of dissemina-
tion can lead to verification of the data analysis process and give the research added
‘trustworthiness’ through the concept of ‘critical friends’.42 This cannot only verify
and inform the data collection and analysis that has already occurred but also assist
the researcher in terms of support, and suggestions that otherwise may not have been
considered.
After the initial higher and lower order themes had been identified, the tran-
scribed interview quotations were read and re-read by 2 academics trained in qualita-
tive research. Each researcher then viewed the higher and lower order themes and
independently identified and verified the phrases, quotations and themes that they
had been asked to consider. These themes and quotations were independently
grouped, compared to the initial themes that had been generated and then placed into
general dimensions above which no general meaning could be identified (Figure 4).
Figure 4.
General dimension pertaining to referee training and performance.
Soccer & Society
7
 Results and discussion
Changes in training and support from the 1980s
The participants described their perception of the training and support they had
received since being involved with refereeing. Initially it is useful to see the trans-
formation in the approach to training respondents have identified. Referees have
suggested that the particular lower order themes, such as physical training, technical
training and psychological training (Figure 2), have all contributed to improvements
in their training and performance and therefore a reduction in HA. Adam, an elite/ex
elite referee, recalls the changes in training over time compared to the training that
referees currently receive, ‘From when I started back in 1988 to now, I think
referees probably get 100 times more support and have a lot more information and
guidance than they’ve ever had’.
Adam’s comments support the historical training developments in refereeing as a
means to explain the reduction in HA outlined in this paper. The argument can be
made that these changes have elevated refereeing towards a more professionalized
mindset, ‘I think again since I retired … even that has become more and more
professional with far more analysis of games to help match officials’ progress and
develop’ (Barry, referee management and training). The professionalization of train-
ing and analysis of matches that Barry discusses can be linked to the reduction in
HA in the English leagues.43 Respondents made several references to the improve-
ment that they had witnessed in the training that referees receive.
Current referee training
The area of referee training that has seen the most rapid development concerns phys-
ical fitness. The move to full time referees at the elite level in England has certainly
helped this improvement,44 although this has been assisted with a willingness to
adapt and embrace recent advancements in the area of physiology.45 This willing-
ness to embrace change has, in turn, led to increased levels of fitness within referee-
ing, ‘I don’t think the fitness levels of referees are a problem in the slightest; they
might have been in years gone by but I think we’re at the level now where we have
taken massive strides forwards’ (Aaron, elite/ex elite referee).
It is clear that referees have embraced enhanced levels of support.46 Training is
now heavily loaded to ensure that referees are fair, unbiased and confident in their
decision-making, potentially as a consequence in the improvement of physical fit-
ness. Because of the increase in referee fitness and therefore the position a referee
takes on the field that facilitates accurate decision-making, the impact of extraneous
elements such as crowd noise on their decision-making have been reduced, if not
entirely eradicated, and as a consequence we can see an associated reduction in HA.
Some reasons for this improvement can be traced to the introduction of full time ref-
erees, the employment of full time sports scientists (since 2001) and the introduction
of the Prozone performance analysis system, used by PGMOL since 2002.
The support that referees at the elite level now receive is substantially improved.
Referees at the elite level, and further down the development pathway, now have
designated referee coaches that work with them and support their training, ‘in the
Premier League, even at semi-professional level, the majority have got coaches’
(Boris, ex elite referee and referee coach). Such initiatives have contributed to the
reduction in HA that has been observed since WW2. The professionalization of
8
T. Webb et al.
 refereeing has extended from physical training to the use of video to review
decision-making. The adaption of these practices has assisted in the reduction in HA
and in turn fostered a climate of professionalism:
We have a video review … we’ll look at some topical trends; we’ll discuss in smaller
groups and then feedback in plenary and a big group. We will also look at the week-
end’s action and highlight some good practice or maybe some areas that could have
been handled better. (Aaron, elite/ex elite referee)
Analysis of decisions made within the elite referee group ensures that good prac-
tice is encouraged.47 These areas of discussion can be worked upon by the referee
coaches and can also be given attention in the referee assessors’ report, ‘If there is
something, say positioning, then yes something will go in the debrief, something
will go in a written assessment … and the referees’ coach will also see that and they
will be able to work on that’ (Barry, referee assessor).
The addition of the referee coach is an advancement that is designed to assist ref-
eree learning. The position is particularly important due to the nature of the use of
video and the group sessions that have been outlined by the interview respondents.
The referee coaches work with the elite referees and identify areas of development
specific to individual referees. Therefore the introduction of the referee coaches is
another step towards the improved training of referees at the elite level and can help
explain the further reduction in HA from the 1980s to the present day.
The PGMOL have introduced other roles such as the training manager, which
demonstrates further evidence of the improved training afforded to referees, ‘we
have a dedicated training manager who provides our theoretical training … we also
have an extranet site which shows us clips and presentations’ (Aidan, elite/ex elite
referee). When this is related back to the reduction in HA, one can begin to see how
the changes in referee training and the support that elite referees have received over
time, manifests themselves in improved decision-making and a subsequent reduction
in HA.
Preparation and Premier League grounds
The increase in the professionalization of training has, in turn, led to a reduction in
HA in English football. However, training has also been focused on improving ref-
eree performance and decision-making at ‘big’ stadiums or in the ‘big’ matches,
although Fred indicated that it is also a result of the quality of the match official in
question:
Referees are human beings … the best ones are least influenced and are only
influenced by what they see, not by what is going on around them … the home crowd,
the score in the match, a previous decision, referees can get influenced by a number of
factors … but the best won’t be. (Brian, referee management and training)
The suggestion is that referees can be influenced, but as referees have improved
through innovations and improvements in training, the ‘best’ referees, or those that
officiate in the Premier League or within professional football are perceived to be
less likely to be influenced by factors such as the ‘home crowd’. The influence of
stadiums, larger crowds and HA is something that is recognized as a factor that
referees need to control and be aware of in order to improve performance and deci-
sion-making. Part of the training for elite referees is being able to perform and act in
the same way irrespective of surroundings, although clearly the training is important
Soccer & Society
9
 to ensure that referees control aspects such as nerves and crowd size in order to
perform effectively:
It was more intimidating when you went to Anfield or Old Trafford than when you
went to Coventry or Aston Villa, but you don’t treat it any different … it’s a little bit
different when you have 65,000 people against 25,000 but once you are actually out
there and you’ve started you’re trying to shut that off. (Ben, referee management and
training)
Referees are now trained, not only physically and technically, but also in terms
of their preparation prior to matches to ensure that when they step onto the pitch
they do not distinguish between the size or magnitude of the clubs in question, or
whether these teams are at home or away. Barry (referee management and training)
stressed that when a referee is on the pitch they do not consider the size of the game
because they are trained and taught to approach every match in the same way:
… because when you’re out on the field of play it’s all yellows and blues you don’t
think ‘oh I can’t give that decision because it’s Manchester United’. You are not even
thinking about that. No, the size of game I don’t think has any bearing, particularly
because the approach to every game should now be standard.
This sentiment was supported by Adam (elite /ex elite referee) who agreed that
‘… the message to get out to all referees is that we should treat every game the
same.’ Evidently, this is something, alongside other aspects of training which elite
referees have also been trained to improve.
The method that the elite refereeing authorities such as the PGMOL and the FA
take when considering referee training, and also the placement of referees at
matches, could also be a factor in the decline of HA over time. For example,
historically referees have been asked to continue to referee a certain team even if it
is perceived that they have had a poor match which has contained errors in decision-
making. However, this process is now more professionalized with a degree of
strategy employed in the placement of referees:
Going back to my very early years, I could referee a Football League game and if that
game didn’t go particularly well, for whatever reason, you used to get sent back there
in a couple of weeks and you kept going back there until you did have a good game
… but of course now you’ve got a body of professional referees. (Brian, referee man-
agement and training)
It appears that alongside the changes and advancements that have been
documented and discussed related to referees’ physical training, the support net-
works have seen investment and structure with the introduction of Referee Coaches,
introduced in order to facilitate and encourage referee development and learning.
Furthermore, referee managers have been considering referee preparation prior to
matches, as well as performance during matches, in order to improve decision-
making and as a consequence, also improve HA.
General summary
The central aim of this paper has been to examine the development, improvement
and professionalization of referee training in order to further explain and understand
the reported reduction in HA in the English professional football leagues.48 The
growth of refereeing since 1886 to the present day has been considered, with
10
T. Webb et al.
 specific reference to the influence that changes in training have had on the referee,
and therefore, the impact that these changes have had on the reduction in HA. The
game has changed incontrovertibly since the end of WW2, with refereeing at the
elite level in today’s game of Association Football never encountering such interest
from those within football, the media and fans.49 The decisions that a referee makes
are often subjected to persistent scrutiny, utilizing a variety of cameras that are
located throughout the stadium. The pressure for referees to get the decision right is
something which those in managerial positions are aware of, and adaptations in
training have been undertaken with this specific focus.
Given the changes in referee training, especially since the inception of the
Premier League in 1991, and more recently the introduction of professional or
‘full-time’ referees in England, but also over time, there has been a marked increase
in the level of support and training that referees receive. This support network is
pronounced within elite refereeing, and has contributed significantly to an increase
in refereeing performance, increase in decision-making accuracy and therefore a
likely reduction in HA. From this view, the current paper postulated that the increase
in the quality and availability of training for referees over time has been the signifi-
cant contributory factor to a reduction in HA.
As highlighted at the outset of this article, the standard model of HA proposes
that there are four factors that may influence HA, namely travel fatigue,50 familiarity
with playing surroundings,51 competition rules that may favour the home team, and
crowd effects on players, officials or both.52 While the present results indicate that
the HA may have lessened due to a decreased affect on officials, it is also plausible
that the advancements in the preparation and training of players may have led to a
decrease in HA. That is, the documented improvements in the training of officials as
highlighted in this paper are likely to be mirrored by improvements in the training
of players, to help teams prepare both tactically and psychologically.53 It follows
that future work is required to better understand the other causal-processes may
impact upon the prevalence of HA that go beyond the performance of officials.54
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
Notes
1.
Courneya and Carron, ‘The Home Advantage in Sport Competitions’; Koyama and
Reade, ‘Playing like the Home’; Nevill and Holder, ‘Home Advantage in Sport’;
Pollard, ‘Home Advantage in Soccer’; Schwartz and Barsky, ’The Home Advantage’.
2.
Courneya and Carron, ‘The Home Advantage in Sport Competitions’.
3.
Allen and Jones, ‘The “Home Advantage”’.
4.
Pollard, ‘Home Advantage in Soccer’; Pollard and Pollard, ‘Long Term Trends’.
5.
Pollard and Pollard, ‘Long Term Trends’.
6.
Nevill et al., ‘The Influence’; ‘Factors Associated’.
7.
Downward and Jones, ‘Effects of Crowd Size’.
8.
Nevill et al., ‘Improved Training’.
9.
For a review, see Allen and Jones, ‘The “Home Advantage”’.
10.
Cf. Uehara et al., ‘Contextualised Skill Acquisition Research’.
11.
Green, The History; Witty, ‘The Organization of Referees’.
12.
Witty, ‘The Organization of Referees’.
13.
FA Referees’ Committee minutes, July 5, 1913.
Soccer & Society
11
 14.
FA Referees Committee minutes, December 1, 1913.
15.
FIFA Annual Congress minutes, June 1, 1913.
16.
Rous, Football Worlds.
17.
Sharpe, 40 Years in Football.
18.
‘Cheltenham Conference’, 3.
19.
Lovick, The ‘Middle’ Man.
20.
Green, The History.
21.
FA Referees’ Committee minutes, May 3, 1957.
22.
FA Referees’ Committee minutes, December 9, 1957.
23.
Webb, ‘The Emergence of Training’.
24.
FA Referees’ Committee minutes, May 3, 1957; FA Referees’ Committee minutes,
September 23, 1957.
25.
Rae, Teaching the Teachers; Webb, ‘The Emergence of Training’.
26.
‘Physical Training’, 6.
27.
Hopcraft, The Football Man.
28.
Inglis, League Football.
29.
FA Instructional Committee minutes, April 22, 1970.
30.
FA Referees’ Committee minutes, April 15, 1970.
31.
Smith, Suggested Physical Fitness, 19–20.
32.
‘Physical Training for Referees’, 16.
33.
Paine, Why We Don’t Want, 14.
34.
Evans and Bellion, The Art of Refereeing.
35.
Hevizi and Szilagyi, How a Referee.
36.
Martin, Fitness and Diet.
37.
‘How Assessors Assess Fitness’.
38.
‘George Courtney Speaks at North Middlesex’.
39.
Nevill et al., ‘Improved Training’.
40.
Byrne, ‘Qualitative Interviewing’; Schutt, Investigating the Social World.
41.
Biddle et al., ‘Research Methods in Sport’.
42.
Faulkner and Sparkes, ‘Exercise as Therapy’.
43.
see Nevill et al., ‘Improved Training’.
44.
‘Football Referees Turn Professional’.
45.
Castagna et al., ‘Physiological Aspects of Soccer’; ‘Activity Profile’; Weston et al.,
‘The Effect’.
46.
Weston, ‘Match Performance’.
47.
see also Helsen and Bultynck, ‘Physical and Perceptual’; Lane et al., ‘Soccer Referee
Decision Making’.
48.
Nevill et al., ‘Improved Training’.
49.
Mason and Lovell, ‘Attitudes, Expectations and Demands’.
50.
Pollard, ‘Home Advantage in Soccer’; and Pollard and Pollard, ‘Long Term Trends’.
51.
Pollard and Pollard, ‘Long Term Trends’.
52.
Nevill et al., ‘The Influence’; ‘Factors Associated’.
53.
Thelwell et al., ‘Using Psychological Skills Training’.
54.
See Allen and Jones, ‘The “Home Advantage”’.
References
Allen, M.S., and M.V. Jones. ‘The “Home Advantage” in Athletic Competitions’. Current
Directions in Psychological Science 23, no. 1 (2014): 48–53.
BBC Sport. ‘Football Referees Turn Professional’. BBC Sport, June 13, 2001. http://news
bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/football/1386841.stm (accessed December 16, 2013).
Biddle, S.J.H., D. Markland, D. Gilbourne, N.L.D. Chatzisarantis, and A.A. Sparkes.
‘Research Methods in Sport and Exercise Psychology: Quantitative and Qualitative
Issues’. Journal of Sports Sciences 19, no. 10 (2001): 777–809.
Byrne, B. ‘Qualitative Interviewing’. In Researching Society and Culture. 2nd ed., ed.
C. Searle, 179–92. London: Sage, 2004.
12
T. Webb et al.
 Castagna, C., G. Abt, and S. D’Ottavio. ‘Activity Profile of International-level Soccer
Referees during Competitive Matches’. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research
18, no. 3 (2004): 486–90.
Castagna, C., G. Abt, and S. D’Ottavio. ‘Physiological Aspects of Soccer Refereeing Perfor-
mance and Training’. Sports Medicine 37, no. 7 (2007): 625–46.
‘Cheltenham Conference’. The Football Referee 4. Transitory Period, September 1946.
Courneya, K.S., and A.V. Carron. ‘The Home Advantage in Sport Competitions: A Literature
Review’. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology 14 (1992): 13–27.
Downward, P., and M. Jones. ‘Effects of Crowd Size on Referee Decisions: Analysis of the
FA Cup’. Journal of Sports Sciences 25 (2007): 1541–5.
Evans, R., and E. Bellion. The Art of Refereeing: Techniques and Advice for Every Soccer
Referee. London: A & C Black, 2005.
Faulkner, G., and A. Sparkes. ‘Exercise as Therapy for Schizophrenia: An Ethnographic
Study’. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology 21 (1999): 52–69.
‘George Courtney Speaks at North Middlesex’. The Football Referee 7, March 1991.
Green, G. The History of the Football Association. London: Naldrett Press, 1953.
Helsen, W., and J.B. Bultynck. ‘Physical and Perceptual-Cognitive Demands of Top-Class
Refereeing in Association Football’. Journal of Sports Sciences 22, no. 2 (2004):
179–89.
Hevizi, O., and G. Szilagyi. ‘How a Referee Should Warm Up’. The Football Referee 5, January,
1985.
Hopcraft, A. The Football Man: People and Passions in Soccer. London: Collins, 1968.
‘How Assessors Assess Fitness’. The Football Referee 2, October 1990.
Inglis, S. League Football and the Men Who Made It. London: Collins Willow, 1988.
‘International Corner’. The Football Referee, August 1938.
Koyama, M., and J.J. Reade. ‘Playing like the Home Team: An Economic Investigation into
Home Advantage in Football’. The International Journal of Sports Finance 4, no. 1
(2009): 16–41.
Lane, A.M., A.M. Nevill, N.S. Ahmad, and N. Balmer. ‘Soccer Referee Decicion Making:
“Shall I Blow the Whistle?”’ Journal of Sport Science and Medicine 5 (2006): 243–53.
Lovick, E. The, ‘Middle’ Man; Mainly for Referees but of Interest to All Followers of the
Game. Bury St. Edmonds: Groom & Son, 1963.
Martin, J. ‘Fitness and Diet’. The Football Referee 6, February 1988.
Mason, C., and G. Lovell. ‘Attitudes, Expectations and Demands of English Premier League
Association Football Referees’. Football Studies 3, no. 2 (2000): 88–102.
Nevill, A.M., N.J. Balmer, and A.M. Williams. ‘The Influence of Crowd Noise and Experi-
ence upon Refereeing Decisions in Football’. Psychology of Sport and Exercise 3 (2002):
261–72.
Nevill, A.M., and R.L. Holder. ‘Home Advantage in Sport’. Sports Medicine 28 (1999):
221–36.
Nevill, A.M., S.M. Newell, and S. Gale. ‘Factors Associated with Home Advantage in Eng-
lish and Scottish Soccer Matches’. Journal of Sports Sciences 14, no. 2 (1996): 181–6.
Nevill, A., T. Webb, and A. Watts. ‘Improved Training of Football Referees and the Decline
in Home Advantage Post-WW2’. Psychology of Sport and Exercise 14 (2013): 220–7.
Paine, R. ‘Why We Don’t Want Professional Referees’. The Football Referee, February
1973.
‘Physical Training and Instructional Meetings’. The Football Referee 3, no. 5. New Series,
May 1957.
‘Physical Training for Referees’. The Football Referees, December 1974.
Pollard, R. ‘Home Advantage in Soccer: A Retrospective Analysis’. Journal of Sports
Sciences 4 (1986): 237–48.
Pollard, R., and G. Pollard. ‘Long Terms Trends in Home Advantage in Professional Team
Sports in North America and England (1876–2003)’. Journal of Sports Sciences 23
(2005): 337–50.
Rae, V. ‘Teaching the Teachers: Referee Course at Bisham Abbey’. The Football Referee 11,
no. 11, November 1958.
Rous, S. Football Worlds: A Lifetime in Sport, Newton Abbot: Readers Union, 1978.
Soccer & Society
13
 Schutt, R.S. Investigating the Social World: The Process and Practice of Research. 6th ed.
London: Pine Forge Press, 2009.
Schwartz, B., and S.F. Barsky. ‘The Home Advantage’. Social Forces 55 (1977): 641–61.
Sharpe, I. 40 Years in Football, London: The Sportsmans Book club, 1954.
Smith, I. ‘Suggested Physical Fitness Test for Referees’. The Football Referee, August 1973.
Thelwell, R.C., I.A. Greenlees, and N.J. Weston. ‘Using Psychological Skills Training to
Develop Soccer Performance’. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology 18, no. 3 (2006):
254–70.
Uehara, L., C. Button, M. Falcous, and K. Davids. ‘Contextualised Skill Acquisition
Research: A New Framework to Study the Development of Sport Expertise’. Physical
Education and Sport Pedagogy 21 (2016): 153–68. doi:10.1080/17408989.2014.924495.
Webb, T. ‘The Emergence of Training and Assessment for Referees in Association Football:
Moving from the Side-Lines’. The International Journal of the History of Sport 31, no. 9
(2014): 1081–97.
Weston, M. ‘Match Performances of Soccer Referees: The Role of Sports Science’. Move-
ment & Sport Sciences – Science & Motricité 87 (2015): 113–7.
Weston, M., S. Bird, W. Helsen, A. Nevill, and C. Castagna. ‘The Effect of Match Standard
and Referee Experience on the Objective and Subjective Match Workload of English Pre-
mier League Referees’. Journal of Science and Medicine in Sport 9, no. 3 (2006):
256–62.
Witty, J.R. ‘The Organization of Referees’. In Association Football, Volume 1, ed. A.H.
Fabian and G. Green, 197–202. London: Caxton, 1960.
14
T. Webb et al.
