 1
Perspective 
December 2016; Vol. 26(5):e2651657
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.17061/phrp2651657
www.phrp.com.au
Abstract
Mosquito-borne disease is an annual problem in Australia, with endemic 
pathogens such as Ross River virus infecting thousands of people each year. 
The recent emergence of Zika virus in South America and the Pacific, together 
with ongoing outbreaks of dengue viruses in Southeast Asia, generated great 
community interest in the most effective strategies to avoid mosquito bites. 
Large-scale mosquito control programs are not common in Australia and are 
limited in New South Wales (NSW). 
The use of topical insect repellents is a key recommendation by health 
authorities to prevent mosquito-borne disease. All products sold in Australia 
purporting to repel mosquitoes must be registered with the Australian 
Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority. Despite around 100 
commercial products registered as repelling mosquitoes, there are relatively 
few active ingredients used across these formulations. The most common are 
diethyltoluamide (DEET), picaridin, p-menthane-3,8-diol (PMD) and a range of 
plant-derived products (e.g. melaleuca, eucalyptus, citronella oils). Research 
has shown that each of these active ingredients varies in the duration of 
protection provided against biting mosquitoes. 
Recommendations by health authorities are informed by this research, 
but inconsistencies between recommendations and available repellent 
formulations and their concentration of active ingredients can cause 
confusion in the community. There are conflicts between the data resulting 
from scholarly research, marketing promotion by manufacturers and 
recommendations provided by overseas health authorities. A review was 
undertaken of NSW Health’s current recommendations on choosing and using 
insect repellents, taking into consideration recent research and currently 
registered topical repellents. 
A review of recommendations on the safe and 
effective use of topical mosquito repellents
Cameron E Webba,b,d and Isabel MR Hessc
a Medical Entomology, NSW Health Pathology, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, Australia
b Marie Bashir Institute for Infectious Diseases and Biosecurity, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia
c Health Risk Policy Unit, Health Protection NSW, NSW Health, Sydney, Australia
d Corresponding author: cameron.webb@health.nsw.gov.au
Article history
Publication date: December 2016
Citation: Webb CE, Hess IMR. A review of 
recommendations on the safe and effective 
use of topical mosquito repellents. Public 
Health Res Pract. 2016;26(5):e2651657. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.17061/phrp2651657
Key points
• Topical insect repellents are 
recommended by health authorities 
to avoid mosquito bites and prevent 
mosquito-borne disease
• Products purporting to repel 
mosquitoes must be registered by the 
Australian Pesticides and Veterinary 
Medicines Authority
• Safe and effective active ingredients 
in topical repellent formulations are 
diethyltoluamide (DEET), picaridin and 
p-menthane-3,8-diol (PMD)
• The provision of recommendations 
on the use of commercially available 
formulations in light of current research 
is critical to the effectiveness of topical 
insect repellents
 Public Health Research & Practice December 2016; Vol. 26(5):e2651657 • doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.17061/phrp2651657
NSW Health topical mosquito repellent recommendations
2
Introduction
In addition to their nuisance-biting impacts, mosquitoes 
have the potential to transmit a range of pathogens 
of medical importance in Australia. Ross River virus, 
Barmah Forest virus, Murray Valley encephalitis virus, 
Kunjin virus and dengue viruses are all mosquito-borne 
pathogens associated with human disease in various 
regions of Australia.1 The threat of small local outbreaks of 
chikungunya virus and Zika virus, triggered by returning 
travellers, is of increasing concern.
The most commonly reported mosquito-borne disease 
in New South Wales (NSW) is caused by Ross River virus, 
with infection causing an illness typified by rash, fever, 
headache and joint pain. The severity of these symptoms 
is often debilitating and can persist for many weeks or 
months.2 It is difficult to predict outbreaks of Ross River 
virus3 and there is no vaccine. The largest outbreak of this 
disease in almost 20 years was reported in 2015, with a 
total of 9551 cases reported from across Australia, 81.8% 
of those from Queensland and NSW.4 
Surveillance of mosquito populations and activity 
of mosquito-borne pathogens throughout NSW informs 
decisions by local health authorities to issue public 
health warnings above and beyond the routine seasonal 
mosquito-borne disease awareness programs. Promoting 
personal protection measures, including avoiding 
mosquito habitats, limiting outdoor activities at times of 
the day when mosquitoes are most active and covering 
up exposed skin with clothing, remain at the core of 
public health messages. The use of topical insect 
repellents is one of the strongest recommendations by 
health authorities.5
Although insect repellents have been shown to 
provide protection against biting mosquitoes, for this 
approach to be effective at preventing mosquito-borne 
disease, it is important that health authorities provide 
recommendations on safe and effective use of these 
products.6,7 Health authorities across Australia provide 
general information on recommended active ingredients, 
but the advice often does not reflect the wide range of 
commercial repellents available, the differences between 
them and the correct use of the formulations.5 
In 2016, NSW Health reviewed the recommended 
personal protection measures that were included in 
fact sheets, media releases and other public health 
communications. This review included revising the 
insect repellent information provided in light of currently 
available commercial formulations and recently published 
mosquito repellent research.
Mosquito repellent formulations 
and their active ingredients
All products claiming to provide protection from biting 
mosquitoes must be approved and registered by the 
Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority 
(APVMA), which assesses their effectiveness and safety. 
There are currently around 100 individual products 
registered as mosquito repellents, including topical insect 
repellents, spatial repellents (e.g. mosquito repellent wrist 
bands and patches) and insecticides (e.g. mosquito 
coils, sticks and plug-in devices).
Spatial repellents such as mosquito coils are used 
commonly and, although there is evidence that they 
provide some protection against biting mosquitoes, 
their role in reducing disease is less well studied.6,7 The 
growing community interest in spatial repellents and new 
insecticide technologies warrants further investigation. 
However, for the purpose of this review, we are only 
considering topical insect repellents.
Once registered, repellents are labelled with active 
ingredient(s) and their concentration, and recommended 
reapplication times and safety warnings. However, this 
information is not consistent across formulation types, 
including those containing the same active ingredient(s). 
This is likely to cause confusion among consumers, 
and the lack of definitive information means local 
health authorities are left to make general statements 
about repellent use (e.g. “Always check the label for 
reapplication times” or “Always follow the product label 
instructions”). This deficiency in labelling of topical insect 
repellents has been identified by the US Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA). The EPA has introduced a 
program to include a “repellency awareness graphic”, 
based on standard scientific testing, on topical repellent 
formulations to help consumers easily assess repellency 
time for biting arthropods.8 A similar program here in 
Australia would be useful.
Diethyltoluamide (DEET)
One of the most widely recommended mosquito 
repellents internationally is N,N-diethyl-3-
methylbenzamide (commonly known as diethyltoluamide, 
or DEET). There are many and varied registered DEET 
formulations available, ranging from less than 10% 
through to 80% concentration. There is a considerable 
body of scientific work supporting their safety and 
effectiveness7,9, with laboratory and field investigations 
demonstrating that DEET effectively protects against a 
range of nuisance-biting and vector mosquito species 
in Australia.10
Picaridin
Picaridin has been shown in laboratory and field 
investigations to provide protection from biting 
mosquitoes.9,10 Registered formulations range in 
concentration from 9% to 20%. Alongside DEET, it 
has been widely recommended by health authorities 
internationally. Picaridin-based formulations are generally 
considered cosmetically more pleasant to use and, 
in Australia, this active ingredient is currently more 
commonly available than lower-dose (<20%) DEET-based 
commercial repellent formulations.
 Public Health Research & Practice December 2016; Vol. 26(5):e2651657 • doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.17061/phrp2651657
NSW Health topical mosquito repellent recommendations
3
Oil of lemon eucalyptus (p-menthane-3,8-diol, 
PMD)
Repellent formulations containing p-menthane-3,8-diol 
(PMD) are becoming widely available and, given their 
effectiveness11,12, are increasingly included in lists of 
recommended products.13 However, this product should 
not be confused with eucalyptus-based essential oil 
formulations, which generally do not provide long periods 
of protection against biting mosquitoes.14 In Australia, 
PMD is registered as “extract of lemon eucalyptus, 
being acid modified oil of lemon eucalyptus (Corymbia 
citriodora)” as it is a byproduct of the hydrodistillation 
process rather than the essential oil itself. It is available 
in 26–40% formulations and, although not tested widely 
in Australia, laboratory studies have demonstrated that a 
30% PMD formulation provided comparable duration of 
protection against biting mosquitoes to low-dose (5–10%) 
DEET- and picaridin-based repellents.11,14 Following the 
2016 review, PMD is now included in the list of repellents 
recommended by NSW Health.15
Botanical extracts
A number of registered topical mosquito repellents 
contain plant-derived active ingredients including one or 
more of citronella, melaleuca, eucalyptus, leptospermum 
and lavender extracts. These formulations typically range 
from <1% through to approximately 8.5%, representing 
relatively low active ingredient concentrations compared 
with other repellents. Although there is evidence that 
repellents containing plant-derived extracts will repel 
biting insects for short periods14, they would need to be 
reapplied far more frequently that DEET-, picaridin- or 
PMD-based repellents to provide comparable protection.5
Health and safety considerations 
of mosquito repellents
There are inconsistencies in the advice included on 
registered labels in Australia. Although some provide 
specific age-related warnings on repellent use, others 
only contain general warnings about use on children, 
so it is difficult for health authorities to be specific in 
warnings about particular active ingredients and their 
concentrations.
There is often a perception that DEET is unpleasant 
to use or may pose a health risk. However, a number of 
studies that investigated health risks associated with use 
of topical DEET-based repellents found that, if used as 
recommended, it poses minimal health risk.9,16 Although 
the safety of picaridin has not been investigated to 
the same extent as DEET, it is also considered a safe 
product to use.17 DEET and picaridin are considered 
safe to use for pregnant and breastfeeding women.18,19 
Recommendations are included on registered products 
safe for use on children older than 3 months. 
There are some inconsistencies relating to the 
recommended use of PMD by health authorities 
internationally. The US Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) recommends PMD-based repellents 
not be used on children younger than 3 years.19 However, 
in Australia, registered products carry an advisory from 
the APVMA not to use the repellent on children younger 
than 12 months. A review of recommendations by NSW 
Health concluded that there was no evidence to support 
recommendations differing from the advisory registered 
by the APVMA.
Botanical-based repellents are often perceived as 
being ‘natural’ and may be preferred by many in the 
community because of perceived risks associated with 
other topical repellents.14 However, essential oils have the 
potential to cause adverse skin reactions20, an important 
consideration when discouraging use of unregistered 
repellents, or ‘homemade’ mixtures, that may contain 
relatively high doses of these products.
Effective use of mosquito 
repellents
Irrespective of the inherent effectiveness of active 
ingredients in mosquito repellents, the best bite protection 
is achieved by thorough application to all exposed skin. 
Recommendations about how to use topical repellents 
are typically absent from public health messages.5 
However, following the NSW Health review, more specific 
information was provided in its fact sheet, highlighting 
the need to follow label instructions and reapplication 
requirements following swimming, vigorous exercise and 
during hot weather.14 
Summary
Regardless of future changes to mosquito-borne disease 
risks, topical mosquito repellents will remain an essential 
component of recommended personal protection 
measures. Although it is unlikely there will be substantial 
changes in the active ingredients used in registered 
mosquito repellents in Australia, the landscape of 
commercial formulations will continue to evolve. Together 
with the emergence of new technologies for mosquito bite 
prevention (i.e. clip-on insecticide devices or insecticide-
treated clothing), it will be important that local health 
authorities routinely review academic studies of mosquito 
repellent effectiveness and safety, particularly for 
picaridin- and PMD-based repellents, to provide the most 
informed public health messages to reduce the burden of 
mosquito-borne disease.
Acknowledgements
This manuscript was prepared with the support of 
the Marie Bashir Institute for Infectious Diseases and 
 Public Health Research & Practice December 2016; Vol. 26(5):e2651657 • doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.17061/phrp2651657
NSW Health topical mosquito repellent recommendations
4
Copyright: 
© 2016 Webb and Hess. This article is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International Licence, 
which allows others to redistribute, adapt and share this work non-commercially provided they attribute the work and any adapted version of it 
is distributed under the same Creative Commons licence terms. See: www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/
Biosecurity and the National Health and Medical 
Research Council Centre of Research Excellence in 
Emerging Infectious Diseases.
Competing interests
NSW Health Pathology has been commissioned by a 
range of companies that develop and market insect 
repellents to test mosquito repellent formulations, and 
to provide expert advice about mosquito biology and 
mosquito-borne disease risks. No external funding was 
received from these companies for the preparation of 
this manuscript. 
Author contributions
Both authors contributed to the paper’s conception 
and made substantial intellectual contributions to 
draft versions.
References
1. Webb CE, Doggett SL, Russell RC. A guide to the 
mosquitoes of Australia. Melbourne: CSIRO Publishing; 
2016. 
2.  Claflin SB, Webb CE. Ross River virus: many vectors 
and unusual hosts make for an unpredictable pathogen. 
PLoS Pathog. 2015;11(9):e1005070.
3. Jacups SP, Whelan PI, Currie BJ. Ross River virus and 
Barmah Forest virus infections: a review of history, 
ecology, and predictive models, with implications for 
tropical northern Australia. Vector-Borne Zoonotic Dis. 
2008;8(2):283–97.
4. Australian Government Department of Health. National 
Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System. Number of 
notifications of Ross River virus infection, received from 
state and territory health authorities in the period of 1991 
to 2015 and year-to-date notifications for 2016. Canberra: 
Department of Health; 2016 [cited 2016 Aug 28] [about 
2 screens]. Available from: www9.health.gov.au/cda/
source/rpt_4.cfm
5. Webb CE. Are we doing enough to promote the 
effective use of mosquito repellents? Med J Aust. 
2015;202(3):128–9.
6. Debboun M, Strickman D. Insect repellents and 
associated personal protection for a reduction in human 
disease. Med Vet Etomol. 2013;27(1):1–9.
7. Goodyer LI, Croft AM, Frances SP, Hill N, Moore SJ, 
Onyango SP, Debboun M. Expert review of the evidence 
base for arthropod bite avoidance. J Trav Med. 
2010;17(3):182–92.
8. EPA. US Environmental Protection Agency. Repellency 
awareness graphic. Washington, DC: Environmental 
Protection Agency; 2016 [cited 2016 Jun 8] [about 4 
screens]. Available from: www.epa.gov/insect-repellents/
repellency-awareness-graphic
9. Antwi FB, Shama LM, Peterson RK. Risk assessments 
for the insect repellents DEET and picaridin. 
Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2008;51(1):31–6.
10. Frances SP, Waterson DG, Beebe NW, Cooper RD. Field 
evaluation of repellent formulations containing deet 
and picaridin against mosquitoes in Northern Territory, 
Australia. J Med Entom. 2004;41(3):414–7.
11. Frances SP, Rigby LM, Chow WK. Comparative laboratory 
and field evaluation of repellent formulations containing 
DEET and lemon eucalyptus oil against mosquitoes 
in Queensland, Australia. J Am Mosq Control Assoc. 
2014;30(1):65–7.
12. Trigg JK, Hill N. Laboratory evaluation of a eucalyptus-
based repellent against four biting arthropods. 
Phytother Res. 1996;10(4):313–6.
13. Carroll SP, Loye J. PMD, a registered botanical mosquito 
repellent with deet-like efficacy. J A Mosq Control Assoc. 
2006;22(3):507–14.
14. Webb CE. Insect repellents derived from Australian 
plants and implications for public health messages. In: 
Insect repellents handbook; Debboun M, Frances SP, 
Strickman D, editors. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2014. 
213–30 pp.
15. NSW Government. Health. Sydney: NSW Health; 2015. 
Mosquitoes are a health hazard; 2016 Apr [cited 
2016 Jun 8] [about 5 screens]. Available from: 
www.health.nsw.gov.au/Infectious/factsheets/Pages/
mosquito.aspx
16. Goodyer L, Behrens RH. Short report: The safety 
and toxicity of insect repellents. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 
1998;59(2):323–4.
17. Charlton NP, Murphy LT, Parker Cote JL, Vakkalanka JP. 
The toxicity of picaridin containing insect repellent 
reported to the National Poison Data System. 
Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2016;54(8):655–8.
18. Koren G, Matsui D, Bailey B. DEET-based insect 
repellents: safety implications for children and pregnant 
and lactating women. CMAJ. 2003;169(3):209–12.
19. Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC 24/7: 
saving lives, protecting people. Atlanta, GA: Centres for 
Disease Control and Prevention; 2016. Insect repellent 
use & safety; 2015 Mar [cited 2016 June 8] [about 3 
screens]. Available from: www.cdc.gov/westnile/faq/
repellent.html
20. Hammer KA, Carson CF, Riley TV, Nielsen JB. A review 
of the toxicity of Melaleuca alternifolia (tea tree) oil. 
Food Chem Toxicol. 2006;44(5):616–25.
