 Epidemiologic Evidence to Guide the Understanding and Prevention of Gun
Violence
Daniel W. Webster*, Magdalena Cerdá, Garen J. Wintemute, and Philip J. Cook
* Correspondence to Dr. Daniel W. Webster, Center for Gun Policy and Research, Department of Health Policy and Management, Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health, 24 North Broadway, Hampton House 593, Baltimore, MD 21205 (e-mail: dwebster@jhsph.edu).
Gunfire from assaults, suicides, and unintentional shootings exacts an enormous burden on public health glob-
ally. The epidemiologic reviews in this special issue enhance our understanding of various forms of gun violence,
inform interventions, and help chart directions for future research. The available science, however, is limited to an-
swer many important questions necessary for mounting successful efforts to reduce gun violence. Certain data are
lacking, and there are numerous analytical challenges to deriving unbiased estimates of policy impacts. Significant
investments in research over the long term are warranted to answer questions central to successful prevention of
gun violence.
Abbreviation: IPV, intimate partner violence.
Firearms violence exacts an enormous burden on the public’s
health. Annual rates of firearm homicide in 2013 were stag-
geringly high in certain countries in Central America (e.g.,
El Salvador and Guatemala, 52.4 and 21.82 per 100,000 pop-
ulation, respectively); South America (e.g., Colombia and
Venezuela, 38.1 and 32.7 per 100,000 population, respec-
tively); and Sub-Saharan Africa (e.g., Lesotho and Swazi-
land, 13.5 and, 8.46 per 100,000 population, respectively).
The high levels of violence involving firearms in these re-
gions often have destabilizing effects on entire countries,
threatening civil society as well as public safety. Most high-
income Western democracies have comparatively low rates of
firearm homicide. The United States is the exception; its fire-
arm homicide rate of 3.55 per 100,000 population in 2013 is
many times higher than that of any other such nation and is
comparable to those of Nicaragua (4.86 per 100,000 popula-
tion), Palestine (3.09 per 100,000 population), South Africa
(3.65 per 100,000 population), and Uganda (3.71 per 100,000
population) (1).
Gun ownership is positively associated with suicide risks
at both the household level and the state level, which is likely
related to differences in the lethality of means of intentional
self-harm (2). In the United States and many other countries,
firearm suicides outnumber firearm homicides by a large mar-
gin (3). Although more challenging to measure and track than
firearm-related deaths, mental and physical nonlethal trauma
from gun violence is no less important than is the death toll
from the use of firearms.
The role of firearms in violence is debated passionately
across political, ideological, and cultural divides as well as
among researchers. Synthesizing the epidemiologic evidence
will not settle these debates but can enhance our ability to an-
swer important questions and inform efforts to prevent fire-
arm violence. This special issue of Epidemiologic Reviews
presents 9 articles that examine the evidence on some of
these important questions and critiques the methods by
which that evidence was obtained.
One important question is whether the relationship be-
tween firearm access and suicide risk is causal or a function
of confounders, measured or unmeasured. In their paper,
Miller et al. (4) assess whether unmeasured confounding
might account for the repeatedly observed positive association
between household access to firearms and risk for firearm sui-
cide. In essence, they conduct a global test of the “it’s not the
gun” hypothesis. Relying on data from 4 case-control studies
that met stringent selection criteria, Miller et al. determine
the properties such a confounder would need to have to explain
an apparent association between firearms and suicide if no in-
dependent association existed. Such a confounder, they find,
would need to be at least as strong a risk factor for suicide as
are major depression and substance use disorders. It would also
need to be implausibly more prevalent in case (suicide) house-
holds than in control households; the imbalance would need to
be larger, by an order of magnitude, than has been observed for
any other risk factor. The possibility that such a confounder
could exist undetected is vanishingly small.
Three articles touch on the topic of substance use and risks
connected to firearms. In the broadest of all reviews, Chen
and Wu (5) present a narrative review on the relationship be-
tween different types of substance use (i.e., alcohol, tobacco,
1
Epidemiol Rev 2016;38:1–4
Epidemiologic Reviews
© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.
All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.
Vol. 38, 2016
DOI: 10.1093/epirev/mxv018
Advance Access publication:
February 10, 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/epirev/article-abstract/38/1/1/2754874 by guest on 04 June 2019
 marijuana, cocaine/crack, drugs in general) and 4 types of be-
haviors or exposures involving firearms (access, unsafe han-
dling, carrying, and violence). Branas et al. (6) conducted a
review and meta-analysis on the relationship between alcohol
use and firearms, while McGinty et al. (7) examined the rela-
tionship between use of controlled substances and violence.
Most studies report positive bivariate associations between
substance abuse and firearm-related risks. Some may assume
that there is acausal relationship; however, confounding arose
as an important concern across the 3 reviews. Researchers
have commonly considered youth gun carrying to be a part
of a set of risky behaviors that include illicit drug and alcohol
use but also include other deviant behaviors (e.g., stealing,
fighting) and criminal social networks. Substance use, illegal
gun carrying, and violence may result from other common
personality traits or environmental conditions. Indeed, in
many cases, associations disappeared or showed a marked
decrease with adjustment for psychiatric disorders, especially
antisocial personality disorder as noted in the reviews by
Chen and Wu (5) and McGinty et al. (7).
Important concerns about causal inference pervade research
in this area. In addition to inadequate controls for potential
confounders, there was a limited numberof prospective studies
that appropriately considered the temporal relationship be-
tween substance use and gun-related behaviors. Those studies
that were prospective included long lag periods between mea-
sures of substance use and violence, making it difficult to
address intervening sources of time-dependent confounding
and to assess potential psychopharmacological effects of alco-
hol and controlled substances. A more robust and potentially
causal association may exist between use of controlled sub-
stances and suicide, as well as between selling illicit drugs
and perpetration of gun violence.
Proving cause and effect, in the case of substance abuse
and gun violence, may be less important for some interven-
tions than others. If substance abuse and selling illicit drugs
are highly correlated with gun violence, policies to prevent ac-
cess to firearms by substance abusers and drug sellers may re-
duce gun violence even if the underlying risk is more tied to
antisocial personality disorders that cannot be practically iden-
tified when screening individuals applying to purchase orcarry
concealed firearms.
Unfortunately, few data exist on the impact that interventions
directed at substance abuse have on firearm-related activities.
Only 1 study across the 3 reviews evaluated this question.
A clinical trial found that a collaborative care intervention
that targeted substance abuse along with post-traumatic stress
syndrome and depression among adolescents admitted to a
US level I trauma center for injuries significantly lowered
risk of weapon carrying at 12 months after injury (8). There
have been no studies of the impact that firearm disqualifica-
tions based on indicators of substance abuse, such as prior
driving convictions or substance use-related misdemeanor
convictions, might have had on firearm violence. These re-
views suggest that studies designed to assess the specific re-
lationship between substance use and firearm violence, using
a prospective design and accounting for key confounders, as
well as evaluations of policies that disqualify individuals
from purchasing or possessing firearms based on substance
use history, are sorely needed.
Most violence involves friends or associates, intimate part-
ners, or family members, which is to say members of the
same social network. There are a variety of mechanisms by
which one’s social network may influence involvement in se-
rious violence: Growing up in a violent home may provide
the children with a model for their own subsequent behavior.
Violence in an intimate partnership may be chronic and in
some cases escalating. Gangs may engender serious violence
by providing members with weapons and social norms that
promote violence. Although there is an extensive literature
on the “cycle of violence” and other social contagion pro-
cesses, there have been very few studies that explore the par-
ticular mechanisms associated with gun violence. Tracy et al.
(9) review the peer review literature since 1996. Of these re-
ports, only 3 focus specifically on gun violence, and all of
those concern co-offending networks. Those studies, which
utilize formal social-network-analysis methods, find that
the likelihood of gun victimization or perpetration is pre-
dicted by network distance from individuals who use guns.
This interesting result suggests the potential of social network
analysis to predict gun violence and, hence, guide prevention
efforts. The review article serves to identify a vital opportu-
nity for future research, which has largely neglected to focus
on the dynamics of social transmission of gun violence
despite its predominant role in homicide.
Intimate partner violence is another context in which fire-
arms access can determine the odds of lethal outcomes. Zeoli
et al. (10) conducted a narrative review on the risks that firearm
access poses for intimate partner violence (IPV) and the impact
of interventions designed to reduce firearm violence in inti-
mate relationships. In 2013, 50% of IPV homicides in the
United States were committed with firearms (11). Studies on
the risk of IPV posed by firearm access are mostly cross-
sectional, making it impossible to conclude whether firearm
access led to abuse. Measurement of firearm access by the per-
petrator also poses an important challenge. Among those in
abusive relationships, perpetrator access to firearms is associ-
ated with IPV severity and lethality. Intervention studies show
evidence that firearm prohibitions for individuals with domes-
tic violence restraining orders are associated with reductions in
intimate partner homicide. In contrast, firearm prohibitions for
convictions for domestic violence misdemeanor crimes and
laws that authorize law enforcement officers to confiscate fire-
arms from the IPV scene were not associated with intimate
partner homicide risks. There have been few data collected
on the enforcement of these laws or research on the effects
of enhanced enforcement on the risk of IPV involving
firearms.
Another article in this special issue takes on the ambitious
task of reviewing research on the effects of gun laws globally,
presenting a systematic review of data from 130 studies of
gun laws in 10 countries published from 1950 to 2014 (12).
Unfortunately, the bulk of these studies had serious limita-
tions that make it difficult to draw unequivocal conclusions.
Deriving unbiased estimates of the effects of gun laws is a
particularly challenging undertaking because of potential bi-
ases from selection and historical confounds. Decisions
about whether or not to enact gun laws may depend on levels
and trends in gun violence as well as on levels of gun own-
ership. Nearly all of the studies reviewed are ecological and
2
Webster et al.
Epidemiol Rev 2016;38:1–4
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/epirev/article-abstract/38/1/1/2754874 by guest on 04 June 2019
 typically do not isolate the target of the firearm policy with
the outcome being measured. For example, background
check and licensing requirements for purchasing or carrying
firearms should have different effects on individuals’ capac-
ity for violence depending on whether they meet legal re-
quirements for purchasing or carrying firearms, but studies
examine only aggregate levels of homicide or other violent
events.
Santaella-Tenorio et al. (12) note these challenges and oth-
ers pertinent to evaluations of gun laws. Many are illustrated in
the evolution of studies of so-called “shall issue” laws that
loosened or eliminated impediments to legal carrying of con-
cealed firearms. Initial studies suggested that shall issue laws
reduced homicides, while subsequent studies identified a num-
ber of errors in the data and in the analyses. Once those errors
were corrected, no effects of shall issue laws on homicides
were evident. A few areas showed some consistency with rea-
sonably strong methods. In addition to the protective effects of
domestic violence restraining order laws, child access preven-
tion laws requiring gun owners to make guns inaccessible to
unsupervised youth are associated with reduced rates of fire-
arm suicides and unintentional shooting deaths. Some gun
laws may be too weak or have important gaps that prevent
their effectiveness. For example, the US federal law requiring
background checks for firearm purchases that applied only to
sales by federally licensed gun dealers did not reduce homicide
rates, but a study of the repeal of a Missouri law requiring
background checks and purchaser licensing for all handgun
sales suggests that the law had suppressed firearm homicide
rates before its repeal. More comprehensive firearms regula-
tions adopted at the national level also showed promise in low-
ering homicide rates, although forecasting a counterfactual for
what would have occurred absent the new regulations is partic-
ularly challenging with national studies.
Two systematic reviews will facilitate efforts by clinicians to
prevent firearm violence as part of their patient care. Roszko
et al. (13) provide an overview of such prevention efforts.
They review 53 articles on clinician attitudes toward and actual
adoption of practices that encourage firearm safety among pa-
tients during health-care delivery. They find that such practices
are uncommon, even when clearly indicated. Several specific
and modifiable factors are associated with failure to adopt such
practices, and the available evidence suggests that a variety of
training and educational approaches can improve clinician per-
formance. Their particular focus is on 12 additional studies, in-
cluding 6 randomized trials, of interventions to increase safe
firearm behavior among patients. Interventions that focused
only on firearms, rather than including firearms among other
topics, showed evidence of effectiveness.
Rowhani-Rahbar et al. (14) address safe storage inter-
ventions, based on results for 4 randomized trials and 3
quasi-experimental studies. Three interventions provided a
free storage device. All 3 yielded beneficial results, even
though they differed substantially in design and implementa-
tion. Of the 4 interventions that did not provide free storage
devices—including those that offered discounts or other in-
centives to purchase such devices—only 1 showed positive
effects. This article includes an excellent discussion of the
theoretical considerations that should inform future efforts
to encourage safe practices related to firearm storage and use.
Both papers emphasize the need for additional, and more
rigorous, research on the best ways to incorporate firearm
violence prevention efforts into many aspects of health care.
Given increasing support for such efforts by medical profes-
sional organizations and others (15), that recommendation is
very timely.
We believe that the research reviewed and critiqued in this
special issue will be valuable to researchers, practitioners,
and policymakers as they seek to better understand and pre-
vent gun violence and injury. Given the magnitude of this
public health problem, interventions should be informed by
the best available research. Importantly, we should strive to
advance the science by addressing the gaps and limitations
described above and in these reviews. As with any area
with the scope and complexity of gun violence, this will re-
quire a greater investment of resources over the long term
than have been devoted to date.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Author affiliations: Center for Gun Policy and Research,
Department of Health Policy and Management, Johns Hop-
kins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Mary-
land (Daniel Webster); Department of Epidemiology,
Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University,
New York, New York (Magdalena Cerdá); Sanford School
of Public Policy, Durham, North Carolina (Philip Cook); Vi-
olence Prevention Research Program, School of Medicine,
University of California at Davis, Sacramento, California
(Garen Wintemute).
Conflict of interest: none declared.
REFERENCES
1. Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, University of
Washington. GBD compare. http://vizhub.healthdata.org/
gbd-compare/. Published 2013. Accessed December 8, 2015.
2. Miller M, Azrael D, Barber C. Suicide mortality in the United
States: the importance of attending to method in understanding
population-level disparities in the burden of suicide. Annu Rev
Public Health. 2012;33:393–408.
3. Richardson EG, Hemenway D. Homicide, suicide, and
unintentional firearm fatality: comparing the United States with
other high-income countries, 2003. J Trauma. 2011;70(1):
238–243.
4. Miller M, Swanson SA, Azrael D. Are we missing
something pertinent? A bias analysis of unmeasured
confounding in the firearm-suicide literature. Epidemiol Rev.
2016;38:62–69.
5. Chen D, Wu L-T. Association between substance use and
gun-related behaviors. Epidemiol Rev. 2016;38:46–61.
6. Branas CC, Han SH, Wiebe DJ. Alcohol use and firearm
violence. Epidemiol Rev. 2016;38:32–45.
7. McGinty EB, Choksy S, Wintemute GJ. The relationship
between controlled substances and violence. Epidemiol Rev.
2016;38:5–31.
8. Zatzick D, Russo J, Lord SP, et al. Collaborative care
intervention targeting violence risk behaviors, substance use,
and posttraumatic stress and depressive symptoms in injured
Epidemiologic Evidence to Understand and Prevent Gun Violence
3
Epidemiol Rev 2016;38:1–4
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/epirev/article-abstract/38/1/1/2754874 by guest on 04 June 2019
 adolescents: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Pediatr. 2014;
168(6):532–539.
9. Tracy M, Braga AA, Papachristos AV. The transmission of gun
and other weapon-involved violence within social networks.
Epidemiol Rev. 2016;38:70–86.
10. Zeoli AM, Malinski R, Turchan B. Risks and targeted
interventions: firearms in intimate partner violence. Epidemiol
Rev. 2016;38:125–139.
11. Federal Bureau of Investigation, US Department of Justice.
Uniform Crime Reporting Program Data: Supplementary
Homicide Reports, 2013. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research; 2015.
(ICPSR36124-v1).
12. Santaella-Tenorio J, Cerdá M, Villaveces A, et al. What do we
know about the association between firearm legislation and
firearm-related injuries? Epidemiol Rev. 2016;38:140–157.
13. Roszko PJD, Ameli J, Carter PM, et al. Clinician attitudes,
screening practices, and interventions to reduce firearm-related
injury. Epidemiol Rev. 2016;38:87–110.
14. Rowhani-Rahbar A, Simonetti JA, Rivara FP. Effectiveness of
interventions to promote safe firearm storage. Epidemiol Rev.
2016;38:111–124.
15. Weinberger SE, Hoyt DB, Lawrence HC, et al. Firearm-related
injury and death in the United States: a call to action from 8
health professional organizations and the American Bar
Association. Ann Intern Med. 2015;162(7):513–516.
4
Webster et al.
Epidemiol Rev 2016;38:1–4
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/epirev/article-abstract/38/1/1/2754874 by guest on 04 June 2019
