 Management of COPD exacerbations:
a European Respiratory Society/American
Thoracic Society guideline
Jadwiga A. Wedzicha (ERS co-chair)1, Marc Miravitlles2, John R. Hurst3,
Peter M.A. Calverley4, Richard K. Albert5, Antonio Anzueto6, Gerard J. Criner7,
Alberto Papi
8, Klaus F. Rabe9, David Rigau10, Pawel Sliwinski11, Thomy Tonia12,
Jørgen Vestbo13, Kevin C. Wilson14 and Jerry A. Krishnan (ATS co-chair)15
Affiliations: 1Airways Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London,
UK. 2Pneumology Dept, Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES),
Barcelona, Spain. 3UCL Respiratory, University College London, London, UK. 4Institute of Ageing and Chronic
Disease, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK. 5Dept of Medicine, University of Colorado, Denver, Aurora, CO,
USA. 6University of Texas Health Science Center and South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio,
TX, USA. 7Dept of Thoracic Medicine and Surgery, Lewis Katz School of Medicine at Temple University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. 8Respiratory Medicine, Dept of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
9Dept of Internal Medicine, Christian-Albrechts University, Kiel and LungenClinic Grosshansdorf, Airway
Research Centre North, German Centre for Lung Research, Grosshansdorf, Germany.
10Iberoamerican
Cochrane Center, Barcelona, Spain. 112nd Dept of Respiratory Medicine, Institute of Tuberculosis and Lung
Diseases, Warsaw, Poland.
12Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, University of Bern, Bern,
Switzerland.
13Division
of
Infection,
Immunity
and
Respiratory
Medicine,
University
of
Manchester,
Manchester, UK. 14Dept of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA. 15University of
Illinois Hospital and Health Sciences System, Chicago, IL, USA.
Correspondence: Marc Miravitlles, Pneumology Dept, Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Pg. Vall d’Hebron
119–129, Barcelona 08035, Spain. E-mail: mmiravitlles@vhebron.net
@ERSpublications
New guideline on the management of #COPD exacerbations from @ERStalk and @atscommunity
http://ow.ly/Pvtr307YCMu
Cite this article as: Wedzicha JA, Miravitlles M, Hurst JR, et al. Management of COPD exacerbations:
a European Respiratory Society/American Thoracic Society guideline. Eur Respir J 2017; 49: 1600791
[https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00791-2016].
ABSTRACT
This document provides clinical recommendations for treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations.
Comprehensive evidence syntheses, including meta-analyses, were performed to summarise all available
evidence relevant to the Task Force’s questions. The evidence was appraised using the Grading of
Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation approach and the results were summarised
in evidence profiles. The evidence syntheses were discussed and recommendations formulated by a
multidisciplinary Task Force of COPD experts.
After considering the balance of desirable and undesirable consequences, quality of evidence, feasibility,
and acceptability of various interventions, the Task Force made: 1) a strong recommendation for noninvasive
mechanical ventilation of patients with acute or acute-on-chronic respiratory failure; 2) conditional
recommendations for oral corticosteroids in outpatients, oral rather than intravenous corticosteroids in
hospitalised patients, antibiotic therapy, home-based management, and the initiation of pulmonary
rehabilitation within 3 weeks after hospital discharge; and 3) a conditional recommendation against the
initiation of pulmonary rehabilitation during hospitalisation.
The Task Force provided recommendations related to corticosteroid therapy, antibiotic therapy,
noninvasive mechanical ventilation, home-based management, and early pulmonary rehabilitation in
patients having a COPD exacerbation. These recommendations should be reconsidered as new evidence
becomes available.
Copyright ©ERS 2017
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00791-2016
Eur Respir J 2017; 49: 1600791
TASK FORCE REPORT
ERS/ATS GUIDELINE
 Introduction
The chronic and progressive course of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is often punctuated
by “exacerbations”, defined clinically as episodes of increasing respiratory symptoms, particularly
dyspnoea, cough and sputum production, and increased sputum purulence. COPD exacerbations have a
negative impact on the quality of life of patients with COPD [1, 2], accelerate disease progression, and can
result in hospital admissions and death [3, 4].
Evidence-based clinical practice guidelines have been developed by other organisations that recommend
inhaled bronchodilator therapy for patients having a COPD exacerbation, as well as supplemental oxygen
for hypoxaemic patients [5]. They also make recommendations related to systemic steroids, antibiotic
therapy, noninvasive mechanical ventilation (NIV) and home-based management. The purpose of our
guidelines is to update the latter recommendations and to address specific questions regarding the
treatment of COPD exacerbations that are not answered by existing guidelines. For the following six
questions, we employed a systematic review of the literature followed by the Grading of Recommendations
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) approach to develop treatment recommendations.
1) Should oral corticosteroids be used to treat ambulatory patients who are having a COPD exacerbation?
2) Should antibiotics be used to treat ambulatory patients who are having a COPD exacerbation?
3) Should intravenous or oral corticosteroids be used to treat patients who are hospitalised with a COPD
exacerbation?
4) Should NIV be used in patients who are hospitalised with a COPD exacerbation associated with acute
or acute-on-chronic respiratory failure?
5) Should a home-based management programme (hospital-at-home) be implemented in patients with
COPD exacerbations?
6) Should pulmonary rehabilitation be implemented in patients hospitalised with a COPD exacerbation?
The target audience of this guideline is specialists in respiratory medicine who manage adults with COPD.
General internists, primary care physicians, emergency medicine clinicians, other healthcare professionals
and policy makers may also benefit from these guidelines. These guidelines provide the basis for rational
decisions in the treatment of COPD exacerbations. Clinicians, patients, third-party payers, stakeholders or
the courts should never view the recommendations contained in these guidelines as dictates. Though
evidence-based guidelines can summarise the best available evidence regarding the effects of an
intervention in a given patient population, they cannot take into account all of the unique clinical
circumstances that may arise when managing a patient.
While the focus of this guideline is the treatment of COPD exacerbations, the Task Force has also
provided a narrative review in the online supplement that answers the following complementary questions.
What is the optimal approach to diagnose a COPD exacerbation? What are the conditions to include in
the differential diagnosis? What tests are required to assess the severity of a COPD exacerbation? How
should a patient be followed during recovery from a COPD exacerbation?
Methods
Group composition
The Task Force co-chairs ( J.A. Wedzicha and J.A. Krishnan) were selected by the European Respiratory
Society (ERS) and American Thoracic Society (ATS). They led all aspects of project management and
selected the panellists, which included 11 clinicians with experience in COPD management and research.
This article has supplementary material available from erj.ersjournals.com
Received: April 20 2016 | Accepted after revision: Nov 15 2016
The guidelines published by the European Respiratory Society (ERS) incorporate data obtained from a comprehensive
and systematic literature review of the most recent studies available at the time. Health professionals are encouraged to
take the guidelines into account in their clinical practice. However, the recommendations issued by this guideline may
not be appropriate for use in all situations. It is the individual responsibility of health professionals to consult other
sources of relevant information, to make appropriate and accurate decisions in consideration of each patient’s health
condition and in consultation with that patient and the patient’s caregiver where appropriate and/or necessary, and to
verify rules and regulations applicable to drugs and devices at the time of prescription.
This document was endorsed by the ERS Executive Committee and approved by the ATS Board of Directors in
December 2016.
Conflict of interest: D. Rigau and T. Tonia act as methodologists for the European Respiratory Society. All other disclosures
can be found alongside this article at erj.ersjournals.com
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00791-2016
2
ERS/ATS GUIDELINE | J.A. WEDZICHA ET AL.
 In addition, there were two methodologists (T. Tonia and D. Rigau) and a clinician–methodologist
(K.C. Wilson). The lead methodologist (T. Tonia) identified and collected the evidence, performed the
evidence syntheses, constructed the evidence profiles, and ensured that all the methodological
requirements were met, with assistance from the other methodologists. The co-chairs and panellists
discussed the evidence and formulated the recommendations; the methodologists did not participate in the
development of recommendations. All panel members were required to disclose their conflicts of interest.
At least 50% of the co-chairs and 50% of the panel were required to be free from conflicts of interest.
Individuals with potential conflicts of interest took part in the discussions about the evidence but did not
participate in the formulation of recommendations.
Formulation of questions
Task Force members compiled a list of issues that they considered important and relevant to the treatment
of COPD exacerbations. The questions were rephrased by the lead methodologist using the PICO
(Population, Intervention, Comparator and Outcomes) format [6]. Discussion and consensus among the
co-chairs and panellists was used to identify the six questions that would be addressed in the guideline.
Rating the importance of outcomes
After choosing the questions, the Task Force identified outcomes that they considered relevant to each
question. They rated the importance of each outcome using a scale from 1 to 9 (a rating of 1–3 was assigned
to outcomes of low importance for decision-making, 4–6 to outcomes important for decision-making and
7–9 to outcomes critically important for decision-making). A teleconference was convened during which the
ratings were discussed and some additional outcomes were rated. At the conclusion of the teleconference, all
outcomes were categorised as “not important”, “important” or “critical” for decision-making.
Literature searches
Our literature searches used the National Institute of Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) guidelines as
a starting point [5, 7]. For questions that were addressed in the 2004 NICE guidelines, we conducted
literature searches in Medline, Embase and the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews beginning in
2003. For questions that were addressed in the 2010 NICE guidelines, we conducted literature searches in
the same databases beginning in 2009. Initial searches were conducted in January 2012, and then updated
in June 2012, February 2013 and September 2015. We used the same or similar search strategies as those
used by NICE. To search Embase and Medline, we searched only the English-speaking literature using the
search strategy shown in the online supplement, whereas to search the Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews, we used the search term “chronic obstructive pulmonary disease”.
Study selection
The lead methodologist screened the titles and abstracts of the retrieved studies, and excluded studies on
the basis of the pre-defined study selection criteria shown in the online supplement. For those studies that
could not be excluded by the title and abstract, we obtained the full text of the articles and then included
or excluded the studies on the basis of our full text review. In cases of uncertainty, the opinions of the
co-chairs and panellists were obtained and decisions were reached by discussion and consensus. We also
screened the reference lists from recent and systematic reviews to ensure that our literature review had not
missed relevant studies.
Evidence synthesis
Study characteristics, types of participants, interventions, the outcomes measured and results were extracted
from each study. If the data were amenable to pooling, effects were estimated via meta-analysis using
Review Manager (version 5.3; The Nordic Cochrane Centre, Copenhagen, Denmark). For the meta-analyses,
the random effects model was utilised unless otherwise specified. Dichotomous outcomes were reported as
relative risks and continuous outcomes were reported as mean differences unless otherwise specified. The
lead methodologist appraised the quality of evidence using the GRADE approach [8].
The lead methodologist used GRADEpro (McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada) to develop
evidence profiles that summarised the findings for each outcome and the rationale for the quality of
evidence appraisal. Thresholds for clinically important changes (used to judge imprecision) included the
following relative risk reductions: mortality 15%, exacerbations 20%, hospitalisations 20%, treatment failure
20% and adverse events 15%. They also included the following absolute reductions: a St George’s
Respiratory Questionnaire score change of 4 points and a forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) change
of 100 mL. The thresholds for clinically important relative risk reductions were based upon the Task
Force’s collective clinical experience and, for consistency, were chosen to be similar to the thresholds used
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00791-2016
3
ERS/ATS GUIDELINE | J.A. WEDZICHA ET AL.
 to develop the NICE guidelines on COPD [7]. The thresholds for clinically important absolute risk
reductions were based upon published literature [9].
Formulating and grading recommendations
The evidence profiles were sent to the Task Force members for review. Using an iterative consensus
process conducted face to face, via teleconference and via email, recommendations were formulated on the
basis of the following considerations: the balance of desirable (benefits) and undesirable consequences
(burden, adverse effects and cost) of the intervention, the quality of evidence, patient values and
preferences, and feasibility [10].
A strong recommendation was made for an intervention when the panel was certain that the desirable
consequences of the intervention outweighed the undesirable consequences, just as a strong recommendation
would have been made against an intervention if the panel was certain that the undesirable consequences of
the intervention outweigh the desirable consequences. A strong recommendation indicates that most
well-informed patients would choose to have or not to have the intervention.
A conditional recommendation was made for an intervention when the panel was uncertain that the desirable
consequences of the intervention outweighed the undesirable consequences, just as a conditional
recommendation would have been made against an intervention if the panel was uncertain that the undesirable
consequences of the intervention outweigh the desirable consequences. Reasons for uncertainty included low or
very low quality of evidence, the desirable and undesirable consequences being finely balanced, or the
underlying values and preferences playing an important role. A conditional recommendation indicates that
well-informed patients may make different choices regarding whether to have or not have the intervention.
Manuscript preparation
The initial draft of the manuscript was prepared by the co-chairs, methodologists and one panellist (M.
Miravitlles). The panel members wrote the content for the online supplement, which was collated and
edited by the co-chairs. Both the manuscript and the online supplement were reviewed, edited and
approved by all panel members prior to submission.
Results
Should oral corticosteroids be used to treat patients whose COPD exacerbation is mild enough to
be treated as an outpatient (i.e. ambulatory patients)?
Summary of the evidence
We identified three relevant systematic reviews [11–13], which identified two trials that evaluated the effects of
oral corticosteroids in ambulatory patients having a COPD exacerbation [14, 15]. Our own systematic review
identified a third clinical trial [16]. These three trials in a total of 204 patients informed the Task Force’s
judgments [14–16]. The first trial enrolled 27 ambulatory patients who were having a COPD exacerbation,
defined as subjective worsening of baseline cough or dyspnoea for more than 24 h, requiring a hospital visit,
and at least one of the following: a 25% increase in β-agonist use, increased sputum production or increased
sputum purulence [15]. The patients were randomly assigned to receive a tapering dose of prednisone or
placebo for 9 days and followed for 14 days following the completion of the tapering dose. The second trial
enrolled 147 patients who were being discharged from the emergency room after being seen for a COPD
exacerbation, defined as having at least two of the following: a recent increase in breathlessness, sputum
volume or sputum purulence [14]. The patients were randomly assigned to receive either 40 mg of oral
prednisone or placebo for 10 days and then followed for 30 days from the initiation of treatment. The most
recent trial randomly assigned 30 ambulatory patients who were having a COPD exacerbation to receive 30 mg
of oral prednisolone or placebo for 14 days and then followed during the treatment course only [16].
The Task Force identified four outcomes a priori as critical to guiding treatment recommendations:
treatment failure (composite of unscheduled visit to the physician, return to the emergency department
because of worsening respiratory symptoms, hospitalisation or unmasking of study medication due to
worsening respiratory symptoms), hospital admissions, mortality and time to next COPD exacerbation.
Change in quality of life and serious adverse events were considered “important” outcomes to guide
treatment recommendations.
When the data were pooled via meta-analysis (see evidence profile 1 in the online supplementary
material), oral corticosteroids caused a trend toward fewer hospital admissions (7.9% versus 17%; relative
risk (RR) 0.49, 95% CI 0.23–1.06). There was no significant difference in treatment failure (26.5% versus
42.4%; RR 0.69, 95% CI 0.22–2.19) or mortality (1.1% versus 1.1%; RR 0.99, 95% CI 0.06–15.48). The
effect on treatment failure would be clinically important if real, but there were too few events to confirm
or exclude the effect and the analysis was limited by severe heterogeneity of uncertain cause, as sensitivity
analyses failed eliminate the heterogeneity. Data regarding length of hospital stay or time to next
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00791-2016
4
ERS/ATS GUIDELINE | J.A. WEDZICHA ET AL.
 exacerbation were not reported in the three studies. Patients who received oral corticosteroids had better
lung function, measured as the FEV1 (mean difference 0.16 L higher, 95% CI 0.04–0.28 L higher) but no
significant difference in quality of life measured by the Chronic Respiratory Questionnaire score (mean
difference 0.38 higher, 95% CI 0.09 lower to 0.85 higher) or serious adverse effects (2.2% versus 1.1%; RR
1.97, 95% CI 0.18–21.29).
Benefits
Oral corticosteroids improved lung function in ambulatory patients having a COPD exacerbation. There
was also a trend toward fewer hospitalisations.
Harms
Various adverse effects were reported in the studies, including seizures, insomnia, weight gain, anxiety,
depressive symptoms and hyperglycaemia. However, it is unclear whether the methods used to assess
harms were similar across the studies and there were too few serious adverse events reported to adequately
evaluate the difference in the risk of harms with oral corticosteroids versus placebo in patients with COPD
exacerbations treated in the ambulatory setting.
Other considerations
There was no information in any of the trials regarding the time to next exacerbation and inadequate
information to have confidence regarding the effects of systemic corticosteroids on several outcomes
considered critical or important to decision making (hospitalisation, mortality and serious adverse events).
Conclusions and research needs
A course of oral corticosteroids for 9–14 days in outpatients with COPD exacerbations improves lung
function and causes a trend toward fewer hospitalisations. No effect on treatment failure, mortality or
adverse effects has been demonstrated, although there were too few events in the trials to definitively
confirm or exclude an effect on any of these outcomes. The Task Force judged that the benefits of oral
corticosteroids probably outweigh the adverse effects, burdens and costs, but was uncertain due to its very
low confidence in the accuracy of the estimated effects.
Phenotypic identification of responders to oral corticosteroids is an area of research that should be
explored. There are some data suggesting that patients with an elevated blood eosinophil count will
respond more to oral corticosteroids than patients with a low blood eosinophil count. One randomised
trial found that patients whose blood eosinophil count was ⩾2% had greater improvement in their
health-related quality of life and faster recovery after receiving oral corticosteroids compared to placebo. In
contrast, in patients whose blood eosinophil count was <2% there was a significantly greater improvement
in health-related quality of life in patients receiving placebo [17]. Another study pooled data from three
randomised trials of patients with a COPD exacerbation and found that systemic steroid-treated patients
with a blood eosinophil count ⩾2% have a treatment failure rate of only 11%, compared with a treatment
failure rate of 66% among those in placebo arm. However, among patients with blood eosinophils <2%,
the rate of failure was 26% with prednisone and only 20% with placebo [18]. Larger randomised controlled
trials with stratification by blood eosinophil count are needed. Several studies suggest that an even shorter
duration of systemic corticosteroid treatment (e.g. 3 days [19], 5 days [20] or 7 days [21]) may be as
effective as longer courses in hospitalised patients with exacerbations of COPD; similar studies need to be
performed in ambulatory patients. Finally, effectiveness studies conducted in real-life situations should be
conducted to confirm the findings of efficacy trials.
What others are saying
The 2010 NICE guidelines [5] concluded that, in the absence of significant contraindications, oral
corticosteroids should be used in conjunction with other therapies in all patients admitted to hospital with
an exacerbation of COPD and considered in patients in the community who have an exacerbation with a
significant increase in breathlessness that interferes with daily activities. The 2014 Global Initiative for
Chronic
Obstructive
Lung
Disease
(GOLD)
strategy
document
[22]
concluded
that
“systemic
corticosteroids are beneficial in the management of COPD. They shorten recovery time, improve lung
function and hypoxemia, and may reduce the risk of early relapse, treatment failure, and length of hospital
stay. A dose of 30–40 mg prednisone per day for 5 days is recommended”.
ERS/ATS recommendation
For ambulatory patients with an exacerbation of COPD, we suggest a short course (⩽14 days) of oral
corticosteroids (conditional recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00791-2016
5
ERS/ATS GUIDELINE | J.A. WEDZICHA ET AL.
 Remarks
The Task Force defines a short course of oral corticosteroids as ⩽14 days.
Values and preferences
This recommendation places a high value on a reduction in treatment failure and a lower value on the
uncertainty regarding the potential for adverse events.
Should antibiotics be administered to ambulatory patients who are having a COPD exacerbation?
Summary of the evidence
We identified three systematic reviews [23–25], which included four trials that evaluated antibiotic therapy
in ambulatory patients with COPD exacerbations [26–29]. Our own systematic review identified an
additional relevant trial that was not included in the published systematic reviews [30]. We pooled two of
the five trials [26, 30] that enrolled a total of 483 participants via meta-analysis to inform the Task Force’s
judgments (evidence profile 2 in the supplementary material). The remaining three trials were excluded
because the diagnosis of COPD was inadequately established among patients enrolled [27], data on
treatment failure were measured on day 5 [29] and the panel believed that 5 days are not enough to judge
whether an exacerbation has resolved [31], and publication was as an abstract only [28].
The Task Force identified a priori six outcomes as critical to guiding treatment recommendations:
treatment failure (composite of death, no resolution or deterioration), adverse events, time to next COPD
exacerbation, hospitalisation, length of hospital stay and death.
Among the trials that were pooled, one randomly assigned 310 ambulatory patients who were having a
COPD exacerbation to receive placebo or amoxicillin/clavulanate for 8 days [30], while the other randomly
assigned 116 similar patients to receive placebo or any one of the following for 7–10 days: trimethoprim/
sulfamethoxazole, amoxicillin or doxycycline [26]. Antibiotic therapy decreased treatment failure (27.9%
versus 42.2%; RR 0.67, 95% CI 0.51–0.87); this effect was driven entirely by lack of resolution and
deterioration, since no deaths were reported. It also prolonged the time to the next exacerbation (difference
of medians 73 days, p=0.015). There was a trend toward more adverse events among patients who received
antibiotic therapy (14.6% versus 7.9%; RR 1.84, 95% CI 0.95–3.57), although most of the adverse events
were described as mild. Data regarding hospitalisation, length of hospital stay and death were not reported.
Benefits
Antibiotic therapy reduced the risk of treatment failure and increased the time between COPD
exacerbations.
Harms
Patients who received antibiotic therapy had a trend toward more adverse events, most of which were mild
gastrointestinal side effects (e.g. diarrhoea).
Other considerations
In this evaluation of ambulatory exacerbations, there was no information in either trial about several
outcomes of interest to the Task Force; specifically, the hospital admission rate, length of hospital stay and
mortality.
Conclusions and research needs
The use of antibiotics in ambulatory patients with exacerbations of COPD reduces the treatment failure
rate and increases the time to the next exacerbation. However, the majority of patients avoided treatment
failure even in the placebo group (58%), suggesting that not all exacerbations require treatment with
antibiotics. Effectiveness studies should be conducted in real-life situations to confirm the findings of
efficacy trials. Identifying biomarkers of bacterial infection may allow the patient population that
definitively requires antibiotic treatment to be more precisely selected [32]. Additional research is needed
to identify patients in whom antibiotic therapy is needed.
What others are saying
The 2010 NICE guidelines [5] advise that antibiotics should be used to treat exacerbations of COPD
associated with purulent sputum. However, the recommendation is not specific for ambulatory patients
with COPD exacerbations. The 2014 GOLD strategy document [22] states that antibiotics should be given
to patients with COPD exacerbations who fulfil certain criteria; again, the recommendation is not specific
to ambulatory patients having an exacerbation of COPD.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00791-2016
6
ERS/ATS GUIDELINE | J.A. WEDZICHA ET AL.
 ERS/ATS recommendation
For ambulatory patients having a COPD exacerbation, we suggest the administration of antibiotics
(conditional recommendation, moderate quality of evidence). Antibiotic selection should be based upon
local sensitivity patterns.
Remarks
Studies suggest that episodes that present with purulent sputum are most likely to benefit from antibiotic
treatment; however, there may be other considerations (e.g. disease severity) when deciding whether or not
to prescribe an antibiotic [22].
Values and preferences
This recommendation places a high value on a reduction in treatment failure and extending the time
between exacerbations, and a lower value on avoiding adverse events.
Should intravenous or oral corticosteroids be used to treat patients who are hospitalised with a
COPD exacerbation?
Summary of the evidence
There is evidence supporting the use of systemic corticosteroids in patients with severe exacerbations of
COPD treated in the hospital [5, 22]. However, high-dose intravenous corticosteroids for admitted patients
with severe exacerbations may not have a higher efficacy than oral corticosteroids and can potentially be
associated with a higher risk of adverse events; therefore, we searched for evidence comparing both routes
of administration of corticosteroids in this population of patients.
We did not identify any systematic reviews comparing intravenous corticosteroids with oral corticosteroids
in hospitalised patients with COPD exacerbations. Our own systematic review identified two trials in a
total of 250 patients hospitalised with a COPD exacerbation [33, 34]. One trial randomly assigned 210
hospitalised patients with COPD exacerbations to receive either 60 mg of intravenous prednisolone plus
oral placebo or 60 mg of oral prednisolone plus intravenous placebo for 5 days [33]. Both groups received
an oral prednisolone taper following the 5 days of full-dose therapy (total duration 10 days). The other
trial randomly assigned 40 patients to receive either 32 mg per day of oral methylprednisolone for 7 days
or 1 mg·kg−1 per day of intravenous methylprednisolone for 4 days followed by 0.5 mg·kg−1 per day of
intravenous methylprednisolone for 3 days (total duration 10 days) [34].
The Task Force identified a priori five outcomes as “critical” to guiding treatment recommendations:
treatment failure (composite of death, admission to the intensive care unit (ICU), readmission to the ICU
due to COPD or intensification of pharmacological therapy), mortality, readmission to the hospital, length
of hospital stay and time next COPD exacerbation. Adverse events were considered important outcomes to
guide treatment recommendations.
When the trial results were pooled (evidence profile 3 in the supplementary material), there were no
significant differences in treatment failure (53.5% for intravenous versus 49.6% for oral corticosteroids; RR
1.09, 95% CI 0.87–1.37), mortality (5.5% for intravenous versus 1.7% for oral corticosteroids; RR 2.78, 95%
CI 0.67–11.51), hospital readmissions (14.2% for intravenous versus 12.4% for oral corticosteroids; RR
1.13, 95% CI 0.60–2.13), or length of hospital stay (mean difference of 0.71 more days with intravenous
steroids than oral steroids, 95% CI ranged from 1.35 fewer days to 2.78 more days). Data regarding time to
next exacerbation were not reported in the studies.
One trial demonstrated an increased risk of mild adverse effects in the intravenous corticosteroids group
(70% versus 20%; RR 3.50, 95% CI 1.39–8.8) [34], which were easily treated with appropriate medications.
Of note, the intravenous arm used a higher dose of corticosteroids than the oral arm; therefore, it is
unknown whether the increased incidence of adverse effects was due to the route of administration or the
dose. Neither trial reported any serious adverse effects.
Benefits
Among outcomes that are known to be improved by corticosteroids therapy (i.e. reduced treatment
failure), there were no differences between oral and intravenous therapy.
Harms
Only one study (which enrolled a total of 40 participants) reported the frequency of adverse events, which
were numerically
higher
in the
group
treated
with
intravenous
corticosteroids than
with
oral
corticosteroids (e.g. 11 versus four developed hyperglycaemia and three versus none had worsening of
hypertension, respectively) [34]. However, these assessments were not performed masked to treatment
assignment and there were too few events to make definitive conclusions about the relative risk of adverse
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00791-2016
7
ERS/ATS GUIDELINE | J.A. WEDZICHA ET AL.
 events with either therapy. A large observational study of 80000 non-ICU patients hospitalised with
COPD exacerbations suggests that >90% of practitioners in the USA favour use of intravenous over oral
corticosteroids in this population [35]. Interestingly, patients in this study treated with intravenous
corticosteroids had a longer length of stay and higher cost compared to those treated with oral
corticosteroids, without clear evidence of benefit (assessed using the composite outcome of death, need for
mechanical ventilation or 30-day readmission) [36].
Other considerations
There was no information in either trial about one of the outcomes of interest to the Task Force: the time
to next exacerbation. There was a serious risk of bias due to lack of blinding for most outcomes, and the
number of events and patients were small for all outcomes; these features decreased the panel’s confidence
in the estimated effects.
Conclusions and research needs
Treatment failure, hospital readmissions and length of hospital stay are not significantly different among
patients who receive oral or intravenous corticosteroids; however, the results indicate that intravenous
therapy might increase the risk of adverse effects. No effect on mortality has been shown, although there
were too few deaths in the trials to definitively confirm or exclude an effect on mortality. Since the studies
did not employ a noninferiority design and the confidence intervals indicated imprecision for both benefits
and harms, we cannot conclude that both intravenous and oral corticosteroids confer similar benefits and
harms. There is therefore insufficient evidence to support one method of administration over the other. An
adequately powered noninferiority trial comparing the relative harms and benefits of intravenous versus oral
corticosteroids in this population is needed, particularly given the potential for increasing the length of stay
and healthcare costs with intravenous therapy, as observed in the observational study.
What others are saying
The 2010 NICE guidelines [5] did not compare oral and intravenous corticosteroids. The 2014 GOLD
strategy document [22] says that the oral prednisolone is preferable.
ERS/ATS recommendation
For patients who are hospitalised due to a COPD exacerbation, we suggest the administration of oral
corticosteroids rather than intravenous corticosteroids if gastrointestinal access and function are intact
(conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence).
Remarks
Intravenous corticosteroids should be administered to patients who are unable to tolerate oral
corticosteroids. Foregoing corticosteroid therapy in patients who cannot tolerate oral therapy is not an
option due to the benefits of corticosteroid therapy.
Values and preferences
This recommendation places a high value on the simplicity of providing oral compared to intravenous
corticosteroids and the potential to reduce healthcare expenditures with oral therapy, rather than
convincing evidence about benefits or harms supporting one form of administration over the other.
Should NIV be used in patients who are hospitalised with a COPD exacerbation associated with
acute or acute-on-chronic respiratory failure?
Summary of the evidence
We identified a systematic review [37] that included 14 randomised trials that evaluated the effects of NIV
on patients with acute respiratory failure due to a COPD exacerbation [48–51]. Our own systematic review
identified an additional seven relevant trials [52–58]. These 21 trials formed the evidence base that was
used to inform the Task Force’s judgments. Many of the trials excluded patients with any of the following:
inability to cooperate, protect the airway or clear secretions; severely impaired consciousness; facial
deformity; high aspiration risk; or recent oesophageal stenosis.
The Task Force identified a priori five outcomes as critical to guiding treatment recommendations: death,
intubation, length of hospital stay, length of ICU stay and nosocomial pneumonia. Complications of treatment
(e.g. aspiration or barotrauma) and pH 1 h after intervention were considered important outcomes.
All of the trials enrolled hospitalised patients with respiratory failure due to a COPD exacerbation. In the
overwhelming majority of the studies, the patients had confirmed acute or acute-on-chronic hypercapnic
respiratory failure; a few of the studies did not specify that the respiratory failure was hypercapnic. Most
the trials compared usual care plus NIV to usual care alone, although a few assigned patients to usual care
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00791-2016
8
ERS/ATS GUIDELINE | J.A. WEDZICHA ET AL.
 plus NIV or usual care plus sham NIV. Due to the nature of the intervention, most of the trials were not
blinded to the patients, caregivers or assessors.
When the trials were pooled via meta-analysis (evidence profile 4 in the supplementary material), patients
who received NIV had a lower mortality rate (7.1% versus 13.9%; RR 0.54, 95% CI 0.38–0.76), were less
likely to require intubation (12% versus 30.6%; RR 0.43, 95% CI 0.35–0.53), had a shorter length of
hospital stay (mean difference 2.88 days fewer, 95% CI 1.17–4.59 days fewer) and ICU stay (mean
difference 4.99 days fewer, 95% CI 0–9.99 days fewer) and had fewer complications of treatment (15.7%
versus 42%; RR 0.39, 95% CI 0.26–0.59). There was no difference in the pH after 1 h (mean difference
0.02, 95% CI 0.01–0.06). When we repeated the analyses using only the studies that had confirmed acute
or acute-on-chronic hypercapnic respiratory failure, the results were essentially the same.
Benefits
NIV reduced the need for intubation, mortality, complications of therapy, and length of both hospital stay
and ICU stay in patients with acute or acute-on-chronic respiratory failure due to a COPD exacerbation.
Harms
There were no reports of adverse consequences; to the contrary, complications of therapy were reduced in
patients who received NIV.
Other considerations
Most of the trials had a serious risk of bias due to uncertain allocation concealment and lack of blinding.
For some outcomes, the estimated effects were inconsistent across studies or the number of events and
patients were small, diminishing confidence in the estimated effects. Similarly, one of the outcomes of
interest, the rate of nosocomial pneumonia, could not be assessed because the data were either not
reported or incompletely reported. These considerations contributed to grading the quality of evidence as
low.
Conclusions and research needs
Use of NIV in patients with acute or acute-on-chronic respiratory failure due to a COPD exacerbation
reduces the need for intubation, mortality, complications of therapy, length of hospital stay and length of
ICU stay. Future research will determine strategies for optimising the delivery of NIV, including the
optimal technique and interface type selection. We need studies to address how to titrate and wean
patients from NIV ventilation, and how to better determine which physiological effects should be expected
during the application of NIV that predict treatment success or failure. The efficacy of home NIV in
patients following a COPD-related hospitalisation when NIV was utilised to treat acute-on-chronic
respiratory failure is also an area that requires additional study. Recent data have reported conflicting
outcomes regarding home NIV in the severe COPD outpatient population [59–62]. Effectiveness studies
should be conducted in real-life situations to confirm the findings of efficacy trials. Other research
opportunities are related to decision-making about whether or when to intubate or not, as well as the use
of NIV by healthcare providers, patients and family members.
What others are saying
The 2010 NICE guidelines [5] did not discuss the use of NIV in COPD exacerbations. In the 2004 NICE
guidelines, however, it was stated that NIV should be used as the treatment of choice for persistent
hypercapnic ventilatory failure during exacerbations despite optimal medical therapy. The 2014 GOLD
strategy document [22] states that, in patients with acute respiratory failure due to a COPD exacerbation,
NIV improves respiratory acidosis and decreases the intubation rate, mortality, respiratory rate, severity of
breathlessness, complications (e.g. ventilator-associated pneumonia) and length of hospital stay. They
recommend the use of NIV in patients with 1) respiratory acidosis or 2) severe dyspnoea with clinical
signs suggestive of respiratory muscle fatigue, increased work of breathing, or both, such as use of
respiratory accessory muscles, paradoxical motion of the abdomen or retraction of the intercostal spaces.
ERS/ATS recommendation
For hospitalised patients with acute or acute-on-chronic hypercapnic respiratory failure due to a COPD
exacerbation, we recommend the use of NIV (strong recommendation, low quality of evidence).
Remarks
The strong recommendation despite the panel’s low confidence in the estimated effects reflects the panel’s
consensus opinion that the overwhelming majority of patients would want NIV given the possibility of
one or more important clinical benefits with minimal risk of harm. Many of the trials excluded patients
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00791-2016
9
ERS/ATS GUIDELINE | J.A. WEDZICHA ET AL.
 with any of the following: inability to cooperate, protect the airway or clear secretions; severely impaired
consciousness; facial deformity; high aspiration risk; or recent oesophageal stenosis.
Values and preferences
This recommendation places a high value on reducing mortality and the need for invasive mechanical
ventilation, and lower value on the burdens associated with NIV.
Should a home-based management programme (hospital-at-home) be implemented in patients
with COPD exacerbations?
Summary of the evidence
A home-based management programme involving nurses and potentially other healthcare professionals (e.g.
physicians, social workers and physical therapists), also known as “hospital-at-home”, offers the option of an
early assisted hospital discharge or an alternative to hospitalisation in patients presenting to the emergency
department with a COPD exacerbation. Clinical trials have compared home-based management to usual care
in patients with COPD exacerbations who meet other additional eligibility criteria (e.g. no impairment of
consciousness, decompensated heart failure or other acute condition, or need for mechanical ventilation).
We found a systematic review [63] that included eight relevant trials [64–71]. Our own systematic review
identified one additional trial [72]. These nine trials formed the evidence base that was used to inform the
Task Force’s judgment. All of the trials enrolled patients who presented with COPD exacerbations; five trials
evaluated hospital admission versus discharge to a hospital-at-home from the emergency department [65–67,
69, 70], three trials assessed ongoing hospital admission versus discharge to a hospital-at-home following an
initial hospitalisation [64, 71, 72] and in one trial, the setting of the discharge could not be determined [68].
Four trials were conducted in the UK [64, 65, 69, 71], four trials were conducted in other European
countries [66, 68, 70, 72] and one trial was conducted in Australia [67].
The Task Force identified a priori three outcomes as critical to guiding treatment recommendations: death,
hospital readmission and time to first readmission. Hospital-acquired infections and quality of life were
considered important outcomes.
When the trials were pooled via meta-analysis (evidence profile 5 in the supplementary material),
home-based management reduced hospital readmissions (26.8% versus 34.2%; RR 0.78, 95% CI 0.62–0.99)
and was associated with a trend towards lower mortality (5.6% versus 8.5%; RR 0.66, 95% CI 0.41–1.05).
There was no difference in the time to first readmission (mean difference of 8 days longer among patients
in the home-based management group, 95% CI 19.7 days longer to 3.7 days shorter). No data were
reported on hospital-acquired infections or quality of life.
The Task Force raised the possibility that a home-based management may have different effects among patients
who are discharged from the emergency department compared to patients who are discharged following an
initial hospitalisation. To address these concerns, a post hoc stratified analysis was performed (evidence profile
5); the results of these analyses did not provide convincing evidence to indicate differential effects among
patients discharged from different locations or to exclude the possibility of heterogeneity of treatment effects.
Benefits
Utilisation of a home-based management model reduced the number of hospital readmissions and,
possibly, mortality in patients with COPD exacerbations.
Harms
Adverse events were not an outcome reported in any of the included trials; therefore, there exists no data
regarding the potential harms of the home-based management model.
Other considerations
For most of the outcomes, the number of events and patients in the trials were small, diminishing confidence
in the estimated effects. There was no information reported for one outcome of interest to the Task Force,
the rate of hospital-acquired infections. In addition, there was insufficient information to draw conclusions
regarding another outcome of interest, quality of life (i.e. among the three trials that reported quality of life,
one did not provide standard deviations, another only provided St George’s Respiratory Questionnaire scores
for a subgroup of participants and a third measured generic health-related quality of life using the
EuroQoL-5D scale). Moreover, the eligibility criteria varied across studies and the capacity of health systems
to deliver home-based care for this population may vary. There is also a large geographical variability in their
availability. Studies are also needed to identify the components of home-based COPD care required for
benefit and how such requirements may vary based on the variable contexts in which patients live.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00791-2016
10
ERS/ATS GUIDELINE | J.A. WEDZICHA ET AL.
 Although not pre-specified by the Task Force as outcomes of interest, it is worth noting that four trials
reported costs, and three reported patient and provider satisfaction. Among the trials that evaluated costs,
two found lower costs for hospital-at-home programmes [67, 70], one found a trend toward lower costs
[66] and one found no difference [73]. Among the three trials that evaluated patient and provider
satisfaction, all reported no differences [69, 70, 74]. While no differences in overall satisfaction were found,
the majority of patients indicated that they would prefer home treatment if they were allowed to choose.
Conclusions and research needs
The home-based management programme model in patients with a COPD exacerbation reduces hospital
admissions, making it a safe and effective way of discharging patients with additional home-based support
in appropriately selected patients. This may increase the availability of hospital beds and reduce pressure
on clinicians to discharge patients whose readiness is uncertain. The home-based model might also reduce
mortality; however, there were too few deaths in the trials to definitively confirm or exclude an effect.
One of the major research needs for home-based management is the development of algorithms to screen
patients to determine which are or are not appropriate for home-based care. Some studies suggest that
home treatment of COPD exacerbations should be considered in all patients unless there are mental status
changes, confusion, hypercarbia, refractory hypoxaemia, serious comorbid conditions or inadequate social
support. However, these criteria need to be evaluated prospectively to define the most appropriate
selection criteria. The feasibility of home-based administration of medications for COPD exacerbations
(i.e. systemic corticosteroids, antibiotics, nebulised bronchodilators and supplemental oxygen) may vary by
patient characteristics (e.g. ability to carry out activities of daily living and level of social support), or by
the capacity of the health system or home health agency. Studies are needed to define the patient selection
criteria and key elements of the home-based programme (e.g. nurse or inter-professional teams that
include a physician, respiratory therapist or social worker; treatment plan at home; criteria for treatment
failure at home; and need for hospitalisation). Finally, studies are needed to prospectively evaluate the
potential for heterogeneity of treatment effects according to whether the home-based management
programme is intended to avoid a hospitalisation or to facilitate early discharge from the hospital to home.
Many of these studies may be best conducted as effectiveness studies in real-life situations; at a minimum,
effectiveness studies should be conducted to confirm the findings of efficacy trials.
What others are saying
The 2010 NICE guidelines [5] did not include a section on home-based management of patients with COPD
exacerbations, but referred to it briefly as something that respiratory nurse specialists might be involved in.
The 2014 GOLD strategy document [22] stated that “hospital at home represents an effective and practical
alternative to hospitalisation in selected patients with exacerbations of COPD without acidotic respiratory
failure. However, the exact criteria for this approach as opposed to hospital treatment remain uncertain and
will vary by healthcare setting. Treatment recommendations are the same for hospitalised patients”.
ERS/ATS recommendation
For patients with a COPD exacerbation who present to the emergency department or hospital, we suggest a
home-based management programme (hospital-at-home; conditional recommendation, moderate quality of
evidence).
Remarks
Appropriately selected patients may include those who do not have acute or acute-on-chronic ventilatory
respiratory failure, respiratory distress, hypoxaemia requiring high-flow supplemental oxygen, an impaired
level of consciousness, cor pulmonale, a need for full-time nursing care, other reasons for hospitalisation
(e.g. myocardial ischaemia), housing or food insecurity, poor social support, or active substance abuse.
Values and preferences
This recommendation places a high value on reducing hospital readmissions, improving patient safety and
potentially also decreasing mortality, and a lower value on the burdens of caring for acutely ill patients at home.
Should pulmonary rehabilitation be implemented in patients hospitalised with a COPD
exacerbation?
Summary of the evidence
We identified a systematic review [75] that included nine trials that randomly assigned hospitalised patients
with COPD exacerbations to early pulmonary rehabilitation plus usual care or usual care alone [76–84]. The
pulmonary rehabilitation programmes all included physical exercise that was initiated within 3 weeks of
initiating treatment for a COPD exacerbation treatment; in five trials, pulmonary rehabilitation was initiated
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00791-2016
11
ERS/ATS GUIDELINE | J.A. WEDZICHA ET AL.
 during the hospitalisation [76, 78, 79, 82, 84] and, in three trials, pulmonary rehabilitation was initiated
following discharge [80, 81, 83]. We excluded one of the trials because the patients had already completed a
pulmonary rehabilitation programme in the past and the trial assessed a repeat programme [77].
Our own systematic review identified five additional relevant randomised trials [85–89], with two studies
enrolling hospitalised patients [88, 89] and three studies enrolling patients up to 8 weeks after hospital
discharge [85–87]. Each trial implemented pulmonary rehabilitation differently: health education and exercise
training, beginning within 2 months following hospital discharge [85]; training in breathing techniques and
physical exercise, beginning 2–3 weeks after hospital discharge [86]; strength and aerobic exercise training,
chest physiotherapy for secretion drainage, breathing retraining, nutrition and psychosocial support, beginning
within 2 weeks after discharge [87]; twice-daily exercise training of varying intensity, initiated during
hospitalisation [88]; and progressive strength and aerobic exercise, initiated within 48 h of admission [89].
These 13 trials formed the evidence base used to inform the Task Force’s decisions. The Task Force
identified a priori three outcomes as critical to guiding the formulation of treatment recommendations:
death, hospital readmission and quality of life. Exercise capacity was considered an important outcome.
Pooling the trials via meta-analysis (evidence table 6) suggested that pulmonary rehabilitation following
admission for an exacerbation may have reduced hospital readmissions (45.0% versus 50.8%; RR 0.65, 95%
CI 0.42–1.00), improved quality of life as measured by a change in the St George’s Respiratory
Questionnaire score (mean difference −11.75, 95% CI −19.76 to −3.75) and improved exercise capacity as
measured by the 6-min walking test (mean difference +88.89 m, 95% CI +26.67 m to +151.11 m).
However, these estimates were uncertain due to inconsistent results for across trials (I2=69% for hospital
readmissions, I2=70% for quality of life and I2=97% for exercise capacity). With respect to mortality, we
excluded one trial from the mortality analysis because the panel decided that its measurement of deaths in
the ICU was potentially misleading [82]; when the remaining trials were pooled, there was no significant
difference among those who did or did not receive pulmonary rehabilitation (19.6% versus 14.1%; RR 1.44,
95% CI 0.97–2.13; I2=0% for mortality).
The panel hypothesised that differences in the timing of the initiation of pulmonary rehabilitation may
have been the cause of the inconsistent results across trials. To test this hypothesis, a post hoc stratified
analysis was performed. Patients who initiated pulmonary rehabilitation during their hospitalisation had
increased mortality (23.8% versus 15.6%; RR 1.54, 95% CI 1.03–2.29), increased exercise capacity (mean
difference +107.92 m, 95% CI +17.57 m to +198.27 m) and no difference in hospital readmissions (52.9%
versus 52.2%; RR 0.88, 95% CI 0.56–1.37), although all outcomes except mortality continued to have
serious heterogeneity. The effect of pulmonary rehabilitation initiated after hospital discharge (up to
3 weeks after discharge) on mortality was uncertain due to the wide confidence interval (2.0% versus 7.8%;
RR 0.37, 95% CI 0.06–2.29). However, pulmonary rehabilitation initiated after hospital discharge (up to
3 weeks after discharge) reduced hospital readmissions (21.5% versus 46.8%; RR 0.37, 95% CI 0.14–0.97)
and improved quality of life (mean difference −11.75, 95% CI −19.76 to −3.75). Similarly, pulmonary
rehabilitation initiated after hospital discharge (up to 8 weeks after discharge) increased exercise capacity
(mean difference +57.47 m, 95% CI +20.04 m to +94.89 m). Again, all outcomes except mortality
continued to have serious heterogeneity. The panel also hypothesised that differences in the way the
pulmonary rehabilitation was conducted were responsible for the inconsistent results; however, this could
not be tested. It is important to recognise, however, that the inconsistency across trials reflect variable
magnitudes of effect (i.e. some studies showed a large benefit while others found a small benefit) and not
differences in the direction of the effect.
Four of the trials evaluated adverse outcomes, three of which detected none [76, 78, 80]. The remaining
trial reported that six (19%) out of 32 patients had at least one adverse event (two events occurred in two
patients in the control group, whereas 11 events occurred in four patients in the exercise groups) [88].
Only one of these adverse events was considered to be serious; a patient in one of the experimental groups
had an episode of atrial fibrillation with accompanying chest pain.
Benefits
Pulmonary rehabilitation initiated during hospitalisation increased exercise capacity. Pulmonary rehabilitation
initiated within 3 weeks following discharge reduced hospital readmissions and improved quality of life.
Pulmonary rehabilitation initiated within 8 weeks following discharge increased exercise capacity.
Harms
Pulmonary rehabilitation initiated during hospitalisation increased mortality. Other serious adverse events
occurring during pulmonary rehabilitation were rare.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00791-2016
12
ERS/ATS GUIDELINE | J.A. WEDZICHA ET AL.
 Other considerations
The reliability of the estimated effects for all outcomes other than mortality is limited by inconsistency
across trials in both the primary analysis and the stratified analysis. In addition to inconsistency,
confidence in the estimated effects for all other outcomes was reduced because all of the trials had a risk
of bias due to uncertain allocation concealment, lack of adherence to the intention-to-treat principle and/
or lack of blinding.
Conclusions and research needs
Pulmonary rehabilitation implemented during hospitalisation increases mortality. Pulmonary rehabilitation
implemented within 3 weeks after discharge following a COPD exacerbation reduces hospital admissions
and improves quality of life, while pulmonary rehabilitation implemented within 8 weeks after discharge
increases exercise capacity. Research is needed to identify the interventions that provide the greatest
benefits; some studies suggest that a combination of regular exercise with breathing technique training may
be best, but additional investigations are needed. Studies employing methodologies of implementation
science (also known as knowledge translation) are needed to test strategies that systematically target
barriers and facilitators of integrating pulmonary rehabilitation into the care of patients with COPD
exacerbations after hospital discharge.
What others are saying
The 2010 NICE guidelines concluded that “pulmonary rehabilitation should be made available to all
appropriate people with COPD including those who have had a recent hospitalization for an acute
exacerbation” [5].
ERS/ATS recommendations
For patients who are hospitalised with a COPD exacerbation, we suggest the initiation of pulmonary
rehabilitation within 3 weeks after hospital discharge (conditional recommendation, very low quality of
evidence).
For patients who are hospitalised with a COPD exacerbation, we suggest not initiating pulmonary
rehabilitation during hospitalisation (conditional recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
Remarks
Early pulmonary rehabilitation refers to a programme that consists of physical exercise and education,
which begins within 3 weeks of the start of treatment of the exacerbation.
TABLE 1 Recommendations for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
exacerbations
Recommendation
Strength
Quality of evidence
1
For ambulatory patients with an exacerbation of COPD,
we suggest a short course (⩽14 days) of oral corticosteroids
Conditional
Very low
2
For ambulatory patients with an exacerbation of COPD,
we suggest the administration of antibiotics
Conditional
Moderate
3
For patients who are hospitalised with a COPD exacerbation,
we suggest the administration of oral corticosteroids rather
than intravenous corticosteroids if gastrointestinal access
and function are intact
Conditional
Low
4
For patients who are hospitalised with a COPD exacerbation
associated with acute or acute-on-chronic respiratory failure,
we recommend the use of noninvasive mechanical ventilation
Strong
Low
5
For patients with a COPD exacerbation who present to the
emergency department or hospital, we suggest a home-based
management programme (hospital-at-home)
Conditional
Moderate
6
For patients who are hospitalised with a COPD exacerbation,
we suggest the initiation of pulmonary rehabilitation within
3 weeks after hospital discharge
Conditional
Very low
7
For patients who are hospitalised with a COPD exacerbation,
we suggest not initiating pulmonary rehabilitation during
hospitalisation
Conditional
Very low
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00791-2016
13
ERS/ATS GUIDELINE | J.A. WEDZICHA ET AL.
 Values and preferences
This recommendation places a high value on improving clinical outcomes and a lower value on the
burden and cost of pulmonary rehabilitation.
Summary
The Task Force utilised comprehensive evidence syntheses to inform its judgments regarding the balance
of benefits versus burdens, adverse effects and costs; the quality of evidence; the feasibility; and the
acceptability of various interventions for COPD exacerbations. A strong recommendation was made for
NIV in patients with acute hypercapnic respiratory failure. Conditional recommendations were made for
oral corticosteroids in outpatients, oral rather than intravenous corticosteroids in hospitalised patients,
antibiotic therapy, home-based management of appropriately selected patients, and initiation of
pulmonary rehabilitation within 3 weeks of hospital discharge (table 1). A conditional recommendation
was made against the initiation of pulmonary rehabilitation during hospitalisation. The systematic review
and GRADE methodology we employed for this ERS/ATS guideline indicated, in several instances, a
sparse evidence base. In such cases, we recommend more definitive studies. These recommendations
should be reconsidered as new evidence becomes available.
References
1
Seemungal TAR, Donaldson GC, Paul EA, et al. Effect of exacerbation on quality of life in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998; 157: 1418–1422.
2
Miravitlles M, Ferrer M, Pont A, et al. Effect of exacerbation on quality of life in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. A 2 year follow-up study. Thorax 2004; 59: 387–395.
3
Burrows B, Bloom JW, Traver GA, et al. The course and prognosis of different forms of chronic airways
obstruction in a sample from the general population. N Engl J Med 1987; 317: 1309–1314.
4
Donaldson GC, Seemungal TA, Bhowmilk A, et al. Relationship between exacerbation frequency and lung
function decline in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Thorax 2002; 57: 847–852.
5
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: management of
chronic pulmonary obstructive disease in adults in primary and secondary care (partial update). London, National
Clinical Guideline Centre, 2010.
6
Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al. GRADE guidelines: 2. Framing question and deciding on important
outcomes. J Clin Epidemiol 2011; 64: 395–400.
7
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: management of
chronic pulmonary obstructive disease in adults in primary and secondary care (partial update). London, National
Clinical Guideline Centre, 2004.
8
Schunemann HJ, Jaeschke R, Cook DJ, et al. An official ATS statement: grading the quality of evidence and
strength of recommendations in ATS guidelines and recommendations. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2006; 174:
605–614.
9
Jones PW, Beeh KM, Chapman KR, et al. Minimal clinically important differences in pharmacological trials. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2014; 189: 250–255.
10
Andrews J, Guyatt G, Oxman AD, et al. GRADE guidelines: 14. Going from evidence to recommendations: the
significance and presentation of recommendations. J Clin Epidemiol 2013; 66: 719–725.
11
Walters J, Gibson P, Wood-Baker R, et al. Systemic corticosteroids for acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2009; 1: CD001288.
12
Quon BS, Gan WQ, Sin DD. Contemporary management of acute exacerbations of COPD: a systematic review
and metaanalysis. Chest 2008; 133: 756–766.
13
Schweiger T, Zdanowicz M. Systemic corticosteroids in the treatment of acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Am J Healt-Syst Pharm 2010; 167: 1061–1069.
14
Aaron SD, Vandemheen KL, Hebert P, et al. Outpatient oral prednisone after emergency treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. New Engl J Med 2003; 348: 2618–2625.
15
Thompson W, Nielson C, Carvalho P, et al. Controlled trial of oral prednisone in outpatients with acute COPD
exacerbation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1996; 154: 407–412.
16
Bathoorn E, Liesker JJ, Postma DS, et al. Anti-inflammatory effects of combined budesonide/formoterol in COPD
exacerbations. COPD J Chron Obstruct Pulm Dis 2008; 5: 282–290.
17
Bafadhel M, McKenna S, Terry S, et al. Blood eosinophils to direct corticosteroid treatment of exacerbations of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. A randomized placebo-controlled trial. Am J Respir Crit Care 2012; 186:
48–55.
18
Bafadhel M, Davies L, Calverley PMA, et al. Blood eosinophil guided prednisolone therapy for exacerbations of
COPD: a further analysis. Eur Respir J 2014; 44: 789–791.
19
Sayiner A, Aytemur ZA, Cirit M, et al. Systemic glucocorticoids in severe exacerbations of COPD. Chest 2001; 119:
726–730.
20
Leuppi JD, Schuetz P, Bingisser R, et al. Short-term vs conventional glucocorticoid therapy in acute exacerbations
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. JAMA 2013; 309: 2223–2231.
21
Chen G, Xie CM, Luo YF. The effects and therapeutic duration of oral corticosteroids in patients with acute
exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases. Chinese J Tuberc and Respir Dis 2008; 31: 577–580.
22
Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Diseases. Global strategy for the diagnosis, management and
prevention of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (revised 2014). Global Inititative for Chronic Lung Disease,
Inc., 2014.
23
Ram FS, Rodriguez-Roisin R, Granados-Navarrete A, et al. Antibiotics for exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006; 2: CD004403.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00791-2016
14
ERS/ATS GUIDELINE | J.A. WEDZICHA ET AL.
 24
Puhan MA, Vollenweider D, Latshang T, et al. Exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: when are
antibiotics indicated? A systematic review. Respir Res 2008; 8: 30.
25
Vollenweider D, Jarrett H, Steurer-Stey C, et al. Antibiotics for exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012; 12: CD010257.
26
Anthonisen NR, Manfreda J, Warren C, et al. Antibiotic therapy in exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Ann Intern Med 1987; 106: 196–204.
27
Jorgensen A, Coolidge J, Pedersen P, et al. Amoxicillin in treatment of acute uncomplicated exacerbations of
chronic bronchitis. A double-blind, placebo-controlled multicentre study in general practice. Scand J Prim Health
Care 1992; 10: 7–11.
28
Brusse-Keizer M, van der Valk P, Hendrix M, et al. Antibiotics in patients with a mild to moderate home-treated
COPD exacerbation: the ABC trial. Am J Resp Crit Care Med 2009; 179: A1493.
29
Allegra L, Grossi E, Pozzi E, et al. The role of antibiotics in the treatment of chronic bronchitis exacerbation:
follow up of a multicenter study. Italian J of Chest Dis 1991; 45: 138–148.
30
Llor C, Moragas A, Hernandez S, et al. Efficacy of antibiotic therapy for acute exacerbations of mild to moderate
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2012; 186: 716–723.
31
Seemungal TA, Donaldson GC, Bhowmik A, et al. Time course and recovery of exacerbations in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000; 161: 1608–1613.
32
Miravitlles M, Moragas A, Hernández S, et al. Is it possible to identify exacerbations of mild to moderate COPD
that do not require antibiotic treatment? Chest 2013; 144: 1571–1577.
33
de Jong YP, Uil SM, Grotjohan HP, et al. Oral or IV prednisolone in the treatment of COPD exacerbations:
a randomized, controlled, double-blind study. Chest 2007; 132: 1741–1747.
34
Ceviker Y, Sayiner A. Comparison of two systemic steroid regimens for the treatment of COPD exacerbations.
Pulm Pharmacol Ther 2014; 27: 179–183.
35
Krishnan JA, Mularski RA. Acting on comparative effectiveness research in COPD. JAMA 2010; 303: 2409–2410.
36
Lindenauer PK, Pekow PS, Lahit MC, et al. Association of corticosteroid dose and route of administration with risk
of treatment failure in acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. JAMA 2010; 303: 2359–2367.
37
Ram FS, Picot J, Lightowler J, et al. Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for treatment of respiratory failure
due to exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2004; 1: CD004104.
38
Andeev S, Tretyakov A, Grigoryants R, et al. Noninvasive positive airway pressure ventilation: role in treating
acute respiratory failure caused by chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Anesteziol Reanimatol 1998; 3: 45–51.
39
Barbe R, Togores B, Rubi M, et al. Noninvasive ventilatory support does not facilitate recovery from acute
respiratory failure caused by chronic obstrucive pulmonary disease. Eur Respir J 1996; 9: 1240–1245.
40
Bott J, Carroll M, Conway J, et al. Randomised controlled trial of nasal ventilation in acute ventilatory failure due
to chronic obstructive airways disease. Lancet 1993; 341: 1555–1557.
41
Brochard L, Mancebo J, Wysocki M, et al. Noninvasive ventilation for acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. New Engl J Med 1995; 333: 817–822.
42
Celikel T, Sungur M, Ceyhan B, et al. Comparison of nonivnasive positive pressure ventilation with standard
medical therapy in hypercapnic acute respiratory failure. Chest 1998; 114: 1636–1642.
43
Conti G, Antonelli M, Navalesi P, et al. Non-invasive vs conventional mechanical ventilation in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease after failure of medical treatment in the ward: a randomised trial. Intensive
Care Med 2002; 28: 1701–1707.
44
del Castillo D, Barrot E, Laserna E, et al. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation for acute respiratory failure in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in a general respiratory ward. Med Clin (Barc) 2003; 120: 647–651.
45
Dikensoy O, Ikidag B, Filiz A, et al. Comparison of noninvasive ventilation and standard medical therapy in acute
hypercapnic respiratory failure: a randomised controlled trial at a tertiary health centre in SE Turkey. Int J Clinical
Pract 2002; 56: 85–88.
46
Khilnani GC, Saikia N, Banga A, et al. Non-invasive ventilation for acute exacerbation of COPD with very high
PaCO2: a randomized controlled trial. Lung India 2010; 27: 125–130.
47
Kramer N, Meyer T, Meharg J, et al. Randomised prospective trial of noninvasive positive pressure ventilation in
acute respiratory failure. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1995; 151: 1799–1806.
48
Plant P, Owen J, Elliott M. Early use of noninvasive ventilation for acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease on general respiratory wards: a multicenter, randomised, controlled trial. Lancet 2000; 355:
1931–1935.
49
Servillo G, Ughi L, Rossano F, et al. Nonionvasive mask pressure support ventilation in COPD patients. Intensive
Care Med 1994; 20: S54.
50
Thys F, Roeseler J, Reynaert M, et al. Noninvasive ventilation for acute respiratory failure: a prospective
randomised placebo-controlled trial. Eur Respir J 2002; 20: 545–555.
51
Zhou R, Chen P, Luo H, et al. Effects of noninvasive positive pressure ventilation on gas exchange and patients’
transformation on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and respiratory failure. Bull Hum Med Univ 2001; 26: 261–262.
52
Carrera M, Marin JM, Anton A, et al. A controlled trial of noninvasive ventilation for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease exacerbations. J Crit Care 2009; 24: 473.e7–14.
53
Keenan SP, Powers CE, McCormack DG. Noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation in patients with milder chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations: a randomized controlled trial. Respir Care 2005; 50: 610–616.
54
Pastaka C, Kostikas K, Karetsi E, et al. Non-invasive ventilation in chronic hypercapnic COPD patients with
exacerbation and a pH of 7.35 or higher. Eur J Intern Med 2007; 18: 524–530.
55
Schmidbauer W, Ahlers O, Spies C, et al. Early prehospital use of non-invasive ventilation improves acute
respiratory failure in acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Emerg Med J 2011; 28: 626–627.
56
Vargas F, Bui HN, Boyer A, et al. Intrapulmonary percussive ventilation in acute exacerbations of COPD patients
with mild respiratory acidosis: a randomized controlled trial. Crit Care 2005; 9: R382–R389.
57
Collaborative Research Group of Noninvasive Mechanical Ventilation for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.
Early use of non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: a multicentre randomized controlled trial. Chin Med J 2005; 118: 2034–2040.
58
Dhamija A, Tyagi P, Caroli R, et al. Noninvasive ventilation in mild to moderate cases of respiratory failure due to
acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Saudi Med J 2005; 26: 887–890.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00791-2016
15
ERS/ATS GUIDELINE | J.A. WEDZICHA ET AL.
 59
Galli JA, Krahnke JS, James Mamary A, et al. Home non-invasive ventilation use following acute hypercapnic
respiratory failure in COPD. Respir Med 2014; 108: 722–728.
60
Coughlin S, Liang WE, Parthasarathy S. Retrospective Assessment of Home Ventilation to Reduce Rehospitalization
in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease. J Clin Sleep Med 2015; 11: 663–670.
61
Kohnlein T, Windisch W, Kohler D, et al. Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for the treatment of severe
stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a prospective, multicentre, randomised, controlled clinical trial.
Lancet Respir Med 2014; 2: 698–705.
62
Struik FM, Sprooten RT, Kerstjens HA, et al. Nocturnal non-invasive ventilation in COPD patients with
prolonged hypercapnia after ventilatory support for acute respiratory failure: a randomised, controlled, parallel-
group study. Thorax 2014; 69: 826–834.
63
Jeppesen E, Brurberg K, Vist G, et al. Hospital at home for acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012; CD003573.
64
Cotton M, Bucknall C, Dagg K, et al. Early discharge for patients with exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: a randomised controlled trial. Thorax 2000; 55: 902–906.
65
Davies L, Wilkinson M, Bonner S, et al. ‘Hospital at home’ versus hospital care in patients with exacerbations of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: prospective randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2000; 321: 1265–1268.
66
Hernandez C, Casas A, Escarrabill J, et al. Home hospitalisation of exacerbated chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease patients. Eur Respir J 2003; 21: 58–67.
67
Nicholson C, Bowler S, Jackson C, et al. Cost comparison of hospital and home based treatment models for acute
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Aust Health Rev 2001; 24: 181–187.
68
Nissen I, Jensen M. Nurse supported discharge of patients with exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Ugeskr Laeger 2007; 169: 2220–2223.
69
Ojoo J, Moon T, McGlone S, et al. Patients’ and carers’ preferences in two models of care for acute exacerbations
of COPD. Thorax 2002; 57: 167–169.
70
Ricuada N, Tibaldi V, Leff B, et al. Substitutive “hospital at home” versus inpatient care for elderly patients with
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a prospective, randomised, controlled trial. J Am Geriatr
Soc 2008; 56: 500.
71
Skwarska E, Cohen G, Skwarksi K, et al. Randomised controlled trial of supported discharge in patients with
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Thorax 2000; 55: 907–912.
72
Utens C, Goossens L, Smeenk F, et al. Early assisted discharge with generic community nursing for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations: results of a randomised controlled trial. BMJ Open 2012; 2: e001684.
73
Goosens L, Utens C, Smeenk F, et al. Cost-effectiveness of early assisted discharge for COPD exacerbations in the
Netherlands. Value Health 2013; 16: 517–528.
74
Utens CMA, Goossens LMA, van Schayck OCP, et al. Patient preference and satisfaction in hospital-at-home and
usual hospital care for COPD exacerbations: Results of a randomised controlled trial. Int J Nurs Stud 2013; 50:
1537–1549.
75
Puhan MA, Gimeno-Santos E, Scharplatz M, et al. Pulmonary rehabilitation following exacerbations of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2009; 1: CD005305.
76
Behnke M, Taube C, Kirsten D, et al. Home-based exercise is capable of preserving hospital-based improvements
in severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Respir Med 2000; 94: 1184–1191.
77
Carr SJ, Hill K, Brooks D, et al. Pulmonary rehabilitation after acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease in patients who previously completed a pulmonary rehabilitation program. J Cardiopulm
Rehabil Prev 2009; 29: 318–324.
78
Eaton T, Young P, Fergusson W, et al. Does early pulmonary rehabilitation reduce acute health-care utilization in
COPD patients admitted with an exacerbation? A randomized controlled study. Respirology 2009; 14: 230–238.
79
Kirsten DK, Taube C, Lehnigk B, et al. Exercise training improves recovery in patients with COPD after an acute
exacerbation. Respir Med 1998; 92: 1191–1198.
80
Man WD, Polkey MI, Donaldson N, et al. Community pulmonary rehabilitation after hospitalisation for acute
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: randomised controlled study. BMJ 2004; 329: 1209.
81
Murphy N, Bell C, Costello RW. Extending a home from hospital care programme for COPD exacerbations to
include pulmonary rehabilitation. Respir Med 2005; 99: 1297–1302.
82
Nava S. Rehabilitation of patients admitted to a respiratory intensive care unit. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1998; 79:
849–854.
83
Seymour JM, Moore L, Jolley CJ, et al. Outpatient pulmonary rehabilitation following acute exacerbations of
COPD. Thorax 2010; 65: 423–428.
84
Troosters T, Probst VS, Crul T, et al. Resistance training prevents deterioration in quadriceps muscle function
during acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2010; 181:
1072–1077.
85
Ghanem M, Elaal EA, Mehany M, et al. Home-based pulmonary rehabilitation program: effect on exercise
tolerance and quality of life in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients. Ann Thorac Med 2010; 5: 18–25.
86
Ko FW, Dai DL, Ngai J, et al. Effect of early pulmonary rehabilitation on health care utilization and health status
in patients hospitalized with acute exacerbations of COPD. Respirology 2011; 16: 617–624.
87
Deepak TH, Mohapatra PR, Janmeja AK, et al. Outcome of Pulmonary Rehabilitation in Patients after Acute
Exacerbation of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease. Indian J Chest Dis Allied Sci 2014; 56: 7–12.
88
Tang CY, Blackstock FC, Clarence M, et al. Early rehabilitation exercise program for inpatients during acute
exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized controlled trial. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev
2012; 32: 163–169.
89
Greening NJ, Williams JE, Hussain SF, et al. An early rehabilitation intervention to enhance recovery during hospital
admission for an exacerbation of chronic respiratory disease: randomized controlled trial. BMJ 2014; 8: 349.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00791-2016
16
ERS/ATS GUIDELINE | J.A. WEDZICHA ET AL.
