 REVIEW
Resveratrol: How Much Wine Do You Have to
Drink to Stay Healthy?1–3
Sabine Weiskirchen and Ralf Weiskirchen*
Institute of Molecular Pathobiochemistry, Experimental Gene Therapy and Clinical Chemistry, Rheinisch-Westfaelische Technische Hochschule
University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany
ABSTRACT
Resveratrol is a naturally occurring stilbene endowed with multiple health-promoting effects. It is produced by certain plants including several
dietary sources such as grapes, apples, raspberries, blueberries, plums, peanuts, and products derived therefrom (e.g., wine). Resveratrol can
be isolated and purified from these biological sources or synthesized in a few steps with an overall high yield. This compound and its glucoside,
the trans-polydatin piceid, have received worldwide attention for their beneficial effects on cardiovascular, inflammatory, neurodegenerative,
metabolic, and age-related diseases. These health-promoting effects are particularly attractive given the prevalence of resveratrol-based
nutraceuticals and the paradoxical epidemiologic observation that wine consumption is inversely correlated to the incidence of coronary
heart disease. However, the notion of resveratrol as a “magic bullet" was recently challenged by clinical trials showing that this polyphenol
does not have a substantial influence on health status and mortality risk. In the present review, we discuss the proposed therapeutic
attributes and the mode of molecular actions of resveratrol. We also cover recent pharmacologic efforts to improve the poor bioavailability
of resveratrol and influence the transition between body systems in humans. We conclude with some thoughts about future research
directions that might be meaningful for resolving controversies surrounding resveratrol. Adv Nutr 2016;7:706–18.
Keywords:
French paradox, therapy, human trials, liver, SIRT1, pharmacology, nanotechnology
Introduction
Resveratrol is a naturally occurring phytoalexin that is pro-
duced by several plants in response to injury. It exerts multiple
biological activities, including anti-inflammatory, antiprolifera-
tive, and antioxidant effects (1). Structurally, this compound is
a stilbenoid that was first isolated in 1939 from the roots of the
white hellebore (Veratrum grandiflorum) (2) and presumably
received its name from the fact that it is a derivative of the ben-
zene-1,3-diol resorcinol and isolated from the Veratrum spe-
cies. Subsequently, resveratrol was isolated from several other
plants, fruits, and derivatives, such as grapes, wines, apples,
raspberries, blueberries, pistachios, plums, peanuts, and a mul-
titude of medicinal and edible plant species undergoing response
to stress conditions (3, 4). Experimental and preclinical
studies have attributed several health-promoting effects
to this compound, including cardioprotective effects, che-
mopreventive activity in diverse cancers, and a capacity to
extend the lifespan of lower organisms (5, 6).
The hope and hype concerning resveratrol was initiated by
the finding that phenolic compounds such as the stilbenes ex-
hibit radical scavenger and antioxidant properties (7, 8). This
may account in part for the so-called French paradox originally
formulated in 1981 by French epidemiologists who observed a
lower mortality incidence of coronary heart disease in France
despite high levels of dietary saturated fat and cigarette smok-
ing (9). It was later assumed that moderate drinking of red
wine over a long period of time can protect against coronary
heart disease and might be the cause of this paradoxical
finding (7). Moreover, it was postulated that resveratrol
modulates signaling pathways that limit the spread of can-
cer cells (10), protects nerve cells from damage (11–13),
helps to prevent diabetes (14), and acts as an antiaging agent
that improves age-related problems (15). Rodent models
suggested that this substance might improve consequences
of an unhealthy lifestyle resulting from high caloric intake
(16). In addition, resveratrol has been shown to mediate
therapeutic hepatic effects in acquired and genetic models
of iron overload (17).
1 Supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) grant SFB/TRR57 P13 and project
E7-6 of the Interdisciplinary Centre for Clinical Research (IZKF) within the Faculty of
Medicine at the Rheinisch-Westfaelische Technische Hochschule Aachen University.
2 Author disclosures: S Weiskirchen and R Weiskirchen, no conflicts of interest.
3 Supplemental Tables 1 and 2 and Supplemental Figures 1 and 2 are available from the
"Online Supporting Material" link in the online posting of the articles and from the same
link in the online table of contents at http://advances.nutrition.org.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed: E-mail: rweiskirchen@ukaachen.de.
706
ã2016 American Society for Nutrition. Adv Nutr 2016;7:706–18; doi:10.3945/an.115.011627.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/7/4/706/4568690 by guest on 02 June 2019
 However, most of the proposed therapeutic cell- and
organ-affecting activities were not confirmed in clinical
trials as of yet, and to our knowledge, there are very few
data regarding the bioavailability of resveratrol in humans.
In healthy subjects, a single dose of resveratrol (100 mg)
combined with polyphenols from a muscadine grape ex-
tract (75 mg) was shown to suppress oxidative and inflam-
matory meal-induced stress response (18). Subjects who
consumed resveratrol (up to 5 g/d) showed decreased cir-
culating levels of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1)4
and IGF-binding protein 3 (19). Consistent with the find-
ing obtained in laboratory animals, a meta-analysis showed
that resveratrol improves diabetes (20) and enhances
vascular functions in individuals with mildly elevated
blood pressure (21). On the other hand, the therapeutic ac-
tivity of resveratrol on health status and mortality was crit-
ically questioned by findings showing that the urinary
resveratrol metabolite concentration is not associated with
inflammatory markers, cardiovascular disease, cancer, or
mortality in older community-dwelling adults (22). There-
fore, there is an obvious necessity for more clinical studies
addressing the potential preventive and curative effects of
resveratrol.
In the present review, we highlight the history of resver-
atrol, provide some examples of proposed functions, and
discuss the presumed molecular resveratrol targets. At the
conclusion, we summarize some pharmacologic aspects,
speculate about effective therapeutic drug concentrations,
and supply clues for potential directions of future resveratrol
research.
Current Status
The phenolic compound resveratrol was first isolated in
1939 from the roots of the white hellebore (V. grandiflorum)
(2) (Figure 1A). This perennial, poisonous medicinal plant
is mainly found in China and Japan and contains some
highly toxic steroidal alkaloids. In traditional Chinese med-
icine (TCM), the dried roots and rhizomes of hellebores are
known as “li lu” and are indicated for jaundice, malaria, di-
arrhea, and headache. Resveratrol is also found in other
plants and fruits including grapes, raspberries, blueberries,
plums, and peanuts. The highest concentrations of resvera-
trol are found in the Japanese knotweed Polygonum japoni-
cum (formerly known as Polygonum cruspdatum) (Figure
1B), which is used in TCM in diverse tea products. Origi-
nally this herbaceous plant was endemic in East Asia, Japan,
China, and Korea. Nowadays, the Japanese knotweed is also
found in many countries in Europe and is classified by the
USDA as one of the worst invasive plant species (24). The
high content of resveratrol in this plant has inspired scien-
tists to establish a number of strategies for isolation and pu-
rification of up to 1 g resveratrol from 100 g of extract
acquired from this source (25). In addition, protocols were
developed to biotransform polydatin to resveratrol by firmly
immobilizing edible Aspergillus niger and yeast in roots of
these plants, resulting in 11-fold increased yields (26). The
use of engineered Escherichia coli strains for producing supe-
rior resveratrol titers and advanced chemical synthesis pro-
tocols is another attractive alternative for providing large
quantities of this drug for commercial use (27, 28). In addi-
tion to purified resveratrol, unspecified extracts from these
plants are also available and marketed as dietary health-
promoting supplements. These are generally made from
red wine or grape extracts. Red grape varieties and red wines
contain roughly 3- to 10-fold more resveratrol than their
white counterparts (Figure 1C, Supplemental Table 1).
Resveratrol exists as 2 geometric isomers in which the 2 phe-
nolic rings are either arranged in trans- or cis-configuration
(Supplemental Figure 1).
Although both cis- and trans-isomers of resveratrol occur
in nature, it is generally assumed that the trans-form is bio-
logically more active (29). However, there are also condi-
tions in which the cis-form showed a higher activity (30).
This contradiction may result from the differences in the
chemical stability of both isomers (31) or the occurrence
of transport proteins (e.g., b-lactoglobulin and albumin)
that are viable carriers that stabilize and deliver resveratrol
in vivo in the biologically effective trans-form (32). In addi-
tion, the biological activities of several trans-stilbene deriva-
tives are less potent than their corresponding cis-isomers
(33, 34).
In grapes, both isomers are synthesized almost entirely in
the skin with a peak just before the grapes reach maturity.
The terminal enzyme that is involved in biosynthesis of res-
veratrol is the stilbene synthase, which is activated by exog-
enous stress factors, UV light, and defined chemical signals
from pathogenic fungi (35). Therefore, the content of res-
veratrol and its isomers in the final wine products may
significantly differ between countries, cultivation areas, vin-
tages, and production years (Supplemental Table 1). Despite
this variability, the concentration of cis-resveratrol is generally
proportional to the concentration of its trans-isomer (35).
The average red wine can be expected to contain ;1.9 6
1.7 mg trans-resveratrol/L.
Sources and Recommended Daily Intake of
Resveratrol
It is presumed that major dietary sources of resveratrol in-
clude grapes, wine, apples, peanuts, and soy (4, 36). In Japan
and China, the Itadori tea is another rich source of resvera-
trol. It is made out of knotweed and applied as a traditional
herbal remedy for heart disease and stroke (37). Because the
concentration of resveratrol in all of these food products is
highly variable, it is somewhat difficult to estimate the aver-
age daily intake. According to a study that included 40,685
subjects (aged 35–64 y) from northern and southern regions
of Spain, the estimated median and mean dietary intake
of total resveratrol and its glucoside trans-polydatin piceid
is 100 and 933 mg/d, respectively, and the major sources
in daily life are wines (98.4%) and grapes or grape juices
(1.6%) (38).
4 Abbreviations used: IGF, insulin-like growth factor; SIRT1, sirtuin-1; TCM, traditional Chinese
medicine; tRNA, transfer RNA.
Resveratrol in health and disease
707
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/7/4/706/4568690 by guest on 02 June 2019
 This resveratrol intake level might hold true for the Span-
ish population, but resveratrol intake may be completely
different in other countries. As discussed above, exogenous
biological and physical stress factors impact the resveratrol
content in a specific food or beverage. In addition, there
are endogenous factors interfering with the biosynthesis of
resveratrol. In peanut kernels, it was shown that germination
resulted in increased resveratrol biosynthesis, shifting the
concentrations from 2.3–4.5 to 11.7–25.7 mg/g with signifi-
cantly different concentrations in the cotyledons, roots, and
stems (39). Also during the production process of wine, the
resveratrol content is modified by various factors, including
temperature, pH value, and level of SO2 (35).
The diverse beneficial effects of resveratrol on a specific
disease are strictly dose-dependent, and high doses of resver-
atrol promote unwanted side effects (40). In this context, it
should be mentioned that natural products not only contain
the trans-resveratrol isomers but also the cis-resveratrol iso-
mers. There is a great wealth of other resveratrol dimers and
higher molecular weight resveratrol variants (commonly
classified as “resveratrol oligomers”) occurring in food and
beverages. Most often, these compounds have nonsystematic
names derived from the name of species from which it was
first identified (Supplemental Table 2). For example, Am-
pelopsins, Amurensins, and Hopeaphenol were named after
Ampelopsis brevipedunculata (a wild grape), Vitis amurensis,
and plants of the genus Hopea (e.g., the evergreen tree Hopea
odorata), respectively.
In addition to these oligomers, glycosylated resveratrol
forms occur in nature. It is assumed that the glycosylation
of resveratrol protects this polyphenol from enzymatic oxida-
tion, thereby extending the cellular half-life and preserving
the antioxidant capacity (41). All of these factors make it dif-
ficult to accurately estimate the exact daily uptake of resvera-
trol in food products. Therefore, a number of manufacturers
sell pharmaceutically produced supplements with the resver-
atrol content exactly specified. Most often, these “highly
potent” drugs are offered with “more is better” recom-
mendations, and some of these “health bomb” formulations
are offered with obscure and unscientific instructions sug-
gesting doses of 1 g resveratrol to achieve the best health im-
provement effects. The recommended amount is equivalent
to a dosage of 12.5 mg/kg body weight if an adult of 80 kg
is assumed. These concentrations are justified by rough
FIGURE 1
Biological sources of resveratrol. (A) Resveratrol was first isolated from the roots of the white hellebore Veratrum album var.
grandiflorum (Veratrum grandiflorum). The phenotype of this plant is characterized by strong and leafy stems arranged in inflorescences
(left). The 6 petals of that plant are spread, not adherent, and of white or greenish color (right). (B) The highest concentrations of
resveratrol are found in the Japanese knotweed Polygonum japonicum (synonym Fallopia japonica, formerly Polygonum cruspdatum).
Originally this herbaceous perennial plant was endemic in East Asia (Japan, China, and Korea) and nowadays can be found in Europe
classified as one of the worst invasive plant species. It belongs to the genus Fallopia and its stems hold lots of distinct raised nodes
(left). The small white or cream flowers are arranged in erect racemes (right). (C) The content of resveratrol in wines originating from
different grape varieties is highly variable. Typically, white wines (e.g., those produced from the varieties White Burgunder, Riesling,
Ortega, and Gewürztraminer) contain ;10 times lower resveratrol quantities than wines made from red grapes varieties [such as
Cabernet Mitos, Cabernet Cubin, Syrah, Spätburgunder (Pinot noir), Cabernet Sauvignon, and Merlot]. The photos in panels A and B
were reproduced from reference 23 with permission. All grape images were taken in Martinsried, Pfalz, Germany. For typical resveratrol
concentrations in depicted wines, please refer to Supplemental Table 1.
708
Weiskirchen and Weiskirchen
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/7/4/706/4568690 by guest on 02 June 2019
 extrapolations from animal experiments, most of which re-
quire daily dosages of 5–100 mg resveratrol/kg body weight
in order to reach a specific biological effect.
Clinical trials assessing the effects of resveratrol in humans
are rather rare, and some were performed by using grape ex-
tracts without precise knowledge of resveratrol concentra-
tions, making it difficult to interpret the results. In one
study, resveratrol was administered to healthy volunteers
(n = 10) at 1 of 4 daily dosages (0.5, 1.0, 2.5, or 5 g) over
the course of 29 d. There was a substantial decrease in circu-
lating IGF-1 and IGF-binding protein 3 among volunteers re-
ceiving 2.5 g/d compared with predosing values. In this study,
it was further shown that the daily uptake of 2.5 and 5 g
caused mild to moderate gastrointestinal symptoms (19). An-
other clinical study in which 42 healthy volunteers consumed
1 g resveratrol/d for 4 wk showed that this regimen was suf-
ficient to modulate enzyme systems that are involved in car-
cinogen activation and detoxification pathways (42). Even
lower doses (5 mg 2 times/d for 4 wk) of a novel resveratrol
formulation termed SRT501 were effective in improving insu-
lin sensitivity in patients with type 2 diabetes, although
SRT501 was originally developed for treatment of multiple
myeloma (43). Similarly, a previous study suggested that
higher doses of 2.5 and 5 g resveratrol/d for 28 d were thera-
peutically effective in patients with type 2 diabetes (44). Al-
though the last 2 studies (42, 43) are highly encouraging,
the observation that different daily doses (10 mg compared
with 5 g) applied in human studies are equally effective indi-
cates a scientific dilemma and further raises the question
about the necessary amount that should be applied to cure
a specific disease. Moreover, the fact that the development of
the resveratrol drug SRT501 was halted because of side effects
(nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea) raised controversial ques-
tions about the overall therapeutic applicability of resveratrol,
resveratrol-enriched supplements, and resveratrol formulations.
Nevertheless, safety studies in humans have shown that res-
veratrol is a safe drug and is reasonably well tolerated at doses
of up to 5 g/d (19, 45). Therefore, the overall low toxicity of
resveratrol should in principle allow the translation of the en-
couraging experimental findings to humans. In contrast
to this assumption, the overall conclusion of a detailed litera-
ture analysis (46) highlighting resveratrol benefits and side ef-
fects, proposed resveratrol activities, and issues of relevant
resveratrol dose for treatment of human diseases was that
the published evidence is not sufficiently strong to justify
a recommendation for the administration of resveratrol to hu-
mans. In addition, the study indicated that an optimal dose of
resveratrol has yet to be established in human studies (46).
However, numerous reports describe therapeutic and health-
promoting benefits of resveratrol consumption, and these
benefits affect many organs (Figure 2). However, most of
these therapeutic activities were only established in cell culture
or in preclinical models. We discuss some of the most impor-
tant findings of health-promoting effects in the following
paragraphs.
Beneficial Effects of Resveratrol
Beneficial effects of resveratrol in heart disease
There are a number of reports describing the beneficial ef-
fects of resveratrol on improvement of heart dysfunction,
FIGURE 2
Some of the reported beneficial effects of resveratrol on organ function.
Resveratrol in health and disease
709
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/7/4/706/4568690 by guest on 02 June 2019
 failure, calcification, and pressure overload, as well as the
attenuation of myocardial hypertrophy by virtue of its an-
tioxidant, antihypertensive, and coronary vasodilating activ-
ities (47). At the molecular level, most likely some of these
effects are mediated through activation of silent information
regulator 1 (SIRT1; also known as Sirtuin 1), 59-adenosine
monophosphate-activated protein kinase, and endogenous
antioxidant enzymes (48). A recent study of the pathogene-
sis of myocardial fibrosis suggested that resveratrol exhibited
its therapeutic effects by inhibiting pathways that were
driven by reactive oxygen species, extracellular regulated
kinases, TGF-b, and periostin (49). In addition, resvera-
trol was shown to prevent collagen expression in cardiac
fibroblasts and to protect against drug-induced cardiotox-
icity (50, 51). The therapeutic effects of resveratrol in
these models could be attributed to the capacity of resver-
atrol to protect against drug-induced glutathione deple-
tion and superoxide dismutase activity (51). A recent
meta-analysis of 6 randomized controlled trials compris-
ing a total of 247 subjects showed that high levels of resver-
atrol consumption significantly decreased the systemic
blood level, although it had no effect on diastolic blood
levels (52).
Beneficial effects of resveratrol in breast cancer
The impact of resveratrol on breast cancer is controversial.
Although some reports showed that resveratrol supplemen-
tation prevented experimental mammary carcinogenesis
(53, 54), other studies found that low concentrations of res-
veratrol promoted breast cancer (55). Resveratrol decreased
breast cancer cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner
(56). Novel aza-resveratrol analogues have already been
tested for their potential to inhibit the proliferation of breast
cancer cells by impacting the expression of estrogen recep-
tors (57). In a pilot study conducted in 40 postmenopausal
women with high BMI, a resveratrol intervention with 1 g
resveratrol/d for 12 wk had favorable effects on estrogen me-
tabolisms and increased the concentrations of the sex steroid
hormone-binding globulin, which is inversely associated to
breast cancer risk (58). Likewise, a randomized double-blind
study of 39 adult women with increased breast cancer risk
showed decreased methylation of the tumor suppressor
gene RASSF-1a (Ras association domain family member
1-a) in resveratrol-treated patients compared with non-
treated subjects and suppression of expression of the cancer
promoting PGE2 (59). However, this study was conducted
with a limited sample size and needs to be validated in larger
cohorts.
Beneficial effects of resveratrol on bone homeostasis
Favorable effects of resveratrol on bone homeostasis have
also been reported. In one study, it induced osteogenesis,
prevented osteoarthritis, and counteracted age-related bone
loss (60). Likewise, the oral administration of resveratrol sig-
nificantly prevented bone loss and osteoclastogenesis in
a murine iron overload-induced bone loss model (61). In
this model, the application of resveratrol reverted the
iron-induced reduction of the bone transcription factor
Runx2, the bone-building Osteocalcin, and type I collagen.
These data suggest that resveratrol mediates bone building
by stimulation of osteoblastic and inhibition of osteoclastic
activities. In line with this assumption, a randomized, placebo-
controlled trial that enrolled 74 middle-aged obese men
showed that oral treatment with 1 g resveratrol/d for 16 wk
promoted formation and mineralization of bone (62).
Resveratrol effects on the pancreas and glucose
metabolism
Oral gavages of resveratrol in methylglyoxal-treated mice in-
creased pancreatic cellular insulin content, suggesting that
this polyphenol may be useful in the treatment of type 2 di-
abetes by protecting against pancreatic cell dysfunction (63).
In humans, there are reports that have shown that resvera-
trol improves glucose homeostasis, decreases insulin resis-
tance, and decreases metabolic disorders, suggesting that
resveratrol has the potential to treat diabetes (64). Based
on experimental findings that were established in rats that
were maintained on a high-fat diet, it is most likely that
some of the therapeutic effects of resveratrol on energy ho-
meostasis and glycemic control were induced by the antiox-
idant function of resveratrol and its capacity to modulate
mitochondrial activities and restore insulin secretion dys-
function (65).
Renal effects of resveratrol
With regard to the kidney, independent reports have shown
that resveratrol attenuates renal injury, fibrosis, unwanted
drug toxicity, and oxidative and diabetes-associated damage
(66–68). Recently, it was demonstrated that resveratrol po-
tentiates vitamin D and nuclear receptor signaling, possibly
elucidating a possible molecular pathway of resveratrol ac-
tivity (69). An inhibitory effect of resveratrol on epithelial-
mesenchymal transition, a process that is associated with
the progression of fibrosis, was recently demonstrated in
the human tubular epithelial cell line HK-2 (66). In the study,
it was demonstrated that resveratrol increased expression of
SIRT1 and inhibited TGF-b pathway via deacetylation of
Smad4, the common intracellular mediator of TGF-b
signaling (66).
Resveratrol and the visual system
Similar positive effects were reported in the eye; resveratrol
protected lens and corneal epithelium, as well as retinal pho-
toreceptor cells, from diabetic complications and other
kinds of damage (70, 71). Comparable to the observations
that were found in renal cells, epithelial-mesenchymal tran-
sition was significantly inhibited in retinal pigment epithelial
cells, suggesting that resveratrol is a potential drug suitable
for the treatment of proliferative vitreoretinopathy, a disease
marked by retinal detachment and ocular trauma (72). In
this model system, resveratrol also leads to a substantial de-
acetylation of Smad4, which resulted in reduced fibrotic
membrane formation. In a diabetic cataract rat model,
a protective effect of resveratrol on lens epithelial cell apoptosis
710
Weiskirchen and Weiskirchen
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/7/4/706/4568690 by guest on 02 June 2019
 was demonstrated by reduced expression of caspase-3 and
lower apoptotic ratios (73).
Resveratrol and fertility
With regard to the ovaries, resveratrol was shown to be an ef-
fective therapy for conditions associated with androgen
excess, thereby protecting against age-dependent decline in
fertility by increasing the ovarian follicular reserve, ovarian
life span, and preventing oocyte apoptosis (74). Other reports
have shown that resveratrol restores erectile function in ex-
perimental models of rats with diabetes, a finding that
was mainly reflected by improvement of intracavernous pres-
sure, mean arterial blood pressure, and modulation of cavern-
ous cyclic GMP levels (75). Recently, it was shown that
resveratrol supplementation modulates oxidative stress, JNK
signaling, and caspase-3 activities, thereby counteracting
diabetes-induced decreases in reproductive organ weights,
sperm count, and motility (76). Similar effects on sperma-
togenesis and general testicular germ cell differentiation of
resveratrol were also reported in surgically rendered cryp-
torchid mice (77).
Resveratrol and the blood system
Resveratrol has been shown to affect platelet aggregation and
apoptosis, most likely by increasing ATP, ADP, and AMP hy-
drolysis (78). It was recently demonstrated that this activity
by resveratrol is useful in preventing unwanted activation of
human platelets during storage for transfusion purposes (79).
The study showed that human platelets treated with resveratrol
released less thromboxane B2 and PGE2 than did control plate-
lets, showed decreased platelet apoptosis in storage, and had a
longer half-life following transfusion (79). Furthermore, it
could be demonstrated that resveratrol decreases the secretion
of PGE2, CCL5/RANTES, and CXCL8/IL-8 and increases
production of IL-1b, IL-6, and IL-10 in LPS-stimulated
peripheral blood leukocytes (80). Independent in vitro exper-
iments that were performed in polymorphonuclear leuko-
cytes isolated from healthy, adult dogs also demonstrated
that resveratrol increased proinflammatory and decreased
anti-inflammatory leukocyte cytokine production in leu-
kocytes (81). These data also show that resveratrol is effec-
tive in reducing the robustness of oxidative burst capability
in leukocytes (81).
Pulmonary effects of resveratrol
In the lungs, resveratrol has been shown to be effective in pre-
venting dysfunction, fibrogenesis, cancer growth, and injury-
induced cell apoptosis and further in displaying antiasthmatic
effects and modulating the activity of drug-metabolizing en-
zymes (82, 83). Novel studies that investigated the effects of res-
veratrol on hypoxia/reoxygenation-induced alveolar epithelial
cell dysfunction suggested that the therapeutic effects of res-
veratrol are partially mediated by promoting surfactant pro-
tein expression and inhibiting the NF-kB signaling pathway,
which controls many genes involved in inflammation (84).
Also some resveratrol oligomers such as cis- and trans-gnetin
H, which are widely applied in TCM, were tested in vitro; were
capable of promoting apoptosis by releasing mitochondria cy-
tochrome c, activating caspase 3 and 7, and inhibiting NF-kB
activation in 4 human cancer cell lines; and were therapeuti-
cally efficient in suppressing the growth of xenograft lung tu-
mors in mice (85).
Neuroprotective effects of resveratrol
Several neuroprotective effects of resveratrol have been re-
ported, including protection against neuronal damage and
ammonia toxicity, abrogation of depression, improvement
of cognitive dysfunction, and increased ability in spatial
learning and memory (86, 87). In a model of rats with mid-
dle cerebral artery occlusion, resveratrol reduced ischemia-
induced apoptosis in the hippocampus in a dose-dependent
manner, indicating that resveratrol is a neuroprotective sub-
stance with therapeutic potential (88). In line with these find-
ings, a recent report in which resveratrol’s neuroprotective
effects were evaluated in neonatal rats showed that resveratrol
effects are long lasting, protecting against brain damage,
reducing infarct volume, and ameliorating the loss of my-
elination (89).
Hepatic effects of resveratrol
Other studies have investigated the therapeutic potential of
resveratrol in hepatic disease models. Experimentally, there
are clear indications that resveratrol ameliorates hepatic lipid
accumulation and progression of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
by downregulation of inflammatory signaling pathways
and regulation of autophagy (90). In the underlying study,
the authors fed mice a methionine-choline deficient diet and
found that the daily intragastric administration of resveratrol
(100 or 250 mg/kg body weight) attenuated hepatic steatosis
and inflammation. In contrast, resveratrol treatment had no
consistent therapeutic effects on the alleviation of mani-
fest experimental steatohepatitis (91). Although these findings
may suggest that resveratrol treatment has preventive but
not curative activities in the pathogenesis of liver diseases,
daily supplementation with 500 mg resveratrol for 12 wk
improved the outcomes in a randomized, double-blinded,
controlled clinical trial that enrolled 50 patients with nonal-
coholic fatty liver disease (92).
The resveratrol tetramer vitisin B is a highly potent in vitro
inhibitor of the hepatitis C virus helicase (93). Furthermore,
in mice that received injections of cancer cells, resveratrol sig-
nificantly inhibited hepatic retention and metastatic growth of
melanoma cells, most likely by interfering with IL-18 secre-
tion, suppressing VCAM-1 expression, and blocking the stim-
ulatory effects of IL-18 on cell adhesion and proliferation (94).
Most recently, it was shown that resveratrol protects the liver
from iron-mediated injury, which is causative in the forma-
tion of acquired and genetic iron-overload diseases (17).
The therapeutic potential of resveratrol was also successfully
proven in models of colorectal and prostate cancer (95, 96).
Resveratrol and muscle
Several independent reports have found favorable effects of
resveratrol on muscle function and injury. In experiments in
Resveratrol in health and disease
711
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/7/4/706/4568690 by guest on 02 June 2019
 which the tibialis region of the hind limbs of rats was sub-
jected to compression injury by 2 cycles of 6-h constant
pressure, administration of resveratrol at daily concentra-
tions of 25 mg/kg prevented the compression-induced man-
ifestations of pathohistologic damages and ameliorated
oxidative damages in a SIRT1-dependent manner (97). Sim-
ilarly, the combined dietary intake of 500 mg resveratrol and
10 mg piperine for 4 wk was recently shown to increase
skeletal muscle mitochondrial capacity upon low-intensity
exercise training (98). Interestingly, resveratrol drastically
impacted the muscle fiber characteristics and antioxidative
capacity of finished pigs, suggesting that resveratrol is an
effective additive to improve pork meat quality (99). Like-
wise, juvenile Southern flounders that were fed a diet sup-
plemented with 600 mg resveratrol/g of food for 16 wk
showed a greater length and body mass than fish fed a con-
trol diet (100). Such studies indicate that resveratrol is a
new supplement to enhance growth in different agricul-
tural and aquacultural settings.
Molecular Activities of Resveratrol
Potential molecular functions of resveratrol were first
reported in 2003 (5). In this pioneering work, it was shown
that resveratrol can modulate the activity of SIRT1, a critical
deacetylase that impacts the acetylation status of p53, fork-
head proteins, and DNA repair enzymes (5). On the other
hand, activation of SIRT1 by resveratrol treatment reduced
tumorigenesis in a mouse model (101). As a consequence,
the binding of resveratrol to SIRT1 is associated with a sig-
nal that mimics calorie restriction and increases DNA
stability, resulting in extended lifespan of Saccharomyces cer-
evisiae (5). Valuable insights on the structural basis of the
resveratrol-SIRT1 interaction and its potential molecular
details on SIRT1 activity regulation by resveratrol were re-
cently obtained from crystal structure analysis (Supplemen-
tal Figure 2) (102). The study suggests that the binding of
different resveratrol molecules to the N-terminal domain
of SIRT1 is principally responsible for promoting tighter
binding between SIRT and a 4-residue acetylated p53 peptide
(i.e., 7-amino-4-methylcoumarin), thereby increasing SIRT1
activities.
Other recent findings considered the possibility that the
tyrosine-like phenolic ring of resveratrol might fit into the
active site pocket of tyrosyl transfer RNA (tRNA) synthe-
tase, which affects downstream activation of key stress
signaling pathways (103). In addition, the binding of resver-
atrol to tyrosyl tRNA synthetase nullifies catalytic activity of
this enzyme and redirects the tRNA synthetase to a nuclear
function, stimulating NAD+-dependent auto-poly-ADP-
ribosylation of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (103). Resver-
atrol was also shown to bind to the F1-ATPase from heart
mitochondria, thereby probably preventing its proper func-
tionality in mitochondrial ATP synthesis (104). Such an
activity would explain resveratrol activity on cellular prolif-
eration and apoptosis.
In another study, the authors used a structure-based drug
discovery strategy that relies on metabolomics-biased
fragment crystallography in which a library is screened
against leukotriene A4 hydrolase, an enzyme that is closely
linked to arachidonic acid metabolism. Using this screen-
ing method, the authors identified resveratrol as an efficient
ligand for leukotriene A4 hydrolase (105). This finding
might explain the antioxidant activity of resveratrol and fur-
ther provide some clues about the molecular details of
how resveratrol modulates inflammatory responses. Well-
designed binding studies using fluorescence spectroscopy
and surface plasmon resonance techniques showed that res-
veratrol also has affinity for phospholipase A2, another key
factor that plays a role in arachidonic acid metabolism and
catalyzes the hydrolysis of phospholipids into arachidonic
acid and lysophospholipids (106). This in turn provides
another good explanation of how resveratrol interferes
with inflammatory signaling. Along those lines, crystallo-
graphic analysis and functional studies showed that resvera-
trol acts as a pathway-selective estrogen receptor-a ligand,
again offering another pathway by which resveratrol modu-
lates the inflammatory response (107).
During recent years, intensive studies have focused on
gaining a better molecular understanding of the proposed
insulin-sensitizing function of resveratrol. X-ray crystallo-
graphic studies and in vitro transactivation assays showed
that resveratrol acts as a PPAR antagonist through its direct
interaction with PPARg and PPARa (108). Other investiga-
tions that analyzed crystal protein-resveratrol complexes
found an affinity for resveratrol and other polyphenols for
insoluble transthyretin, which is relevant in the pathogenesis
of diverse amyloid disorders such as familial amyloid poly-
neuropathy, familial amyloid cardiomyopathy, and senile
systemic amyloidosis (109). The precise molecular and
structural basis of this interaction was recently determined
in high resolution (110). These insights may provide the
molecular basis to understand some of the reported benefi-
cial neuro- or cardioprotective effects of resveratrol that are
due to increased fibrillogenesis and enable potential new
therapeutic intervention strategies for targeting unwanted
transthyretin aggregations within a specific tissue.
Biotransformation and Pharmacologic Aspects
in Resveratrol Biology
As outlined above, there is a wealth of literature describing
beneficial effects of resveratrol in diverse preclinical disease
models. However, the clinical potential of resveratrol is some-
what difficult to estimate because there is insufficient infor-
mation about optimal dosage, biotransformation, potential
side effects, and pharmacokinetic parameters. In addition,
there are a number of parameters and pharmacologic consid-
erations that affect the rate of active and passive individual
absorption in the gastrointestinal tract (111). Unfortunately,
most of the studies that investigated pharmacologic aspects
of resveratrol were done only in healthy volunteers, and there
is no guarantee that these findings can be recapitulated in dis-
eased patients. In addition, compared with its solubility in
ethanol (;50 g/L), the aqueous solubility of resveratrol
(;3 mg/100 mL) is rather low, suggesting that alcoholic
712
Weiskirchen and Weiskirchen
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/7/4/706/4568690 by guest on 02 June 2019
 beverages are beneficial to increase resveratrol’s bioavailability
and peak plasma concentrations. Likewise, the administration
of special galenic formulations of resveratrol is potentially
suitable to increase the bioavailability of resveratrol. For ex-
ample, in patients with colorectal cancer with hepatic metas-
tases scheduled to undergo hepatectomy, the application of
the micronized resveratrol formulation SRT501 induced
3.6-fold higher plasma levels than those published for equiv-
alent doses of nonmicronized resveratrol. This drug formu-
lation further extended the mean half-life by over 1 h and
almost doubled the time to maximum plasma concentra-
tions (112). Other approaches to increase the bioavailability
of resveratrol arose from the finding that the combined appli-
cation of resveratrol with other molecules such as pterostil-
bene, a stilbenoid chemically related to resveratrol, can
result in synergistic and additive effects in breast cancer cell
lines (113). Likewise, the combination of resveratrol and v-3
PUFAs exerted synergistic effects on CCL5/RANTES expres-
sion in LPS-stimulated human peripheral blood leukocytes
and additive effects on IL-6 or CXCL8/IL-8 expression in
IL-1b-activated chondrocytes (80). Similarly, the synthesis of
higher molecular oligomers of resveratrol and analogues is
currently studied as an option to increase the selectivity of res-
veratrol activity. Compared with resveratrol, the triple-bond
resveratrol analogue (i.e., 3,4’
,5-trihydroxy-diphenylacetylene)
had weaker antioxidant activity and stronger inhibitory effect
on NF-kB activation and on cyclooxygenase-2, TNF-a, and
IL-6 production in the mouse leukemic monocyte macrophage
cell line RAW 264.7 (114).
On the other hand, methylated resveratrol was shown to
increase antitumor activity but failed to mediate beneficial
metabolic effects in vitro and mediated its cell growth inhib-
itory effects at different stages (115). These findings suggest
that structural optimization approaches targeting the resver-
atrol molecule might be suitable to selectively change its ac-
tivity into a desired direction.
Resveratrol Prodrugs
As discussed above, the therapeutic usage of resveratrol is
somewhat hampered by its low bioavailability. As a com-
pound that is poorly soluble in water, resveratrol is effec-
tively absorbed by passive diffusion in the intestine where
it is then transported into the liver. Before it reaches the
systemic circulation, the presystemic metabolism (i.e., first
pass effect) in the liver leads to a substantial reduction of
free resveratrol (116). Resveratrol is conjugated in phase II
metabolism to higher soluble glucuronides (e.g., resveratrol-
3-O-glucuronide, resveratrol-4-O-glucuronide) and sulfates
(e.g., resveratrol-trisulfate) or is bound to albumin and lipo-
proteins (116). Thus, the therapeutic efficacy of resveratrol
after oral administration is rather low. Therefore, efforts
that either increase the bioavailability of resveratrol or delay
its phase II metabolism by delivering resveratrol as a pro-
drug are primary targets for the biomedical exploitation of
resveratrol (117). Recently, it was demonstrated that the en-
gagement of the free OH groups within resveratrol into an
N-monosubstituted carbamate linkage with natural amino
acids prevents conjugation, increases the stability at low
pH values, and decreases the rate of hydrolysis (117). An-
other strategy that is based on polymer conjugation by using
ester- and ether-based polyethylene glycol and polyethylene
glycol-polylactide linker chemistry allowed researchers to
increase the half-life of resveratrol in rat plasma from 0.13
to 3 h (118). There are also intensive efforts to develop strat-
egies to prepare liposome- or nanotechnology-based resver-
atrol formulations for enhancing the aqueous solubility and
stability or improving the rate and extent of absorption
(119, 120). In addition, resveratrol is used as a blueprint
for the design and synthesis of novel, more potent drugs.
HS-1793, for example, is a resveratrol analogue that is free
from the restriction of metabolic instability, bypassing the
high-dose requirement in therapeutic use. This substance
was shown to induce cell cycle arrest and apoptotic cell
death in breast cancer cell lines more effectively than resver-
atrol and maintain its good compatibility in standard tests of
genotoxicity (121, 122). Some innovative soluble galenic
forms of resveratrol should, in principle, also improve the
bioavailability and efficiency of resveratrol in humans,
thereby allowing a decreasing drug burden in humans (123).
Therapeutic Doses of Resveratrol and the
French Paradox
Current recommendations for daily consumption of resvera-
trol are primarily based on arithmetical animal-to-human
dosage conversion. Unfortunately, the confirmation of thera-
peutic effectiveness of these calculated resveratrol concentra-
tions in humans is still pending (124). Independent studies
have shown that resveratrol consumption in a daily range
of 700–1000 mg/kg body weight is well tolerated without tox-
icologic effects and that concentrations #2 g/d are harmless
when applied in the short term (46, 125). Based on these
and other findings, various “experts” claim that a daily dosage
of 1 g/d is effective for treatment of diverse disorders in hu-
mans. In addition, the permanent launch of articles with a
lack of scientific background has led to the notion that the
consumption of supplements enriched with resveratrol is
health-promoting or suitable to alleviate diverse medical con-
ditions. Moreover, the uncritical acceptance and erroneous
interpretation of the French paradox, which links a lower
incidence of coronary heart disease with the chronic con-
sumption of low doses of red wine or intake of other resver-
atrol-containing nutrients, have led to the assumption that
red wine, grapes, peanuts, chocolate, Itadori tea, or other
foods or beverages are a kind of “daily health therapy.”
However, one wonders how much of these nutrients
must be consumed to reach the RDA of 1 g resveratrol. Typ-
ical resveratrol concentrations reported for conventional
food products are: peanuts without seed coats, 0.03–
0.14 mg/g (126); red wines, 0.361–1.972 mg/L (127); white
wines, 0–1.089 mg/L (128); rosé wines, 0.29 mg/L (129);
beers, 1.34–77.0 mg/L (130); skin of tomatoes, ;19 mg/g
dry weight (131); dark chocolate, 350 mg/kg; milk chocolate,
100 mg/kg (132); Itadori tea, 68 mg/100 mL (37); red
grapes, 92–1604 mg/kg fresh weight (133); white grapes,
Resveratrol in health and disease
713
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/7/4/706/4568690 by guest on 02 June 2019
 59–1759 mg/kg fresh weight (133); and apples, 400 mg/kg
fresh weight (4). On the basis of these given concentrations,
it is not possible to absorb the recommended dose of re-
sveratrol through uptake of any of these nutrients or com-
binations thereof (Figure 3). This inevitably raises the
question: how can scientists justify the French paradox by
drinking red wine or consuming other foods or beverages?
The newest annual report on wine published by the Global
Agricultural Information Network reveals that France is the
world’s biggest wine producer (4.6 billion liters in 2014)
and consumer with a per capita consumption of 43.4 L in
2014 (134). Assuming ;73% of these wines are red/rosé
wines and 27% are white wines, and further adopting that
red/rosé wines contain ;2 mg/L resveratrol and white wines
contain ;0.5 mg resveratrol/L, the annual consumption of
31.7 L of red wine and 11.7 L of white wine is equal to an up-
take of ;70 mg resveratrol/y (or 0.2 mg/d) or 5000 times less
than the proposed therapeutic dose of 1 g/d. Even if further
daily resveratrol sources (grapes or peanuts) are considered,
these rough calculations clearly document that the consump-
tion of red wine is not a good explanation of the pathologic
mechanisms predicting the French paradox.
Of course, we must admit that our calculations only con-
sider the amount of unbound resveratrol in respective
beverages and foods. As discussed above, many of the men-
tioned nutrients contain higher molecular constituents (i.e.,
resveratrol oligomers) and resveratrol glucosides (e.g., trans-
polydatin piceid), which often occur in high concentra-
tions and show similar or sometimes higher potency in
cell culture and animal studies (135, 136). Unfortunately,
the knowledge of these oligomeric entities is poor, and the
pharmacologic properties of these compounds are widely
unknown. In this regard, the continuous development of da-
tabases, such as the Phenol-Explorer, that provide informa-
tion about the polyphenol content in foods, would be
extremely helpful in estimating the daily uptake of resvera-
trol and resveratrol derivatives (137, 138). In addition, in-
vestigation of long-term resveratrol consumption safety,
especially in medicated individuals, is urgently needed to es-
timate the therapeutic potential of resveratrol for clinical sig-
nificance in the daily care of patients (139).
Another critical issue is the targeting of resveratrol activities
to a specific organ. In most of the preclinical studies per-
formed in animals, resveratrol was orally or intraperitoneally
administered, resulting in a systemic distribution. Currently,
there are several investigations aiming to develop nanotech-
nology-based formulation, i.e., resveratrol-encapsulated nano-
particles, to improve pharmacokinetic properties and to
enhance targetability and bioavailability of resveratrol (140).
In summary, it is certainly valid to argue that it is not pos-
sible to take up 1 g of unbound resveratrol/d by consuming
conventional food products. Alternatives that are offered by
many companies include a variety of (sometimes outrageously
expensive) nutritional supplements with precisely defined re-
sveratrol content. Although their clinical usefulness is ques-
tionable, they are advertised with extravagant promises. It
will be interesting to see how new experimental findings in re-
sveratrol research will be translated into the clinics.
FIGURE 3
Quantities of food
and beverages that must be
consumed to reach
therapeutic doses. Based on
animal studies, daily
resveratrol doses in the range
of hundreds of milligrams to
several grams for therapeutic
intervention have been
proposed. If a person intends
to ingest 1 g resveratrol each
day, this would require
consuming the depicted
quantities of foods or
beverages. The calculation is
based on typical resveratrol
contents found in peanuts
without seed coats (0.03–0.14
mg/g) (126), red wine (Pinot
noir from France, 0.362–1.979
mg/L) (127), white wine
(Riesling from Spain, 0.057–
0.390 mg/L) (128), rosé wine
from Serbia (0.29 mg/L) (129),
beer (1.34–77.0 mg/L) (130), skin of tomato (;19 mg/g dry weight) (131), dark chocolate (350 mg/kg), milk chocolate (100 mg/kg) (132),
Itadori tea (68 mg/100 mL, when prepared by infusing 1 g of the commercial root prepared with 100 mL of boiling water for 5 min) (37),
red Merlot grapes from Japan (1259 mg/kg fresh weight) (133), white Riesling grapes from Japan (387 mg/kg fresh weight) (133), and
cultivated apples (estimating a mean total content of 400 mg/kg fresh weight found in 150 different cultivars) (4).
714
Weiskirchen and Weiskirchen
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/7/4/706/4568690 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Conclusions
Resveratrol is a polyphenol that is present in the human diet
and has a large variety of potential therapeutic properties.
However, it is not possible to absorb the recommended ther-
apeutic doses of resveratrol by drinking wine or through die-
tary sources. In addition, to date, most of the beneficial effects
are only established in preclinical models. One of the major
challenges in resveratrol research is to determine whether
the observed health-promoting effects are transferable to hu-
mans. Therefore, clinical trials with the aim of determining
the effective dosage regimen for the therapy of specific diseases
are urgently needed. These trials must be conducted with well-
standardized resveratrol formulations in order to allow the
comparison of obtained results. Because previous studies in
humans have already consistently shown that the bioavailabil-
ity of resveratrol after oral intake is rather low, the development
of resveratrol formulations with better pharmacologic proper-
ties is still a challenging task. Likewise, structural optimization
and the development of new galenic resveratrol formulations
such as resveratrol-encapsulated nanoparticles should help
to physiologically increase resveratrol’s activity and overall bio-
availability, to lower the necessary dose, to prevent unwanted
side effects during therapy, and to target resveratrol activities
to specific organs. Resveratrol-enriched supplements might
be suitable to allow daily uptake of therapeutically relevant
doses (currently presumed to be 1 g) that are not obtainable
by conventional foods or beverages. In addition, resveratrol
might be a supplement that enhances growth or quality of
products cultured in different agricultural and aquacultural
settings, thereby developing health-promoting effects. In
this regard, the intensification of research of resveratrol oligo-
mer chemistry and biology may also offer some avenues for
new therapeutic drugs with better pharmacologic properties.
In the long term, such investigations will reveal whether all
the hype and hope associated with resveratrol are scientifically
justified.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Hiroshi Moriyama (23) for providing
images for this review and Kevin Brulois for critical reading
of the manuscript. All chemical structures depicted were
generated with the open source molecule viewer Jmol (ver-
sion 14.2.15_2015.07.09) that is freely available (141). Drawn
pictures were prepared with CorelDRAW X6 (Corel GmbH,
Munich, Germany). SW provided photographs and prepared
the final figures for this review. RW drafted the text and pro-
vided ideas for images. Both authors read and approved the
final manuscript.
References
1. Porro C, Cianciulli A, Calvello R, Panaro MA. Reviewing the role of
resveratrol as a natural modulator of microglial activities. Curr Pharm
Des 2015;21:5277–91.
2. Takaoka M. Resveratrol, a new phenolic compound, from Veratrum
grandiflorum. Nippon Kagaku Kaishi 1939;60:1090–100 (in Japanese).
3. Rocha-González HI, Ambriz-Tututi M, Granados-Soto V. Resveratrol:
a natural compound with pharmacological potential in neurodegener-
ative diseases. CNS Neurosci Ther 2008;14:234–47.
4. Farneti B, Masuero D, Costa F, Magnago P, Malnoy M, Costa G,
Vrhovsek U, Mattivi F. Is there room for improving the nutraceutical
composition of apple? J Agric Food Chem 2015;63:2750–9.
5. Howitz KT, Bitterman KJ, Cohen HY, Lamming DW, Lavu S, Wood
JG, Zipkin RE, Chung P, Kisielewski A, Zhang LL, et al. Small mole-
cule activators of sirtuins extend Saccharomyces cerevisiae lifespan.
Nature 2003;425:191–6.
6. Baur JA, Sinclair DA. Therapeutic potential of resveratrol: the in vivo
evidence. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2006;5:493–506.
7. Fauconneau B, Waffo-Teguo P, Huguet F, Barrier L, Decendit A,
Merillon JM. Comparative study of radical scavenger and antioxidant
properties of phenolic compounds from Vitis vinifera cell cultures us-
ing in vitro tests. Life Sci 1997;61:2103–10.
8. Murcia MA, Martínez-Tomé M. Antioxidant activity of resveratrol
compared with common food additives. J Food Prot 2001;64:379–84.
9. Richard JL, Cambien F, Ducimetière P. [Epidemiologic characteristics
of coronary disease in France] Nouv Presse Med 1981;10:1111–4 (in
French).
10. Tang FY, Su YC, Chen NC, Hsieh HS, Chen KS. Resveratrol inhibits
migration and invasion of human breast-cancer cells. Mol Nutr
Food Res 2008;52:683–91.
11. Jang M, Cai L, Udeani GO, Slowing KV, Thomas CF, Beecher CW,
Fong HH, Farnsworth NR, Kinghorn AD, Mehta RG, et al. Cancer
chemopreventive activity of resveratrol, a natural product derived
from grapes. Science 1997;275:218–20.
12. Tredici G, Miloso M, Nicolini G, Galbiati S, Cavaletti G, Bertelli A.
Resveratrol, MAP kinases and neuronal cells: Might wine be a neu-
roprotectant? Drugs Exp Clin Res 1999;25:99–103.
13. Marambaud P, Zhao H, Davies P. Resveratrol promotes clearance of
Alzheimer’s disease amyloid-beta peptides. J Biol Chem 2005;280:
37377–82.
14. Bagul PK, Banerjee SK. Application of resveratrol in diabetes: ratio-
nale, strategies and challenges. Curr Mol Med 2015;15:312–30.
15. Rabassa M, Zamora-Ros R, Urpi-Sarda M, Bandinelli S, Ferrucci L,
Andres-Lacueva C, Cherubini A. Association of habitual dietary res-
veratrol exposure with the development of frailty in older age: the In-
vecchiare in Chianti study. Am J Clin Nutr 2015;102:1534–42.
16. Pan QR, Ren YL, Liu WX, Hu YJ, Zheng JS, Xu Y, Wang G. Resveratrol
prevents hepatic steatosis and endoplasmic reticulum stress and regu-
lates the expression of genes involved in lipid metabolism, insulin re-
sistance, and inflammation in rats. Nutr Res 2015;35:576–84.
17. Das SK, DesAulniers J, Dyck JR, Kassiri Z, Oudit GY. Resveratrol me-
diates therapeutic hepatic effects in acquired and genetic murine
models of iron-overload. Liver Int 2016;36:246–57.
18. Ghanim H, Sia CL, Korzeniewski K, Lohano T, Afbuaysheh S, Marumganti
A, Chaudhuri A, Dandona P. A resveratrol and polyphenol preparation
suppresses oxidative and inflammatory stress response to a high-fat,
high-carbohydrate meal. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2011;96:1409–14.
19. Brown VA, Patel KR, Viskaduraki M, Crowell JA, Perloff M, Booth
TD, Vasilinin G, Sen A, Schinas AM, Piccirilli G, et al. Repeat dose
study of the cancer chemopreventive agent resveratrol in healthy vol-
unteers: safety, pharmacokinetics, and effect on the insulin-like
growth factor axis. Cancer Res 2010;70:9003–11.
20. Hausenblas HA, Schoulda JA, Smoliga JM. Resveratrol treatment as an
adjunct to pharmacological management in type 2 diabetes mellitus: sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. Mol Nutr Food Res 2015;59:147–59.
21. Wong RH, Berry NM, Coates AM, Buckley JD, Bryan J, Kunz I, Howe
PR. Chronic resveratrol consumption improves brachial flow-mediated
dilatation in healthy obese adults. J Hypertens 2013;31:1819–27.
22. Semba RD, Ferrucci L, Bartali B, Urpí-Sarda M, Zamora-Ros R, Sun K,
Cherubini A, Bandinelli S, Andres-Lacueva C. Resveratrol levels and
all-cause mortality in older community-dwelling adults. JAMA Intern
Med 2014;174:1077–84.
23. Wild plants in and around Shimane [Internet; updated 2016 Feb 21;
cited 2016 Jan 16]. Available from: http://wildplantsshimane.jp.
24. Species profiles: Japanese knotweed [Internet]. Beltsville (MD): USDA
National Agricultural Library. [cited 2016 Jan 15]. Available from: http://
www.invasivespeciesinfo.gov/plants/knotweed.shtml.
Resveratrol in health and disease
715
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/7/4/706/4568690 by guest on 02 June 2019
 25. Wang DG, Liu WY, Chen GT. A simple method for the isolation and
purification of resveratrol from Polygonum cuspidatum. J Pharaceut
Anal 2013;3:241–7.
26. Jin S, Luo M, Wang W, Zhao CJ, Gu CB, Li CY, Zu YG, Fu YJ, Guan Y.
Biotransformation of polydatin to resveratrol in Polygonum cuspida-
tum roots by highly immobilized edible Aspergillus niger and yeast. Bi-
oresour Technol 2013;136:766–70.
27. Lim CG, Fowler ZL, Hueller T, Schaffer S, Koffas MA. High-yield res-
veratrol production in engineered Escherichia coli. Appl Environ Mi-
crobiol 2011;77:3451–60.
28. Guiso M, Marra C, Farina A. A new efficient resveratrol synthesis. Tet-
rahedron Lett 2002;43:597–8.
29. Morris VL, Toseef T, Nazumudeen FB, Rivoira C, Spatafora C, Tringali C,
Rotenberg SA. Anti-tumor properties of cis-resveratrol methylated analogs
in metastatic mouse melanoma cells. Mol Cell Biochem 2015;402:83–91.
30. Bertelli AA, Giovannini L, Bernini W, Migliori M, Fregoni M,
Bavaresco L, Bertelli A. Antiplatelet activity of cis-resveratrol. Drugs
Exp Clin Res 1996;22:61–3.
31. Trela BC, Waterhouse AL. Resveratrol: isomeric molar absorptivities
and stability. J Agric Food Chem 1996;44:1253–7.
32. Pantusa M, Bartucci R, Rizzuti B. Stability of trans-resveratrol associ-
ated with transport proteins. J Agric Food Chem 2014;62:4384–91.
33. Roberti M, Pizzirani D, Simoni D, Rondanin R, Baruchello R, Bonora C,
Buscemi F, Grimaudo S, Tolomeo M. Synthesis and biological evalu-
ation of resveratrol and analogues as apoptosis-inducing agents. J Med
Chem 2003;46:3546–54.
34. Cardile V, Chillemi R, Lombardo L, Sciuto S, Spatafora C, Tringali C.
Antiproliferative activity of methylated analogues of E- and Z-resveratrol.
Z Naturforsch C 2007;62:189–95.
35. Stervbo U, Vang O, Bonnesen C. A review of the content of the puta-
tive chemopreventive phytoalexin resveratrol in red wine. Food Chem
2007;101:449–57.
36. Sales JM, Resurreccion AV. Resveratrol in peanuts. Crit Rev Food Sci
Nutr 2014;54:734–70.
37. Burns J, Yokota T, Ashihara H, Lean ME, Crozier A. Plant foods and
herbal sources of resveratrol. J Agric Food Chem 2002;50:3337–40.
38. Zamora-Ros R, Andres-Lacueva C, Lamuela-Raventós RM, Berenguer
T, Jakszyn P, Martínez C, Sánchez MJ, Navarro C, Chirlaque MD,
Tormo MJ, et al. Concentrations of resveratrol and derivatives in foods
and estimation of dietary intake in a Spanish population: European
Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC)-Spain
cohort. Br J Nutr 2008;100:188–96.
39. Wang KH, Lai YH, Chang JC, Ko TF, Shyu SL, Chiou RY. Germination
of peanut kernels to enhance resveratrol biosynthesis and prepare
sprouts as a functional vegetable. J Agric Food Chem 2005;53:242–6.
40. Mukherjee S, Dudley JI, Das DK. Dose-dependency of resveratrol in
providing health benefits. Dose Response 2010;8:478–500.
41. Regev-Shoshani G, Shoseyov O, Bilkis I, Kerem Z. Glycosylation of resver-
atrol protects it from enzymic oxidation. Biochem J 2003;374:157–63.
42. Chow HH, Garland LL, Hsu CH, Vining DR, Chew WM, Miller JA,
Perloff M, Crowell JA, Alberts DS. Resveratrol modulates drug- and
carcinogen-metabolizing enzymes in a healthy volunteer study. Can-
cer Prev Res (Phila) 2010;3:1168–75.
43. Brasnyó P, Molnár GA, Mohás M, Markó L, Laczy B, Cseh J, Mikolás E,
Szijártó IA, Mérei A, Halmai R, et al. Resveratrol improves insulin
sensitivity, reduces oxidative stress and activates the Akt pathway in
type 2 diabetic patients. Br J Nutr 2011;106:383–9.
44. Elliott PJ, Walpole S, Morelli L, Lambert PD, Lunsmann W, Westphal CH,
Lavu S. Resveratrol/SRT501. Drugs Future 2009;34:291–5.
45. Patel KR, Scott E, Brown VA, Gescher AJ, Steward WP, Brown K. Clin-
ical trials of resveratrol. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2011;1215:161–9.
46. Vang O, Ahmad N, Baile CA, Baur JA, Brown K, Csiszar A, Das DK,
Delmas D, Gottfried C, Lin HY, et al. What is new for an old mole-
cule? Systematic review and recommendations on the use of resvera-
trol. PLoS One 2011;6:e19881.
47. Raj P, Zieroth S, Netticadan T. An overview of the efficacy of resver-
atrol in the management of ischemic heart disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci
2015;1348:55–67.
48. Zordoky BN, Robertson IM, Dyck JR. Preclinical and clinical evidence
for the role of resveratrol in the treatment of cardiovascular diseases.
Biochim Biophys Acta 2015;1852:1155–77.
49. Wu H, Li GN, Xie J, Li R, Chen QH, Chen JZ, Wei ZH, Kang LN,
Xu B. Resveratrol ameliorates myocardial fibrosis by inhibiting
ROS/ERK/TGF-b/periostin pathway in STZ-induced diabetic mice.
BMC Cardiovasc Disord 2016;16:5.
50. Chen T, Li J, Liu J, Li N, Wang S, Liu H, Zeng M, Zhang Y, Bu P.
Activation of SIRT3 by resveratrol ameliorates cardiac fibrosis and
improves cardiac function via the TGF-b/Smad3 pathway. Am J
Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2015;308:H424–34.
51. Arafa MH, Mohammad NS, Atteia HH, Abd-Elaziz HR. Protective ef-
fect of resveratrol against doxorubicin-induced cardiac toxicity and fi-
brosis in male experimental rats. J Physiol Biochem 2014;70:701–11.
52. Liu Y, Ma W, Zhang P, He S, Huang D. Effect of resveratrol on blood
pressure: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Clin Nutr
2015;34:27–34.
53. Banerjee S, Bueso-Ramos C, Aggarwal BB. Suppression of 7,12-
dimethylbenz(a)anthracene-induced mammary carcinogenesis in
rats by resveratrol: Role of nuclear factor-kB, cyclooxygenase 2, and
matrix metalloprotease 9. Cancer Res 2002;62:4945–54.
54. Chatterjee M, Das S, Janarthan M, Ramachandran HK, Chatterjee M.
Role of 5-lipoxygenase in resveratrol mediated suppression of 7,12-
dimethylbenz(a)anthracene-induced mammary carcinogenesis in rats.
Eur J Pharmacol 2011;668:99–106.
55. Castillo-Pichardo L, Cubano LA, Dharmawardhane S. Dietary grape
polyphenol resveratrol increases mammary tumor growth and metas-
tasis in immunocompromised mice. BMC Complement Altern Med
2013;13:6.
56. Chin YT, Hsieh MT, Yang SH, Tsai PW, Wang SH, Wang CC, Lee YS,
Cheng GY, HuangFu WC, London D, et al. Anti-proliferative and gene
expression actions of resveratrol in breast cancer cells in vitro. Onco-
target 2014;5:12891–907.
57. Ronghe A, Chatterjee A, Singh B, Dandawate P, Murphy L, Bhat NK,
Padhye S, Bhat HK. Differential regulation of estrogen receptors a
and b by 4-(E)-{(4-hydroxyphenylimino)-methylbenzene,1,2-diol}, a
novel resveratrol analog. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2014;144:500–12.
58. Chow HH, Garland LL, Heckman-Stoddard BM, Hsu CH, Butler VD,
Cordova CA, Chew WM, Cornelison TL. A pilot clinical study of re-
sveratrol in postmenopausal women with high body mass index: Ef-
fects on systemic sex steroid hormones. J Transl Med 2014;12:223.
59. Zhu W, Qin W, Zhang K, Rottinghaus GE, Chen YC, Kliethermes B,
Sauter ER. trans-Resveratrol alters mammary promoter hypermethy-
lation in women at increased risk for breast cancer. Nutr Cancer
2012;64:393–400.
60. Tou JC. Evaluating resveratrol as a therapeutic bone agent: preclinical
evidence from rat models of osteoporosis. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2015;
1348:75–85.
61. Zhao L, Wang Y, Wang Z, Xu Z, Zhang Q, Yin M. Effects of dietary
resveratrol on excess-iron-induced bone loss via antioxidative charac-
ter. J Nutr Biochem 2015;26:1174–82.
62. Ornstrup MJ, Harsløf T, Kjær TN, Langdahl BL, Pedersen SB. Resver-
atrol increases bone mineral density and bone alkaline phosphatase in
obese men: a randomized placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2014;99:4720–9.
63. Cheng AS, Cheng YH, Lee CY, Chung CY, Chang WC. Resveratrol
protects against methylglyoxal-induced hyperglycemia and pancreatic
damage in vivo. Nutrients 2015;7:2850–65.
64. Szkudelski T, Szkudelska K. Resveratrol and diabetes: from animal to
human studies. Biochim Biophys Acta 2015;1852:1145–54.
65. Kong W, Chen LL, Zheng J, Zhang HH, Hu X, Zeng TS, Hu D. Resver-
atrol supplementation restores high-fat diet-induced insulin secretion
dysfunction by increasing mitochondrial function in islet. Exp Biol
Med (Maywood) 2015;240:220–9.
66. Xiao Z, Chen C, Meng T, Zhang W, Zhou Q. Resveratrol attenuates
renal injury and fibrosis by inhibiting transforming growth factor-b
pathway on matrix metalloproteinase 7. Exp Biol Med (Maywood)
2016;241:140–6.
716
Weiskirchen and Weiskirchen
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/7/4/706/4568690 by guest on 02 June 2019
 67. Yaylali A, Ergin K, Ceçen S. Effect of resveratrol on leptin and sirtuin 2
expression in the kidneys in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Anal
Quant Cytopathol Histpathol. 2015;37:243–51.
68. Valentovic MA, Ball JG, Brown JM, Terneus MV, McQuade E,
Van Meter S, Hedrick HM, Roy AA, Williams T. Resveratrol attenuates
cisplatin renal cortical cytotoxicity by modifying oxidative stress.
Toxicol In Vitro 2014;28:248–57.
69. Dampf Stone A, Batie SF, Sabir MS, Jacobs ET, Lee JH, Whitfield GK,
Haussler MR, Jurutka PW. Resveratrol potentiates vitamin D and nu-
clear receptor signaling. J Cell Biochem 2015;116:1130–43.
70. Ciddi V, Dodda D. Therapeutic potential of resveratrol in diabetic com-
plications: in vitro and in vivo studies. Pharmacol Rep 2014;66:799–803.
71. Tsai TY, Chen TC, Wang IJ, Yeh CY, Su MJ, Chen RH, Tsai TH, Hu FR.
The effect of resveratrol on protecting corneal epithelial cells from cy-
totoxicity caused by moxifloxacin and benzalkonium chloride. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2015;56:1575–84.
72. Ishikawa K, He S, Terasaki H, Nazari H, Zhang H, Spee C, Kannan R,
Hinton DR. Resveratrol inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transition of
retinal pigment epithelium and development of proliferative vitreoret-
inopathy. Sci Rep 2015;5:16386.
73. Wang HM, Li GX, Zheng HS, Wu XZ. Protective effect of resveratrol
on lens epithelial cell apoptosis in diabetic cataract rat. Asian Pac J
Trop Med 2015;8:153–6.
74. Ortega I, Duleba AJ. Ovarian actions of resveratrol. Ann N Y Acad Sci
2015;1348:86–96.
75. Bai Y, An R. Resveratrol and sildenafil synergistically improve diabetes-
associated erectile dysfunction in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats.
Life Sci 2015;135:43–8.
76. Faid I, Al-Hussaini H, Kilarkaje N. Resveratrol alleviates diabetes-
induced testicular dysfunction by inhibiting oxidative stress and c-Jun
N-terminal kinase signaling in rats. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2015;
289:482–94.
77. Li E, Guo Y, Wang G, Chen F, Li Q. Effect of resveratrol on restor-
ing spermatogenesis in experimental cryptorchid mice and analysis
of related differentially expressed proteins. Cell Biol Int 2015;39:
733–40.
78. Schmatz R, Mann TR, Spanevello R, Machado MM, Zanini D,
Pimentel VC, Stefanello N, Martins CC, Cardoso AM, Bagatini M,
et al. Moderate red wine and grape juice consumption modulates
the hydrolysis of the adenine nucleotides and decreases platelet aggre-
gation in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Cell Biochem Biophys
2013;65:129–43.
79. Lannan KL, Refaai MA, Ture SK, Morrell CN, Blumberg N, Phipps
RP, Spinelli SL. Resveratrol preserves the function of human platelets
stored for transfusion. Br J Haematol 2016;172:794–806.
80. Schwager J, Richard N, Riegger C, Salem N Jr. v-3 PUFAs and resver-
atrol differently modulate acute and chronic inflammatory processes.
Biomed Res Int 2015;2015:535189.
81. Woode RA, Axiak-Bechtel SM, Tsuruta K, Amorim JR, Zhang Y,
DeClue AE. Resveratrol decreases oxidative burst capacity and alters
stimulated leukocyte cytokine production in vitro. Vet Immunol Im-
munopathol 2015;163:164–73.
82. Chen G, Tang J, Ni Z, Chen Q, Li Z, Yang W, Din J, Luo X, Wang X.
Antiasthmatic effects of resveratrol in ovalbumin-induced asthma
model mice involved in the upregulation of PTEN. Biol Pharm Bull
2015;38:507–13.
83. Xuan LL, Shi J, Yao CS, Bai JY, Qu F, Zhang JL, Hou Q. Vam3, a res-
veratrol dimer, inhibits cigarette smoke-induced cell apoptosis in
lungs by improving mitochondrial function. Acta Pharmacol Sin
2014;35:779–91.
84. Liu PL, Chong IW, Lee YC, Tsai JR, Wang HM, Hsieh CC, Kuo HF,
Liu WL, Chen YH, Chen HL. Anti-inflammatory effects of resveratrol
on hypoxia/reoxygenation-induced alveolar epithelial cell dysfunction.
J Agric Food Chem 2015;63:9480–7.
85. Gao Y, He C, Ran R, Zhang D, Li D, Xiao PG, Altman E. The resver-
atrol oligomers, cis- and trans-gnetin H, from Paeonia suffruticosa
seeds inhibit the growth of several human cancer cell lines. J Ethno-
pharmacol 2015;169:24–33.
86. Ge L, Liu L, Liu H, Liu S, Xue H, Wang X, Yuan L, Wang Z, Liu D.
Resveratrol abrogates lipopolysaccharide-induced depressive-like be-
havior, neuroinflammatory response, and CREB/BDNF signaling in
mice. Eur J Pharmacol 2015;768:49–57.
87. Ge JF, Xu YY, Li N, Zhang Y, Qiu GL, Chu CH, Wang CY, Qin G,
Chen FH. Resveratrol improved the spatial learning and memory in
subclinical hypothyroidism rat induced by hemi-thyroid electrocau-
terization. Endocr J 2015;62:927–38.
88. Meng Z, Li J, Zhao H, Liu H, Zhang G, Wang L, Hu HE, Li DI, Liu M,
Bi F, et al. Resveratrol relieves ischemia-induced oxidative stress in the
hippocampus by activating SIRT1. Exp Ther Med 2015;10:525–30.
89. Arteaga O, Revuelta M, Urigüen L, Álvarez A, Montalvo H, Hilario E. Pre-
treatment with resveratrol prevents neuronal injury and cognitive deficits
induced by perinatal hypoxia-ischemia in rats. PLoS One 2015;10:e0142424.
90. Ji G, Wang Y, Deng Y, Li X, Jiang Z. Resveratrol ameliorates hepatic
steatosis and inflammation in methionine/choline-deficient diet-
induced steatohepatitis through regulating autophagy. Lipids Health
Dis 2015;14:134.
91. Heebøll S, Thomsen KL, Clouston A, Sundelin EI, Radko Y, Christensen LP
,
Ramezani-Moghadam M, Kreutzfeldt M, Pedersen SB, Jessen N, et al.
Effect of resveratrol on experimental non-alcoholic steatohepatitis.
Pharmacol Res 2015;95–96:34–41.
92. Faghihzadeh F, Adibi P, Rafiei R, Hekmatdoost A. Resveratrol supple-
mentation improves inflammatory biomarkers in patients with nonal-
coholic fatty liver disease. Nutr Res 2014;34:837–43.
93. Lee S, Yoon KD, Lee M, Cho Y, Choi G, Jang H, Kim BS, Jung DH,
Oh JG, Kim GW, et al. Identification of a resveratrol tetramer as a potent
hepatitis C virus helicase inhibitor. Br J Pharmacol 2016;173:191–211.
94. Salado C, Olaso E, Gallot N, Valcarcel M, Egilegor E, Mendoza L,
Vidal-Vanaclocha F. Resveratrol prevents inflammation-dependent
hepatic melanoma metastasis by inhibiting the secretion and effects
of interleukin-18. J Transl Med 2011;9:59.
95. Yang S, Li W, Sun H, Wu B, Ji F, Sun T, Chang H, Shen P, Wang Y,
Zhou D. Resveratrol elicits anti-colorectal cancer effect by activating
miR-34c-KITLG in vitro and in vivo. BMC Cancer 2015;15:969.
96. Dhar S, Kumar A, Rimando AM, Zhang X, Levenson AS. Resveratrol and
pterostilbene epigenetically restore PTEN expression by targeting oncomiRs
of the miR-17 family in prostate cancer. Oncotarget 2015;6:27214–26.
97. Sin TK, Yung BY, Yip SP, Chan LW, Wong CS, Tam EW, Siu PM.
SIRT1-dependent myoprotective effects of resveratrol on muscle in-
jury induced by compression. Front Physiol 2015;6:293.
98. Polley KR, Jenkins N, O’Connor P, McCully K. Influence of exercise
training with resveratrol supplementation on skeletal muscle mito-
chondrial capacity. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 2016;41:26–32.
99. Zhang C, Luo J, Yu B, Zheng P, Huang Z, Mao X, He J, Yu J, Chen J,
Chen D. Dietary resveratrol supplementation improves meat quality
of finishing pigs through changing muscle fiber characteristics and
antioxidative status. Meat Sci 2015;102:15–21.
100. Wilson WN, Baumgarner BL, Watanabe WO, Alam MS, Kinsey ST. Ef-
fects of resveratrol on growth and skeletal muscle physiology of juve-
nile southern flounder. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol
2015;183:27–35.
101. Wang RH, Sengupta K, Li C, Kim HS, Cao L, Xiao C, Kim S, Xu X,
Zheng Y, Chilton B, et al. Impaired DNA damage response, genome
instability, and tumorigenesis in SIRT1 mutant mice. Cancer Cell
2008;14:312–23.
102. Cao D, Wang M, Qiu X, Liu D, Jiang H, Yang N, Xu RM. Structural
basis for allosteric, substrate-dependent stimulation of SIRT1 activity
by resveratrol. Genes Dev 2015;29:1316–25.
103. Sajish M, Schimmel P. A human tRNA synthetase is a potent PARP1-
activating effector target for resveratrol. Nature 2015;519:370–3.
104. Gledhill JR, Montgomery MG, Leslie AG, Walker JE. Mechanism of
inhibition of bovine F1-ATPase by resveratrol and related polyphe-
nols. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007;104:13632–7.
105. Davies DR, Mamat B, Magnusson OT, Christensen J, Haraldsson MH,
Mishra R, Pease B, Hansen E, Singh J, Zembower D, et al. Discovery of
leukotriene A4 hydrolase inhibitors using metabolomics biased frag-
ment crystallography. J Med Chem 2009;52:4694–715.
Resveratrol in health and disease
717
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/7/4/706/4568690 by guest on 02 June 2019
 106. Shukla PK, Gautam L, Sinha M, Kaur P, Sharma S, Singh TP. Struc-
tures and binding studies of the complexes of phospholipase A2 with
five inhibitors. Biochim Biophys Acta 2015;1854:269–77.
107. Nwachukwu JC, Srinivasan S, Bruno NE, Parent AA, Hughes TS,
Pollock JA, Gjyshi O, Cavett V, Nowak J, Garcia-Ordonez RD, et al.
Resveratrol modulates the inflammatory response via an estrogen
receptor-signal integration network. eLife 2014;3:e02057.
108. Calleri E, Pochetti G, Dossou KS, Laghezza A, Montanari R, Capelli D,
Prada E, Loiodice F, Massolini G, Bernier M, et al. Resveratrol and its
metabolites bind to PPARs. ChemBioChem 2014;15:1154–60.
109. Klabunde T, Petrassi HM, Oza VB, Raman P, Kelly JW, Sacchettini JC.
Rational design of potent human transthyretin amyloid disease inhib-
itors. Nat Struct Biol 2000;7:312–21.
110. Florio P, Folli C, Cianci M, Del Rio D, Zanotti G, Berni R. Trans-
thyretin binding heterogeneity and anti-amyloidogenic activity of
natural polyphenols and their metabolites. J Biol Chem 2015;290:
29769–80.
111. Smoliga JM, Blanchard O. Enhancing the delivery of resveratrol in hu-
mans: if low bioavailability is the problem, what is the solution? Mol-
ecules 2014;19:17154–72.
112. Howells LM, Berry DP, Elliott PJ, Jacobson EW, Hoffmann E, Hegarty
B, Brown K, Steward WP, Gescher AJ. Phase I randomized, double-
blind pilot study of micronized resveratrol (SRT501) in patients
with hepatic metastases: safety, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacody-
namics. Cancer Prev Res (Phila) 2011;4:1419–25.
113. Kala R, Shah HN, Martin SL, Tollefsbol TO. Epigenetic-based combi-
natorial resveratrol and pterostilbene alters DNA damage response
by affecting SIRT1 and DNMT enzyme expression, including SIRT1-
dependent g-H2AX and telomerase regulation in triple-negative breast
cancer. BMC Cancer 2015;15:672.
114. Antus C, Radnai B, Dombovari P, Fonai F, Avar P, Matyus P, Racz B,
Sumegi B, Veres B. Anti-inflammatory effects of a triple-bond resver-
atrol analog: Structure and function relationship. Eur J Pharmacol
2015;748:61–7.
115. Scherzberg MC, Kiehl A, Zivkovic A, Stark H, Stein J, Fürst R,
Steinhilber D, Ulrich-Rückert S. Structural modification of resveratrol
leads to increased anti-tumor activity, but causes profound changes in
the mode of action. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2015;287:67–76.
116. Gambini J, Inglés M, Olaso G, Lopez-Grueso R, Bonet-Costa V,
Gimeno-Mallench L, Mas-Bargues C, Abdelaziz KM, Gomez-Cabrera
MC, Vina J, et al. Properties of resveratrol: in vitro and in vivo studies
about metabolism, bioavailability, and biological effects in animal
models and humans. Oxid Med Cell Longev 2015;2015:837042.
117. Mattarei A, Azzolini M, La Spina M, Zoratti M, Paradisi C, Biasutto
L. Amino acid carbamates as prodrugs of resveratrol. Sci Rep 2015;
5:15216.
118. Siddalingappa B, Benson HA, Brown DH, Batty KT, Chen Y. Stabiliza-
tion of resveratrol in blood circulation by conjugation to mPEG and
mPEG-PLA polymers: investigation of conjugate linker and polymer
composition on stability, metabolism, antioxidant activity and pharma-
cokinetic profile. PLoS One 2015;10:e0118824.
119. Basavaraj S, Betageri GV. Improved oral delivery of resveratrol using
proliposomal formulation: investigation of various factors contribut-
ing to prolonged absorption of unmetabolized resveratrol. Expert
Opin Drug Deliv 2014;11:493–503.
120. Wang S, Su R, Nie S, Sun M, Zhang J, Wu D, Moustaid-Moussa N.
Application of nanotechnology in improving bioavailability and bio-
activity of diet-derived phytochemicals. J Nutr Biochem 2014;25:
363–76.
121. Jeong MH, Yang K, Lee CG, Jeong DH, Park YS, Choi YJ, Kim JS, Oh
SJ, Jeong SK, Jo WS. In vitro genotoxicity assessment of a novel resver-
atrol analogue, HS-1793. Toxicol Res 2014;30:211–20.
122. Kim JA, Kim DH, Hossain MA, Kim MY, Sung B, Yoon JH, Suh H,
Jeong TC, Chung HY, Kim ND. HS-1793, a resveratrol analogue, in-
duces cell cycle arrest and apoptotic cell death in human breast cancer
cells. Int J Oncol 2014;44:473–80.
123. Amiot MJ, Romier B, Dao TM, Fanciullino R, Ciccolini J, Burcelin R,
Pechere L, Emond C, Savouret JF, Seree E. Optimization of trans-
resveratrol bioavailability for human therapy. Biochimie 2013;95:1233–8.
124. Tomé-Carneiro J, Gonzálvez M, Larrosa M, Yáñez-Gascón MJ, García-
Almagro FJ, Ruiz-Ros JA, Tomás-Barberán FA, García-Conesa MT,
Espín JC. Resveratrol in primary and secondary prevention of cardiovas-
cular disease: a dietary and clinical perspective. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2013;
1290:37–51.
125. Vang O. What is new for resveratrol?: Is a new set of recommendations
necessary? Ann N Y Acad Sci 2013;1290:1–11.
126. Sanders TH, McMichael RW, Jr., Hendrix KW. Occurrence of resver-
atrol in edible peanuts. J Agric Food Chem 2000;48:1243–6.
127. Jeandet P, Bessis R, Maume BF, Sbaghi M. Analysis of resveratrol in
burgundy wines. J Wine Res 1993;4:79–85.
128. Romero-Pérez AI, Lamuela-Raventós RM, Buxaderas S, de la Torre-
Boronat MC. Resveratrol and piceid as varietal markers of white
wines. J Agric Food Chem 1996;44:1975–8.
129. Cvejic JM, Djekic SV, Petrovic AV, Atanackovic MT, Jovic SM, Brceski
ID, Gojkovic-Bukarica LC. Determination of trans- and cis-resveratrol
in Serbian commercial wines. J Chromatogr Sci 2010;48:229–34.
130. Chiva-Blanch G, Urpi-Sarda M, Rotchés-Ribalta M, Zamora-Ros R,
Llorach R, Lamuela-Raventós RM, Estruch R, Andrés-Lacueva C. De-
termination of resveratrol and piceid in beer matrices by solid-phase
extraction and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. J
Chromatogr A 2011;1218:698–705.
131. Ragab AS, Van Fleet J, Jankowski B, Park JH, Bobzin SC. Detection
and quantitation of resveratrol in tomato fruit (Lycopersicon esculen-
tum Mill.). J Agric Food Chem 2006;54:7175–9.
132. Hurst WJ, Glinski JA, Miller KB, Apgar J, Davey MH, Stuart DA. Survey
of the trans-resveratrol and trans-piceid content of cocoa-containing
and chocolate products. J Agric Food Chem 2008;56:8374–8.
133. Okuda T, Yokotsuka K. Trans-resveratrol concentrations in berry skins
and wines from grapes grown in Japan. Am J Enol Vitic 1996;67:93–9.
134. Wine Annual Report and Statistics 2015 [Internet]. Washington (DC):
Global Agricultural Information Network (GAIN Report Number
IT1512), USDA Foreign Agricultural Service. [cited 2016 Jan 16]. Avail-
able from: http://gain.fas.usda.gov/Recent%20GAIN%20Publications/
Wine%20Annual_Rome_EU-28_3–16–2015.pdf.
135. Cichewicz RH, Kouzi SA. Resveratrol oligomers: Structure, chemistry,
and biological activity. In: Atta-ur-Rahman, editor. Studies in Natural
Products Chemistry. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 2002. p. 507–79.
136. Xue YQ, Di JM, Luo Y, Cheng KJ, Wei X, Shi Z. Resveratrol oligomers
for the prevention and treatment of cancer. Oxid Med Cell Longev
2014;2014:765832.
137. Phenol-Explorer Database on polyphenol content in foods [Internet;
cited 2016 Jan 15]. Available from: http://phenol-explorer.eu.
138. Rabassa M, Zamora-Ros R, Urpi-Sarda M, Andres-Lacueva C. Resver-
atrol metabolite profiling in clinical nutrition research–from diet to
uncovering disease risk biomarkers: epidemiological evidence. Ann
N Y Acad Sci 2015;1348:107–15.
139. Tomé-Carneiro J, Larrosa M, González-Sarrías A, Tomás-Barberán FA,
García-Conesa MT, Espín JC. Resveratrol and clinical trials: the crossroad
from in vitro studies to human evidence. Curr Pharm Des 2013;19:6064–93.
140. Summerlin N, Soo E, Thakur S, Qu Z, Jambhrunkar S, Popat A. Re-
sveratrol nanoformulations: challenges and opportunities. Int J Pharm
2015;479:282–90.
141. Jmol: An open-source Java viewer for chemical structures in 3D [In-
ternet; cited 2016 Jan 16]. Available from: http://jmol.sourceforge.net.
718
Weiskirchen and Weiskirchen
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/7/4/706/4568690 by guest on 02 June 2019
