 Thalamic reticular impairment underlies attention deficit in 
Ptchd1Y/− mice
Michael F. Wells1,2,*, Ralf D. Wimmer3,4,*, L. Ian Schmitt3,4, Guoping Feng2,5,†, and Michael 
M. Halassa3,4,6,7
1Department of Neurobiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA
2McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
3Neuroscience Institute, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA
4Department of Neuroscience & Physiology, New York University Langone Medical Center, New 
York, NY 10016, USA
5Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA
6Department of Psychiatry, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, 
USA
7Center for Neural Science, New York University, New York, NY 1003, USA
Abstract
Developmental disabilities, including attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), intellectual 
disability (ID), and autism spectrum disorders (ASD), affect 1 in 6 children in the United States. 
Recently, PTCHD1 (Patched-domain containing protein 1) gene mutations have been found in 
~1% of patients with ID and ASD. PTCHD1 deletion patients show symptoms of ADHD, sleep 
disruption, hypotonia, aggression, ASD, and ID. Although PTCHD1 is likely critical for normal 
development, the connection between its deletion and the ensuing behavioral defects is poorly 
understood. Here, we report that during early postnatal development, mouse Ptchd1 is selectively 
expressed in the thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN), a group of GABAergic neurons that regulate 
thalamo-cortical transmission, sleep rhythms, and attention. Ptchd1 deletion attenuates TRN 
activity by reducing calcium-dependent potassium currents (SK). Restricted TRN deletion of 
Ptchd1 leads to attention deficits and hyperactivity, both of which are rescued by pharmacological 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
†Corresponding author: Guoping Feng, ; Email: fengg@mit.edu
*These authors contributed equally to this work
Author Contributions:
MFW and GF conceived the genetic studies and designed associated experiments, while RDW and MMH conceived the physiologic 
studies and designed associated experiments. All authors designed the behavioral studies. MFW and RDW collected the data. MFW, 
RDW, and LIS analyzed the data. MFW, RDW, MMH, and GF interpreted the results. MFW, MMH, GF wrote the paper with input 
from RDW.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2016 April 7; 532(7597): 58–63. doi:10.1038/nature17427.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 augmentation of SK channels. Global Ptchd1 deletion recapitulates learning impairment, hyper-
aggression, and motor defects, all of which are insensitive to SK pharmacological targeting and 
not found in the TRN-restricted deletion mouse. This study maps clinically-relevant behavioral 
phenotypes onto TRN dysfunction in a human disease model, while also identifying molecular and 
circuit targets for intervention.
Recent genetic studies have revealed significant overlaps of risk genes across seemingly 
distinct neurodevelopmental and psychiatric disorders including autism spectrum disorder 
(ASD), attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), schizophrenia, and intellectual 
disability (ID) [1–4]. Such shared genetic architectures could potentially explain the overlap 
of behavioral abnormalities across these diagnostic categories, but because of the difficulty 
in mapping circuitry mechanisms of behavior, understanding how diverse genetic lesions 
converge onto behavior-relevant circuit dysfunction has been limited.
Here we focused on PTCHD1, a gene that is mutated in about 1% of all patients with ASD 
and ID [5–10]. Comprehensive clinical analysis of PTCHD1 deletion patients identified a 
variable, non-syndromic neurodevelopmental disorder with symptoms ranging from 
attention deficit, hyperactivity, sleep abnormality, hypotonia, and learning disability [11]. 
We found that Ptchd1 was selectively expressed in the thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN) of 
the mouse in early development and continued to be enriched in this structure throughout 
adult life. The TRN is critical for thalamo-cortical transmission [12–15], generation of sleep 
rhythms [12, 16–18], sensorimotor processing [19, 20], and attention [13, 21], and its 
perturbation could result in deficits in these domains. By generating a Ptchd1 knockout (KO) 
mouse, we recapitulated many of these human symptoms. Critically, we mapped ADHD-like 
behaviors onto TRN circuit dysfunction via two independent methods. First, by deleting 
Ptchd1 selectively from the TRN, we replicated the attention deficit and hyperactivity 
behaviors, but not other disease-related phenotypes found in the full KO. Second, 
pharmacological rescue of TRN biophysical dysfunction selectively rescued these ADHD-
related behaviors in the Ptchd1 KO. These findings constitute the first evidence for a “leaky 
thalamus” in a neurodevelopmental disorder, where irrelevant inputs that are normally 
suppressed become highly distracting. Most importantly, we identified the TRN and its SK 
channels as circuit and molecular targets for intervention.
Altered TRN neuronal biophysics
The X-linked Ptchd1 gene is predicted to encode a twelve-pass transmembrane protein with 
a sterol-sensing domain (SSD) [5], prompting its classification as a member of the Patched 
family and speculation that it may function as a Sonic hedgehog receptor [22–24]. 
Prenatally, Ptchd1 expression is found in the developing cerebellum and diencephalon 
[www.eurexpress.org; Ref Seq XM_142262]. We found Ptchd1 mRNA to be confined to the 
TRN at birth, and by P15 onwards, to be expressed in the striatum, cortex, and cerebellum 
(Fig. 1a–b, Ext. Data Fig. 1, Supplemental Table 1). Interestingly, Patched family members 
Ptchd2 and Ptchd3 show no TRN expression [Allen Brain Atlas; Exp 77620810 & Exp 
71891731, respectively]. Thus, Ptchd1 may play a unique role in the TRN.
Wells et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To understand how Ptchd1 deletion might contribute to neurodevelopmental disorders, we 
generated a conditional allele of Ptchd1 by targeting Exon 2 (Ext. Data Fig. 2a). This exon 
encodes 3 out of the 12 transmembrane domains including a significant portion of the SSD. 
Loss of this exon is predicted to generate a prematurely terminated non-functional protein 
(Ext. Data Fig. 2b). In situ hybridization, genotype PCR, and cDNA transcript analyses 
confirmed successful excision of Exon 2 (Ext. Data Fig. 2c–e; For source data, see 
Supplemental Figure 1). Because Ptchd1 is X-linked and patients are almost exclusively 
males, we used hemizygous male mice (Ptchd1Y/−; referred to as Ptchd1 KO) for this study. 
Ptchd1 KO mice were viable with normal body weight allowing for direct genetic modeling 
of this human condition.
Given the enriched expression of Ptchd1 in the TRN, we focused our initial investigation on 
this structure in Ptchd1 KO mice. The TRN is a group of GABAergic neurons that provide 
the major source of inhibition to thalamic relay nuclei, and are thought to regulate cortical 
rhythms, sleep, and attention [21, 25, 26]. To begin investigating possible physiological 
changes in the KO mice, we exploited a well-known characteristic of TRN neurons. 
Depending on their resting membrane potential, these neurons fire in two distinct modes 
upon receiving synaptic input [27]. At depolarized membrane potential, they fire tonic Na+ 
spikes. When hyperpolarized, they generate repetitive “low-threshold” Ca2+ transients 
crowned by high-frequency Na+ spikes known as bursts [26, 28–30]. Whole-cell patch-
clamp recordings of TRN neurons revealed a significant decrease in repetitive bursting in 
KO mice compared to wild-type (WT) controls (Fig. 1c–d). These changes were not the 
result of altered KO TRN neuron resting membrane potential, input resistance, or escape 
from hyperpolarization (Fig. 1d, inset).
Because repetitive bursting is known to depend on interactions between T-type Ca2+ and 
small conductance calcium-activated (SK) K+ channels [26], we asked which of these two 
conductances were primarily impaired in the KO. Under voltage clamp, we found T currents 
to be intact but SK currents to be reduced by 50% in the KO (Fig. 1e–h). We took note that 
SK channels are sensitive to resting state intracellular Ca2+ ([Ca2+]i) [26, 31] and measured 
this concentration using the ratiometric Ca2+ indicator Fura-2AM in TRN neurons from 
acute brain slices. We found a two-fold reduction of [Ca2+]i in KO TRN neurons (Fig. 1i), 
suggesting that altered Ca2+ homeostasis may underlie SK channel deficits.
Reduced TRN-generated sleep spindles
Previous studies have suggested that TRN bursting plays a role in the generation of sleep 
spindles [19, 28], predicting that the diminished bursting found in Ptchd1 KO mice would 
lead to reduced sleep spindles. Using independently adjustable multi-electrode arrays to 
directly target TRN neurons for electrophysiological recordings in freely behaving animals 
and surface electroencephalography (Fig. 2a, Ext. Data Fig. 3a) [32], we discovered that KO 
TRN neurons exhibited reduced burst firing in sleep (Fig. 2b) and KO mice showed overall 
reduction in sleep spindle count (Fig. 2c, Ext. Data Fig. 3b–c). Further, the degree of TRN 
neuronal engagement in spindle events was substantially diminished in the KO (Ext. Data 
Fig. 3d–f), supporting the link between the cellular and network phenotypes in this disorder 
and perhaps other human neurodevelopmental disorders [33, 34]. Importantly, consistent 
Wells et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with the notion that sleep spindles are a marker for sleep stability [35, 36], we found Ptchd1 
KO mice to display highly fragmented sleep (Fig. 2d–f; Supplemental Table 2).
Impaired sensory-evoked thalamic inhibition
In addition to reduced rebound bursting, insufficient K+-mediated hyperpolarization is 
expected to more generally alter TRN neuronal excitability. Most importantly, it could lead 
to neurons not being hyperpolarized enough for T-type Ca2+ channels to de-inactivate and 
boost excitability [24]. Therefore, despite finding T-type currents to be intact under 
controlled voltage clamp conditions (at −70mV), insufficient hyperpolarization caused by 
reduced SK current would render T-type channels less recruitable under physiological 
conditions [17], leading to reduced TRN neuronal activity and diminished overall thalamic 
inhibition. To test this prediction at the population level and in the intact brain, we used 
chloride photometry, a tool that we recently developed as a proxy for population-level 
GABAergic inhibition [13]. This technique utilizes FRET-based measurements of the 
chloride-sensor SuperClomeleon [37], a reporter composed of a cyan fluorescent protein 
(CFP) FRET-donor and a chloride-quenchable yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) FRET 
acceptor (Fig. 3a). By introducing SuperClomeleon into visual thalamic neurons (lateral 
geniculate nucleus, LGN; Fig. 3b) we observed visual-evoked chloride transients (Fig. 3c–
d), replicating our recent findings [13]. Visual-evoked inhibitory transients were observed in 
both WT and Ptchd1 KO LGN, but a quantitative comparison revealed a 25% reduction of 
these transients in the KO (Fig. 3e–g). Impaired inhibition was also observed in response to 
trains of stimuli (Fig. 3h, j). Interestingly, a small inhibitory augmentation as a result of 
repeated stimulation was observed in WTs and this augmentation was also significantly 
reduced in the KOs (Fig. 3h–i). Altogether, these findings provide direct evidence for 
reduced thalamic inhibition in Ptchd1 KO mice and are consistent with impaired TRN 
output with ensuing deficits in sensory-related thalamic inhibition.
ADHD-like behaviors in Ptchd1 KO mice
We have recently observed that thalamic inhibition is utilized to suppress unwanted sensory 
inputs during attention [12]. The observed reduction in thalamic inhibition (Fig. 3) would 
predict that unwanted sensory inputs may become particularly distracting for Ptchd1 KO 
mice. To test this hypothesis, we trained mice on a visual detection task shown to require 
attentional engagement [12] (Fig. 4a). Mice initiated each trial by continuously breaking an 
infrared barrier for 0.5–0.7 seconds, ensuring proper head position when a visual stimulus 
was presented either to the right or left of the animal. Correct indication of visual stimulus 
location by nose-poking resulted in reward delivery. Under such conditions, Ptchd1 KO mice 
performance was comparable to WTs (Fig. 4b). However, in the presence of a visual 
distractor during anticipation, KO mice showed impaired performance (Fig. 4c). The specific 
distractibility phenotype, rather than a more general failure of attentional engagement, 
revealed by this novel behavioral paradigm is consistent with the prediction of impaired 
thalamic inhibition required for distractor suppression. It is also consistent with clinical 
findings in patients with related neurodevelopmental disorders [38]. This impairment was 
not the result of general sensorimotor dysfunction given intact performance on standard 
sensorimotor testing (Ext. Data Fig. 4a–c).
Wells et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Distractibility is often accompanied by hyperactivity in several human neurodevelopmental 
disorders such as ADHD [39, 40]. ADHD symptoms are frequently observed in patients 
with PTCHD1 mutations [11]. Interestingly, Ptchd1 KO mice showed a hyperactivity 
phenotype in the open field (Fig. 4d). Classical ADHD-related hyperactivity is predicted to 
respond effectively to amphetamines, as had been previously described in other mouse 
models of neurodevelopmental disease [41]. Surprisingly, Ptchd1 KO hyperactivity was 
insensitive to amphetamine treatment (Fig. 4e–f), suggesting a unique pathophysiological 
origin that may be related to the approximately 30% of ADHD patients who do not respond 
to amphetamines [42].
In addition to attention deficits and hyperactivity, Ptchd1 KO mice showed a variety of 
behavioral abnormalities. While KO mice showed intact performance on tasks requiring 
simple spatial learning (Ext. Data Fig. 5a–d), they exhibited significant deficits on tasks 
necessitating more complex associations that are believed to require integration across 
multiple brain structures [43]. KO mice showed fear-induced freezing deficits in contextual 
(Fig. 4g) and cued (Fig. 4h) fear conditioning paradigms. Impaired learning was 
corroborated by profound deficits on the inhibitory avoidance task (Fig. 4i). KO mice also 
exhibited motor defects such as gait abnormalities (Ext. Data Fig. 5e) and hypotonia (Ext. 
Data Fig. 5f), as well as hyper-aggression (Ext. Data Fig. 5g–h). All of these behaviors were 
independent of genetic background (Ext. Data Fig. 6). These behaviors are consistent with 
clinical findings of multi-system abnormalities in PTCHD1 deletion patients, suggesting the 
major function of PTCHD1 is evolutionarily conserved. Interestingly, while several 
PTCHD1 deletion patients have been diagnosed with ASD, KO mice did not exhibit 
differences in repetitive grooming (Ext. Data Fig. 7a) or social interaction (Ext. Data Fig. 
7b–c). This may reflect evolutionary divergence either in PTCHD1 function or in behavioral 
circuits related to PTCHD1 deficiency [44].
TRN defects underlie ADHD-like behaviors
To determine which behavioral abnormalities are caused by TRN dysfunction, we sought 
strategies to largely limit Ptchd1 deletion to the TRN. To choose the appropriate Cre-driver 
line to breed with floxed Ptchd1 (Ptchd1+/fl) mice, we looked for specific TRN overlap 
between candidate markers and PTCHD1 expression. Immunohistochemical co-labeling 
experiments of Ptchd1-YFP+/−, a novel knock-in mouse with Yellow Fluorescent Protein 
(YFP) in place of Ptchd1 Exon 1 (Ext. Data Fig. 8a), revealed significant and unique overlap 
between YFP and the inhibitory neuronal marker GAD67 in the TRN (Ext. Data Fig. 8b; 
Supplemental Table 3).
Both parvalbumin (PV) and somatostatin (SOM) are inhibitory neural markers that are 
widely expressed across TRN neurons [45, 46] and showed overlap with YFP limited to this 
region (Ext. Data Fig. 8c), suggesting that mating Cre-drivers of either PV or SOM to 
Ptchd1+/fl mice would result in a Ptchd1 deletion that is primarily confined to the TRN. 
Given the early postnatal expression of PTCHD1 and SOM in the TRN (Ext. Data Fig. 9), 
we reasoned that the Som-Cre mouse would be a more suitable choice for such experiments 
[47]. We crossed Ptchd1+/fl female mice to Som-Cre mice and generated male mice lacking 
Ptchd1 in the TRN (Som-Cre+:Ptchd1Y/fl), as confirmed by in situ hybridization (Fig. 5a).
Wells et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Som-Cre+:Ptchd1Y/fl mice displayed attention deficits (Fig. 5b) and recapitulated the 
hyperactivity phenotype observed in the germline KO (Fig. 5c–d), suggesting that these 
behaviors are explained by TRN dysfunction. Som-Cre+:Ptchd1Y/fl mice showed intact 
learning (Fig. 5e) and did not show hypotonia or hyper-aggression (Ext. Data Fig. 10a–b), 
reaffirming the circuit specificity of this genetic model. Interestingly, Som-Cre+:Ptchd1Y/fl 
mice exhibited fragmented sleep (Ext. Data Fig. 10c–e), confirming the notion that sleep 
abnormalities observed in the germline KO are of TRN origin, and that sleep and attention 
deficits can arise from common circuit dysfunction [48].
Finally, we asked whether pharmacological boosting of SK channels could rescue ADHD-
like KO behaviors. Acute injection of the SK positive allosteric modulator 1-ethyl-
benzimidazolinon (1-EBIO) significantly mitigated impaired sensory-evoked thalamic 
inhibition in germline KOs with no impact on inhibitory transients in the WTs (Fig. 6a). 
Consistent with these physiological effects, 1-EBIO did not impact attentional task 
performance in the WT mice (Fig. 6b) but substantially mitigated distractibility in the KO 
mice (Fig. 6c). In addition, 1-EBIO injection rescued the hyperactivity phenotype in the KOs 
(Fig. 6d–e). Specificity of this pharmacological approach was supported by it not impacting 
other abnormalities including hypotonia (Ext. Data Fig. 10f), hyper-aggression (Ext. Data 
Fig. 10g), and learning deficits (Fig. 6f). Together, these results further support SK channel 
dysfunction as a cellular mechanism for these behavioral abnormalities. Future studies 
examining the therapeutic benefit of SK targeting for sleep fragmentation and instability and 
its potential relevance to inattention would be important.
Discussion
To our knowledge, this study is the first to show that a TRN circuit deficit is central to a 
specific set of behavioral impairments in a human neurodevelopmental disease model. 
Utilizing a conditional knockout approach of Ptchd1, a gene whose expression is restricted 
to the TRN during early postnatal development, we mapped behavioral phenotypes onto 
their circuit substrates. We additionally discovered that modulation of SK channel function 
might be explored as a potential novel treatment strategy for PTCHD1 deletion patients with 
attention deficits and hyperactivity. Hyperactivity of TRN origin may be the motor 
equivalent of sensory distractibility, which could involve dysfunctional motor TRN-thalamic 
circuits. Future experiments exploring inhibitory control of motor thalamus will formally 
test this conjecture.
While basic studies have shown the TRN to be central for attention [21, 49] and sleep 
spindles [16], our study directly shows how disease-relevant impaired TRN output can result 
in attention deficits, hyperactivity, and sleep disruption. This direct demonstration was made 
possible by developing SuperClomeleon photometry, a technique that can now be widely 
applied to disease models as a screen for impaired thalamic inhibition. It is possible that a 
“leaky thalamus” caused by impaired TRN function underlies attention deficits, 
hyperactivity, and sleep disruption across various neurodevelopmental disorders, and we 
expect the set of genetic, physiologic, and behavioral approaches we introduce here to 
facilitate such discoveries.
Wells et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Methods
Ptchd1 conditional KO mice
Ptchd1 conditional knockout mice were generated by homologous recombination in R1 
embryonic stem cells and implanted in C57Bl/6J blastocysts using standard procedures. The 
targeting vector was designed to flank Exon 2 of the Ptchd1 gene with loxP sites and a NEO 
cassette. Chimaeric mice were crossed to C57Bl/6J females (Jackson Labs). Germline 
transmission was determined by genotyping PCR of mouse tail DNA, using primer pFW 
Pt1cKO Gen 1a (GGATGGTACCACCTACAATATGC) and pRV Pt1cKO Gen 3b 
(AAGCCAAAGAGTTTACCCTG) for the wild-type allele (187 base pairs) and the floxed 
allele (227 base pairs). The F1 hybrids were crossed to C57Bl/6J β-Actin Flp mice to excise 
the NEO cassette. The floxed mice were then backcrossed to C57Bl/6J mice for 5 
generations. After the 5th generation, speed congenic genotyping PCRs were conducted to 
determine the approximate purity of the background. Only mice showing >95% C57Bl/6J 
background were used for subsequent matings. Backcrossed Ptchd1 KO mice were then bred 
with C57Bl/6J β-Actin Cre mice to produce germline knockouts of the floxed allele. 
Genotypes were determined by PCRs using the pFW Pt1cKO Gen 1a and pRV Pt1cKO Gen 
4c (GGACTTTGGAGTAAACCACC; in the NEO cassette) primers for the knockout allele 
(351 base pairs). For all behavioral experiments in the C57Bl/6J background, Ptchd1Y/− 
(KO) and Ptchd1Y/+ (WT) males were bred with Ptchd1+/− females. For the C57/129 mixed 
background behavioral experiments, 129+/+ males were bred with Ptchd1+/− C57Bl/6J 
females and the F1 offspring were used for experiments. Animals were housed 3–5 by 
genotype per cage at a constant 23°C in a 12 h light/dark cycle (lights on at 07:00) with ad 
libitum food and water (unless otherwise noted).
Healthy age-matched male mice between 2–5 months were used for all behavioral 
experiments. Sample sizes were chosen based on standards in the field as well as previous 
experience with phenotype comparisons. All behavior experiments employed a group 
counterbalancing strategy to ensure that both genotypes were being tested at equal 
frequencies throughout the testing day. For drug studies, mice were chosen at random to be 
included in the vehicle-treated versus drug-treated groups. Experimenters were blind to 
genotype, but not group (i.e. Group A vs Group B), during data acquisition and analysis. 
D’Agostino and Pearson omnibus normality tests were run. When normality was violated, 
non-parametric tests (Wilcoxon ranksum) were used. ANOVA was used to estimate group 
variance where multiple comparisons were made. All data analyzed with two-tailed t-tests 
showed similar variances between groups. Data presented as scatterplot with mean denoted 
by bar, unless otherwise noted. All animal experiments were conducted according to the 
NIH Health Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and were approved by the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
Ptchd1-YFP mice
Ptchd1-YFP mice were generated by homologous recombination in R1 embryonic stem cells 
and implanted in C57Bl/6J blastocysts using standard procedures. The targeting vector 
replaced Exon 1 of the mouse Ptchd1 gene with ATG-eYFP-STOP cassette and a NEO 
cassette. Correctly-altered ES colonies were PCR screened using primers targeting the YFP 
Wells et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 insert and long-arm PCR (LA Taq) methods. Chimaeric mice were crossed to C57Bl/6J 
females from Jackson Labs. Germline transmission was assessed through genotyping PCR 
of mouse tail DNA, using primers pFW Pt1-YFPki Gen 3a (TTACTTCCTTTTCCCCACC), 
pRV Pt1-YFPki Gen 3a (CCCAGGTTCTCTAGTAGATTCC), and pFW Pt1-YFPki Gen 3b 
(GGAGAGTGAATCTAGGTGGAG) for the wild-type allele (positive band = 190 base 
pairs) and the YFP positive allele (positive band = 316 base pairs). The F1 hybrids were 
backcrossed to C57Bl/6J mice for 2 generations. Female mice containing the YFP insertion 
(Ptchd1-YFP+/−) were used for all immunohistochemistry experiments.
In situ hybridization
mRNA in situ hybridization was performed with 20 μm cryosections from freshly frozen P0, 
P15, and P35 brain tissue from male mice using a mixture of two digoxigenin (DIG)-
labelled probes against mouse Ptchd1 cDNA (GenBank Accession NM_001093750.1; Ex2 
base pairs 372-1006 and Ex3 base pairs 1290-2027), except for the WT-KO comparisons, in 
which only Ex2 probe was used. The hybridization signal was detected using an alkaline 
phosphatase (AP)-conjugated anti-DIG antibody (Roche) and developed using 5-bromo-4-
cloro-indolylphosphate/nitroblue tetrazolium (BCIP/NBT; Roche). Sections were imaged 
using an Olympus BX61 motorized fluorescent microscope.
Immunohistochemistry
Mice were perfused with ice-cold 1X PBS and 4% paraformaldehyde. Brains were then 
fixed overnight at 4°C prior to vibratome sectioning. Fifty micron sections were washed 
with 1X PBS 3 × 5 mins prior to a 1 hr room temperature incubation in blocking solution 
(5% normal goat serum, 2% BSA, 0.2% Triton X-100 in 1X PBS). Sections were then 
incubated overnight at 4°C in primary antibody solution: Rabbit anti-GFP (Invitrogen 
A11122; 1:1000), Chicken anti-GFP (Abcam 13970; 1:1000) Mouse anti-GAD67 (Millipore 
5406; 1:1000), Rabbit anti-Somatostatin (Peninsula Labs T4102; 1:1000), and Mouse anti-
NeuN (Millipore MAB377; 1:1000). Following the 3 × 20 mins wash in 1X PBS, tissue was 
incubated for 4 hrs at room temperature in second antibody solution: Goat anti-Rabbit Alexa 
488 (LT A-11034; 1:1000), Goat anti-Rabbit Alexa 555 (LT A-21428; 1:1000), Goat anti-
Mouse Alexa 488 (LT A-11001; 1:1000), Goat anti-Mouse Alexa 555 (LT A-21422; 
1:1000), and Goat anti-Chicken Alexa 488 (LT A-11039; 1:1000). Sections were once again 
washed 3 × 20 mins in 1X PBS prior to mounting onto glass slides using Fluoro-Gel. Images 
were taken with an Olympus Fluoview 1000 confocal microscope. YFP co-labeling was 
quantified using ImageJ. Images were converted to 8-bit files and automatically background 
substracted and thresholded. The resulting images were converted to a mask and then the 
processes “fill holes” and “watershed” were implemented. The processed images were then 
analyzed using the “analyze particles” feature with the squared size set to “200-Infinity” and 
the show feature set to “outlines.” This end product of this procedure was an image 
containing enumerated cell skeletons. Skeleton images from the green and red channels were 
merged and overlapping skeletons were counted as a co-labeling event.
Slice electrophysiology
Freshly prepared brain slices from P21-P28 male mice were superfused with oxygenated 
ACSF (in mM: 125 NaCl, 25 NaHCO3, 25 glucose, 2.5 KCl, 1.25 NAH2PO4, 1.2 MgCl2, 2 
Wells et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CaCl2, 1.7 ascorbic acid) and recorded at 30–34°C. Patch pipettes (2.5–4 MΩ) contained the 
following intracellular solution in mM: 140 KMeSO4, 10KCl, 10 HEPES, 0.1 EGTA, 4Mg-
ATP, 0.2 Na-GTP, 10 phosphocreatine, (285 mOsm, pH 7.2). For rebound burst 
characterization, cells were held in current clamp at potentials ranging from −85 to −25 mV 
through constant current injection. Rebound bursting was determined following a 600 ms, 
−0.5 nA current step. Events crossing 2 standard deviations of the baseline noise were 
considered bursts. To determine T and SK currents, responses to different hyperpolarizing 
steps (500 ms, ranging from −110 to −60 mV) were recorded in voltage clamp configuration. 
T currents were isolated through application of the SK channel blocker apamin (100 nM) 
while SK currents were estimated by digital subtraction of the isolated T current from 
control currents without apamin in slices from 4–5 mice per genotype. Cells where the input 
resistance changed > 15% during the recording were excluded from the analysis.
In vivo TRN recordings
Hyperdrives containing 12 individually adjustable microdrives loaded with 1–2 stereotrodes 
were built as previously described [37]. Mice were anesthetized with 1% isofluorane and 
mounted on a stereotaxic frame. A 3 × 2.5 mm craniotomy (center coordinate M–L: 2.5 mm, 
A–P: −1.3 mm) was drilled and the hyperdrive was implanted at a 15° angle relative to 
midline. At time of implantation, stereotrodes were lowered <500 microns into the brain. 
Three stainless steel screws (one located prefrontal and two cerebellar) served as EEG 
electrodes and ground and anchored together with two additional fixation screws the 
hyperdrive to the skull. After recovery, mice were connected to a custom made 32-channel 
preamplifier headstage (Neuralynx, Bozeman, MT) and data was acquired using a 
Neuralynx Digilynx recording system. Stereotrode signals were amplified, filtered between 
0.1 Hz and 9 kHz and digitized at approximately 30 kHz. Spikes were manually clustered 
using the MClust toolbox for MATLAB, and bursts were identified as at least two spikes 
with inter-spike interval ≤10 ms which were preceeded by ≥ 70 ms of silence. Spindle 
detection was performed as previously described [12]. The EEG signal was filtered within 
the spindle frequency band (9–15 Hz) and the Hilbert transform (MATLAB function 
“hilbert”) was computed. The envelope of the signal (1 s smoothing) was used as a basis for 
spindle detection. A threshold of one standard deviation (SD) was applied and each 
threshold crossing, with parameters of > 0.5 s and < 3 s, were initially included. These 
events were subsequently visually inspected before being included in the analysis. To assess 
consistency in the phase locking of individual TRN neurons with spindles, we used spike 
phase synchrony analysis between unit firing and spindle band (9–15 Hz) filtered component 
of the LFP (Ext. Data Fig. 3d–f). For each TRN unit we first constructed a spike-phase 
histogram of firing rates relative to alpha. Units were considered significantly phase locked 
if the distribution of spike phases significantly differed from a uniform distribution based on 
Rayleigh’s test for circular uniformity (cut-off, p < 0.05). To quantify the degree of phase-
locking, the Pearson’s correlation coefficient between spike counts and phase angle was 
computed for each unit. Analysis was performed in MATLAB using the circular statistics 
toolbox.
Wells et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Sleep analysis
Sleep-related immobility was used to measure sleep bout duration in mice (C57: 9 WT and 
10 KO; Som-Cre: 10 WT and 10 KO), a technique that has previously been shown to 
correlate (r = 0.94) with EEG recordings [50]. We used BIOBSERVE Behavioral Sequencer 
boxes (BIOBSERVE; Bonn, Germany) that utilize Piezo sensors and video recordings to 
automatically score 23 different movements/behaviors, including immobility (Sequencer 
label “STILL”). The lighting inside the boxes were set to 5–10 lux, which mimicked home 
cage light intensity in the MIT animal holding facility. Mice were placed into a custom-
made transparent plastic cylinder (diameter: 16 cm x height: 16 cm) containing home cage 
bedding in order to reduce the arena parameters and facilitate sleep. At 7AM, mice were 
placed in the behavioral sequencers and given 1 hour to acclimate. After the acclimation 
period, behavior was automatically scored for 6 hours (8AM–2PM). Data was manually 
curated to identify bouts of sleep, which were defined as at least 40 seconds of immobility 
[50] that is not interrupted by more than 2 seconds of upper body movements (Sequencer 
labels “HEAD”, “FACE”, “NOSE”, “CHEEK”, “BACK”, “ORIENT_LOOK”, “ORIENT 
SNIFF”) or by 4 or more seconds of general body movements (Sequencer labels “PAW”, 
“LEG”, “TUMMY”, etc.). These bout parameters were confirmed by two observers viewing 
raw video during pilot tests. Behavioral recordings and analysis were conducted by a 
genotype-blind experimenter. Given the 40 second minimum required to be classified as a 
bout, median data and cumulative probability were used to compare genotypes. 
Kolomgorov-Smirnov and the Wilcoxon ranksum tests were used for statistical analysis. All 
individual data points are plotted with crossbar denoting median.
Fibre-photometry-based optical chloride measurements
Mice (6 WT and 6 KO) were injected with 400 nl of AAV-hSyn-SuperClomeleon into the 
LGN (from Bregma A–P: −2 mm, M–L: −2.1 mm, D–V: −2.5 mm) and chronically 
implanted with optical fibres (400 μm, Doric lenses, Canada) targeted directly above LGN 
(D–V: 2.1 mm). Following at least two weeks of virus expression, FRET-based measurement 
of visual evoked [Cl−]i responses was performed as previously described [13]. Briefly, CFP 
excitation was achieved through a fibre-coupled LED (Thorlabs, Newton, New Jersey) light 
source, filtered using a 434 nm clean-up filter (MF434-17 Thorlabs, Newton, New Jersey) 
and light was delivered to the LGN via a 600 μm, 0.48 NA optic patch cord (Fig. 2g). 
SuperClomeleon CFP and YFP emissions were separated using a single-edge beam splitter 
(FF511-Di01, Semrock, Rochester, New York) and collected using two femtowatt silicon 
photoreceiver (Newport, Irvine, California). Signal was digitized and recorded using a TDT 
signal acquisition system (Tucker-Davis Technologies, Alachua, Florida). Visual stimulation 
consisted of a 50 ms LED light pulses delivered to the eye contralateral to the recorded 
LGN. Normalized delta fluorescence (df/F) was calculated for evoked responses relative to 
the baseline fluorescence level before each event (1-s window) and smoothed with a 
convolution filter (50 ms half-width). The minimum signal within a 500 ms window 
following stimulation was considered the peak response. For pharmacological SK channel 
enhancement, mice were injected with 25 mg/kg 1-EBIO following 30 min of baseline 
recordings. Maximal drug effects were estimated from evoked responses recorded between 
30 min to 1 h following injection.
Wells et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Visual detection task
Mice (C57: 8 WT and 9 KO from 2 independently-tested cohorts; Som-Cre: 8 WT and 8 KO 
from 2 independently-tested cohorts; EBIO: 7 WT-Veh, 7 WT-EBIO, 7 KO-Veh, 7 KO-
EBIO) were food restricted to 85–90% of their ad libitum body weight and training occurred 
in a custom built test chamber as previously described [32]. During testing, a white noise 
indicated that a new trial was available, and mice had to continuously break an infrared 
barrier for 500–700 ms to initiate a trial. Upon successful initiation, a 50 ms visual stimulus 
was presented randomly either on the left or right side. Correct response at the 
corresponding nose-poke unit resulted in a milk reward (10 μl evaporated milk, Nestle) that 
was available for 15 sec. Following an intertrial interval (ITI) of 5 sec a new trial became 
available. Response at the incorrect location resulted in immediate blockage of poke access 
and a 30 sec timeout before the next trial. To test for distractibility, in one third of the trials a 
50 ms distractor appeared at the opposite location of where the stimulus would be displayed 
in the 200 ms time window before successful initiation. For drug treatment experiments, 
mice were injected with 1-EBIO (Tocris #1041; 25 mg/kg in 10% DMSO; subcutaneous 
injection) or vehicle 30 mins prior to testing. Wilcoxon ranksum test was used for statistical 
analysis. All individual data points are plotted with crossbar denoting median.
Fura-2AM Calcium imaging
Freshly prepared brain slices from P21-P28 male mice (4 WT and 5 KO) were superfused 
with oxygenated ACSF (in mM: 125 NaCl, 25 NaHCO3, 25 glucose, 2.5 KCl, 1.25 
NAH2PO4, 1.2 MgCl2, 2 CaCl2, 1.7 ascorbic acid) and recorded at 30–34°C. Cells (37 WT, 
36 KO) were filled with Fura-2AM dye (Molecular Probes) using a Picospritzer II that 
applied ~10 psi for 1 min through a 1–2 MΩ glass pipette. Slices were given 1 hr to recover 
in ACSF prior to imaging. Individual cells were imaged using an Olympus BX61WI 
microscope with an attached CoolSnapF2 camera. Pixel intensity was measured using 
ImageJ software with whole-field background correction. Ratiometric values were converted 
to [Ca2+]i using the following equation:
where Kd refers to the Ca2+ dissociation constant (140 nM), R refers to the ratiometric 
measurement of the observed cell, Rmax and Rmin correspond to the ratio under conditions of 
saturated Ca2+ levels and in zero Ca2+, respectively. The values of Sb2 (bound state) and Sf2 
(free Ca2+ state) are proportional to the fluorescence excited by 380 nm under conditions of 
saturated Ca2+ levels and in zero Ca2+, respectively. Unpaired t-tests were used to compare 
nM concentrations between the two groups. Data presented as mean ± s.e.m.
Open Field
Locomotor activity in mice (C57: 30 WT and 31 KO from 3 independently-tested cohorts; 
MIX: 10 WT and 11 KO from 1 cohort; AMPH: 5 WT-Veh, 5 WT-AMPH, 6 KO-Veh, 6 KO- 
AMPH; EBIO: 13 WT-Veh, 13 WT-EBIO, 13 KO-Veh, and 15 KO-EBIO from 2 
independently-tested cohorts; Som-Cre: 21 WT and 22 KO from 2 independently-tested 
cohorts) was evaluated over a 60 min period in an automated Omnitech Digiscan apparatus 
Wells et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (AccuScan Instruments) as previously described (Peca et al., Nature 2011). Locomotor 
activity was assessed as total distance travelled (m). Anxiety-like behavior was defined by 
number of rearings and time spent in the center as compared to time spent in the perimeter 
(thigmotaxis) of the open field. For drug treatment experiments, mice were placed in the 
open field arena for 30 minutes prior to amphetamine (3 mg/kg in saline; intraperitoneal 
injection), 1-EBIO (25 mg/kg in 10% DMSO; subcutaneous injection), or vehicle injections. 
Mice were then returned to open field arena for an additional 30–90 minutes. Two-way 
repeated measures ANOVA with Bonferroni post-hoc tests were used for statistical analysis. 
Time binned data (“distance”) presented as mean ± s.e.m. Summated data (“total distance”) 
plotted as individual data points with crossbar denoting mean. One C57 KO mouse was 
excluded for escaping from the arena during testing.
Grooming
Young adult male mice (C57: 9 WT and 13 KO from 1 cohort; MIX: 10 WT and 12 KO 
from 1 cohort) were used for analysis of grooming behavior. Individually housed animals 
were habituated in the testing room for one hour prior to experimentation. Mice were video-
taped for 2 hr under 2 lux (red light) illumination. Grooming behaviors were coded from 
19:00–21:00 hr (2 hr beginning at the initiation of the dark cycle). This segment was 
analyzed using Noldus Observer software and the total amount of time in the 2 hr segment 
spent grooming was determined. A genotype-blind observer recorded all types of grooming, 
including incidences of face-wiping, scratching/rubbing of head and ears, and full-body 
grooming. Two-tailed t-tests were used for statistical analysis. All individual data points are 
plotted with crossbar denoting mean.
Rotarod
Motor coordination was assessed in mice (C57: 19 WT and 21 KO from 2 independently-
tested cohorts; MIX: 10 WT and 10 KO from 1 cohort) using an accelerating rotarod test 
(Med Associates) over the course of two days. On the first day (training day) animals 
underwent three 5 min trials at a constant speed (16 rpm). On the second day (testing day), 
animals underwent three 5 min trials at accelerating speeds (4–40 rpm). For all trials, the 
latency to fall was determined. Animals were tested for three trials in a single day with an 
inter-trial interval of 10–30 min. Two-way repeated measures ANOVA with Bonferroni post-
hoc tests were used for statistical analysis. Data plotted as mean ± s.e.m. Two C57 KO mice 
were excluded for jumping off the rotarod during testing.
Hanging Wire
Animals (C57: 12 WT and 11 KO from 1 cohort; MIX: 10 WT and 12 KO from 1 cohort; 
EBIO: 6 WT-Veh, 6 WT-EBIO, 6 KO-Veh, and 6 KO-EBIO from 1 cohort; Som-Cre: 12 WT 
and 11 KO from 1 cohort) were suspended 40 cm above the ground from a 2mm horizontal 
wire. The average of three trials with an inter-trial interval of 5 mins was recorded. For drug 
treatment experiments, mice were injected with 1-EBIO (Tocris #1041; 25 mg/kg in 10% 
DMSO; subcutaneous injection) or vehicle 30 mins prior to testing. Two-tailed t-tests were 
used for statistical analysis. All individual data points are plotted with crossbar denoting 
mean.
Wells et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Gait
The forepaws of animals (C57: 10 WT and 11 KO from 1 cohort) were painted green and the 
hindpaws were painted pink. After a two minute habituation trial, the mice were allowed to 
walk down a 50 cm track. The length and width of each stride were measured by an observer 
blind to genotype and the averages were recorded. Two-tailed t-tests were used for statistical 
analysis. All individual data points are plotted with crossbar denoting mean.
Hot Plate
Animals (C57: 20 WT and 21 KO from 2 independently-tested cohorts; MIX: 10 WT and 12 
KO from 1 cohort) were placed onto a heating block set to 55°C surface temperature 
(Columbus Instruments). Latency to lick a forepaw or hindpaw was measured. The average 
of three trials with an inter-trial interval of 5 mins was recorded. Two-tailed t-tests were used 
for statistical analysis. All individual data points are plotted with crossbar denoting mean.
Acoustic startle and pre-pulse inhibition
Auditory abilities and sensory motor function in mice (C57: 20 WT and 21 KO from 2 
independently-tested cohorts; MIX: 10 WT and 12 KO from 1 cohort) was measured using 
Hamilton Kinder Scientific Pre-pulse Startle Monitor chambers with Startle Monitor 
software. On the first day, mice underwent a 5 min acclimation trial in the acoustic startle 
boxes. On the second day, half of the mice were tested on the acoustic startle protocol while 
the other half was tested on the pre-pulse inhibition protocol. These protocol groups were 
switched on the third day. To test acoustic startle, mice are presented with pulses of various 
dB level without pre-pulses for approximately 30 mins. The testing session is preceded by a 
5 min exposure to 65 dB background noise. Each mouse then receives a total of 92 stimuli 
(trials) with inter-trial intervals ranging from 7–23s presented in pseudo-random order. The 
stimuli include a presentation of 8 pulse-alone trials (120 dB, 40 ms pulse, 4 at the 
beginning and 4 at the end of the session), 77 pulse trials (7 each of 70, 75, 80, 85, 90, 95, 
100, 105, 110, 115, and 120 dB, 40 ms pulse), and 7 trials each without pulse or pre-pulse 
presentation. To test PPI, mice were once again exposed to 65 dB background for 5 min 
prior to testing. Each mouse received a total of 57 stimuli (trials) with inter-trial intervals 
ranging from 7–23s presented in pseudorandom order. The stimuli include a presentation of 
8 pulse-alone trials (120 dB, 40 ms pulse, 4 at the beginning and 4 at the end of the session), 
35 pre-pulse trials (7 each of 70, 75, 80, 85 and 90 dB, 20 ms pre-pulse given 100 ms prior 
to a 120 dB, 40 ms pulse), and 7 trials each without pulse or pre-pulse presentation. The PPI 
percentage within each test session was calculated as follows: [100−(mean Pre-pulse 
response/mean Pulse response) × 100)]. For all experiments, response to startle stimuli is 
measured in Newtons (N). Startle at each pulse level is averaged across trials and then across 
animals in a treatment group. Two-way repeated measures ANOVA with Bonferroni post-
hoc tests were used for statistical analysis. Data plotted as mean ± s.e.m.
Three-chambered social interaction assay
Littermate male mice (C57: 10 WT and 11 KO from 1 cohort; MIX: 10 WT and 12 KO from 
1 cohort) were used for all tests. Age and size-matched 129 male target subjects (Stranger 1 
and Stranger 2) were habituated to being placed inside wire cages for three days (20 mins/
Wells et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 day) before beginning of testing. Test mice were habituated to the testing room for at least 
1hr before the start of behavioral tasks. The social test apparatus consisted of a transparent 
acrylic box with removable floor and partitions dividing the box into three chambers. The 
wire cages used to contain the stranger mice were cylindrical, 11 cm in height, a bottom 
diameter of 10.5 cm with the bars spaced 1 cm apart (Galaxy Cup, Spectrum Diversified 
Designs). An inverted metal can was placed on the top of the cage to prevent the test mice 
from climbing on the top of the wire cage. For the sociability test, the test animal was 
introduced to the middle chamber and left to habituate for 10 mins. Following this period, 
the middle chamber doors were opened and the test mouse was allowed to freely explore all 
three chambers for an additional 10 mins. The test mouse was then returned to the middle 
chamber, after which an unfamiliar mouse (Stranger 1) was introduced into a wire cage on 
one of the side-chambers and an empty wire cage on the other side-chamber. The dividers 
were then raised and the test animal was allowed to freely explore all three chambers over a 
10 min session. Following the 10 min session, the mouse was returned to the middle 
chamber while a novel stranger mouse (Stranger 2) was inserted in the wire cage previously 
empty and again the test animal was left to explore for a 10 min session. The time spent by 
the mouse (nose-point) in close proximity (~5cm) to the wire cages was calculated using 
automated software (Noldus Ethovison 9). The release of the animals and relative position of 
social and inanimate targets was counterbalanced. However, for each individual test animal 
the location of Stranger 1 was maintained during Stranger 1 – E and Stranger 1 – Stranger 2 
testing of the social behavior. One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni multiple comparison tests 
were used for statistical analysis. All individual data points are plotted with crossbar 
denoting mean.
Resident intruder
Animals (C57: 10 WT and 10 KO from 1 cohort; EBIO: 6 WT-Veh, 6 WT-EBIO, 6 KO-Veh, 
6 KO-EBIO from 1 cohort; Som-Cre: 6 WT and 6 KO from 1 cohort) were individually 
housed for 2 weeks prior to testing with bedding left undisturbed for one week prior to 
testing. Animals were tested in a room with 10 lux lighting. On the test day, animals were 
habituated to the test room for 1 hour prior to testing. After acclimation, an age and weight-
matched conspecific male stranger mouse was introduced to the home cage of the test 
animal. The subsequent interactions were videotaped for 5 minutes. All interactions were 
analyzed using Noldus Observer by a genotype-blind observer. Aggressive interactions were 
defined by instances of biting, fighting, and tail-rattling. For drug treatment experiments, 
mice were injected with 1-EBIO (Tocris #1041; 25 mg/kg in 10% DMSO; subcutaneous 
injection) or vehicle 30 mins prior to testing. Wilcoxon ranksum and Kruskal-Wallis non-
parametric tests were used for statistical analysis because WT mice did not pass normality 
tests. All individual data points are plotted with crossbar denoting median.
Inhibitory avoidance
Animals (C57: 24 WT and 23 KO from 2 independently-tested cohorts; MIX: 10 WT and 12 
KO from 1 cohort; EBIO: 7 WT-Veh, 8 WT-EBIO, 9 KO-Veh, and 10 KO-EBIO from 2 
independently-tested cohorts; Som-Cre: 11 WT and 12 KO from 1 cohort) underwent one 
training session followed by 24hr and 48hr post-training trials. On the training day, mice 
were placed in the light side of the IA box (Ugo Basile) and allowed to habituate for 30 sec. 
Wells et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To quantify pre-shock latency and the effects of baseline locomotor activity levels on this 
task, the door to the dark side of the box was then opened and the latency to cross was 
measured. Upon entering the dark side of the box, the mice were given a 0.5mA shock for 
2–4 seconds, followed by a 60 sec post-shock habituation. On the probe trials, mice were 
placed in the light side of the box with the door to the dark side already opened. Latency to 
cross was once again measured with a maximum duration of 9 mins. For drug treatment 
experiments, mice were injected with 1-EBIO (Tocris #1041; 25 mg/kg in 10% DMSO; 
subcutaneous injection) or vehicle 30 mins prior to the shock training protocol. Two-way 
repeated measures ANOVA with Bonferroni post-hoc tests were used for statistical analysis. 
All individual data points are plotted with crossbar denoting mean.
Fear conditioning
Animals (C57: 10 WT and 11 KO from 1 cohort) were tested for fear-induced freezing using 
Med Associates fear conditioning chambers encased in sound attenuating cubicles optimized 
for near infrared (NIR) video recording. The training protocol involved a 3 min habituation 
period in the conditioning box, followed by three rounds of a 30 sec tone + 2 sec/0.75 mA 
shock + 90 sec rest. The final shock was followed by a 2 min post-training habituation. The 
following day, mice were returned to the conditioning box and the time spent freezing was 
measured. Four hours after, the mice were returned to the conditioning boxes with 
modifications. A white triangular insert was added to change the dimensions of the box and 
0.1% acetic acid was sprayed onto the base of the box in order to change the scent of the 
box. Once again, the time spent freezing over the course of 5 minutes was measured. 
Freezing was measured using Video Freeze software package analysis of NIR recordings. 
Two-tailed t-tests were used for statistical analysis. All individual data points are plotted 
with crossbar denoting mean.
Morris water maze
Spatial learning testing in mice (C57: 10 WT and 10 KO from 1 cohort) was conducted 
using a testing pool that was 120 cm in diameter and a platform 8 cm in diameter. The 
platform was submerged 1 cm below the water surface. Pool water was maintained at 23.0 
± 0.5 °C and made opaque by mixing-in white non-toxic white paint. During training, 90 sec 
duration trials were used. If the animals did not find the platform within 90 sec, the 
experimenter guided the animal to the platform. After reaching the platform the animals 
were left for 15 sec on top of the platform before being removed. Trials were administered 
for 5–6 days with four trials per animal per day with the platform located in the NW 
quadrant. For two consecutive days after the training protocol, 60 sec probe trials were 
performed (one per day). The reversal training commenced with the platform in the SE 
quadrant, and proceeded as described above. The experimenter followed the animals’ 
progress using tracking software outside of the testing room. Tracking and analysis were 
performed using the Noldus Ethovison software. Two-way repeated measures ANOVA with 
Bonferroni post-hoc tests and one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni multiple comparison tests 
were used for statistical analysis. All individual data points are plotted with crossbar 
denoting mean.
Wells et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Developmental expression pattern of Ptchd1
a–d, In situ hybridization labeling of Ptchd1 mRNA at (a) P0 (coronal), (b) P15 (coronal), 
and (c–d) P35 (coronal and sagittal) from 3 C57/BL6 WT mice per age. White arrows 
indicate location of TRN region (scale bar = 1 mm).
Wells et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 2. Generation of Ptchd1 KO mouse
a, Diagram depicting the “full-length” and non-functional “Exons 1+3” Ptchd1 isoforms. 
Genetic ablation of Exon 2 results in the removal of a majority of the transmembrane 
domains normally present in the endogenous full-length isoform. b, Schematic describing 
strategy to create Ptchd1 KO mouse. Mice containing targeted allele were crossed to β-Actin 
Flp mice to remove the Neo cassette and β-Actin Cre mice to excise Exon 2. c, In situ 
hybridization probes targeting Exon 2 confirm successful genetic ablation of full-length 
Ptchd1 mRNA (scale bar = 1 mm). d, PCR genotyping confirms deletion of Exon 2 from 
genome of male KO mice. e, qPCR of WT and KO cDNA samples shows removal of full-
length Ptchd1 isoform.
Wells et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 3. Burst and spindle phase locking characteristics of Ptchd1 KO and WT 
TRN neurons in vivo
a, left, Example of unit clustering for a stereotrode recording. Two units (green and blue) are 
clearly separated when plotting peak-trough of the two electrodes of the streotrode against 
each other. right, Spike-wave form of the two clustered units as they appear on the two 
electrodes of the stereotrode. Raw trace below shows a burst discharge (asterisk) of each unit 
during NREM sleep with colored ticks indicating corresponding individual spikes. A burst 
was identified as at least 2 spikes with an ISI ≤10ms preceded by a period of 70 ms silence. 
Enlarged trace shows the accelerando-deccelerando firing pattern characteristic for a TRN 
burst. b, Firing rate during NREM sleep is comparable between genotypes (89 WT, 80 KO 
Wells et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cells from 4 WT, 3 KO mice; P>0.1 Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistics). c, Ptchd1 KO TRN 
neurons show reduced propensity to generate bursts, even when excluding the 10% of KO 
cells with the highest firing rate (89 WT, 72 KO cells from 4 WT, 3 KO mice; P<0.05 
Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistics). d, Spindle-phase histogram for an example WT and KO 
neuron. Note that the WT neuron shows a preferred phase around the peak (0 degrees) of the 
spindle oscillation in WT but not KO. e, Example LFP recording (top) showing the temporal 
alignment of TRN spikes (bottom) to the preferred phase of the spindle activity (9–15 Hz, 
middle). f, Ptchd1 KO mice show reduced phase-locking strength to spindle activity 
compared to WT littermates (89 WT, 80 KO cells from 4 WT, 3 KO mice).
Extended Data Figure 4. Ptchd1 KO mice have intact sensory responses and rotarod 
performance
a–c, Normal (a) acoustic startle (20 WT, 20 KO), (b) pre-pulse inhibition (20 WT, 20 KO) 
and (c) hot plate response in Ptchd1 KO mice (20 WT, 21 KO). d, Ptchd1 KO mice show 
normal motor coordination on the accelerating rotarod test (19 WT, 20 KO). Two-tailed t-
tests (c) and two-way repeated measures ANOVA with Bonferroni post-hoc tests (a–b, d) 
were used for statistical analysis. Mean ± s.e.m. N.S. = not significant.
Wells et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 5. Intact spatial learning but motor and aggression abnormalities in 
Ptchd1 KO mice
a, Comparable learning curves between WT and KO mice during cued training protocol. b, 
Intact spatial learning demonstrated in 24hr probe trial. c, Ptchd1 KO mice show normal 
reversal learning curve. d, No significant difference between WT and KO mice in 24 hour 
probe trial after reversal learning protocol (10 WT, 10 KO). e, Representative images of WT 
(black) and KO (red) strides. Forepaw position is represented by green paint and hindpaw 
position is represented by pink paint (scale bar = 2cm). Quantification reveals elongated 
stride length and width (10 WT, 11 KO). f, KO mice show drastic reductions in grip strength 
as measured by the hanging wire test (12 WT, 11 KO). g–h, KO mice attack intruder mice 
for a longer duration (g) and with a shorter latency to attack (h) in the resident-intruder test 
for aggression (10 WT, 10 KO). Two-way repeated measures ANOVA with Bonferroni post-
hoc tests (a, c), one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni multiple comparison tests (b, d), two-
tailed t-tests (e, f) and Wilcoxon ranksum tests (g, h) were used for statistical analysis. Mean 
± s.e.m. (a, e), mean (b, d, e–f), median (g–h). *P<0.05; **P<0.01; ***P<0.001; N.S. = not 
significant.
Wells et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 6. Hyperactivity, hypotonia, and learning deficits in C57/129 Ptchd1 KO 
mice
a, Ptchd1 KO mice showed increased locomotor activity (10 WT, 11 KO). b, KOs show 
decreased mean holding time in the hanging wire test (10 WT, 12 KO) but c, normal motor 
coordination in the rotarod task (10 WT, 10 KO). d–f, Sensory responses as measured by 
acoustic startle (d), pre-pulse inhibition (e), and hot plate (f) are also normal in KO mice (10 
WT, 12 KO). g–h, Normal sociability (g) and novel social recognition (h) in mixed 
background Ptchd1 KO mice (10 WT, 11 KO). i, KO mice show impaired associative 
learning and memory in the inhibitory avoidance task (9 WT, 12 KO). Two-tailed t-tests (b, 
f), one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni multiple comparison tests (g–h), and two-way repeated 
measures ANOVA with Bonferroni post-hoc tests (a, c–e, i) were used for statistical 
analysis. Mean ± s.e.m. *P<0.05; **P<0.01; ***P<0.001; N.S. = not significant.
Wells et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 7. Normal grooming and social interaction behaviors in Ptchd1 KO mice
a, KO mice do not show excessive or injurious grooming behaviors (9 WT, 13 KO). b–c, KO 
mice (b) spent comparable amounts of time interacting with stranger mice in the three-
chambered social interaction task and (c) display normal social novelty behaviors (10 WT, 
11 KO). Two-tailed t-tests (a) and two-way repeated measures ANOVA with Bonferroni 
post-hoc tests (b–c) were used for statistical analysis. Bar in scatterplot denotes mean. 
***P<0.001; N.S. = not significant.
Extended Data Figure 8. YFP overlap with SOM interneuron marker is primarily confined to 
the TRN in Ptchd1-YFP mice
a, Schematic describing strategy to create Ptchd1-YFP mouse in which Exon 1 was replaced 
with YFP cassette. b, YFP-positive cells co-label with GAD67 antibody in TRN and the 
purkinje layer of the cerebellum, but not in cortex or striatum. c, YFP-positive cells also co-
label with SOM antibody in TRN, but not in other structures. Arrows denote overlap. (bar = 
20 μm).
Wells et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 9. Som-Cre recombinase activity is early and robust in TRN neurons
a, P4 Som-Cre+:TdTomato+ brains show TdTomato+ cells in the TRN. Inset shows 
magnified image taken with 20X objective. b–c, At (b) P15 and (c) P30, Cre recombinase 
activity in the TRN of the Som-Cre+:TdTomato+ brains is robust, as shown by the inset 
depicting the significant TdTomato overlap with the pan-neuronal marker NeuN.
Wells et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 10. Genetic disruption of Ptchd1 TRN expression affects sleep stability but 
not grip strength or aggressive behaviors
a–b, Som-Cre+:Ptchd1Y/fl mice appear normal in (a) the hanging wire (12 Ptchd1Y/+, 11 
Ptchd1Ylfl) and (b) resident intruder task (6 Ptchd1Y/+, 6 Ptchd1Ylfl). c–e, Som-
Cre+:Ptchd1Y/fl mice show reductions in sleep bout duration as shown in (c) cumulative 
probability plot and (d) comparison of medians with (e) no differences in total time spent 
sleeping when compared to Som-Cre+:Ptchd1Y/+ littermates (10 Ptchd1Y/+, 10 Ptchd1Ylfl). 
f–g, 1-EBIO treatment has no effect on performance on (f) the hanging wire or (g) resident 
intruder task (6 WT-Veh, 6 WT-EBIO, 6 KO-Veh, 6 KO-EBIO). Kolomgorov-Smirnov test 
(a), Wilcoxon ranksum tests (b–c), two-tailed t-tests (d), and two-way repeated measures 
ANOVA with Bonferroni post-hoc tests (f), and Kruskal-Wallis with Dunn’s multiple 
comparisons tests were used for statistical analysis. Median (b–c, e–g), mean (d,f). *P<0.05; 
**P<0.01; ***P<0.001; N.S. = not significant.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Wells et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Acknowledgments
We thank Ruqi Tang for insightful discussion during the initiation of the project, Huaiying Wang, Triana Dalia, 
Elaine Kwan, Heather Zaniewski for technical support, and Dr. John Vincent (Centre for Addiction and Mental 
Health, Toronto, Canada) for insightful discussion. We thank Dr. Jeremy Petravicz and Travis Emery from the Sur 
lab (MIT) for assistance with Ca2+ imaging and Dr. Arnold Heynen from the Bear lab (MIT) for technical advice 
on the inhibitory avoidance task. We thank all members of the Feng lab for their help and support. We thank Mick 
and Joshua Ball (Newcastle, Australia) for their insight and inspiration throughout this project. This work was 
supported by a grant from Simons Foundation Autism Research Initiative (SFARI Award ID: 307913) to GF and 
MMH, NIH grants to GF (NIH/NIMH, R01MH097104) and MMH (R01MH107680), and funds from the Poitras 
Center for Affective Disorders Research and the Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research at the Broad Institute of 
MIT and Harvard to GF. MFW is supported by an NIH Ruth L. Kirschstein National Research Service Award 
(FMH098641A). RDW is supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation.
References
1. Coe BP, Girirajan S, Eichler EE. The genetic variability and commonality of neurodevelopmental 
disease. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2012; 160C(2):118–29. [PubMed: 22499536] 
2. Coe BP, Girirajan S, Eichler EE. A genetic model for neurodevelopmental disease. Curr Opin 
Neurobiol. 2012; 22(5):829–36. [PubMed: 22560351] 
3. Zhou Y, et al. Mice with Shank3 Mutations Associated with ASD and Schizophrenia Display Both 
Shared and Distinct Defects. Neuron. 2016; 89(1):147–62. [PubMed: 26687841] 
4. Cristino AS, et al. Neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders represent an interconnected 
molecular system. Mol Psychiatry. 2014; 19(3):294–301. [PubMed: 23439483] 
5. Noor A, et al. Disruption at the PTCHD1 Locus on Xp22.11 in Autism spectrum disorder and 
intellectual disability. Sci Transl Med. 2010; 2(49):49ra68.
6. Pinto D, et al. Functional impact of global rare copy number variation in autism spectrum disorders. 
Nature. 2010; 466(7304):368–72. [PubMed: 20531469] 
7. Whibley AC, et al. Fine-scale survey of X chromosome copy number variants and indels underlying 
intellectual disability. Am J Hum Genet. 2010; 87(2):173–88. [PubMed: 20655035] 
8. Marshall CR, et al. Structural variation of chromosomes in autism spectrum disorder. Am J Hum 
Genet. 2008; 82(2):477–88. [PubMed: 18252227] 
9. Filges I, et al. Deletion in Xp22.11: PTCHD1 is a candidate gene for X-linked intellectual disability 
with or without autism. Clin Genet. 2011; 79(1):79–85. [PubMed: 21091464] 
10. Torrico B, et al. Contribution of common and rare variants of the PTCHD1 gene to autism 
spectrum disorders and intellectual disability. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015; 23(12):1694–701. 
[PubMed: 25782667] 
11. Chaudhry A, et al. Phenotypic spectrum associated with PTCHD1 deletions and truncating 
mutations includes intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder. Clin Genet. 2015; 88(3):
224–33. [PubMed: 25131214] 
12. Halassa MM, et al. State-dependent architecture of thalamic reticular subnetworks. Cell. 2014; 
158(4):808–21. [PubMed: 25126786] 
13. Wimmer RD, et al. Thalamic control of sensory selection in divided attention. Nature. 2015; 
526(7575):705–9. [PubMed: 26503050] 
14. Pinault D. The thalamic reticular nucleus: structure, function and concept. Brain Res Brain Res 
Rev. 2004; 46(1):1–31. [PubMed: 15297152] 
15. Guillery RW, Feig SL, Lozsadi DA. Paying attention to the thalamic reticular nucleus. Trends 
Neurosci. 1998; 21(1):28–32. [PubMed: 9464683] 
16. Halassa MM, et al. Selective optical drive of thalamic reticular nucleus generates thalamic bursts 
and cortical spindles. Nat Neurosci. 2011; 14(9):1118–20. [PubMed: 21785436] 
17. Bartho P, et al. Ongoing network state controls the length of sleep spindles via inhibitory activity. 
Neuron. 2014; 82(6):1367–79. [PubMed: 24945776] 
18. von Krosigk M, Bal T, McCormick DA. Cellular mechanisms of a synchronized oscillation in the 
thalamus. Science. 1993; 261(5119):361–4. [PubMed: 8392750] 
Wells et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 19. Marlinski V, Sirota MG, Beloozerova IN. Differential gating of thalamocortical signals by reticular 
nucleus of thalamus during locomotion. J Neurosci. 2012; 32(45):15823–36. [PubMed: 23136421] 
20. Erlij D, et al. Dopamine D4 receptor stimulation in GABAergic projections of the globus pallidus 
to the reticular thalamic nucleus and the substantia nigra reticulata of the rat decreases locomotor 
activity. Neuropharmacology. 2012; 62(2):1111–8. [PubMed: 22108379] 
21. McAlonan K, Cavanaugh J, Wurtz RH. Guarding the gateway to cortex with attention in visual 
thalamus. Nature. 2008; 456(7220):391–4. [PubMed: 18849967] 
22. Zhong Y, et al. Comprehensive analysis of patched domain-containing genes reveals a unique 
evolutionary pattern. Genet Mol Res. 2014; 13(3):7318–31. [PubMed: 24615097] 
23. Goodrich LV, et al. Altered neural cell fates and medulloblastoma in mouse patched mutants. 
Science. 1997; 277(5329):1109–13. [PubMed: 9262482] 
24. Rohatgi R, Milenkovic L, Scott MP. Patched1 regulates hedgehog signaling at the primary cilium. 
Science. 2007; 317(5836):372–6. [PubMed: 17641202] 
25. Jasper H. Diffuse projection systems: the integrative action of the thalamic reticular system. 
Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1949; 1(4):405–19. discussion 419–20. [PubMed: 
18421831] 
26. Cueni L, et al. T-type Ca2+ channels, SK2 channels and SERCAs gate sleep-related oscillations in 
thalamic dendrites. Nat Neurosci. 2008; 11(6):683–92. [PubMed: 18488023] 
27. Jahnsen H, Llinas R. Voltage-dependent burst-to-tonic switching of thalamic cell activity: an in 
vitro study. Arch Ital Biol. 1984; 122(1):73–82. [PubMed: 6087765] 
28. Astori S, et al. The Ca(V)3.3 calcium channel is the major sleep spindle pacemaker in thalamus. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108(33):13823–8. [PubMed: 21808016] 
29. Huguenard JR, Prince DA. A novel T-type current underlies prolonged Ca(2+)-dependent burst 
firing in GABAergic neurons of rat thalamic reticular nucleus. J Neurosci. 1992; 12(10):3804–17. 
[PubMed: 1403085] 
30. Ying SW, Goldstein PA. Propofol-block of SK channels in reticular thalamic neurons enhances 
GABAergic inhibition in relay neurons. J Neurophysiol. 2005; 93(4):1935–48. [PubMed: 
15563549] 
31. Coulon P, et al. Burst discharges in neurons of the thalamic reticular nucleus are shaped by 
calcium-induced calcium release. Cell Calcium. 2009; 46(5–6):333–46. [PubMed: 19913909] 
32. Brunetti PM, et al. Design and fabrication of ultralight weight, adjustable multi-electrode probes 
for electrophysiological recordings in mice. J Vis Exp. 2014; (91):e51675. [PubMed: 25225749] 
33. Ferrarelli F, et al. Reduced sleep spindle activity in schizophrenia patients. Am J Psychiatry. 2007; 
164(3):483–92. [PubMed: 17329474] 
34. Limoges E, et al. Atypical sleep architecture and the autism phenotype. Brain. 2005; 128(Pt 5):
1049–61. [PubMed: 15705609] 
35. Dang-Vu TT, et al. Spontaneous brain rhythms predict sleep stability in the face of noise. Current 
Biology. 2010; 20(15):R626–R627. [PubMed: 20692606] 
36. Wimmer RD, et al. Sustaining Sleep Spindles through Enhanced SK2-Channel Activity 
Consolidates Sleep and Elevates Arousal Threshold. Journal of Neuroscience. 2012; 32(40):
13917–13928. [PubMed: 23035101] 
37. Grimley JS, et al. Visualization of synaptic inhibition with an optogenetic sensor developed by cell-
free protein engineering automation. J Neurosci. 2013; 33(41):16297–309. [PubMed: 24107961] 
38. Remington A, et al. Selective attention and perceptual load in autism spectrum disorder. Psychol 
Sci. 2009; 20(11):1388–93. [PubMed: 19843262] 
39. Sachs GS, et al. Comorbidity of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder with early- and late-onset 
bipolar disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 2000; 157(3):466–8. [PubMed: 10698829] 
40. Leyfer OT, et al. Comorbid psychiatric disorders in children with autism: interview development 
and rates of disorders. J Autism Dev Disord. 2006; 36(7):849–61. [PubMed: 16845581] 
41. Won H, et al. GIT1 is associated with ADHD in humans and ADHD-like behaviors in mice. Nat 
Med. 2011; 17(5):566–72. [PubMed: 21499268] 
42. Spencer T, et al. Efficacy of a mixed amphetamine salts compound in adults with attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2001; 58(8):775–82. [PubMed: 11483144] 
Wells et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 43. Curzon, P.; Rustay, NR.; Browman, KE. Cued and Contextual Fear Conditioning for Rodents. In: 
Buccafusco, JJ., editor. Methods of Behavior Analysis in Neuroscience. Boca Raton (FL): 2009. 
44. Nestler EJ, Hyman SE. Animal models of neuropsychiatric disorders. Nat Neurosci. 2010; 13(10):
1161–9. [PubMed: 20877280] 
45. Meyer AH, et al. In vivo labeling of parvalbumin-positive interneurons and analysis of electrical 
coupling in identified neurons. J Neurosci. 2002; 22(16):7055–64. [PubMed: 12177202] 
46. Graybiel AM, Elde RP. Somatostatin-like immunoreactivity characterizes neurons of the nucleus 
reticularis thalami in the cat and monkey. J Neurosci. 1983; 3(6):1308–21. [PubMed: 6133921] 
47. Taniguchi H, et al. A resource of Cre driver lines for genetic targeting of GABAergic neurons in 
cerebral cortex. Neuron. 2011; 71(6):995–1013. [PubMed: 21943598] 
48. Chen Z, et al. Thalamic circuit mechanisms link sensory processing in sleep and attention. 
Frontiers in Neural Circuits. 2015
49. Zikopoulos B, Barbas H. Pathways for emotions and attention converge on the thalamic reticular 
nucleus in primates. J Neurosci. 2012; 32(15):5338–50. [PubMed: 22496579] 
50. Fisher SP, et al. Rapid assessment of sleep-wake behavior in mice. J Biol Rhythms. 2012; 27(1):
48–58. [PubMed: 22306973] 
Wells et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Impaired repetitive bursting and SK2 currents in KO TRN neurons
a–b, Ptchd1 expression (3 WT mice). Bar = 1 mm. c, Representative TRN burst traces (out 
of 8 WT, 9 KO cells). d, Reduced burst firing in KO TRN neurons (8 WT, 9 KO cells). e, 
Representative T and SK2 current traces. f, Normal T (g) and reduced SK2 currents (h) in 
KO cells (8 WT, 9 KO). i, Diminished free [Ca2+]i in KO cells. Representative heat maps 
show background-corrected intensity (37 WT, 36 KO cells). Wilcoxon ranksum (d, f–h) and 
two-tailed t-tests (i). Mean ± s.e.m. *P<0.05; ***P<0.001; N.S.=not significant.
Wells et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Decreased spindles and sleep fragmentation in KO mice
a, Multielectrode implant targeting TRN b, Decreased TRN burst discharge in KOs (89 WT, 
80 KO cells from 4 WT, 3 KO mice). c, Reduced spindles in KOs. d–f, KOs display shorter 
sleep bouts with normal total sleep duration (9 WT, 10 KO). Kolomgorov-Smirnov (b, d) 
and Wilcoxon ranksum tests (c, e–f). Median (c, e–f). *P<0.05; ***P<0.001; N.S.=not 
significant.
Wells et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Reduced sensory-evoked thalamic inhibition in KO mice
a, Schematic of CFP-to-YFP FRET. b, Confocal images of superclomeleon expression in 
LGN (bar = 100 μm). c, Stimuli delivered to the eye contra-lateral to implanted LGN. d, 
Example traces of visually-evoked CFP and YFP fluorescence changes. e–g, Reduced LGN 
inhibition in KOs reflected in peak FRET response (f) and smaller area under the curve (g; 
AUC) (6 WT, 6 KO mice). h–j, KOs also show decreased facilitation of FRET response (6 
WT, 6 KO mice). Wilcoxon ranksum tests (e–j). Mean ± s.e.m. *P<0.05; **P<0.01
Wells et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. KO mice show attention, locomotor, and learning impairment
a, Visual detection task design (8 WT, 9 KO). b, KOs showed comparable baseline 
performance. c, KOs displayed decreased accuracy in the presence of distractors. d, KOs 
show increased locomotion in open field (30 WT, 31 KO). e–f, KOs show normal responses 
to amphetamine (5 WT-Veh, 6 WT-Amph, 5 KO-Veh, 6 KO-Amph). g–h, KOs exhibit 
decreased fear-induced learning behaviors in (g) contextual and (h) cued fear conditioning 
tests (10 WT, 11 KO). i, Diminished KO latency to cross in inhibitory avoidance task (24 
WT, 23 KO). Wilcoxon ranksum (b–c), two-tailed t (g–h), and two-way RM ANOVA with 
Bonferroni post-hoc tests (d–f, i). Median (b,c), mean ± s.e.m. (d–e), mean (f–i). *P<0.05; 
**P<0.01; ***P<0.001; N.S.=not significant.
Wells et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. TRN dysfunction explains ADHD-like behaviors in KO
a, Ptchd1 ablation from TRN (bar = 1 mm). b, Som-Cre+:Ptchd1Y/fl mice recapitulate 
attention deficits observed in KOs (8 Ptchd1Y/+, 8 Ptchd1Ylfl). c–d, Som-Cre+:Ptchd1Y/fl 
mice are hyperactive (21 Ptchd1Y/+, 22 Ptchd1Ylfl). e, Som-Cre+:Ptchd1Y/fl mice show intact 
ability to form complex association (11 Ptchd1Y/+, 12 Ptchd1Ylfl). Wilcoxon ranksum (b), 
two-tailed t (d), and two-way RM ANOVA with Bonferroni post-hoc tests (c, e). Median (b), 
mean ± s.e.m (c), mean (de). *P<0.05; **P<0.01; N.S.=not significant.
Wells et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. SK2 enhancement corrects ADHD-like KO symptoms
a, 1-EBIO corrects inhibitory transients in KOs (7 WT-Veh, 7 WT-EBIO, 7 KO-Veh, 7 KO-
EBIO). b–c, 1-EBIO improves KO attention performance (7 WT-Veh, 7 WT-EBIO, 7 KO-
Veh, 7 KO-EBIO). d–e, 1-EBIO rescues KO hyperactivity (13 WT-Veh, 13 WT-EBIO, 13 
KO-Veh, 15 KO-EBIO). f, No 1-EBIO effects on inhibitory avoidance (7 WT-Veh, 8 WT-
EBIO, 9 KO-Veh, 10 KO-EBIO). Wilcoxon ranksum (a–c) and two-way RM ANOVA with 
Bonferroni post-hoc tests (d–f). Mean ± s.e.m. (a, d), mean (e–f) *P<0.05; **P<0.01; 
***P<0.001; N.S. = not significant.
Wells et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
