 States With Prescription Drug Monitoring Mandates Saw 
Reduction In Opioids Prescribed To Medicaid Enrollees
Hefei Wen1, Bruce R. Schackman2,3, Brandon Aden2,4, and Yuhua Bao2,3,*
1Department of Health Management and Policy, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky
2Department of Healthcare Policy and Research, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New 
York
3Department of Psychiatry, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York
4Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York
Abstract
Prescription drug monitoring programs are promising tools to use in addressing the prescription 
opioid epidemic, yet prescribers’ participation in these state-run programs remains low as of 2014. 
Statutory mandates for prescribers to register with their state’s program, use it, or both are 
believed to be effective tools to realize the programs’ full potential. Our analysis of aggregate 
Medicaid drug utilization data indicates that state mandates for prescriber registration or use 
adopted in 2011–14 were associated with a reduction of 9–10 percent in population-adjusted 
numbers of Schedule II opioid prescriptions received by Medicaid enrollees and amounts of 
Medicaid spending on these prescriptions. This effect was largely associated with mandates of 
registration, which were comprehensive in all adopting states, and not with mandates of use, which 
were largely limited in scope or strength before 2015. Our findings support the use of mandates of 
registration in prescription drug monitoring programs as an effective and relatively low-cost 
policy. Future research should further assess the value of strong mandates of use to ensure safer 
and more appropriate prescribing of opioids.
Between 1991 and 2010 the population-adjusted volume of opioid prescriptions in the 
United States more than doubled, increasing from 304 per 1,000 people to 680 per 1,000.1 
The increase in prescription opioid use coincided with a rapid escalation in nonmedical use 
of prescription opioids2 and opioid overdose–related deaths.3,4 Prescribers of controlled 
substances are believed to be an important link in addressing the deadly drug overdose 
epidemic.5
Prescription drug monitoring programs are statewide databases that gather information from 
pharmacies on dispensed prescriptions of controlled substances. Prescribers are important 
intended users of these databases. A complete picture of each patient’s prescription history 
provided by the database can help prescribers identify patients at high risk of misusing 
controlled substances, while ensuring access to effective pain relief for patients who make 
*Corresponding author: Yuhua Bao, PhD. 402 E 67th St., New York, NY 10065; (O) 646 962-8037; yub2003@med.cornell.edu. 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Health Aff (Millwood). 2017 April 01; 36(4): 733–741. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2016.1141.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 legitimate use of the drugs. The surging prescription opioid epidemic and earmarked federal 
grant funding for prescription drug monitoring programs6 have spurred a wave of 
implementations or upgrades of these programs during the past decade. To date, forty-nine 
states and the District of Columbia have such programs in operation—Missouri is the only 
state without a program in place.
Recent evaluations have provided evidence of the impact of prescription drug monitoring 
programs. A study using data that analyzed pain-related visits to physicians’ offices in 
twenty-four states over a ten-year period found that implementation of monitoring programs 
was associated with reduced prescribing of Schedule II opioids7—the subclass of 
prescription opioids with the highest risk of abuse and dependence, according to the Drug 
Enforcement Agency. Another study, using mortality data from thirty-five states over a 
fifteen-year period, found substantial reduction in opioid overdose–related deaths associated 
with state implementation of a prescription drug monitoring program.8 Yet another study, 
using claims data for disability enrollees in Medicare for the period 2006–12, did not find an 
operating drug monitoring program to be associated with a decline in the rate of high-risk 
opioid use or treatment for prescription opioid overdose.9
Participation by prescribers in their state’s monitoring program remained low in the years 
covered by these studies. A report by the Prescription Drug Monitoring Program Center of 
Excellence at Brandeis University estimated a median program registration rate of 35 
percent among licensed prescribers who prescribed at least one controlled substance in the 
period 2010–12.10 A national survey in 2014 found that 53 percent of primary care 
physicians used their state’s program at least once, but that many did not use it routinely.11 
Given that two of the three studies described above found the monitoring programs to have 
taken effect immediately following implementation,7,8 the observed impact might be due to 
increased awareness by prescribers about the prescription opioid epidemic in response to the 
launching of the monitoring program in their states, instead of their use of the programs on a 
regular basis. As states deploy policies to increase prescribers’ use of prescription drug 
monitoring programs, the impact of the ongoing use of the programs needs to be evaluated.
Prominent policy strategies employed by states include mandates that prescribers register 
with the drug monitoring program (a prerequisite for using it) and mandates that prescribers 
use the system under certain clinical circumstances, such as upon initial prescribing and 
every three months thereafter.12 Prescriber mandates are believed to be more effective in 
inducing prescribers to use the monitoring programs consistently, compared to campaigns to 
recruit prescribers to participate in the program—which are resource intensive and have had 
lackluster outcomes.12 By the end of 2015, twenty-three states had adopted mandates for 
prescriber registration, and twenty-nine states had adopted some version of a mandate to use 
the monitoring program.12 Examinations of data from the drug monitoring programs of 
Kentucky13 and of New York, Ohio, and Tennessee12 indicated that after implementation of 
the mandates, there were rapid increases in prescribers’ participation in these programs and 
decreases in high-risk behaviors related to opioid prescriptions that suggested that drugs 
were being misused or diverted to people for whom they were not prescribed.
Wen et al.
Page 2
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In this study we assessed the effects of prescriber mandates, of both registration and use, on 
the number of prescription opioids received by Medicaid enrollees and Medicaid spending 
on these drugs. Medicaid enrollees have excessive burdens of chronic pain14 and are at a 
much higher risk of substance use disorders,15,16 compared to populations with other types 
of insurance. Medicaid enrollees are thus at heightened risk for prescription opioid 
misuse15,17 and were five to six times as likely to die from opioid-related overdose 
compared to populations with other types of insurance.17,18 Reducing the number of unsafe 
prescriptions of opioids in the Medicaid population should be a priority for any state’s drug 
control policies.
We used state-level aggregate data on prescription opioids received by Medicaid enrollees 
and Medicaid program spending on prescription opioids to examine the effects of mandates, 
of both registration and use, adopted by twenty-five states in the period 2011–14. This 
comprehensive evaluation provides much-needed evidence that supports states’ policies 
designed to further improve the impact of prescription drug monitoring programs.
Study Data And Methods
Data
Our primary data source was the 2011–14 Medicaid State Drug Utilization Files from the 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). To be eligible for federal matching 
funds, all states are required to report to the CMS the numbers of prescriptions for 
Medicaid-covered outpatient drugs and Medicaid spending on these drugs through fee-for-
service Medicaid and Medicaid managed care programs.19 This requirement resulted in 
nearly complete data on all Medicaid-covered prescription drug use nationwide.20
The Medicaid State Drug Utilization Files identify prescription drugs with their eleven-digit, 
three-segment National Drug Code numbers and provide information on the total number of 
prescriptions and pre-rebate Medicaid spending (that is, spending not accounting for rebates 
paid by drug manufacturers) associated with each National Drug Code in each calendar 
quarter. According to the data, in 2014, 165.5 million opioid prescriptions were dispensed to 
Medicaid enrollees nationwide, which accounted for 7.3 percent of the number of 
prescription drugs paid for by Medicaid programs in that year. Opioids containing 
hydrocodone (37 percent of all opioids) and opioids containing oxycodone (22 percent) were 
the top opioids dispensed. Per population opioid prescriptions dispensed varied greatly 
across states, with an interquartile range of 15–23 prescriptions per quarter per 100 enrollees 
in 2014 (see online Appendix A1).21 Opioids dispensed to patients in the emergency 
departments or inpatient settings or paid for with cash were not included in these data.
Study Population
We restricted our study period to 2011–14 because the pace of states’ adoption of mandates 
picked up only after 2012, and the most recent Medicaid State Drug Utilization Files 
available were for the fourth quarter of 2014. We excluded two states (Missouri and 
Pennsylvania) and the District of Columbia, none of which had implemented a monitoring 
program (based on user access date) before 2015. We also excluded two states (Alabama and 
Wen et al.
Page 3
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Utah) with an effective date of mandates before 2011 but no changes to their mandates in 
our study period. Our study sample thus included 736 state-quarter pairs (forty-six states 
multiplied by sixteen calendar quarters).
Measures
The two outcome measures we examined were the number of filled prescriptions (including 
both new prescriptions and refills) and the amount of pre-rebate Medicaid spending on 
prescription opioids in each quarter per 100 Medicaid enrollees. The numbers of Medicaid 
enrollees for each state-quarter pair were included in public data from CMS.22 Prescription 
opioids were identified by linking the National Drug Code numbers with information in the 
Approved Drug Products with Therapeutic Equivalence Evaluations, known as the Orange 
Book, published by the Food and Drug Administration.23 We excluded buprenorphine, 
which is commonly used for medication-assisted treatment of opioid use disorder. 
Prescription opioids were further categorized as Schedule II or Schedule III opioids based on 
their classification by the Drug Enforcement Agency, which reflected a recent 
reclassification of all hydrocodone-containing combination opioids (such as Vicodin and 
Lortab) from Schedule III to Schedule II.24 Schedule II opioids are considered to have 
greater potential for abuse and dependence, compared to Schedule III opioids. We converted 
the nominal Medicaid spending values in the study period to December 2014 dollars, based 
on the national monthly Consumer Price Index.
Implementation of mandates for registration, use, or both related to prescription drug 
monitoring programs was defined based on the effective date of each statutory mandate. The 
Prescription Drug Monitoring Project of the National Alliance for Model State Drug Laws25 
provided us with effective dates of state mandates. During our study period, seventeen states 
implemented mandates of registration, and twenty implemented some version of mandates 
of use. (Because many states implemented both types of mandates, twenty-five states 
implemented a mandate of some kind.) Appendix A221 provides a summary of mandate 
policies adopted by the forty-six states included in our study. For each state-quarter pair, we 
determined whether the state had any mandate (of registration or use), a mandate of 
registration only, a mandate of use only, or mandates of both registration and use. We set 
each of the policy indicators to 1 for each full quarter after the effective date of the mandate 
or mandates. Appendix A321 provides examples from four hypothetical states.
While mandates of registration typically apply to all licensed prescribers in a state, the 
comprehensiveness of mandates of use varies widely across states. They differ in terms of 
types of drugs and types of prescribers to which the mandate applies, the circumstances 
under which prescribers are mandated to use the system, and whether prescribers are to 
exercise their subjective judgment as to what constitutes inappropriate use in deciding 
whether to use the system12 (Appendix A2).21
In recent years, mandates of use have imposed increasingly broad and obligatory criteria and 
thus have become stronger and more comprehensive over time. In contrast, the mandates of 
use that states adopted in our study period were weak, with three exceptions: Kentucky 
(whose mandate became effective in 2012), New York (2013), and Tennessee (2013). We 
considered these three mandates to be strong for two reasons: They require all prescribers, 
Wen et al.
Page 4
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 regardless of practice settings, to query the monitoring programs when first prescribing an 
opioid or benzodiazepine and subsequently at least every twelve months should prescribing 
continue, and they do not allow prescriber discretion on whether to query the program based 
on subjective judgment about possible inappropriate use. Because of the limited number of 
state-quarter pairs in which there were strong mandates of use in our study period (21 of 736 
state-quarter pairs), we chose not to differentiate between strong and weak mandates of use 
in our main analysis, but we examined them separately in an exploratory analysis.
Analysis
The staggered implementation of mandates across states created a natural experiment. Our 
analysis compared the numbers of opioid prescriptions and Medicaid spending on 
prescription opioids per 100 Medicaid enrollees in state-quarter pairs exposed to mandates 
and those not exposed to mandates. We estimated a series of linear models for both 
outcomes. In addition to the key independent variable of exposure to mandates, we included 
a set of dichotomous state indicators, one for each state (state fixed effects), to control for 
across-state differences in the population-adjusted volume of prescriptions and Medicaid 
spending on prescription opioids dispensed to enrollees. We also included a set of year fixed 
effects to control for nationwide trends in these outcomes.
In addition, our models controlled for state-level policies and general economic conditions 
that varied over time, including a dichotomous indicator of newly implemented prescription 
drug monitoring programs during the study period (for nineteen states);26 a dichotomous 
indicator of states’ implementation of Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act in 
201427 or the partial implementation of Medicaid expansion between 2011 and 2013;28 the 
Medicaid managed care penetration rate, measured as the percentage of all Medicaid 
enrollees in comprehensive managed care programs; the percentage of the 
noninstitutionalized population living in poverty (measured at the state-year level); and 
state-year level unemployment rate. Standard errors were derived by taking into account 
clustering at the state level.29
In our main analysis, we first estimated the effect of any mandate of registration or use. 
Then, in a separate analysis, we estimated the effects associated with mandates of 
registration only, mandates of use only, and mandates of both registration and use. Separate 
analyses were conducted for Schedule II, Schedule III, and all opioids. In an exploratory 
analysis, we further broke down mandates of both registration and use into mandates of 
registration and weak mandates of use versus mandates of registration and strong mandates 
of use, since all three states that adopted relatively strong mandates of use (Kentucky, New 
York, and Tennessee) also had mandates of registration when their mandates of use went 
into effect.
Limitations
Our study had several limitations. First, we could not tell whether the changes associated 
with states’ implementation of mandates that we found reflected a trend toward more 
appropriate and safer prescribing of opioids to Medicaid patients. Nor were we able to 
evaluate whether such mandates had any unintended effects that deterred appropriate opioid 
Wen et al.
Page 5
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 prescribing. To shed some light on this point, we conducted a separate analysis by focusing 
on fentanyl, morphine, and hydromorphone—opioids commonly used to treat cancer pain.13 
Combined, these three drugs accounted for 7.6 percent of all prescription opioids dispensed 
to Medicaid enrollees.
Second, we did not have data on actual prescribers’ registration with and use of their state’s 
drug monitoring program. Because of their aggregate nature, the Medicaid State Drug 
Utilization Files did not allow us to derive patient-level measures such as daily morphine 
milligram-equivalent doses, multiple provider episodes (an indicator of possible misuse of 
controlled substances), or overlapping opioid prescriptions or total days of supply—
measures that would capture high-risk patient behaviors related to opioid prescriptions. 
Thus, our study is unable to shed much light on the behavioral pathways by which state 
mandates had an effect on prescription opioid use.
Third, states that adopted mandates might have experienced more rapid growth in the opioid 
epidemic compared to other states, which would tend to bias our results in the direction of 
suggesting that the mandates lacked effects. Alternatively, implementation of mandates 
might have coincided with other reasons for changes in opioid prescriptions, such as 
Medicaid policies limiting coverage of high-dose opioid prescriptions or placing certain 
opioids on more restrictive formulary tiers,30 which would bias our estimates in the opposite 
direction. Thus, our results are associational rather than causal, but the net impact of the 
biases (after they cancel each other out) is unknown.
Study Results
Based on our data for 736 state-quarter pairs, the average number of opioid prescriptions per 
quarter per 100 Medicaid enrollees was 21.3 (95% confidence interval: 20.7, 21.8). Schedule 
II (average: 14.9; 95% CI: 14.5, 15.3) and Schedule III opioids (average: 6.4; 95% CI: 6.2, 
6.6) accounted for 70 percent and 30 percent of all opioids, respectively. Average total 
Medicaid spending per quarter per 100 enrollees on all opioids was $874.0 (95% CI: 839.5, 
908.4), of which $519.4 (95%CI: 500.1, 538.7) was spent on Schedule II and $354.5 (95% 
CI: 331.6, 377.5) on Schedule III opioids (dollar amounts do not sum to total because of 
rounding).
Our analysis indicated that mandates of any kind, of either registration or use, were 
associated with a 9–10 percent reduction in the use of Schedule II opioids by Medicaid 
enrollees over our study years, 2011–2014. The average numbers of Schedule II opioid 
prescriptions per quarter per 100 Medicaid enrollees were 15.3 without any mandate, 
compared to 13.9 with some kind of mandate (Exhibit 1). Average Medicaid spending on 
Schedule II opioids per quarter per 100 enrollees over the study years was $536.7 without 
any mandate, compared to $477.0 with a mandate (Exhibit 2). The difference in the numbers 
of Schedule III opioid prescriptions between states with and those without mandates was 
minimal and not significant (Exhibit 1). There was a difference of 6.6 percent in the numbers 
of all opioid prescriptions between states with and those without mandates, but that change 
was not significant.
Wen et al.
Page 6
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In our analysis that differentiated between mandates of registration and mandates of use, we 
found that both the numbers of prescriptions and the amounts of Medicaid spending were 
significantly lower (by approximately 10 percent) in states with a mandate of registration 
alone or a mandate of registration and use, compared to states with no mandate (Exhibits 3 
and 4). In contrast, having a mandate of use alone was not associated with a significant 
decrease in Schedule II opioid prescriptions or spending. None of the mandate policy 
categories was associated with significant changes in the number of prescriptions of or 
spending on Schedule III opioids or all opioids (data not shown).
Full regression outputs of our main analyses are provided in Appendix A4.21
Our exploratory analysis further broke down mandates of use into strong versus weak 
mandates and examined changes in both outcomes associated with five categories of 
mandate policies (Appendix A5).21 Similar to the results in our main analysis, mandates of 
registration alone were associated with a reduction of more than 10 percent in both 
outcomes, compared to no mandates. Mandates of use alone (all of which were considered 
weak mandates) did not have an effect on either outcome. Changes associated with mandates 
of registration and weak mandates of use were similar to those associated with mandates of 
registration and strong mandates of use.
In the analysis that focused on drugs commonly used for cancer pain, we did not find any 
mandate policy to be associated with a significant change in the number of prescriptions of 
or Medicaid spending on these drugs (Appendix A6).21
Discussion
The past few years have seen an acceleration in states’ adoption of statutory mandates that 
prescribers register with their state’s prescription drug monitoring program, use the program, 
or both. Our analysis of data from the Medicaid State Drug Utilization Files indicated that 
such mandates implemented in the period 2011–14 were associated with a reduction of 9–10 
percent in population-adjusted prescriptions of and Medicaid spending on Schedule II 
opioids for enrollees. No effect was seen for Schedule III opioids. Our results also suggest 
that reductions in numbers of Schedule II opioid prescriptions were largely associated with 
mandates of registration and not with mandates of use—which were generally weak during 
our study period. Our estimates suggest that if every state adopted a mandate of registration, 
Medicaid programs nationwide would save over $166 million (95% CI: 18 million, 314 
million) from reduced spending on Schedule II opioids over 12 months (Appendix A7).21
An important policy implication is that mandates of registration alone could be effective in 
promoting safer and more contained prescribing of opioids with the highest potential for 
abuse and dependence. This is contrary to the common belief that mandating registration 
only might have limited effects, since mandates of registration alone do not guarantee that 
prescribers will actually use the monitoring programs.12,31 Since registration with the 
system was the prerequisite for querying it, mandates of registration might have substantially 
lowered the initial hurdle involved in using the system by making prescribers familiar with 
the process of using it. In addition, the fact that such mandates require all prescribers to 
Wen et al.
Page 7
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 register with the monitoring program might have further raised prescribers’ awareness of 
misuse and abuse of controlled substances among their patients, leading to subsequent 
changes in prescribing practices. If it is indeed the case that mandates of registration would 
encounter far less pushback from the provider community31 and are less costly to enforce 
(for example, registration can be enforced as a condition for license renewal), compared to 
mandates of use, states that do not yet have any mandate in place should consider adopting 
at least mandates of registration.
Our findings suggest that mandates of use alone implemented before 2015 had limited 
effects on the numbers of opioid prescriptions received by Medicaid enrollees or Medicaid 
spending on these drugs. Consistently, mandates of use had very limited incremental effects 
when combined with mandates of registration. Of note, in seventeen of the twenty states that 
implemented some mandate of use during our study period, the mandates were of limited 
scope (for example, applying only to prescribers in opioid addiction treatment programs), 
strength (for example, relying on prescribers’ judgment to determine the need to query the 
drug monitoring program), or both. Our findings suggest that weak mandates of use are 
unlikely to be an effective tool to induce population-wide changes in opioid prescribing.
Three states (Kentucky, New York, and Tennessee) adopted strong mandates of use during 
our study period. Our exploratory analysis did not find a greater reduction in opioid use by 
Medicaid patients associated with these strong mandates of use (all of which were in 
combination with mandates of registration), compared to weak mandates of use in 
combination with a mandate of registration. This is in contrast to findings of single-state 
evaluations that have reported rapid increases in prescribers’ use of the monitoring 
programs, reductions in multiple provider episodes, and reductions in total volume of 
prescribing of certain drugs after the programs were implemented.12 Although our study 
used a much stronger design than the single-state before-and-after approach, we had a 
limited number of states with strong mandates and limited follow-up time after their 
implementation (nine quarters for Kentucky, five for New York, and seven for Tennessee). 
Thus, our findings are at best preliminary and need to be revisited as more recent data 
become available. In addition, future studies using data that capture patient-level high-risk 
opioid prescription patterns will shed more definitive light on the effectiveness of mandates 
in changing prescribing behaviors.
Despite encouraging evidence that supports the use of mandates, enforcement remains a 
challenge—but more so for mandates of use than for mandates of registration. For example, 
Massachusetts adopted a policy according to which the renewal of a prescriber’s registration 
to prescribe controlled substances triggers the prescriber’s registration with the prescription 
drug monitoring program. Such approaches are believed to be more effective and efficient 
than campaigns to recruit prescribers to register voluntarily.
For mandates of use—especially strong mandates with comprehensive coverage of 
prescribers and clinical circumstances—no such ready regulatory mechanisms are available 
for enforcement. Extensive state monitoring of prescribers’ compliance may not be possible
—or if it is possible, it may be costly. However, provider organizations may be able to 
regulate their members by integrating monitoring program reports with electronic medical 
Wen et al.
Page 8
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 records, health information exchange systems, or both32 and by enforcing queries of the 
drug monitoring program as a condition of prescribing under defined circumstances. 
Technical barriers to such regulation could be surmountable, but there might be a lack of 
incentives on the part of provider organizations to implement the regulation, especially if 
prescribers strongly resist complying with the mandate of use. In addition, data security and 
patient confidentiality remain serious concerns when patient data are integrated across 
different systems.32
Conclusion
Our analysis of aggregate Medicaid drug utilization data indicates that state mandates for 
prescribers to register with or use the prescription drug monitoring programs adopted in 
2011–14 were associated with reductions of 9–10 percent in population-adjusted numbers of 
Schedule II opioid prescriptions received by Medicaid enrollees and amounts of Medicaid 
spending on these prescriptions. This reduction was largely associated with mandates for 
prescribers to register with their state’s monitoring program and not with the generally weak 
mandates to use the programs that we found in the study period. States’ adoption of 
mandates has accelerated in recent years. Future studies need to provide updated 
assessments of the role of strong mandates of use in ensuring safer and more appropriate use 
of prescription opioids.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
An early version of this article was presented at the AcademyHealth Annual Research Meeting in Boston, 
Massachusetts, June 27, 2016. This work was funded by a pilot grant from the Center for Health Economics of 
Treatment Interventions for Substance Use Disorder, HCV, and HIV, a National Institute on Drug Abuse Center of 
Excellence (Grant No. P30DA040500). Bruce Schackman and Brandon Aden are funded by the National Institute 
on Drug Abuse (Grant No. P30DA040500). The authors thank the National Alliance for Model State Drug Laws for 
providing the effective dates of state mandates. The authors also thank Philip Jeng for his excellent assistance with 
the manuscript.
Notes
1. Volkow, ND. Hearing before the Senate Caucus on International Narcotics Control [Internet]. 
Washington (DC): US Congress; 2014 May 14. [cited 2016 Aug 16]. Available to download from: 
https://www.drugabuse.gov/about-nida/legislative-activities/testimony-to-congress/2016/americas-
addiction-to-opioids-heroin-prescription-drug-abuse
2. RTI International. Results from the 2014 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: detailed tables 
[Internet]. Rockville (MD): Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration; 2015 Sep 
10. [cited 2017 Feb 10]. Available from: http://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/NSDUH-
DetTabs2014/NSDUH-DetTabs2014.pdf
3. Bohnert AS, Valenstein M, Bair MJ, Ganoczy D, McCarthy JF, Ilgen MA, et al. Association 
between opioid prescribing patterns and opioid overdose–related deaths. JAMA. 2011; 305(13):
1315–21. [PubMed: 21467284] 
4. Rudd RA, Aleshire N, Zibbell JE, Gladden RM. Increases in drug and opioid overdose deaths—
United States, 2000–2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016; 64(50–51):1378–82. (MMWR). 
[PubMed: 26720857] 
Wen et al.
Page 9
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 5. Department of Health and Human Services, Behavioral Health Coordinating Committee, 
Prescription Drug Abuse Subcommittee. Addressing prescription drug abuse in the United States: 
current activities and future opportunities [Internet]. Washington (DC): HHS; [cited 2017 Feb 10]. 
Available from: http://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/pdf/
hhs_prescription_drug_abuse_report_09.2013.pdf
6. Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance. Harold Rogers Prescription Drug Monitoring Program 
[Internet]. Washington (DC): CFDA; [cited 2017 Feb 10]. Available from: http://www.cfda.gov/
index?s=program&mode=form&tab=core&id=ce6f8849c6fd92bb108062ab1f9150bd
7. Bao Y, Pan Y, Taylor A, Radakrishnan S, Luo F, Pincus HA, et al. Prescription drug monitoring 
programs are associated with sustained reductions in opioid prescribing by physicians. Health Aff 
(Millwood). 2016; 35(6):1045–51. [PubMed: 27269021] 
8. Patrick SW, Fry CE, Jones TF, Buntin MB. Implementation of prescription drug monitoring 
programs associated with reductions in opioid-related death rates. Health Aff (Millwood). 2016; 
35(7):1324–32. [PubMed: 27335101] 
9. Meara E, Horwitz JR, Powell W, McClelland L, Zhou W, O’Malley AJ, et al. State legal restrictions 
and prescription-opioid use among disabled adults. N Engl J Med. 2016; 375(1):44–53. [PubMed: 
27332619] 
10. Kreiner, P., Nikitin, R., Shields, TP. Bureau of Justice Assistance prescription drug monitoring 
program performance measures report: January 2009 through June 2012 [Internet]. Prescription 
Drug Monitoring Program Center of Excellence, Heller School for Social Policy and Management, 
Brandeis University; Waltham, MA: Washington (DC): Bureau of Justice Assistance; [last revised 
2014 Apr 4; cited 2017 Feb 10]. Available from: http://www.pdmpexcellence.org/sites/all/
pdfs/BJA%20PDMP%20Performance%20Measures%20Report%20Jan%202009%20to%20June
%202012%20FInal_with%20feedback.pdf
11. Rutkow L, Turner L, Lucas E, Hwang C, Alexander GC. Most primary care physicians are aware 
of prescription drug monitoring programs, but many find the data difficult to access. Health Aff 
(Millwood). 2015; 34(3):484–92. [PubMed: 25732500] 
12. Prescription Drug Monitoring Program Center of Excellence at Brandeis. PDMP prescriber use 
mandates: characteristics, current status, and outcomes in selected states. Waltham (MA): The 
Center; 2016. Revision 3, May 2016 [Internet][cited 2017 Feb 10]. Available from: http://
www.pdmpexcellence.org/sites/all/pdfs/COE%20briefing%20on%20mandates%203rd
%20revision.pdf
13. Freeman, PR., Goodin, A., Troske, S., Talbert, J. Kentucky House Bill 1 Impact Evaluation: 
executive summary prepared for the Kentucky Cabinet for Health and Family Services [Internet]. 
Institute for Pharmaceutical Outcomes and Policy, Department of Pharmacy Practice and Science, 
College of Pharmacy, University of Kentucky; Lexington, KY: Frankfort (KY): The Cabinet; 2015 
Mar. [cited 2017 Feb 10]. Available from: http://www.chfs.ky.gov/NR/rdonlyres/
842D66B1-612C-4A26-9FE2-C526329D0BEE/0/
KentuckyHB1ImpactStudyExecutiveSummary03262015.pdf
14. Shmagel A, Foley R, Ibrahim H. Epidemiology of chronic low back pain in US adults: data from 
the 2009–10 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 
2016; 6811:1688–94.
15. Mack KA, Zhang K, Paulozzi L, Jones C. Prescription practices involving opioid analgesics among 
Americans with Medicaid, 2010. J Health Care Poor Underserved. 2015; 26(1):182–98. [PubMed: 
25702736] 
16. Adelmann PK. Mental and substance use disorders among Medicaid recipients: prevalence 
estimates from two national surveys. Adm Policy Ment Health. 2003; 31(2):111–29. [PubMed: 
14756195] 
17. Han B, Compton WM, Jones CM, Cai R. Nonmedical prescription opioid use and use disorders 
among adults aged 18 through 64 years in the United States, 2003–2013. JAMA. 2015; 314(14):
1468–78. [PubMed: 26461997] 
18. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Overdose deaths involving prescription opioids among 
Medicaid enrollees—Washington, 2004–2007. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2009; 58(42):
1171–5. (MMWR). [PubMed: 19875978] 
Wen et al.
Page 10
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 19. HealthData.gov. Medicaid drug programs data and resources [Internet]. Baltimore (MD): Centers 
for Medicare and Medicaid Services; [cited 2017 Feb 10]. Available from: http://
www.medicaid.gov/medicaid-chip-program-information/by-topics/benefits/prescription-drugs/
medicaid-drug-programs-data-and-resources.html
20. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector General. States’ collection of 
rebates for drugs paid through Medicaid managed care organizations. Washington (DC): HHS; 
2012 Sep. [cited 2017 Feb 10]. Available from: https://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/
oei-03-11-00480.pdf
21. To access the Appendix, click on the Appendix link in the box to the right of the article online.
22. Medicaid.gov. Medicaid and CHIP Enrollment Data [Internet]. Baltimore (MD): Centers for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services; 2016 Nov 21. Available from: https://www.medicaid.gov/
medicaid/program-information/medicaid-and-chip-enrollment-data/index.html
23. Food and Drug Administration. Approved drug products with therapeutic equivalence evaluations 
(Orange Book) [Internet]. Silver Spring (MD): FDA; [updated 2017 Jan 25; cited 2017 Feb 13]. 
Available for download from: http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/InformationOnDrugs/ucm129662.htm
24. Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice. Schedules of controlled substances: 
rescheduling of hydrocodone combination products from Schedule III to Schedule II. Fed Regist. 
2014; 79(163):49661–82. [PubMed: 25167591] 
25. National Alliance for Model State Drug Laws. Prescription drug monitoring programs [Internet]. 
Manchester (IA): NAMSDL; c2017. [cited 2017 Feb 13]. Available from: http://www.namsdl.org/
prescription-monitoring-programs.cfm
26. National Alliance for Model State Drug Laws. PDMP dates of operation [Internet]. Charlottesville 
(VA): NAMSDL; c2015. [cited 2017 Feb 13]. Available from: http://www.namsdl.org/library/
580225E9-E469-AFA9-50E7579C1D738E71/
27. Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. Status of state action on the Medicaid expansion decision 
[Internet]. Menlo Park (CA): KFF; c2017. [cited 2017 Feb 13]. Available from: http://kff.org/
health-reform/state-indicator/state-activity-around-expanding-medicaid-under-the-affordable-care-
act/
28. Sommers BD, Kenney GM, Epstein AM. New evidence on the Affordable Care Act: coverage 
impacts of early Medicaid expansions. Health Aff (Millwood). 2014; 33(1):78–87. [PubMed: 
24395938] 
29. Bertrand M, Duflo E, Mullainathan S. How much should we trust differences-in-differences 
estimates? Q J Econ. 2004; 119(1):249–75.
30. Keast SL, Nesser N, Farmer K. Strategies aimed at controlling misuse and abuse of opioid 
prescription medications in a state Medicaid program: a policymaker’s perspective. Am J Drug 
Alcohol Abuse. 2015; 41(1):1–6. [PubMed: 25490606] 
31. Haffajee RL, Jena AB, Weiner SG. Mandatory use of prescription drug monitoring programs. 
JAMA. 2015; 313(9):891–2. [PubMed: 25622279] 
32. Clark, T., Eadie, J., Kreiner, P., Strickler, G. Prescription drug monitoring programs: an assessment 
of the evidence for best practices [Internet]. Prescription Drug Monitoring Program Center of 
Excellence, Heller School for Social Policy and Management, Brandeis University; Waltham, MA: 
Philadelphia (PA): Pew Charitable Trusts; 2012 Sep 20. [cited 2017 Feb 13]. Available from: 
http://www.pewtrusts.org/~/media/assets/0001/pdmp_update_1312013.pdf
Biographies
Hefei Wen is an assistant professor of health management and policy at the University of 
Kentucky, in Lexington.
Bruce R. Schackman is a professor of healthcare policy and research at Weill Cornell 
Medical College, in New York City.
Wen et al.
Page 11
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Brandon Aden is an assistant professor of medicine and of healthcare policy and research at 
Weill Cornell Medical College.
Yuhua Bao (yub2003@med.cornell.edu) is an associate professor of healthcare policy and 
research at Weill Cornell Medical College.
Wen et al.
Page 12
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Exhibit 1. 
Average predicted numbers of opioid prescriptions per 100 Medicaid enrollees per quarter in 
states with and without mandates for prescribers to register with or use the prescription drug 
monitoring program, 2011–14
Source/Notes: SOURCE Authors’ analysis of data for 2011–14 from the Medicaid State 
Drug Utilization Files. NOTES Schedule II opioids are the subclass of prescription opioids 
with the highest risk of abuse and dependence. Schedule III opioids have a lower potential 
for abuse and dependence than Schedule II opioids. As explained in the text, Alabama, 
Missouri, Pennsylvania, Utah, and the District of Columbia were excluded from the analysis. 
The error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. **p < 0.05
Wen et al.
Page 13
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Exhibit 2. 
Average predicted Medicaid spending on prescription opioids per 100 enrollees per quarter 
in states with and without mandates for prescribers to register with or use the prescription 
drug monitoring program, 2011–14
Source/Notes: SOURCE Authors’ analysis of data for 2011–14 from the Medicaid State 
Drug Utilization Files. NOTES Spending (in 2014 dollars) is before rebates paid by drug 
manufacturers. Schedule II and Schedule III opioids are explained in Exhibit 1 Notes. As 
explained in the text, Alabama, Missouri, Pennsylvania, Utah, and the District of Columbia 
were excluded from the analysis. The error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. **p < 
0.05
Wen et al.
Page 14
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Exhibit 3. 
Average predicted numbers of prescriptions for Schedule II prescription opioids per 100 
Medicaid enrollees per quarter in states with and without mandates for prescribers to register 
with and/or to use the prescription drug monitoring program, 2011–14
Source/Notes: SOURCE Authors’ analysis of data for 2011–14 from the Medicaid State 
Drug Utilization Files. NOTES Schedule II opioids are explained in the Exhibit 1 Notes. 
Mandates of registration require prescribers to register with the state’s monitoring program. 
Mandates of use require that prescribers use the program under certain circumstances, such 
as for a new prescription. Significance denotes the difference between a mandate policy 
category and no mandate. As explained in the text, Alabama, Missouri, Pennsylvania, Utah, 
and the District of Columbia were excluded from the analysis. The error bars indicate 95% 
confidence intervals. **p < 0.05.
Wen et al.
Page 15
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Exhibit 4. 
Average predicted Medicaid spending on Schedule II prescription opioids per 100 enrollees 
per quarter in states with and without mandates for prescribers to register with and/or to use 
the prescription drug monitoring program, 2011–14
Source/Notes: SOURCE Authors’ analysis of data for 2011–2014 from the Medicaid State 
Drug Utilization Files. NOTES Spending (in 2014 dollars) is before rebates paid by drug 
manufacturers. Schedule II opioids are explained in the Exhibit 1 notes. Mandate policy 
categories are explained in the Exhibit 3 Notes. Significance denotes the difference between 
a mandate policy category and no mandate. As explained in the text, Alabama, Missouri, 
Pennsylvania, Utah, and the District of Columbia were excluded from the analysis. The error 
bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. **p < 0.05.
Wen et al.
Page 16
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
