 Hepatic Arterial Infusion of Low-Density Lipoprotein 
Docosahexaenoic Acid Nanoparticles Selectively Disrupts 
Redox Balance in Hepatoma cells and Reduces Growth of 
Orthotopic Liver Tumors in Rats
Xiaodong Wen1, Lacy Reynolds1, Rohit S. Mulik1, Soo Young Kim1, Tim Van Treuren1, 
Liem H. Nguyen2,3, Hao Zhu2,3, and Ian R. Corbin1,3,*
1Advanced Imaging Research Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at 
Dallas, Dallas, TX 75390, USA
2Children’s Research Institute Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, TX 75390, USA
3Internal Medicine Division of Liver and Digestive Diseases, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, TX 75390, USA
Abstract
Background & Aims—Dietary intake of the natural omega-3 fatty acid docosahexaenoic acid 
(DHA) has been implicated in protecting patients with viral hepatitis B or C from developing 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Little is known about the effects of DHA on established solid 
tumors. Herein, we describe a low-density lipoprotein (LDL)-based nanoparticle that acts as a 
transporter for unesterified DHA (LDL–DHA) and demonstrates selective cytotoxicity towards 
*Correspondence should be addressed to: Dr. Ian R. Corbin, Advanced Imaging Research Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, 
Texas, 75390, Phone: 214-645-7044; Fax: 214-645-2744; ian.corbin@utsouthwestern.edu. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Conflict of Interest:
None
Author’s Contributions:
Xiaodong Wen
Acquisition and analysis of data; contribution to design; draft article
Lacy Reynolds
Acquisition and analysis of data; critical revision of content; draft article
Rohit S. Mulik
Acquisition and analysis of data; critical revision of content; draft article
Soo Young Kim
Acquisition and analysis of data
Tim Van Treuren
Acquisition and analysis of data
Liem H. Nguyen
Acquisition and analysis of data
Hao Zhu
Contribution to design and interpretation of data
Ian R. Corbin
Contribution to conception and design; Analysis and interpretation of data; Draft article and critical revision; Final 
approval for publication; Accountable for all aspects of work
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Gastroenterology. 2016 February ; 150(2): 488–498. doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2015.10.008.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 HCC cells. We investigated the ability of LDL–DHA to reduce growth of orthotopic hepatomas in 
rats.
Methods—ACI rats were given intrahepatic injections of rat hepatoma cells (H4IIE); 24 tumor-
bearing rats (mean tumor diameter, ~1 cm) were subject to a single hepatic artery injection of LDL 
nanoparticles (2 mg/kg) loaded with DHA (LDL–DHA), triolein (LDL–TO) or sham surgery 
controls. Tumor growth was measured by magnetic resonance imaging and other methods; tumor, 
liver and serum samples were collected and assessed by histochemical, immunofluorescence, 
biochemical and immunoblot analyses.
Results—Three days after administration of LDL–TO or sham surgery, the control rats had 
large, highly vascularized tumors that contained proliferating cells. However, rats given LDL–
DHA had smaller, pale tumors that were devoid of vascular supply and greater than 80% of the 
tumor tissue was necrotic. Four to 6 days after injection of LDL–DHA, the tumors were 3-fold 
smaller than those of control rats. The liver tissue that surrounded the tumors showed no histologic 
or biochemical evidence of injury. Injection of LDL–DHA into the hepatic artery of rats 
selectively deregulated redox reactions in tumor tissues by: increasing levels of reactive oxygen 
species and lipid peroxidation, depleting and oxidizing glutathione and nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide phosphate, and significantly downregulating the antioxidant enzyme glutathione 
peroxidase-4. Remarkably, the redox balance in the surrounding liver was not disrupted.
Conclusion—LDL–DHA nanoparticle selectively kills hepatoma cells and reduces growth of 
orthotopic liver tumors in rats. It induces tumor-specific necrosis by selectively disrupting redox 
balance within the cancer cell.
Keywords
Nanomedicine; liver cancer; n-3 fatty acids ROS; lipid peroxidation
Introduction
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common cancer worldwide and is 
responsible for over a half a million deaths annually1. The incidence and mortality of HCC 
have steadily increased three-fold over the past two decades and it is now ranked as the 
fastest growing cause of cancer-related deaths in the United States2, 3. Moreover, estimates 
indicate that this increasing trend is expected to continue into the next decade4. Within the 
United States less than 20% of newly diagnosed HCC patients present at an early stage, 
which are amenable for curative therapies such as surgical resection, liver transplantation, or 
ablative techniques5. Of the remaining 80% of patients, 60% of HCC patients present with 
either intermediate or advanced stage disease. Unfortunately, the treatment options for these 
patients are limited, and even with the recently approved systemic multikinase inhibitor, 
Sorafenib, the 5-year survival rate for HCC remains <12%.3 The poor prognosis of these 
patients highlights the need for more effective therapies. Natural products have and continue 
to be an invaluable source for anticancer drug discovery6. In recent years, the natural 
omega-3 fatty acid, docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) has been shown to possess promising 
anticancer properties7, 8. In fact, a study by Swanda et al recently reported that the dietary 
consumption of fish rich in omega-3 fatty acids protects against the development of HCC in 
Wen et al.
Page 2
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 patients with hepatitis B or C infection9. Evidence for the beneficial effects of dietary DHA 
on established solid tumors, however, is sparse. Although numerous in vitro cell cultures 
studies have shown that unesterified omega-3 fatty acids have a potent dose-dependent 
cytotoxic effect on cancer cells10, 11, these doses of omega-3 fatty acid simply cannot be 
achieved in vivo at the local tumor site through dietary consumption of these lipids12. To 
address this issue, our lab has recently engineered a novel low-density lipoprotein (LDL) 
based nanoparticle that is uniformly reconstituted with unesterified DHA (herein referred to 
as LDL–DHA)13. We demonstrated that the LDL–DHA nanoparticle closely resembles 
native plasma LDL, and is an ideal transporter for DHA. Therapeutically, LDL–DHA 
nanoparticles proved to be selectively cytotoxic towards HCC cells. In a murine cell culture 
system, LDL–DHA is able to efficaciously kill HCC cells at doses that do not harm normal 
liver cells13. We later showed that the lethal anticancer actions of LDL–DHA nanoparticle 
treatment were mediated by the selective induction of lipid peroxidation and oxidative stress 
in the murine HCC cells. In the present study, we evaluate the in vivo anticancer efficacy of 
the LDL–DHA nanomedicine in an orthotopic syngeneic rat model of HCC.
Materials and Methods
Preparation of LDL–DHA
Human LDL was isolated from apheresis plasma of patients with familial 
hypercholesterolemia using sequential density gradient ultracentrifugation14. Incorporation 
of unesterified DHA (Nuchek Prep, INC) into LDL was performed by the reconstitution 
method as described in our previous publication13. Throughout these studies LDL 
reconstituted with triolein (LDL-TO) or oleic acid (LDL-OA) served as controls. 
Nanoparticle characterization (structure and composition) was performed as described 
previously13 to ensure consistency of batch to batch preparations.
Cell Culture and Animals
The rat heptoma cell line, H4IIE, was maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium 
(DMEM) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). Cells were grown at 37°C in an 
atmosphere of 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator.
Adult ACI rats (175–195 g) were obtained from Harlan Laboratories, Inc. (Indianapolis, IN). 
Rats were housed under standard laboratory conditions with a 12 hour day/night cycle and 
were maintained on Purina rat chow and water ad libitum throughout the studies. All studies 
were approved by the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center Animal Ethics 
Committee.
For details on the culture of mouse and human cells, hepatocyte isolation for primary 
hepatocyte culture, orthotopic HCC implantation, MRI detection of tumor size, hepatic 
artery injections, serum analyses, tissue pathology, cell viability and cell death assays please 
refer to the Experimental Procedure section in the Supporting Information.
Wen et al.
Page 3
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Measurements of Oxidative Stress
Determination of cell and tissue levels of lipid peroxidation, reactive oxygen species (ROS), 
protein-bound carbonyls, NADPH/NADP, GSH/GSSG and the redox potential of the 
glutathione redox couple are described in detail in the Experimental section in the 
Supporting Information.
Western Blot and Immunohistochemistry
Detailed descriptions of western blot analysis performed on cell and tissue proteins and 
immunohistochemistry of tissue sections can be found in the Supporting Information.
Statistical Evaluation
The results were expressed as mean ± standard error. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) with 
Tukey’s multiple comparison post hoc testing was used for evaluation of differences 
between groups. Differences with a P value less than 0.05 were deemed significant.
Results
Physicochemical Properties of LDL Nanoparticles
LDL–DHA nanoparticles were prepared by the reconstitution method described 
previously13. The physicochemical properties of the LDL–DHA were similar to those 
previously reported. The mono-dispersed nanoparticles had an average particle size of 20 
nm, surface charge −25mV and DHA loading approximating 1152 molecules per LDL 
particle. More details of the LDL–DHA nanoparticle composition can be seen in 
Supplementary Fig. 1. The control LDL nanoparticles reconstituted with triolein (LDL-TO) 
or oleic acid (LDL-OA) were of similar size (23–24 nm) and zeta potential reading were −15 
mV and −25 mV respectively. On average LDL-TO nanoparticles carried 344 triolein 
molecules, while LDL-OA carried 1700 molecules of oleic acid.
LDL–DHA is able to Selectively Kill HCC Cells and Exhibits Significant Therapeutic Activity 
In Vivo
LDL–DHA dose response studies were performed in malignant H4IIE hepatoma cells and 
their syngeneic normal counterparts, ACI rat primary hepatocytes (Fig. 1A). The H4IIE cells 
were particularly sensitive to the LDL–DHA treatments, complete cell kill was achieved at 
60 µM LDL–DHA. Meanwhile, the primary hepatocytes remained unharmed in this dose 
range. It was not until concentrations reached approximately 125–130 µM that primary 
hepatocytes started to experience cytotoxic effects of the treatment. To further demonstrate 
that the selective cytotoxic properties of LDL–DHA was not a rat specific effect, dose 
response studies were also performed in mouse and human hepatocyte and HCC cell lines 
(Supplementary Fig. 2). Similar to the rat cells, selective cytotoxicity was evident among the 
mouse (Hepa1C7, TIB-75) and human (SK-Hep1) HCC cells relative to their normal non-
malignant counterparts. These findings are in keeping with our previous publication13 and 
the work of others utilizing free polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs)15, 16. Dose response 
curves of control LDL nanoparticles (LDL-OA (Supplementary Fig. 3) and LDL-TO (data 
not shown)) displayed no toxicity in either rat cell types over an extended dose range.
Wen et al.
Page 4
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To visualize the ultrastructural changes occurring in the H4IIE cells following LDL–DHA 
treatment, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed 24 hours after LDL 
nanoparticle exposure (Fig. 1B). Untreated control and the LDL-TO treated H4IIE cells 
displayed similarly healthy epithelial morphology. Conversely, toxicity from the LDL–DHA 
treatment could clearly be seen in many of the H4IIE cells. These cells adopted a more oval/
spherical shape and nuclear chromatin condensation/ fragmentation, along with disrupted 
plasma membrane. At higher magnification, dysmorphic mitochondria along with many 
autophagosomes/autolysosomes could be seen throughout their cytoplasm. Fluorescent 
markers of cell death (propidium iodide (PI) and Annexin-V) were also used to identify the 
pathways of cell death in the treated cells (Supplementary Fig. 4). The LDL–DHA treated 
H4IIE cells displayed strong fluorescence signal for both PI and Annexin-V, suggesting a 
mixed pattern of cell killing mediated by LDL–DHA. Neither untreated controls nor the 
LDL-TO treated cells displayed fluorescent signals for apoptosis or necrosis, indicating that 
these cells maintained good viability.
A local regional transarterial approach was taken to administer the LDL nanoparticles to the 
hepatoma bearing rats. This hepatic artery injection approach minimizes the systemic 
exposure of our nanoparticle drug in the animals and ensures that adequate concentrations of 
LDL nanoparticles reached the H4IIE tumors. Studies with fluorophore-labelled LDL 
nanoparticles (LDL-DiR) demonstrated that HAI was able to achieve high levels of LDL 
nanoparticle delivery to the hepatoma equaling or even surpassing that of the liver (Fig. 2A). 
Furthermore, fluorescent microscopy was able confirm in situ intracellular uptake of the 
LDL nanoparticle into liver and tumor cells (Fig 2B). Next, the therapeutic and biological 
effects of HAI of LDL–DHA were assessed three days following sham surgery or a single 
injection of LDL nanoparticles (Fig. 3).
Sham operated (n=5) and LDL-TO treated (n=7) animals similarly displayed large poorly 
differentiated HCC. These tumors were highly vascularized and histologic sections showed 
viable tissue that was actively proliferating. The LDL–DHA treated rats (n=12) had smaller 
pale tumors that were noticeably void of vascular supply. Histology later confirmed that 
LDL–DHA treated tumors had undergone complete necrosis (Fig. 3 and Supplementary 
Table 1). Surrounding the necrotic tumors were sharp boundaries of granulation-type tissues 
characterized by fibrous deposition and phagocytic cell infiltrates. Tissue sections depicted 
in Fig. 2 show a clear and definitive demarcation of necrotic tumor tissue and viable liver 
tissue. In addition, complementary immunohistochemical analyses for Ki-67 and cleaved 
caspase-3 staining were also performed on these tissue sections (Supplementary Fig. 5). 
Sham and LDL-TO treated tumors displayed abundant staining for proliferative activity 
(Ki-67). Sparse staining of cleaved-caspase-3 (apoptosis) was seen in the Sham and LDL-
TO treated tumors. In contrast, staining for both Ki-67 and cleaved caspase-3 were 
noticeably absent in LDL–DHA treated tumors. Interestingly, the absence of cleaved 
caspase-3 staining suggests that in vivo tumors underwent a caspase independent cell death 
following LDL–DHA treatment.
Although the LDL–DHA treatment was able to severely induce pronounced damage to HCC 
tumors in situ, this nanomedicine proved to be highly selective, as the surrounding liver 
showed little to no evidence of injury. Accompanying serum biochemistry tests were 
Wen et al.
Page 5
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 performed, they showed that the LDL–DHA treated animals actually had lower levels of the 
markers of liver injury, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase 
(AST) compared to Sham and LDL-TO controls (Supplementary Table 2). All the other 
analytes in the serum biochemistry panel were unremarkable between the groups with the 
exception of albumin which was slightly lower for the LDL–DHA treated animals.
A subset of treated rats was also followed by non-invasive magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) to assess the treatment effect of LDL–DHA (Fig. 4). Tumor volume measurements 
followed 4–6 days after treatment revealed that LDL–DHA significantly inhibited the 
growth of the rat hepatoma approximately 3 fold compared to LDL-TO treated animals. 
These results were later validated in an additional cohort of rats evaluated 7 days following 
Sham and LDL nanoparticle treatments (Supplementary Fig. 6). Upon sacrifice LDL–DHA 
treated tumors were smaller (~2.5 fold) and pale in color compared to Sham and LDL-TO 
injected animals. Histology later confirmed that LDL–DHA was selectively cytotoxic to the 
HCC tumors without injuring the surrounding liver. In addition, serum biochemistry tests 
also consistently showed lower levels of ALT and AST in the LDL–DHA treated animals 
(Supplementary Table 3). At this time albumin levels were normalized in the LDL–DHA 
group; however, the blood urea nitrogen levels were slightly lower than controls.
Supplementary experiments were also performed in mice with MYC-induced liver tumors to 
demonstrate the anticancer effects of the LDL–DHA nanoparticles in an additional model of 
liver cancer. After only three systemic injections of LDL–DHA (4 mg/kg) the aggressive 
liver tumors in the MYC overexpressing mice already showed evidence of LDL–DHA 
anticancer cytotoxicity. These tumors had higher levels of damaging lipid peroxides 
(TBARS) and lower indices of cell proliferation compared to LDL-TO treated mice 
(Supplementary Fig. 7A,B). In addition, the LDL–DHA treated mice also had smaller 
abdominal girth indicative of suppressed tumor growth/hepatomegaly (Supplementary Fig. 
7C).
LDL–DHA Killing of Cancer Cells is Mediated by Free Radical Rather than Oxygenase 
Enzymatic Activity
DHA, like other PUFAs, can be the substrate for a number of oxygenase enzyme systems 
which include cyclooxygenase (COX), lipoxygenase (LOX) and cytochrome P450 
(CYP450). To investigate the importance of these enzymatic pathways in the tumor 
cytotoxicity of LDL–DHA, specific inhibitors to each of these enzymes were evaluated in 
viability assays with LDL–DHA treated H4IIE cells. Supplementary Fig. 8A shows that 
known effective doses of 1-aminobenzotriazole (CYP450 inhibitor), NS-398 (a selective 
inhibitor of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)), Nordihydroguaiaretic acid ((NDGA) a non-
selective LOX inhibitor), and indomethacin (a nonselective inhibitor of COX1 and 2) were 
unable prevent the cytotoxicity induced by LDL–DHA. Given that none of these inhibitors 
were able to protect against LDL–DHA treatment, we next sought to examine the role of 
free radical mediated lipid peroxidation in this process. Vitamin E, a known free radical 
scavenger and inhibitor of lipid peroxidation, was able to effectively rescue the H4IIE cells 
from LDL–DHA cytotoxicity over a wide range of vitamin E concentrations (from 10 µM–
Wen et al.
Page 6
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 200 µM) (Supplementary Fig. 8B). Overall, these finding suggest that the LDL–DHA tumor 
cytotoxicity is mediated by free radical propagated redox-stress.
LDL–DHA Treatment Selectively Induces Redox-Stress in Cancer Cells
The cellular response to LDL–DHA treatment is characterized by a selective increase of 
redox stress within HCC cells. When H4IIE cells are exposed to LDL–DHA (40 µM) over a 
48 hour period, significant increases in ROS and lipid peroxidation were detected by 
dihydroethidium (DHE) fluorescence and thiobarbituric acid reactive species (TBARs) 
measurements respectively (Fig. 5A and B). Under the same conditions of LDL–DHA 
treatment, primary ACI rat hepatocytes do not experience any increase in ROS or lipid 
peroxidation (Supplementary Fig. 9A and B). Finally, carbonyl levels were also assayed in 
the H4IIE cells before and after LDL nanoparticle treatment as a measure of protein 
oxidation. Once again, H4IIE cells demonstrated significant redox stress (6-fold increase in 
protein carbonylation), after LDL–DHA treatment compared to untreated and LDL-TO 
treated controls (Fig. 5C).
Parallel experiments examining in situ redox status were performed in tumor bearing rats 
after sham and LDL nanoparticle treatments. Strong DHE tissue staining was selectively 
detected in the HCC of LDL–DHA treated rats (Fig. 5D). Meanwhile, the DHE staining in 
the corresponding livers from the LDL–DHA injected animals remained unchanged from 
sham levels. Semi quantitative analysis indicated that the paired tumor/liver DHE 
fluorescence intensity ratio was on average 4 fold for LDL–DHA treated animals, while the 
ratios in Sham and LDL-TO treated animals was 1 and 0.7 respectively (Supplementary Fig. 
10). Tissue lipid peroxidation, as measured by the TBARS indices, followed a similar trend 
as the DHE readings (Fig. 5E). While Sham and LDL-TO treated animals had similar 
TBARS tumor/liver ratios (approximately 1.7-fold), LDL–DHA administered animals had 
significantly higher tumor/liver ratio reaching on average 3.3 fold. Lastly, the level of tissue 
protein carbonyls was investigated using the 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine (DNPH) 
spectrometric method; however, no difference in the tumor/liver protein carbonyl ratios was 
detected across the groups of rats (Supplementary Fig. 11). The high amounts of interfering 
chromophores present in tissue that absorbs at 370 nm (e.g., haemoglobin, myoglobin, 
retinoids) likely precluded the accurate measurements of the protein adducts in these 
samples.17
LDL–DHA Reduces the Antioxidant Enzymatic Capacity in HCC
Next, we sought to examine the status of the antioxidant enzymes superoxidase dismutase 1 
(SOD-1), catalase and glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPx-4), following LDL nanoparticle 
treatments. In the H4IIE cell culture studies, LDL–DHA treatment significantly reduced 
GPx-4 protein expression relative to control LDL-TO treated cells (Fig. 6A and B). The 
expression levels of SOD-1 and catalase did not differ between these treatment groups. For 
the in vivo studies, the protein expression levels of the antioxidants enzymes three days after 
sham and LDL nanoparticle treatments are presented in Fig. 6C. In general, tumors tended to 
express less of the antioxidant enzymes compared to their corresponding liver. Densitometry 
analysis of the Western blots revealed that only tumor GPx-4 protein levels were 
significantly down-regulated after LDL–DHA treatment (Fig. 6D). These findings are 
Wen et al.
Page 7
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 consistent with the in vitro results. Further analyses of the antioxidant enzymes were carried 
out in the subset of rats studied seven days post treatment (Supplementary Fig. 12). Tumor/
liver ratios of GPx-4 and SOD-1 were significantly lower in LDL–DHA groups compared to 
the Sham and LDL-TO controls. The catalase tumor/liver ratio was similar between Sham 
and LDL–DHA treatment groups, but was significantly higher in the LDL-TO treated 
animals.
Tumor Cells Selectively Experience Severe Deregulation of Redox Couples Following 
LDL–DHA Treatment
The metabolic redox couples NADPH/NADP and GSH/GSSG play a central to the overall 
redox status of the cell. Cultures of H4IIE cells experienced significant reductions in both 
NADPH/NADP and GSH/GSSG after incubation with LDL–DHA (Fig. 7A). In both cases 
LDL–DHA caused the ratios of the redox couples to drop to 40%–50% of their LDL-TO 
treated or untreated controls.
Changes in the redox status following LDL–DHA administration were even more 
pronounced in the in vivo animal model (Fig. 7B). The ratios of NADPH/NADP and GSH/
GSSG decreased precipitously in the tumors after the LDL–DHA treatment. The values for 
NADPH/NADP and GSH/GSSG ratios were approximately 25% and 18%, respectively, of 
that of the untreated and LDL-TO treated tumor controls. Despite the drastic changes in the 
tumor redox status following LDL–DHA treatment, redox homeostasis in the liver was 
maintained regardless of the treatment group.
In contrast to the simple ratios of GSH/GSSG, the glutathione half-cell potential 
(EGSSG/2GSH) utilizes the Nernst equation to quantitatively determine the reduction potential 
and reducing capacity of the sample and more accurately reflects the physiological state of 
the cell/tissue. Changes in the EGSSG/2GSH have been shown to correlate with the biological 
status of the cell: where in general proliferating cells are reported to be ≈ −240 mV; 
differentiating cell ≈ −200mV; quiescent cells are in between proliferation and 
differentiation states; and finally cell death occurs at potentials ≈ −170 mV and more 
positive.18 The EGSSG/2GSH for untreated, LDL-TO and LDL–DHA treated H4IIE cells were 
−232 ± 4.1 mV, −224 ± 3.1 mV, and −205 ± 0.01 mV respectively (Fig. 7A). The effects of 
LDL–DHA treatment on the tissue values for EGSSG/2GSH were more striking (Fig. 7B). The 
liver EGSSG/2GSH findings were similar to that for GSH/GSSG results, regardless of the 
treatment groups, a reduction potential value around −275 mV was measured for all of the 
livers. The tumors from sham and LDL-TO treated animals had similar reduction potentials, 
−265.9 ± 1.1 mV and −251.4 ± 6.5 mV respectively. Lastly, the LDL–DHA treated tumor 
experienced a greater oxidative state as their reduction potential values shifted to −208.2 ± 
9.8 mV.
Discussion
The findings of the present study demonstrate how reformulation of DHA into a LDL 
nanoparticle expands the utility of this n-3 PUFA enabling its use as an anticancer 
therapeutic. The transarterial administration of LDL nanoparticles delivers DHA to tumors 
at sufficiently high concentrations to induce significant tumoricidal effects. Equally 
Wen et al.
Page 8
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 compelling is the fact that the surrounding liver (which receives a similar dose of LDL–
DHA) shows no evidence of injury or hepatoxicity. While most chemoembolic treatments 
delivered via the transarterial route target HCC, accompanying injury to the surrounding 
liver is common19 and in some rare clinical cases lobar atrophy or even fatal liver failure can 
occur20. Locoregional LDL–DHA treatment was highly selective for HCC, discrete 
boundaries of tumor necrosis and reactive fibrosis could be seen next to healthy hepatocytes. 
In fact, the serum markers of hepatocellular injury, ALT and AST, were significantly lower 
in the LDL–DHA treated animals than the Sham or LDL-TO treated rats. This suggests that 
LDL–DHA treatments are potentially beneficial to the surrounding normal liver by reducing 
hepatocellular injury. This is in keeping with anti-inflammatory and pro-resolving properties 
of DHA.
One of the hallmark features of the LDL–DHA treatment is the selective induction of redox 
stress in the H4IIE cells and tumors, while under equivalent conditions, normal cells and 
tissues remain unharmed. It is now well accepted in oncology that cancer cells augment and 
promote higher levels of oxidative stress21, 22. This pro-oxidant state is thought to maintain 
and drive the progression of the malignant phentotype23, 24. The findings from the present 
study support this observation as the poorly differentiated fast growing H4IIE tumors are 
associated with higher levels of lipid peroxidation, overall lower amounts of antioxidant 
enzymes, and trends towards lower ratios of GSH/GSSG and NADH/NADP than the 
surrounding normal liver. Elevated levels of oxidative stress, however, also predisposes 
neoplastic cells to injury from further ROS insults induced by exogenous agents. Under the 
same conditions normal cells effectively buffer the ROS challenge as their basal levels of 
oxidative stress are low and their antioxidative capacity is fully intact. We propose that the 
LDL–DHA nanotherapy operates under similar principles.
Once the LDL nanoparticle is endocytosed and degraded in the cell, the released DHA 
encounters drastically different environments in normal versus malignant cells. Within the 
normal cell, oxidative stress levels are low and as such DHA is not readily attacked by ROS. 
Instead, the cell actively converts the pool of non-esterified DHA to an acyl CoA derivative 
to maintain low concentrations of non-esterified fatty acids25. As a fatty acylCoA, DHA is 
rapidly esterified into neutral and polar lipids, while minor fractions undergo microsomal 
oxidation. Conversely, within the cancer cell, high concentrations of ROS likely readily 
attack the bisallylic hydrogens in the DHA molecule allowing lipid peroxidation to rapidly 
propagate throughout the cell. The magnitude of the lipid peroxidation process becomes 
significantly amplified when one considers that a single LDL–DHA nanoparticle transports 
over 1100 DHA molecules, a single LDL receptor transports scores of LDL per day (LDL 
receptor recycle time~20mins) and that a liver cell typically expresses between 15,000 and 
70,000 LDL receptors26.
The pathological sequelae that arise from this massive lipid peroxidation undoubtedly 
involves damaged cell membranes, but equally destructive is the copious generation of 
reactive aldehyde end-products27. The α,β-unsaturated aldehydes, such as malondialdehyde 
(MDA), are particularly pervasive as they diffuse within or across cells to attack distant 
targets from their site of origin28. These aldehydes react with most biomolecules to form 
adducts28. Evidence of this activity is seen by the markedly increased amount of protein 
Wen et al.
Page 9
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 adducts (protein-carbonyls) in the LDL–DHA treated H4IIE cells. Once formed the adducts 
irreversibly alter the protein structure, ultimately leading to protein dysfunction. The 
collective deleterious effects of lipid peroxidation on cellular organelles is evident in the 
TEM of the LDL–DHA treated H4IIE cells. Our results are consistent with others29 in 
showing that apoptotic and necrotic cell death can arise from extensive lipid peroxidation 
and aldehyde generation.
In addition to the cellular damage described above, the oxidized products of DHA also 
significantly cripple the antioxidative capacity of HCC cells/tumors. To prevent the 
accumulation of toxic α,β-unsaturated lipid aldehydes within the cell, phase II detoxification 
reactions conjugate intracellular glutathione with the aldehydes (via glutathione S-
transferase (GST)) to facilitate their active export from the cell30. The high concentrations 
and activity of GSH and GST within the cell enables this pathway to function as a high 
capacity detoxification system31. This in fact turns out to be the major route of aldehyde 
detoxification and elimination within the cell32. The efficiency of this system, however, 
ultimately serves to the detriment of the cancer cell as intracellular GSH pools are rapidly 
depleted following LDL–DHA treatment. Several other groups have also reported that GSH 
levels become significantly reduced in cancer cells after DHA exposure33, 34. As a result of 
the GSH depletion, the cells capacities to buffer oxidative challenges are greatly diminished. 
The significant reductions in the HCC’s GSH/GSSG ratio and the GSH reduction potential 
(reducing capacity) clearly reveal the severe redox dysregulation induced by the LDL–DHA 
treatment. Under these strained conditions the NADPH/NADP couple is unable to provide 
sufficient reducing equivalents to the GSH system as the equilibrium of this couple is also 
shifted to a more oxidized state.
The ROS stress incited by LDL–DHA treatment is further exacerbated by the inhibitory 
effects of DHA on SOD-1 and GPx-4. This is particularly pertinent in the current setting, 
since GPx-4 is the only glutathione peroxidase known to directly act on phospholipid 
hydroperoxides, and thus is critical in protecting against lipid peroxidation35. Studies by 
Tuller et al and Ding et al have shown that DHA down-regulates the expression of SOD-1 
and GPx-4 in cancer cells36, 37. Overall, we see that LDL–DHA treatment not only increases 
oxidation potential by initiating lipid peroxidation, reactive aldehyde generation and GSH 
depletion within malignant cells, but it also suppresses their antioxidant enzyme system, 
which further enhances the levels of oxidative stress ultimately ushering the demise of the 
cancer cell.
In conclusion, our study demonstrates that LDL–DHA nanoparticles have potent anti-cancer 
activity. Unlike other transarterial therapies the LDL–DHA nanoparticle is fully 
biocompatible, non-embolic and highly selective for its tumor target making it an attractive 
therapeutic alternative for other locoregional cancer indications. Future experiments will 
include long term survival studies to evaluate the therapeutic benefits provided by repeated 
LDL–DHA treatments.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Wen et al.
Page 10
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank Dr. Mary Wight-Carter for providing histopathology expertise and Mr. John Shelton for his technical 
experimental assistance. We would also like to thank Mrs. Denise Ramirez from the UTSW Whole Brain 
Microscopy Facility (WBMF) in the Department of Neurology and Neurotherapeutics for assistance with slide 
scanning.
Financial Support:
This work was supported in part by the American Gastroenterological Association (AGA) Research Foundation 
Scholar Award (IC), the Southwestern Small Animal Imaging Research Program (SW-SAIRP) (NCI U24 
CA126608), the Cancer Center Support Grant (5P30 CA 142543-05) and the University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center President’s Research Council Award (IC).
Abbreviations
HCC
hepatocellular carcinoma
DHA
Docosahexaenoic acid
LDL
Low-density lipoprotein
LDL–DHA
Low-density lipoprotein uniformly loaded with docosahexaenoic acid
LDL–DiR
Low-density lipoprotein labelled with the lipophilic carbocyanine dye DiR 
(1,1'-Dioctadecyl-3,3,3',3'-Tetramethylindotricarbocyanine Iodide)
LDL-TO
Low-density lipoprotein uniformly loaded with triolein
LDL-OA
Low-density lipoprotein uniformly loaded with oleic acid
DMEM
Dulbeco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium
FBS
Fetal bovine serum
ROS
Reactive oxygen species
NADP
Oxidized Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
NADPH
Reduced Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
GSH
Reduced Glutathione
GSSG
Oxidized Glutathione
ANOVA
Analysis of variance
PUFA
Polyunsaturated fatty acid
TEM
Transmission electron microscopy
PI
Propidium iodide
MRI
Magnetic resonance imaging
ALT
Alanine aminotransferase
AST
Aspartate aminotransferase
COX
cyclooxygenase
LOX
Lipoxygenase
Wen et al.
Page 11
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CYP450
Cytochrome P450
NDGA
Nordihydroguaiaretic acid
DHE
Dihydroethidium
TBARS
thiobarbituric acid reactive species
DNPH
2,4-Dinitrophenylhydrazine
SOD-1
Superoxidase dismutase 1
GPx-4
Glutathione peroxidase 4
MDA
Malondialdehyde
GST
Glutathione S-transferase
References
1. Gomaa AI, Khan SA, Toledano MB, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma: epidemiology, risk factors and 
pathogenesis. World J Gastroenterol. 2008; 14:4300–4308. [PubMed: 18666317] 
2. El-Serag HB. Epidemiology of hepatocellular carcinoma in USA. Hepatol Res. 2007; 37(Suppl 
2):S88–S94. [PubMed: 17877502] 
3. El-Serag HB. Hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2011; 365:1118–1127. [PubMed: 
21992124] 
4. El-Serag HB. Epidemiology of viral hepatitis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Gastroenterology. 
2012; 142:1264–1273. e1. [PubMed: 22537432] 
5. El-Serag HB, Siegel AB, Davila JA, et al. Treatment and outcomes of treating of hepatocellular 
carcinoma among Medicare recipients in the United States: A population-based study. Journal of 
Hepatology. 2006; 44:158–166. [PubMed: 16290309] 
6. Newman DJ, Cragg GM. Natural products as sources of new drugs over the last 25 years. J Nat 
Prod. 2007; 70:461–477. [PubMed: 17309302] 
7. Siddiqui RA, Harvey K, Stillwell W. Anticancer properties of oxidation products of 
docosahexaenoic acid. Chem Phys Lipids. 2008; 153:47–56. [PubMed: 18343223] 
8. Berquin IM, Edwards IJ, Chen YQ. Multi-targeted therapy of cancer by omega-3 fatty acids. Cancer 
Letters. 2008; 269:363–377. [PubMed: 18479809] 
9. Sawada N, Inoue M, Iwasaki M, et al. Consumption of n-3 Fatty Acids and Fish Reduces Risk of 
Hepatocellular Carcinoma. Gastroenterology. 2012; 142:1468–1475. [PubMed: 22342990] 
10. O’Flaherty JT, Hu Y, Wooten RE, et al. 15-Lipoxygenase Metabolites of Docosahexaenoic Acid 
Inhibit Prostate Cancer Cell Proliferation and Survival. PLoS ONE. 2012; 7:e45480. [PubMed: 
23029040] 
11. Kang KS, Wang P, Yamabe N, et al. Docosahexaenoic acid induces apoptosis in MCF-7 cells in 
vitro and in vivo via reactive oxygen species formation and caspase 8 activation. PLoS One. 2010; 
5:e10296. [PubMed: 20421971] 
12. Conquer JA, Holub BJ. Effect of supplementation with different doses of DHA on the levels of 
circulating DHA as non-esterified fatty acid in subjects of Asian Indian background. J Lipid Res. 
1998; 39:286–292. [PubMed: 9507989] 
13. Reynolds L, Mulik RS, Wen X, et al. Low-density lipoprotein-mediated delivery of 
docosahexaenoic acid selectively kills murine liver cancer cells. Nanomedicine. 2014:1–19.
14. Lund-Katz S, Laplaud PM, Phillips MC, et al. Apolipoprotein B-100 conformation and particle 
surface charge in human LDL subspecies: implication for LDL receptor interaction. Biochemistry. 
1998; 37:12867–12874. [PubMed: 9737865] 
Wen et al.
Page 12
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 15. Das UN, Huang YS, Begin ME, et al. Uptake and distribution of cis-unsaturated fatty acids and 
their effect on free radical generation in normal and tumor cells in vitro. Free Radic Biol Med. 
1987; 3:9–14. [PubMed: 3040539] 
16. Grammatikos SI, Subbaiah PV, Victor TA, et al. n-3 and n-6 fatty acid processing and growth 
effects in neoplastic and non-cancerous human mammary epithelial cell lines. Br J Cancer. 1994; 
70:219–227. [PubMed: 8054269] 
17. Dalle-Donne I, Rossi R, Giustarini D, et al. Protein carbonyl groups as biomarkers of oxidative 
stress. Clin Chim Acta. 2003; 329:23–38. [PubMed: 12589963] 
18. Schafer FQ, Buettner GR. Redox environment of the cell as viewed through the redox state of the 
glutathione disulfide/glutathione couple. Free Radic Biol Med. 2001; 30:1191–1212. [PubMed: 
11368918] 
19. Li X, Zheng CS, Feng GS, et al. An implantable rat liver tumor model for experimental 
transarterial chemoembolization therapy and its imaging features. World J Gastroenterol. 2002; 
8:1035–1039. [PubMed: 12439920] 
20. Clark TW. Complications of hepatic chemoembolization. Semin Intervent Radiol. 2006; 23:119–
125. [PubMed: 21326755] 
21. Toyokuni S, Okamoto K, Yodoi J, et al. Persistent oxidative stress in cancer. FEBS Letters. 1995; 
358:1–3. [PubMed: 7821417] 
22. Szatrowski TP, Nathan CF. Production of large amounts of hydrogen peroxide by human tumor 
cells. Cancer Res. 1991; 51:794–798. [PubMed: 1846317] 
23. Burdon RH. Superoxide and hydrogen peroxide in relation to mammalian cell proliferation. Free 
Radic Biol Med. 1995; 18:775–794. [PubMed: 7750801] 
24. Behrend L, Henderson G, Zwacka RM. Reactive oxygen species in oncogenic transformation. 
Biochem Soc Trans. 2003; 31:1441–1444. [PubMed: 14641084] 
25. Jump DB, Botolin D, Wang Y, et al. Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and hepatic gene transcription. 
Chem Phys Lipids. 2008; 153:3–13. [PubMed: 18343222] 
26. Ratushny, AV.; Ignatieva, EV.; Matushkin, Y., et al. Mathematical Model of Cholesterol 
Biosynthesis Regulation in the Cell. Proceedings of the Second International Conference on 
Bioinformatics of Genome Regulation and Structure; Novosibirsk, Russia. 2000; 
27. Kawai Y, Takeda S, Terao J. Lipidomic analysis for lipid peroxidation-derived aldehydes using gas 
chromatography-mass spectrometry. Chem Res Toxicol. 2007; 20:99–107. [PubMed: 17226932] 
28. Gueraud F, Atalay M, Bresgen N, et al. Chemistry and biochemistry of lipid peroxidation products. 
Free Radic Res. 2010; 44:1098–1124. [PubMed: 20836659] 
29. Ayala A, Mu #xf1, et al. Lipid Peroxidation: Production, Metabolism, and Signaling Mechanisms 
of Malondialdehyde and 4-Hydroxy-2-Nonenal. Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity. 
2014; 2014:31.
30. Long EK, Picklo MJ Sr. Trans-4-hydroxy-2-hexenal, a product of n-3 fatty acid peroxidation: 
make some room HNE. Free Radic Biol Med. 2010; 49:1–8. [PubMed: 20353821] 
31. Hayes JD, McLellan LI. Glutathione and glutathione-dependent enzymes represent a co-ordinately 
regulated defence against oxidative stress. Free Radic Res. 1999; 31:273–300. [PubMed: 
10517533] 
32. Hartley DP, Ruth JA, Petersen DR. The hepatocellular metabolism of 4-hydroxynonenal by 
alcohol dehydrogenase, aldehyde dehydrogenase, and glutathione S-transferase. Arch Biochem 
Biophys. 1995; 316:197–205. [PubMed: 7840616] 
33. Leonardi F, Attorri L, Benedetto RD, et al. Effect of arachidonic, eicosapentaenoic and 
docosahexaenoic acids on the oxidative status of C6 glioma cells. Free Radical Research. 2005; 
39:865–874. [PubMed: 16036367] 
34. Merendino N, Loppi B, D'Aquino M, et al. Docosahexaenoic acid induces apoptosis in the human 
PaCa-44 pancreatic cancer cell line by active reduced glutathione extrusion and lipid peroxidation. 
Nutr Cancer. 2005; 52:225–233. [PubMed: 16201853] 
35. Imai H, Nakagawa Y. Biological significance of phospholipid hydroperoxide glutathione 
peroxidase (PHGPx, GPx4) in mammalian cells. Free Radic Biol Med. 2003; 34:145–169. 
[PubMed: 12521597] 
Wen et al.
Page 13
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 36. Tuller ER, Beavers CT, Lou JR, et al. Docosahexaenoic acid inhibits superoxide dismutase 1 gene 
transcription in human cancer cells: the involvement of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
alpha and hypoxia-inducible factor-2alpha signaling. Mol Pharmacol. 2009; 76:588–595. 
[PubMed: 19528198] 
37. Ding WQ, Lind SE. Phospholipid hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase plays a role in protecting 
cancer cells from docosahexaenoic acid-induced cytotoxicity. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007; 6:1467–
1474. [PubMed: 17431126] 
Wen et al.
Page 14
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Effects of LDL nanoparticles on primary hepatocytes and H4IIE cells
(A) MTS dose response assay of ACI rat primary hepatocytes and H4IIE cells to LDL–DHA 
(0–200 µM). Experiments were performed in triplicate wells with at least three independent 
runs. Results are expressed as mean ± SEM. *, P ≤ 0.05; ****, P ≤ 0.0001 versus 
corresponding untreated group. All readings after 25 µM are significant at P ≤ 0.0001 for the 
H4IIE cells. (B) Transmission electron microscopy of H4IIE cells at baseline (untreated) and 
those treated with LDL-TO and LDL–DHA for 24 hours. Left panel (2000 nm magnification 
bar) right panel (1000 nm magnification bar). CC, nuclear chromatin condensation; M, 
Wen et al.
Page 15
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mitochondria; Arrow head denotes swollen dysmorphic mitochondria; arrow condensed 
mitochondria; (×) autophagosome/autolysosome; L, lysosome.
Wen et al.
Page 16
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Biodistribution and fluorescent imaging of LDL-DiR four hours following hepatic 
artery injection in HCC bearing rats
(A) Data units are DiR fluorescence intensity per gram of tissue. Blood readings are 
measured in DiR fluorescence intensity per mL of blood. Data are expressed as mean ± 
SEM. (B) Representative fluorescence image of excised liver and tumor and corresponding 
fluorescent microscopy of liver and tumor sections. The HCC tumor is highlighted by the 
dotted circle. Note the intracellular granular punctate fluorescent pattern present in 
Wen et al.
Page 17
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 fluorescent microscopy sections is indicative of the receptor mediated endocytic 
internalization of the LDL nanoparticles.
Wen et al.
Page 18
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Therapeutic effect of HAI of LDL–DHA in HCC bearing rats
In situ (left) and excised (middle) view of liver and H4IIE HCC tumor three days after sham 
or hepatic artery injection (HAI) with 2 mg/kg of LDL nanoparticles. The right panel shows 
the corresponding histology at the liver tumor interface (10× magnification). Dotted line 
indicates liver tumor boundary. HAI, hepatic artery injection.
Wen et al.
Page 19
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Assessment of tumors with MRI
Representative T2-weighted sagittal images of tumor bearing rats (A) before LDL 
nanoparticle treatment; (B) 72 hours after LDL-TO treatment; and (C) 72 hours after LDL–
DHA treatment. The tumor is highlighted by the dotted circle and the white arrow head 
indicates liver. (D) Changes in tumor volume measured 4–6 days after LDL nanoparticle 
treatments compared to pre-treatment tumor volume. Data are expressed as mean fold 
change ± SEM. **, P ≤ 0.01 versus LDL-TO treated animals.
Wen et al.
Page 20
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. LDL–DHA increases oxidative stress in vitro and in vivo
Measures of oxidative stress in H4IIE cell after LDL–DHA treatment. (A) Superoxide ROS 
levels were measured by dihydroethidium fluorescence intensity per mg of cell protein. (B) 
The TBARS assay measured lipid peroxide levels per mg of cell protein. (C) Protein 
carbonyls (mg of cell protein) were detected as 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine derivatives. All 
assays were measured in H4IIE cells at Baseline and 48 hours after 40 µM LDL-TO or 40 
µM LDL–DHA treatment. Data for the assay are normalized to the untreated control to yield 
fold change and expressed as mean ± SEM. In vivo superoxide and lipid peroxide levels in 
HCC 3 days after Sham and HAI treatment of LDL nanoparticles (2 mg/kg). (D) 
Dihydroethidium fluorescence imaging of tissues was performed at 20× with Texas Red 
Wen et al.
Page 21
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 filter (λex= 596). (E) TBARS reading in liver and H4IIE tumor samples. The data are 
expressed as a ratio of tumor to liver (mean ± SEM) for each treatment group (B). *, P ≤ 
0.05; **, P ≤ 0.01; ***, P ≤ 0.001; ****, P ≤ 0.0001 versus untreated or sham groups.
Wen et al.
Page 22
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. In vitro and in vivo protein expression of catalase, SOD-1 and GPx-4 following LDL 
nanoparticle treatments
(A, B) Protein expression levels of enzyme antioxidant 72 hours after LDL nanoparticle (40 
µM) treatments in H4IIE cells. Representative blots and quantifications are shown. The data 
are expressed relative to β-actin expression (mean ± SEM) for each treatment group. *, P ≤ 
0.05 (C,D) Protein expression levels of enzyme antioxidants in rat liver and H4IIE tumor 72 
hours after Sham and HAI treatment of LDL nanoparticles (2 mg/kg). Representative blots 
and quantifications are shown. The data are expressed relative to β-actin expression as a 
ratio of tumor to liver (mean ± SEM) for each treatment group. *, P ≤ 0.05
Wen et al.
Page 23
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. In vitro and in vivo redox couples following LDL nanoparticle treatments
(A) GSH/GSSG, glutathione half-cell potential, and NADPH/NADP levels in H4IIE cells at 
baseline (untreated) and 48 hours after LDL nanoparticle (40 µM) treatments. (B) GSH/
GSSG, glutathione half-cell potential, and NADPH/NADP levels in rat liver and H4IIE 
tumor 72 hours after Sham and HAI treatment of LDL nanoparticles (2 mg/kg). The data are 
expressed as mean ± SEM for each treatment group (B). *, P ≤ 0.05; **, P ≤ 0.01; ***, P ≤ 
0.001; ****, P ≤ 0.0001 versus indicated groups.
Wen et al.
Page 24
Gastroenterology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
