 fpsyg-09-00771
May 22, 2018
Time: 17:19
# 1
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 22 May 2018
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00771
Edited by:
Florin Dolcos,
University of Illinois
at Urbana–Champaign, United States
Reviewed by:
Barbara Fredrickson,
The University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill, United States
David M. Fresco,
Kent State University, United States
Ekaterina Denkova,
University of Miami, United States
*Correspondence:
Helen Y. Weng
Helen.Weng@ucsf.edu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Emotion Science,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 06 October 2017
Accepted: 30 April 2018
Published: 22 May 2018
Citation:
Weng HY, Lapate RC, Stodola DE,
Rogers GM and Davidson RJ (2018)
Visual Attention to Suffering After
Compassion Training Is Associated
With Decreased Amygdala
Responses. Front. Psychol. 9:771.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00771
Visual Attention to Suffering After
Compassion Training Is Associated
With Decreased Amygdala
Responses
Helen Y. Weng1,2,3*, Regina C. Lapate3,4, Diane E. Stodola3, Gregory M. Rogers5 and
Richard J. Davidson3,5
1 Osher Center for Integrative Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States,
2 Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States, 3 Center for Healthy
Minds, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, United States, 4 Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of
California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, United States, 5 Department of Psychiatry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI,
United States
Compassion meditation training is hypothesized to increase the motivational salience of
cues of suffering, while also enhancing equanimous attention and decreasing emotional
reactivity to suffering. However, it is currently unknown how compassion meditation
impacts visual attention to suffering, and how this impacts neural activation in regions
associated with motivational salience as well as aversive responses, such as the
amygdala. Healthy adults were randomized to 2 weeks of compassion or reappraisal
training. We measured BOLD fMRI responses before and after training while participants
actively engaged in their assigned training to images depicting human suffering or non-
suffering. Eye-tracking data were recorded concurrently, and we computed looking
time for socially and emotionally evocative areas of the images, and calculated visual
preference for suffering vs. non-suffering. Increases in visual preference for suffering
due to compassion training were associated with decreases in the amygdala, a
brain region involved in negative valence, arousal, and physiological responses typical
of fear and anxiety states. This pattern was specifically in the compassion group,
and was not found in the reappraisal group. In addition, compassion training-related
increases in visual preference for suffering were also associated with decreases in
regions sensitive to valence and empathic distress, spanning the anterior insula and
orbitofrontal cortex (while the reappraisal group showed the opposite effect). Examining
visual attention alone demonstrated that engaging in compassion in general (across both
time points) resulted in visual attention preference for suffering compared to engaging
in reappraisal. Collectively, these findings suggest that compassion meditation may
cultivate visual preference for suffering while attenuating neural responses in regions
typically associated with aversive processing of negative stimuli, which may cultivate a
more equanimous and nonreactive form of attention to stimuli of suffering.
Keywords: compassion, meditation, visual attention, amygdala, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
1
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 771
 fpsyg-09-00771
May 22, 2018
Time: 17:19
# 2
Weng et al.
Compassion Training and Visual Attention
INTRODUCTION
Compassion involves affective, cognitive, as well as motivational
responses to suffering, where the person who witnesses suffering
feels a sense of caring for and wanting to help others experiencing
suffering (Goetz et al., 2010; Dahl et al., 2015; Engen and
Singer, 2016). Compassion may be cultivated through mental
training such as meditation (Salzberg, 1997), and compassion
meditation has been shown to enhance positive emotional
responses (Fredrickson et al., 2008; Hutcherson et al., 2008;
Klimecki et al., 2012, 2014) and prosocial behavioral responses
to suffering (Leiberg et al., 2011; Condon et al., 2013; Weng et al.,
2013, 2015; McCall et al., 2014; Ashar et al., 2016). However, little
is known about the more basic attentional mechanisms that may
support this affective and behavioral profile due to compassion
meditation training.
Compassion increases the motivational salience of cues of
suffering, where attention is drawn to suffering due to the
motivation to care for others’well-being and the desire to
relieve suffering (Goetz et al., 2010). Attentional qualities which
support compassion are thought to be focused, sustained, and
selective to cues of suffering (Halifax, 2012). Compassion is
also an embodied dynamic process (Halifax, 2012), which may
include greater visual attention to cues of suffering from the
observer to the receiver of compassion. Indeed, compassion
often involves gazing and leaning towards others (Eisenberg
et al., 1988; Gurthrie et al., 1997), and gaze is typically directed
towards stimuli that are consistent with goals (Isaacowitz, 2006).
In particular, compassionate goals often involve understanding
and caring for others who are suffering; therefore, more visual
attention should be deployed to stimuli of suffering to perceive
and understand the nature of suffering, and possibly to motivate
prosocial action (Davidson and Harrington, 2001; Goetz et al.,
2010). This may result in a visual preference for cues of suffering
compared to neutral cues. For example, if someone is injured
in a crowd of people, the observer would need to look at cues
of suffering such as the site of the injury and the person’
s facial
expressions, and disengage from neutral cues such as non-injured
areas and faces of other people who are not in pain, in order to
engage in targeted helping behaviors such as dressing the wound.
This is in contrast to other emotion regulatory strategies that
have different motivational goals such as cognitive reappraisal
(Jackson et al., 2000; van Reekum et al., 2007; Ochsner and
Gross, 2008; Lee et al., 2009), where meaning of stimuli is
cognitively reinterpreted, and may direct visual attention away
from stimuli of suffering to aid the goal of reducing negative
emotion. Indeed, decreased emotional responses and neural
changes during cognitive reappraisal is explained in part by a
reduction in the degree to which people look at emotionally
evocative parts of negative images (van Reekum et al., 2007).
Compassion
meditation
involves
mental
exercises
that
cultivate concern for and motivation to relieve suffering of
the self and others (Salzberg, 1997; Hofmann et al., 2011).
For example, in Weng et al. (2013), participants cultivated
compassion for a loved one, the self, a stranger, and a difficult
person (someone with whom there is conflict). For each
target of compassion meditation, three steps were practiced:
(1) envisioning suffering, or imagining a time each person has
suffered; (2) mindful attention to reactions to suffering, where
non-judgmental attention is brought to sensations, thoughts,
and feelings that arise in response to envisioning suffering;
and (3) cultivating compassion, where feelings of care and
concern for the target are practiced as well as a desire to relieve
suffering (Weng et al., 2013, 2017). These practices are thought to
enhance prosocial action through emotion regulatory pathways
(Weng et al., 2013, 2017) of (1) reducing empathic distress (also
called personal distress), which involves aversive physiological,
emotional, and cognitive reactions to others’
suffering (Batson,
1991; Ashar et al., 2016), and (2) enhancing compassion or
empathic concern, which involve care for and desire to alleviate
others’
suffering (Batson, 1991; Goetz et al., 2010).
Previous
studies
have
demonstrated
that
practicing
compassion meditation internally results in increased prosocial
behavior externally towards strangers in novel situations
including altruistic monetary giving (Weng et al., 2013; McCall
et al., 2014; Ashar et al., 2016), costly and non-costly helping in
a computer game (Leiberg et al., 2011), and offering a seat to an
injured stranger (Condon et al., 2013). However, less has been
done to investigate intermediate steps that may lead to prosocial
behavior, such as changes in visual attention. Because visual
imagery and visual perception recruit largely overlapping brain
regions (Ganis et al., 2004), it is plausible that internal visual
imagery in compassion meditation may transfer to external visual
perception and increase attention given to cues of suffering.
In addition, because compassion meditation aims to cultivate
a more balanced non-judgmental response to suffering, it is
possible that while visual attention to suffering may increase
motivated by empathic concern, emotional responses may
become less negative and reactive (Weng et al., 2017), which
should decrease neural and physiological responses that could
induce empathic distress, motivate self-focus, and result in
withdrawal (Batson et al., 1987; Batson, 1991).
Greater visual engagement with stimuli of suffering in
compassion may require regulation of emotional responses to
suffering. Neurally, emotional responses to negative stimuli are
often correlated with increased amygdala activation, which can be
measured using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
(Zald, 2003; Phelps and LeDoux, 2005). The amygdala has been
consistently shown to be activated in response to aversive stimuli
(Zald, 2003), including visual stimuli depicting human emotional
and physical suffering (Bruneau et al., 2015). In addition,
subregions of amygdala such as the centromedial nucleus of
the amygdala have direct projections to brain regions such as
the lateral hypothalamus, basal forebrain, and brainstem, which
mediate physiological responses associated with emotions via
activation of the sympathetic nervous system (Davis and Whalen,
2001; Phelps and LeDoux, 2005). This includes physiological
responses typical of fear and anxiety (Phelps and LeDoux,
2005) and arousal responses to social stimuli (Davis et al.,
2010), which may motivate self-focus and withdrawal, rather
than prosocial engagement (Batson, 1991). In the context of
witnessing another’
s suffering, the amygdala may be activated due
to empathic distress, particularly if increased visual engagement
with suffering is occurring. Compassion meditation training
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
2
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 771
 fpsyg-09-00771
May 22, 2018
Time: 17:19
# 3
Weng et al.
Compassion Training and Visual Attention
may therefore reduce activation of the amygdala in response
to suffering while actively engaging in compassion, reflecting
more equanimous emotional responses (Desbordes et al., 2014)
which may decrease activation of the sympathetic nervous
system.
Recent understandings of amygdala functioning suggest that it
has a more general function in processing motivational salience,
which can include stimuli that are negative, positive, arousing,
interesting, or unusual, depending on a perceiver’
s goals (Adolphs
et al., 1999; Hamann et al., 2002; Phan et al., 2003; Cunningham
and Brosch, 2012). Engaging in compassion should increase
the motivational salience of suffering, which may activate the
amygdala and stimulate physiological output to indicate the
presence of suffering, which can then facilitate the recruitment
of prosocial responses. In this case, it is possible that compassion
meditation training may increase amygdala activation as a
reflection of greater salience of cues of suffering and motivation to
relieve suffering. Supporting this interpretation, Desbordes et al.
(2012) found increased amygdala activation after compassion
training while attending to negative visual stimuli (i.e., not
actively engaging in compassion). Furthermore, the level of
amygdala activation was negatively correlated with depression
symptoms, suggesting functional utility in greater amygdala
activation to negative stimuli due to compassion training.
While our previous work demonstrated that short-term
compassion meditation training increased prosocial behavior
compared to reappraisal training (Weng et al., 2013), whether
increased visual attention to cues of suffering due to compassion
training would be associated with increased or decreased
amygdala activation is unknown and is the subject of this
report. Here, in a subset of participants from a previously
published dataset (Weng et al., 2013), we conducted a
preliminary investigation of whether compassion meditation
training compared to cognitive reappraisal training would result
in changes in visual attention to cues of human suffering while
actively engaging in regulatory strategies, and of how these
changes in visual attention were associated with neural responses
to suffering. In our study, reappraisal training served as an
active control training condition where emotions are regulated
for a different motivational goal, which is more self -oriented
to decrease personal negative emotions. This is in contrast to
compassion, which is more other-oriented to enhance prosocial
motivation and action. Therefore, individual differences in visual
preference to suffering due to the different trainings may reflect
different motivational goals, which could result in differential
associations with responses indexed by amygdala activation.
Participants viewed images of human suffering and non-
suffering before and after training in the fMRI scanner, and
eye-tracking data were collected during the brain scans. Visual
preference for suffering was determined by the percentage
looking time within regions of images depicting social and
affective cues of suffering vs. non-suffering. Using an individual
differences framework, we tested whether compassion training-
related increases in visual preference for suffering would be
differentially associated with amygdala activation compared to
reappraisal training. In addition, we investigated the direction
of the relationship due to compassion training, testing whether
greater visual preference for suffering would be associated with
(a) reduced neural responses in the amygdala (supporting the
empathic distress interpretation of amygdala engagement), or
(b) increased amygdala responses (supporting the motivational
salience interpretation of amygdala engagement). In addition,
we tested the impact of compassion vs. reappraisal training on
visual attention to suffering, independent of its relationship with
neural responses. Lastly, in preliminary exploratory analyses,
we investigated whether greater visual preference for suffering
following compassion training may reflect prosocial motives
and be associated with increases in prosocial behavior in
the Redistribution Game, an economic exchange paradigm
(previously reported in this sample, Weng et al., 2013).
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Participants
Fifty-six participants completed the entire protocol, which
included being randomized to compassion or reappraisal
training, completing 2 weeks of 30 min daily training (11/14
practice days were required), and attending a functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) session before and after training.
Participants were healthy adults (18–
45 years of age), MRI-
compatible, right-handed, and had no previous experience in
meditation or cognitive-behavioral therapy. Data analyses were
conducted on a subset of the sample who had adequate pupil
registration and eye-tracking data at both pre- and post-
training (see section “
Materials and Methods”
; total N = 24;
Compassion n = 12, mean age = 20.92 years, SD = 2.19,
female n = 7, White n = 12; Hispanic or Latino n = 1;
Reappraisal n = 12, mean age = 21.58 years, SD = 2.87,
female n = 8, Asian n = 1, White n = 10, Black or African
American n = 1). The groups did not differ in age, gender,
baseline trait empathic concern (Davis, 1980), or practice time
(all ps > 0.24). The experiment was approved by the University
of Wisconsin-Madison Health Sciences Institutional Review
Board, all procedures were performed in accordance with these
guidelines, and all subjects gave informed consent and were paid
for participation.
Procedure
Overview
Participants came to the laboratory on three occasions. At Visit
1, they were randomized to compassion or reappraisal training
where they were briefly instructed in the assigned strategy
and practiced the fMRI task in a mock MRI scanner. Visit
2 occurred approximately 1 week later, where they completed
the pre-training fMRI scan, and began training later that day.
Visit 3 occurred immediately after the 2 weeks of training was
completed, and included the post-training fMRI scan and the
altruistic behavior task (outside of the scanner). Eye-tracking data
were collected during the fMRI scans.
Trainings
Training consisted of practicing compassion meditation or
reappraisal using guided audio instructions via the Internet or
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
3
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 771
 fpsyg-09-00771
May 22, 2018
Time: 17:19
# 4
Weng et al.
Compassion Training and Visual Attention
compact disc for 30 min/day for 2 weeks. Compassion trainees
practiced cultivating feelings of compassion for different targets
including a loved one, the self, a stranger, and a difficult person
(someone with whom they had conflict). For each person, they
imagined a time when the person had suffered, brought non-
judgmental and balanced attention to reactions to suffering, and
then practiced wishing the person relief from suffering. They
repeated compassion-generating phrases such as, “
May you be
free from suffering. May you have joy and happiness.”They were
also instructed to pay attention to bodily sensations (particularly
around the heart) and to envision a golden light extending from
their heart to the heart of the other person.
The reappraisal trainees practiced re-interpreting personally
stressful events to decrease negative affect. They practiced
the 3 strategies in response to daily stressors such as having
an argument with a significant other. Strategies included:
(1) thinking about the situation from a different perspective
(such as thinking that the argument was helpful in working
through conflict), (2) thinking about the situation from a
friend or family member’
s perspective, and (3) imagining a
year had gone by and a positive outcome had occurred.
Reappraisal training used common approaches in cognitive-
behavioral therapy and was designed by a licensed clinical
psychologist. Participants were required to complete at least
11/14 trainings and training adherence was monitored by the
study team. Self-report ratings from daily reports of trainings
showed that compassion trainees reported increased compassion
for most targets after each session, and reappraisal trainees
reported decreased negative emotions after each session. See
Weng et al. (2013) for full training details and download trainings
at https://centerhealthyminds.org/well-being-tools/compassion-
training/.
Study Measures
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI)
fMRI data acquisition
Whole-brain functional and anatomical images were acquired
using a General Electric 3 Tesla MRI scanner (GE Medical
Systems, Waukesha, WI, United States) with LX software (version
ESE12M4), a transmit-receive quadrature birdcage coil, and Nvi
(40 mT/m; 150 mT·m−1·ms−1 slew rate) gradients. Functional
images were acquired using a T2∗-weighted gradient-echo, echo
planar imaging (EPI) pulse sequence [30 sagittal slices, 4 mm
thickness, 1 mm interslice gap; 64 × 64 matrix; 240 mm
field of view (FOV); repetition time (TR)/echo time (TE)/Flip,
2000 ms/30 ms/90o; 146 whole-brain volumes per block]. A high-
resolution T1- weighted anatomical image was also acquired
(T1-weighted inversion recovery fast gradient echo; 256 × 256
in-plane resolution; 240 mm FOV; 124 × 1.2 mm axial slices).
fMRI task paradigm
The fMRI task and eye-tracking data were collected before and
after training. Participants employed their assigned emotion
regulation strategy to a series of images depicting human
suffering
(Negative)
or
non-suffering
(Neutral)
from
the
International Affective Picture System (Lang et al., 1999)
(800 × 600 resolution). Compassion trainees were instructed
to evoke feelings of compassion while silently repeating
compassion-generating phrases. In contrast, Reappraisal trainees
were instructed to decrease negative emotions by silently re-
interpreting the emotional meaning of the images (such as,
“
This is a scene from a movie, and this person is not really
injured”
). Strategies included thinking of a better outcome
and viewing the scene as fake or not real, which are similar
reappraisal strategies as previously reported in the literature
(Jackson et al., 2000; van Reekum et al., 2007; Ochsner and
Gross, 2008; Lee et al., 2009). Negative images depicted emotional
distress, physical pain, or acts of violence (e.g., burn victim,
crying child). Neutral images depicted people in non-emotional
situations, such as working or walking on a street. Two parallel
sets of images (20 negative and 16 neutral) were created to
ensure that participants viewed different images before and
after training. Set order was counterbalanced and randomized.
Images were pseudorandomized so that 3 or more images
from either condition were not presented in a row. Image
randomization was performed once for each set and then
fixed. Images were balanced across sets for published normative
ratings of valence and arousal (Lang et al., 1999), as well
as stimulus properties of hue, luminance, and saturation (all
ps > 0.1).
Participants were instructed to view the images and regulate
their emotional responses for each 12-s image presentation over
3 blocks. Each block included: (a) fixation baseline (20 s), (b)
auditory and visual instruction (“
Compassion”or “
Reappraisal”
;
3 s), (c) fixation cross (5–
7 s), (d) 12 cycles of image presentation
(Negative or Neutral; 12 s) and fixation inter-trial interval
(5–
11 s, randomized), and (f) final baseline (17–
38 s). Three
Regulation blocks were intermixed with three Attend blocks,
where participants did not change their emotional response.
Because neural activation was related to prosocial outcomes only
during Regulation and not Attend trials (Weng et al., 2013,
2017), we primarily focused our analyses on Regulation trials, and
conducted follow up analyses in the Attend condition.
fMRI pre-processing
Image analysis was performed with AFNI (Cox, 1996) unless
otherwise noted. Data were slice-time corrected and motion
corrected with realignment to the first volume. They were then
field map corrected (Jezzard and Clare, 1999) using prelude
(Smith et al., 2004) from FSL and in-house software1, and
spatially smoothed using a Gaussian kernel with a full width at
half maximum of 6 mm. Anatomical images from post-training
were first normalized to the Montreal Neurological Institute
(MNI152) template using an affine transformation with FLIRT
(Jenkinson et al., 2002), and then re-normalized to the MNI152
template using a non-linear algorithm implemented by FNIRT in
FSL. The resulting warp matrices were applied to the functional
data (re-sampled to 2 mm3).
fMRI first level (subject) analysis
Functional magnetic resonance imaging analyses were performed
on participants with adequate pupil gaze registration at both
1https://web.archive.org/web/20150925171213/http://brainimaging.waisman.
wisc.edu/~jjo/fieldmap_correction/fieldmap_correction.html
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
4
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 771
 fpsyg-09-00771
May 22, 2018
Time: 17:19
# 5
Weng et al.
Compassion Training and Visual Attention
pre- and post-training (n = 24). Functional data were modeled
with a general linear model (GLM) in AFNI (Cox, 1996), and
the hemodynamic response was modeled with a block function
for the full 12-s trial period. The GLM modeled hemodynamic
responses to all conditions in the study (Regulation: Regulate or
Attend, Valence: Negative or Neutral), and activation to Regulate
trials were analyzed for this study. For each participant, we
computed a Negative–
Neutral contrast, which was interrogated
with the eye-tracking data. Regressor betas from the Negative–
Neutral contrast were converted to percent signal change (PSC).
PSC maps were created for each time point (Pre and Post) and
were normalized to the MNI152 2 mm template, which were used
to compute a Post–
Pre training difference PSC map, as well as an
average PSC map across both time points.
Eye-Tracking Data
Visual attention was assessed during the fMRI experiment using
an eye-tracking iView X system (v. 1.3.31) with a remote eye-
tracking device (SensoMotoric Instruments, Teltow, Germany),
which was interfaced with the fiber optic goggle system while
participants performed the fMRI task. The iView system enables
the simultaneous display of (1) video monitoring of eye
movements (which allows us to monitor visual engagement and
sleepiness) and (2) tracking over time of pupil gaze position
over the 800 × 600 field of view. Prior to the start of the first
scan, gaze fixations were calibrated by asking the participant to
focus their attention on each of 9 dots presented in a random
order in either one of the 4 corners of the display space,
midway between each corner, and in the middle of the screen.
Movement of the pupil was monitored at 60 Hz during the entire
fMRI experiment. Data quality was assessed by observing the
iView display for congruence between video monitoring of eye
movements and analogous tracking of pupil gaze movements
in the field of view. Participants with missing data at any time
point due to technical issues (malfunctioning eye-tracking device,
computer, or e-prime errors) were excluded (n = 12). Participants
that demonstrated poor pupil registration (due to poor initial
registration or interference of signal such as excessive blinking,
which resulted in flickering and inconsistent signal that moved
outside the field of view, or mismatch between video monitoring
of eye position and displayed pupil position) were also not
included for analyses (n = 20). Adequate eye tracking data by
these standards were acquired from 24 participants at both pre-
and post-training (Compassion n = 12, Reappraisal n = 12).
Those with adequate data at both time points (n = 24) did not
significantly differ from those who did not (n = 32) in age, gender,
group assignment, baseline empathic concern (Davis, 1980),
average bilateral amygdala activation (at Pre, Post, or Post–
Pre
training), or ranked redistribution behavior (all ps > 0.11).
Eye-tracking data were analyzed to determine the amount of
visual attention to social and emotion-relevant regions within
the images. Looking Time was computed as the percentage
of data points located within defined social and emotional
areas of interest (AOIs) compared to total number of data
points in the field of view within each 12-s trial (Figure 1)
(van Reekum et al., 2007). Visual preference for suffering was
computed by a difference score for percentage looking time
in Negative–
Neutral AOIs, and training-related changes were
computed from a difference score of Post–
Pre training. To
determine the areas of interest (AOIs) on the images, two trained
assistants independently drew (rectangular and elliptical) AOIs
on each of the images using iView Analysis software (v. 1.09.29,
SensoMotoric Instruments). An AOI was defined as object(s)
within the image that provided social and affective meaning to
the scene (e.g., the injured portions of a person’
s body, faces
within main characters in the scene, gun pointed at victim; see
Figure 1). The AOIs generated by each individual were then
compared. An AOI was only accepted when defined by both
individuals, and when the size was within approximately 20% of
the other. When these criteria were not met, a third person helped
determine the AOIs size and placement. In-house software2 was
then used to calculate the percentage of time looking within the
AOIs compared to the entire image screen (Figure 1).
Altruistic Behavior
Altruistic behavior was assessed post-training with an economic
decision-making task called the Redistribution Game, and
previous results have found that compassion training increases
costly redistribution compared to reappraisal training (Weng
et al., 2013, 2015). Briefly, the Redistribution Game models both
(1) unfair treatment of an anonymous stranger and (2) the
participant’
s willingness to redistribute funds at a personal cost.
Using anonymous online interactions, participants first observed
Player A (given $10) transfer an unfair amount of money ($1)
to Player B who had no money. After witnessing this unequal
exchange, participants could choose to spend any amount of
2https://github.com/njvack/gazehound
FIGURE 1 | Quantifying visual attention to suffering. (A) Areas of interest (in
red) were drawn around regions of the image depicting social and emotional
information (see section “Materials and Methods” for full details). Images used
for this figure represent examples of images that depict human suffering
(Negative) or non-suffering (Neutral), which in the experiment were taken from
the IAPS dataset (Lang et al., 1999). Persons depicted provided written
consent for images to be used. (B) Looking time for each condition was
computed by calculating the percentage of data points within the areas of
interest (in red) compared to total data points in the entire screen (in blue).
Visual preference for suffering was computed by a difference score for
percentage looking time in Negative vs. Neutral AOIs, and training-related
changes were computed from a difference score of Post–Pre training.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
5
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 771
 fpsyg-09-00771
May 22, 2018
Time: 17:19
# 6
Weng et al.
Compassion Training and Visual Attention
their own money ($5) to redistribute funds from Player A to
Player B (every $1 spent results in $2 redistributed from Player
A to B). Participants were paid the amount that was left in their
endowment after making the decision. Only participants who
believed they were interacting with real participants and had
valid visual attention data at both time points were included for
exploratory data analyses.
Social Desirability
Positive social qualities such as compassion may be influenced
by social desirability. In previous research with a similar sample,
we found both self-reported compassion, as well as economic
behavior in the Redistribution Game, were positively correlated
with self-reported social desirability (Weng et al., 2013, 2015). We
administered the Marlowe-Crowne Social Desirability (Crowne
and Marlowe, 1960) scale to ensure that visual attention was not
influenced by social desirability.
Data Analysis
Overview
We analyzed our data from the Regulation condition in three
main steps to identify group differences in (1) relationships
between visual attention to suffering and neural responses (in
the amygdala and whole-brain), (2) visual attention to suffering,
and (3) relationships between visual attention to suffering and
altruistic behavior. Because our a priori hypotheses concerned
differences in visual attention to suffering due to compassion
training, we first examined the data that reflected changes
directly due to training (Post–
Pre training contrast). In order
to examine neural and visual responses to suffering (vs. non-
suffering), the contrast of Negative–
Neutral was used for all data
analyses (e.g., visual preference for suffering). To understand
the contribution of the Time factor in significant training-
related effects, we performed follow-up tests in data obtained
after training (Post-training) as well as before training (Pre-
training). Finally, to examine whether results were specific to
the Regulation condition, we performed parallel analyses in the
Attend condition.
Relationships Between Visual Attention and fMRI
Neural Responses (Group Level Analysis)
First, we investigated whether training-related changes in visual
attention and neural responses to suffering differed between
groups. We computed this using a Group (Compassion,
Reappraisal) × Looking Time (continuous percentage looking
time within AOIs) interaction test with the fMRI data
(Negative–
Neutral, Post–
Pre training contrast in both measures),
controlling for main effects of Group and Looking Time. We
performed the interaction test within (1) a region of interest
(ROI) of the bilateral amygdala and (2) the whole brain. To
clarify the contributions of each time point to any significant
interactions, we performed follow up interactions within each
time point.
Region-of-interest (ROI) analyses within the amygdala
For the ROI analyses of the amygdala, we extracted average
percent signal change from the left and right ROI masks at
50% probability from the Harvard-Oxford atlas in FSL (left
amygdala ROI: 240 voxels or 1920 mm3; right amygdala ROI:
280 voxels or 2240 mm3; Desikan et al., 2006), and created
summary bilateral amygdala scores for each time point as well as
difference scores. We performed the interaction tests using IBM
SPSS Statistics (version 24) using hierarchical linear regression
on extracted PSC values from the bilateral amygdala. Main
effect variables of Group and Looking Time were entered in
Step 1, and the interaction variable of Group × Looking Time
was entered in Step 2. In exploratory analyses, we examined
potential hemispheric and subregional amygdala contributions
by performing voxel-wise regression tests within the left and
right amygdala (small-volume corrected within each hemisphere
using Monte Carlo simulations, voxel-wise threshold at p < 0.05,
corrected for multiple comparisons within the left and right
amygdala at p < 0.05 and an extent of 416 and 464 mm3,
respectively). The regression modeled the interaction of the
Group × Looking Time on neural data, controlling for the main
effects of Group and Looking Time.
Whole-brain analysis
A whole-brain voxel-wise interaction test of Group × Looking
Time was conducted using 3dRegAna in AFNI, within functional
data that were thresholded at 25% gray matter probability within
the MNI152 atlas FSL, controlling for main effects of Group
and Looking Time. The whole-brain analysis was corrected for
multiple comparisons within the MNI152 atlas (thresholded
at 25%) using Monte Carlo simulations (AlphaSim in AFNI;
p < 0.01 corrected [cluster size ≥ 2496 mm3] after initial
thresholding at p < 0.01 [R2 ≥ 0.291, F3,21 = 8.11]). To
decompose the simple effects driving the interaction, regressions
of looking time and neural activation were performed in each
group, and significant voxels (p < 0.01) were identified within
the significant interaction clusters. Result maps depict voxels
from the significant (1) interaction cluster, (2) compassion
simple effect, and (3) reappraisal simple effect (Figure 3
and Supplementary Figure S1). Values were extracted only to
determine the direction of the relationship and to inspect for
outliers.
Visual Attention
To examine whether visual attention to suffering was impacted
by compassion training, we computed a 3-way Group (COM,
REP) × Time (Pre, Post) × Valence (Negative, Neutral) ANOVA
on percentage looking time values when participants were
employing their respective trainings. The main effects of Group,
Time, and Valence, and the interactions of Group × Time,
Group × Valence, Time × Valence, and Group × Time × Valence
were modeled. Significant main effects and interactions were
followed up with post-hoc testing. We performed a subsequent
3-way ANOVA with social desirability entered as a covariate
to ensure any significant findings were not due to social
desirability. Follow up tests within each time point were
performed.
Visual Attention and Altruistic Behavior
Exploratory analyses were conducted to test whether greater
visual attention to suffering after compassion training may
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
6
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 771
 fpsyg-09-00771
May 22, 2018
Time: 17:19
# 7
Weng et al.
Compassion Training and Visual Attention
reflect prosocial motivation and is associated with greater
altruistic behavior. Analyses were conducted in a subset of
participants who had both eye tracking data of adequate
quality and valid redistribution responses (Compassion n = 8;
REP n = 9, histograms displayed in Supplementary Figure
S3). We investigated the relationship between looking time
and redistribution behavior (calculated as rank values to
decrease the influence of outliers; see Weng et al., 2013)
using looking time metrics that reflected visual attention to
suffering (Negative–
Neutral contrast) across both time points
and changes directly due to training (Post–
Pre training). To
gain a preliminary estimate of the direction and magnitude of
relationship between visual attention and altruistic behavior, a
Pearson’
s correlation was computed between looking time and
redistribution (rank) in each group. Using the Fisher r- to
z-transformation, we also tested the difference in correlations
between groups.
RESULTS
Relationships Between Visual Attention
and Neural Responses
Visual Attention and Amygdala Analyses
We examined how the training groups differ in their relationship
between percentage looking time to suffering and amygdala
activation given the amygdala’
s involvement in motivational
salience of stimuli (Cunningham and Brosch, 2012) and
physiological responses in aversive emotional states (Davis and
Whalen, 2001; Phelps and LeDoux, 2005). Visual attention was
assessed using an eye-tracking metric of percentage looking
time that calculated the percentage of data points within the
social and emotion-relevant areas of interest (van Reekum
et al., 2007), compared to data points in the entire image
screen for images depicting suffering (negative) and non-
suffering (neutral) (Figure 1). When we examined changes in
visual attention to suffering and amygdala activation due to
training (Post–
Pre training, Negative–
Neutral contrast in both
metrics; L amygdala ROI size: 1920 mm3, R amygdala ROI
size: 2240 mm3), we found that training group significantly
modulated the association between amygdala activation and
looking time (Group × Looking Time interaction �R2 = 0.24,
B = −0.013, SE = 0.005, Fchange = 6.91, p < 0.05, controlling
for main effects of Group and Looking Time; Figure 2). In
particular, the simple effects of the significant Group × Looking
Time interaction revealed that increased visual preference to
suffering produced by compassion training was associated
with decreased activation in bilateral amygdala (B = −0.008,
SE = 0.004, t = −2.05, sr = −0.38, p = 0.05), whereas the
association between visual attention and amygdala activation
due to reappraisal training was not significant (B = 0.004,
SE = 0.003, t = 1.71, sr = 0.32, p = 0.10). Follow-up tests
within each time point demonstrated that this interaction was
primarily driven by the relationship between looking time and
amygdala activation at post-training (p = 0.06) rather than
at pre-training (p = 0.76). To investigate the laterality and
potential subregions that may have contributed to this significant
interaction, we performed exploratory voxel-wise analyses within
the amygdala ROIs using the same interaction model. A cluster
in the right amygdala survived correction (p < 0.05 within the
right amygdala ROI) and was located in the dorsal aspect of
the amygdala (Supplementary Figures S1A–
C). Extracted values
confirmed the direction of the relationship and were displayed
for
inspection
purposes
only
(Supplementary Figure S1D).
Analogous Group × Looking Time interaction tests in the
FIGURE 2 | (A) Bilateral amygdala regions of interest (ROIs) from the Harvard-Oxford probabilistic atlas (Desikan et al., 2006) provided in FSL (thresholded at 50%
probability and displayed on the 2 mm MNI152 atlas). (B) Increases in visual attention to suffering due to compassion training were associated with decreases in
amygdala activation, whereas no relationship was found due to reappraisal training (Group × Looking Time interaction, p < 0.05; ∗Compassion simple effect
p = 0.05). Both looking time percentage and amygdala activation values represent the contrast of suffering vs. non-suffering (Neg-Neu) and post vs. pre-training
(Post–Pre). PSC denotes percent signal change of the BOLD response within the amygdala.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
7
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 771
 fpsyg-09-00771
May 22, 2018
Time: 17:19
# 8
Weng et al.
Compassion Training and Visual Attention
Attend condition were not significant at Pre, Post, or Post-Pre
training (ps > 0.32).
Visual Attention and Whole-Brain Analyses
We hypothesized that compassion training-related changes in
visual attention to suffering would be differentially associated
with changes in neural responses to human suffering compared
to reappraisal training (Post–
Pre training, Negative–
Neutral
contrast). The whole-brain Group × Looking Time interaction
test on training-related neural responses to suffering revealed
a significant cluster spanning the right anterior insula (AI)
and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC; 4096 mm3, MNI peak voxel:
[24, 26, −8]; p < 0.01, corrected; Figure 3]. To characterize
the direction of the interaction in the right AI/OFC, simple
effects regression testing within the cluster showed that
changes due to compassion training resulted in a negative
relationship between visual attention and brain activation to
suffering (voxels thresholded at p < 0.01 depicted in red in
Figure 3), while changes due to reappraisal training resulted
in a positive relationship between visual attention and brain
activation (voxels thresholded at p < 0.01 depicted in blue
in Figure 3). Because associations with looking time and
amygdala activation were driven by post-training data, we also
report the results of the whole-brain interaction in post-training
data only (see Supplementary Material and Supplementary
Figure S2).
Visual Attention
We tested whether visual attention to suffering was impacted by
compassion training using an eye-tracking metric of percentage
looking time that calculated the percentage of data points within
the social and emotion-relevant areas of interest (van Reekum
et al., 2007), compared to data points in the entire image screen
for images depicting suffering (negative) and non-suffering
(neutral) (Figure 1). A 3-way ANOVA of Group (Compassion,
Reappraisal) × Time (Pre-training, Post-training) × Valence
(Negative, Neutral) on the eye-tracking data yielded a significant
Group × Valence interaction (F1,22 = 8.47, p < 0.01; Figure 4).
This Group × Valence interaction remained significant when
controlling for self-reported social desirability (F1,21 = 8.14,
p < 0.01). Upon investigating the drivers of this interaction, we
found that across both time points, the compassion group spent
more time looking at social and emotional regions of negative
images compared to neutral images (Negative mean = 54.18,
SD = 16.79; Neutral mean = 50.70, SD = 18.98; t11 = 2.85,
p < 0.05; Figure 4), whereas the reappraisal group did not
(Negative mean = 53.33, SD = 6.93; Neutral = 55.00, SD = 7.32,
t11 = −1.31, p = 0.22). Within each valence, the groups did not
significantly differ in looking time (ps > 0.47). In summary,
employing compassion (compared to reappraisal) produced a
visual preference for cues of suffering compared to non-suffering
across both time points. No other main effects or interactions
were found within the 3-way ANOVA in the Regulation
condition, and the Attend condition did not yield a significant
3-way interaction or 2-way Group × Valence interaction (which
was present in Regulation trials; ps > 0.34).
FIGURE 3 | A cluster that spans the right anterior insula (AI) and orbitofrontal
cortex (OFC) was identified from a whole-brain Group (Compassion,
Reappraisal) × Looking Time (percentage) interaction performed on Post vs.
Pre-training neural activation (PSC) in the Negative vs. Neutral conditions
(orange voxels; ∗∗∗p < 0.01 voxel-wise threshold, p < 0.01 corrected,
displayed on 2 mm MNI template). To characterize the simple effects within
the significant interaction voxels, regression tests of Looking Time and neural
activation (Negative–Neutral ) were performed in each training group
(∗∗ thresholded at p < 0.01). Within the significant interaction cluster, red
voxels indicate that the Compassion group showed a significant negative
relationship between looking time and neural activation, and blue voxels
indicate that the Reappraisal group showed a positive relationship between
looking time and neural activation.
FIGURE 4 | Participants who employ compassion show greater visual
preference for suffering, where visual attention to emotional regions of images
depicting human suffering (Negative) was greater compared to non-suffering
(Neutral). Those who employ reappraisal show the opposite pattern at a
non-significant level (∗∗Group × Valence interaction test F1,22 = 8.47,
p < 0.01; ∗Paired t-test, p < 0.05). No group differences were found for
Negative or Neutral images (ps > 0.47). Error bars indicate standard error of
the mean.
Exploratory Analyses: Visual Attention
and Altruistic Behavior
In exploratory analyses in a subset of participants with valid
prosocial behavioral data, we investigated whether greater visual
attention to suffering (Negative–
Neutral contrast) was associated
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
8
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 771
 fpsyg-09-00771
May 22, 2018
Time: 17:19
# 9
Weng et al.
Compassion Training and Visual Attention
with altruistic behavior as measured by the redistribution
game after training. Indeed, the compassion group showed a
trend towards a positive association between visual attention
to suffering and prosocial behavior whereas the reappraisal
group showed a negative association (slope difference, z = 1.62,
p = 0.10; Supplementary Figure S3). Due to the early exploratory
nature of the analyses, these results are further reported in the
Supplementary Material to aid future hypotheses and research.
DISCUSSION
In summary, the present findings, whilst preliminary due to
the small sample size, suggest that after compassion meditation
training, individuals who visually engage more with suffering
while actively generating compassion show decreased activation
in the amygdala and right AI/OFC, brain regions sensitive to
processing negatively valenced and arousing stimuli. This is
in contrast to individuals who engage in reappraisal training
(which cultivates cognitive reinterpretation of stimuli to decrease
personal negative emotions), where greater visual preference
for suffering due to training was not associated with amygdala
activation, and was positively associated with activation in
AI/OFC. Importantly, these associations were found specifically
when participants were engaging in compassion (vs. reappraisal)
as a regulatory means to change emotional responses, and not
when they were simply attending to images of suffering. Given
the low number of participants, these should be considered
preliminary results that should be interpreted with caution and
confirmed with future research containing larger sample sizes.
We tentatively interpret the results and provide suggestions for
future research.
Together, these findings may suggest that compassion training
may support greater visual engagement with suffering (vs.
non-suffering) while mitigating neural responses to aversive
events that may activate the sympathetic nervous system
and inhibit prosocial behavior, therefore cultivating a more
balanced relationship with stimuli of suffering. When examining
visual attention behavior independently of neural responses,
participants engaging in compassion (across both time points)
spent more time visually attending to cues of suffering compared
to non-suffering relative to those who engage in reappraisal. This
difference in looking time by valence was specific to compassion –
when participants engaged in reappraisal, there was no difference
in the amount of the time they visually attend to suffering vs. non-
suffering. Of note, these groups did not differ in absolute looking
time in either valence alone, suggesting that the interaction
is driven by the within-compassion group difference of visual
attention to suffering vs. non-suffering (e.g., visual preference for
suffering).
We found that compassion training-related increases in visual
attention to suffering were associated with training-related
decreases in amygdala activation, a brain region involved in
processing motivational salience, which include stimuli that are
negative, positive, arousing, interesting, or unusual, depending
on a perceiver’
s goals (Adolphs et al., 1999; Hamann et al., 2002;
Phan et al., 2003; Cunningham and Brosch, 2012). Exploratory
voxel-wise analyses highlighted a cluster in the right dorsal
amygdala primarily contributing to this effect. The dorsal
amygdala has been implicated in processing arousal of social
stimuli (Davis et al., 2010), and may include the centromedial
nucleus of the amygdala, which has direct projections to brain
regions that mediate sympathetic physiological responses typical
of fear and anxiety such as changes in blood pressure, heart rate,
and endocrine responses (Davis and Whalen, 2001; Phelps and
LeDoux, 2005). Therefore, decreased activation in this region
after compassion training associated with greater visual attention
may reflect decreased arousal in response to suffering, which may
mitigate empathic distress and facilitate prosocial engagement
(Batson, 1991).
Furthermore, this finding was driven by relationships found
at post- and not pre-training, further suggesting that this
outcome may be specifically due to compassion training. This
suggests that the compassion trainees who were able to visually
engage more with cues of suffering were doing so despite not
further engaging neural regions typically sensitive to valence
and arousal content of negative stimuli. It is possible that these
participants, despite allocating attention to aversive visual cues
may be less reactive to suffering, and could potentially show
less aversive psychophysiological responses in skin conductance
and heart rate which is partially mediated by the amygdala.
Disambiguating the directionality of this –
i.e., determining
whether visual behavior change influences neural changes or vice
versa—is a critical direction for future research. In addition,
future work should examine whether a more calm, balanced
attention to human suffering (Halifax, 2012) characterized
by attenuated sympathetic-nervous system responding causally
supports prosocial behavior.
It is important to note as the field is moving beyond
the
negative
emotion-centric
interpretations
of
amygdala
engagement
(LeDoux
and
Hofmann,
2018),
amygdala
functioning has also been recognized to be generally involved
in motivational salience and be sensitive to not only negative
but also positive stimuli, arousal, and novelty (Cunningham and
Brosch, 2012). Although it is likely that compassion training
enhances the motivational salience of suffering, the negative
relationship between visual preference for suffering and amygdala
in our dataset suggest that amygdala in this study paradigm more
likely reflected decreased aversive responses to suffering rather
than increased motivational salience. Although other studies
have not specifically investigated the relationship between visual
attention and amygdala responses due to compassion meditation,
the direction of the amygdala finding is supported by research
in expert meditation practitioners showing decreased amygdala
responses to film clips of suffering while engaging in compassion
vs. attending (Engen and Singer, 2015). However, this finding
is in contrast to previously reported findings by Desbordes
et al. (2012), where they showed greater amygdala activation
to negative stimuli was increased after compassion training,
albeit in an “
attend” state rather than an active compassion
state. One putatively important difference between the present
study and Desbordes et al. (2012) is that our study had a shorter
training period (7 h total over 2 weeks compared to 8 weeks),
and perhaps changes in amygdala function early on in training
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
9
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 771
 fpsyg-09-00771
May 22, 2018
Time: 17:19
# 10
Weng et al.
Compassion Training and Visual Attention
while actively engaging in compassion reflect reduced aversive
responses to suffering. Alternatively, our finding may also reflect
more sustained amygdala activation over the length of the entire
trial (modeled by a block function over 12s), which we modeled
to associate with looking time over the entire trial. It is plausible
that motivational salience may be better modeled by a different
amygdala response function focused on initial phasic responses,
and future fMRI research should tease these different functional
aspects of neural activation apart by using multivariate analysis
combined with subjective reports of salience, empathic concern,
and empathic distress (e.g., Ashar et al., 2017).
After compassion training, greater visual preference for
suffering was negatively associated with activation in the right AI
and OFC; whereas after reappraisal training, visual attention to
suffering was associated with greater AI/OFC activation. The AI
has been consistently implicated in studies and meta-analyses of
empathy (Lamm et al., 2011) and is thought to be involved in
representing empathic distress. Specifically, the AI is considered
part of the shared representations model of empathy (Zaki and
Ochsner, 2012), where the perceiver of suffering may show
activation in that region when they both experience and observe
situations. The negative relationship between visual preference
for suffering and AI may indicate that compassion trainees are
able to visually engage more with suffering while dampening their
shared representation of empathic distress.
The OFC is known to be bidirectionally connected with
the amygdala (Salzman and Fusi, 2010), and from a decision-
making model of how sensory stimuli are processed into choices,
the amygdala and OFC and are part of the neural circuitry
that represent the affective value of stimuli (Grabenhorst and
Rolls, 2011). These regions have both been previously implicated
in the encoding value and valence of a variety of emotional
stimuli across different sensory modalities (Grabenhorst and
Rolls, 2011). From this framework, the negative relationship
between visual attention to suffering and activation in the
amygdala and OFC after compassion training may reflect
that attention to negative stimuli is being decoupled with
neural responses that are typically activated in response to
aversive stimuli. This may suggest that compassion trainees
may be learning to visually engage more with suffering while
cultivating a more equanimous emotional response (Desbordes
et al., 2014). In reappraisal trainees, greater visual attention
to suffering may be associated with greater AI/OFC activation
because those who visually attended to suffering may have been
less successful at implementing reappraisal strategies and their
associated attention mechanisms (van Reekum et al., 2007),
which typically entail distancing from or reinterpreting the
emotionally challenging stimulus.
We suggest that employing compassion in general may result
in a visual preference for cues of suffering, where greater visual
attention is directed to cues of suffering than neutral stimuli.
This visual preference for cues of suffering may be due to the
prosocial motives of compassion to care for and help those who
are suffering (Isaacowitz, 2006), which may result in heightened
visual attentiveness to understand the context of suffering, along
with the display of non-verbal cues which signals attentiveness
to those in need (Ellsworth and Ludwig, 1972). The reappraisal
group did not demonstrate this valence-based visual preference.
The implemented reappraisal strategies may have been sufficient
to regulate negative emotion, without gaze aversion being needed
to further decrease negative emotion (van Reekum et al., 2007),
particularly because the negative images used in the study
were not extremely intense. Comparing the groups within
each valence, engaging in compassion vs. reappraisal did not
result in significant differences in looking time. This suggests
that employing compassion and reappraisal result in a similar
absolute looking time to visual cues of suffering as well as
non-suffering; however, the relative looking time (e.g., visual
preference) to suffering vs. non-suffering is more pronounced
when employing compassion. Future studies that are more highly
powered should further investigate this question.
Counter to our hypotheses, we observed changes in visual
attention to suffering as a function of engaging in compassion in
general (across both time points), as opposed to directly due to
compassion training (i.e., training-related changes). We interpret
the lack of training-level changes with caution because of the
short duration of training and the relatively small sample size—
therefore, future research should investigate these questions
with longer training length as well as larger sample sizes.
Although compassion meditation did not directly increase visual
attention to suffering, tests employing an individual differences
model suggested that only compassion training-related changes
in visual attention to suffering were related to differential neural
responses. In addition, early exploratory analyses associated
visual preference for suffering due to compassion training
with greater prosocial responses; however, this trend-level
finding should be interpreted with caution and is reported for
completeness and to inform future research. Future work should
collect larger samples with high quality eye tracking data, and
should include a “
No Training”control group with an Attend
condition that is not intermixed with Regulation conditions,
which would provide a better assessment of baseline visual
attention and neural responses. Because the reappraisal training
condition also actively regulates emotions and changes eye
gaze behavior, direct comparison of eye gaze behavior between
reappraisal and compassion groups is challenging to readily
interpret. Finally, the fMRI paradigm could be improved by
increasing the number of trials, as well as balancing the number
of trials, within each valence.
In summary, the current findings, whilst preliminary due
to the low sample size, suggest that engaging in compassion
as an emotion regulation strategy towards suffering resulted
in increases in visual attention to regions of images depicting
suffering
compared
to
non-suffering.
Thus,
engaging
in
compassion may be a useful strategy in situations where
attention needs to turn toward suffering, such as when a doctor
aids a patient. While our results suggest that compassion training
may not be needed to produce this visual change, individual
differences in greater visual preference for suffering due to
compassion meditation training may help decrease aversive
neural responses to suffering, even as visual attention to suffering
increases. This may help individuals stay calm in the face of
suffering and more readily able to engage in prosocial action.
Further research should explore these questions with larger
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
10
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 771
 fpsyg-09-00771
May 22, 2018
Time: 17:19
# 11
Weng et al.
Compassion Training and Visual Attention
sample sizes, and determine whether compassion intervention
strategies could aid people who are often exposed to others’
suffering such as health care workers and caregivers.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
HW, DS, GR, and RD designed the study. HW and DS collected
data. HW, RL, GR, and RD conceived data analyses. HW
analyzed data. All authors contributed to writing the manuscript.
FUNDING
This work was supported by the National Institutes of
Health (NCCIH K08-AT009385 – HW, principal investigator
(PI); NCCIH T32-AT006956 –R. Hecht and J. Moskowitz, PIs;
NCCIH T32-AT006956 –B. Barrett, PI; NCCIH P01-AT004952
and NIMH T32-MH018931—RD, PI; NICHD P30-HD003352—
M. Seltzer, PI); the Mind and Life Institute and University
of Wisconsin Psychology Department Marian Schwartz award
(HW); the Fetzer Institute, John Templeton Foundation, Impact
Foundation, J. W. Kluge Foundation, and Mental Insight
Foundation, and gifts from Bryant Wangard, Ralph Robinson,
Keith and Arlene Bronstein, and Ann Down (RD).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Nathan Vack for eye-tracking data processing,
Carien van Reekum and Andrew Fox for data analysis
consultation, Jeanette Mumford for fMRI statistics consultation,
Matthew Olson for assistance with data collection, and the
staffs of the Center for Healthy Minds, Laboratory for Affective
Neuroscience, and Waisman Laboratory for Brain Imaging and
Behavior.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online
at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.
2018.00771/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Adolphs, R., Russell, J. A., and Tranel, D. (1999). A role for the human amygdala
in recognizing emotional arousal from unpleasant stimuli. Psychol. Sci. 10,
167–
171. doi: 10.1111/1467-9280.00126
Ashar, Y. K., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Dimidjian, S., and Wager, T. D. (2017).
Empathic care and distress: predictive brain markers and dissociable
brain
systems.
Neuron
94,
1263–
1273.e4.
doi:
10.1016/j.neuron.2017.
05.014
Ashar, Y. K., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Yarkoni, T., Sills, J., Halifax, J., Dimidjian, S.,
et al. (2016). Effects of compassion meditation on a psychological model of
charitable donation. Emotion 16, 691–
705. doi: 10.1037/emo0000119
Batson, C. D. (1991). The Altruism Question. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Batson, C. D., Fultz, J., and Schoenrade, P. A. (1987). Distress and empathy:
two qualitatively distinct vicarious emotions with different motivational
consequences. J. Pers. 55, 19–
39. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-6494.1987.tb00426.x
Bruneau, E. G., Jacoby, N., and Saxe, R. (2015). Empathic control through
coordinated interaction of amygdala, theory of mind and extended pain matrix
brain regions. Neuroimage 114, 105–
119. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.
04.034
Condon, P., Desbordes, G., Miller, W. B., and DeSteno, D. (2013). Meditation
increases compassionate responses to suffering. Psychol. Sci. 24, 2125–
2127.
doi: 10.1177/0956797613485603
Cox, R. W. (1996). AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of functional
magnetic resonance neuroimages. Comput. Biomed. Res. Int. J. 29, 162–
173.
doi: 10.1006/cbmr.1996.0014
Crowne, D. P., and Marlowe, D. (1960). A new scale of social desirability
independent of psychopathology. J. Consult. Psychol. 24, 349–
354. doi: 10.1037/
h0047358
Cunningham, W. A., and Brosch, T. (2012). Motivational salience: amygdala
tuning from traits, needs, values, and goals. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 21, 54–
59.
doi: 10.1177/0963721411430832
Dahl, C. J., Lutz, A., and Davidson, R. J. (2015). Reconstructing and deconstructing
the self: cognitive mechanisms in meditation practice. Trends Cogn. Sci. 19,
515–
523. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2015.07.001
Davidson, R. J., and Harrington, A. (2001). Visions of Compassion: Western
Scientists and Tibetan Buddhists Examine Human Nature. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Davis, F. C., Johnstone, T., Mazzulla, E. C., Oler, J. A., and Whalen, P. J. (2010).
Regional response differences across the human amygdaloid complex during
social conditioning. Cereb. Cortex 20, 612–
621. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhp126
Davis, M., and Whalen, P. J. (2001). The amygdala: vigilance and emotion. Mol.
Psychiatry 6, 13–
34. doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4000812
Davis, M. A. (1980). A multidimensional approach to individual differences in
empathy. JSAS Cat. Sel. Doc. Psychol. 10:85.
Desbordes, G., Gard, T., Hoge, E. A., Hölzel, B. K., Kerr, C., Lazar, S. W.,
et al. (2014). Moving beyond mindfulness: defining equanimity as an outcome
measure in meditation and contemplative research. Mindfulness 6, 356–
372.
doi: 10.1007/s12671-013-0269-8
Desbordes, G., Negi, L. T., Pace, T. W. W., Wallace, B. A., Raison, C. L., and
Schwartz, E. L. (2012). Effects of mindful-attention and compassion meditation
training on amygdala response to emotional stimuli in an ordinary, non-
meditative state. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 6:292. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00292
Desikan, R. S., Ségonne, F., Fischl, B., Quinn, B. T., Dickerson, B. C., Blacker, D.,
et al. (2006). An automated labeling system for subdividing the human cerebral
cortex on MRI scans into gyral based regions of interest. Neuroimage 31,
968–
980. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.01.021
Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R. A., Bustamante, D., Mathy, R. M., Miller, P. A., and
Lindholm, E. (1988). Differentiation of vicariously induced emotional reactions
in children. Dev. Psychol. 24, 237–
246. doi: 10.1037/0012-1649.24.2.237
Ellsworth, P. C., and Ludwig, L. M. (1972). Visual behavior in social interaction.
J. Commun. 22, 375–
403. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-2466.1972.tb00164.x
Engen, H. G., and Singer, T. (2015). Compassion-based emotion regulation up-
regulates experienced positive affect and associated neural networks. Soc. Cogn.
Affect. Neurosci. 10, 1291–
1301. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsv008
Engen, H. G., and Singer, T. (2016). Affect and motivation are critical in
constructive meditation. Trends Cogn. Sci. 20, 159–
160. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2015.
11.004
Fredrickson, B. L., Cohn, M. A., Coffey, K. A., Pek, J., and Finkel, S. M. (2008).
Open hearts build lives: positive emotions, induced through loving-kindness
meditation, build consequential personal resources. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 95,
1045–
1062. doi: 10.1037/a0013262
Ganis, G., Thompson, W. L., and Kosslyn, S. M. (2004). Brain areas underlying
visual mental imagery and visual perception: an fMRI study. Cogn. Brain Res.
20, 226–
241. doi: 10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2004.02.012
Goetz, J. L., Keltner, D., and Simon-Thomas, E. (2010). Compassion: an
evolutionary analysis and empirical review. Psychol. Bull. 136, 351–
374.
doi: 10.1037/a0018807
Grabenhorst, F., and Rolls, E. T. (2011). Value, pleasure and choice in the ventral
prefrontal cortex. Trends Cogn. Sci. 15, 56–
67. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2010.12.004
Gurthrie, I. K., Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R. A., Murphy, B. C., Holmgren, R.,
Mazsk, P., et al. (1997). The relations of regulation and emotionality to
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
11
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 771
 fpsyg-09-00771
May 22, 2018
Time: 17:19
# 12
Weng et al.
Compassion Training and Visual Attention
children’
s situational empathy-related responding. Motiv. Emot. 21, 87–
108.
doi: 10.1023/A:1024478415317
Halifax, J. (2012). A heuristic model of enactive compassion. Curr. Opin. Support.
Palliat. Care 6, 228–
235. doi: 10.1097/SPC.0b013e3283530fbe
Hamann, S. B., Ely, T. D., Hoffman, J. M., and Kilts, C. D. (2002). Ecstasy and
agony: activation of the human amygdala in positive and negative emotion.
Psychol. Sci. 13, 135–
141. doi: 10.1111/1467-9280.00425
Hofmann, S. G., Grossman, P., and Hinton, D. E. (2011). Loving-kindness and
compassion meditation: potential for psychological interventions. Clin. Psychol.
Rev. 31, 1126–
1132. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2011.07.003
Hutcherson, C. A., Seppala, E. M., and Gross, J. J. (2008). Loving-kindness
meditation increases social connectedness. Emotion 8, 720–
724. doi: 10.1037/
a0013237
Isaacowitz, D. M. (2006). Motivated gaze: the view from the gazer. Curr. Dir.
Psychol. Sci. 15, 68–
72. doi: 10.1111/j.0963-7214.2006.00409.x
Jackson, D. C., Malmstadt, J. R., Larson, C. L., and Davidson, R. J. (2000).
Suppression and enhancement of emotional responses to unpleasant pictures.
Psychophysiology 37, 515–
522. doi: 10.1111/1469-8986.3740515
Jenkinson, M., Bannister, P., Brady, M., and Smith, S. (2002). Improved
optimization for the robust and accurate linear registration and motion
correction of brain images. Neuroimage 17, 825–
841. doi: 10.1006/nimg.2002.
1132
Jezzard, P., and Clare, S. (1999). Sources of distortion in functional MRI data.
Hum. Brain Mapp. 8, 80–
85. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0193(1999)8:2/3<80::
AID-HBM2>3.0.CO;2-C
Klimecki, O. M., Leiberg, S., Lamm, C., and Singer, T. (2012). Functional neural
plasticity and associated changes in positive affect after compassion training.
Cereb. Cortex 23, 1552–
1561. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs142
Klimecki, O. M., Leiberg, S., Ricard, M., and Singer, T. (2014). Differential pattern
of functional brain plasticity after compassion and empathy training. Soc. Cogn.
Affect. Neurosci. 9, 873–
879. doi: 10.1093/scan/nst060
Lamm, C., Decety, J., and Singer, T. (2011). Meta-analytic evidence for common
and distinct neural networks associated with directly experienced pain and
empathy for pain. Neuroimage 54, 2492–
2502. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.
10.014
Lang, P. J., Bradley, M. M., and Cuthbert, B. N. (1999). International Affective
Picture System (IAPS): Instruction Manual and Affective Ratings. Technical
Report A-6. University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
LeDoux, J. E., and Hofmann, S. G. (2018). The subjective experience of emotion:
a fearful view. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 19, 67–
72. doi: 10.1016/j.cobeha.2017.
09.011
Lee, H., Shackman, A. J., Jackson, D. C., and Davidson, R. J. (2009). Test-
retest reliability of voluntary emotion regulation. Psychophysiology 46, 874–
879.
doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8986.2009.00830.x
Leiberg, S., Klimecki, O., and Singer, T. (2011). Short-term compassion training
increases prosocial behavior in a newly developed prosocial game. PLoS One
6:e17798. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017798
McCall, C., Steinbeis, N., Ricard, M., and Singer, T. (2014). Compassion meditators
show less anger, less punishment, and more compensation of victims in
response to fairness violations. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 8:424. doi: 10.3389/
fnbeh.2014.00424
Ochsner, K. N., and Gross, J. J. (2008). Cognitive emotion regulation. Curr. Dir.
Psychol. Sci. 17:153. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8721.2008.00566.x
Phan, K. L., Taylor, S. F., Welsh, R. C., Decker, L. R., Noll, D. C., Nichols, T. E.,
et al. (2003). Activation of the medial prefrontal cortex and extended amygdala
by individual ratings of emotional arousal: a fMRI study. Biol. Psychiatry 53,
211–
215. doi: 10.1016/S0006-3223(02)01485-3
Phelps, E. A., and LeDoux, J. E. (2005). Contributions of the amygdala to emotion
processing: from animal models to human behavior. Neuron 48, 175–
187.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.09.025
Salzberg, S. (1997). Lovingkindness: The Revolutionary Art of Happiness. Boston,
MA: Shambhala.
Salzman, C. D., and Fusi, S. (2010). Emotion, cognition, and mental state
representation in amygdala and prefrontal cortex. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 33,
173–
202. doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.051508.135256
Smith, S. M., Jenkinson, M., Woolrich, M. W., Beckmann, C. F., Behrens,
T. E. J., Johansen-Berg, H., et al. (2004). Advances in functional and structural
MR image analysis and implementation as FSL. Neuroimage 23(Suppl. 1),
S208–
S219. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.07.051
van Reekum, C. M., Johnstone, T., Urry, H. L., Thurow, M. E., Schaefer, H. S.,
Alexander, A. L., et al. (2007). Gaze fixations predict brain activation during
the voluntary regulation of picture-induced negative affect. Neuroimage 36,
1041–
1055. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.03.052
Weng, H. Y., Fox, A. S., Hessenthaler, H. C., Stodola, D. E., and Davidson, R. J.
(2015). The role of compassion in altruistic helping and punishment behavior.
PLoS One 10:e0143794. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143794
Weng, H. Y., Fox, A. S., Shackman, A. J., Stodola, D. E., Caldwell, J. Z. K., Olson,
M. C., et al. (2013). Compassion training alters altruism and neural responses
to suffering. Psychol. Sci. 24, 1171–
1180. doi: 10.1177/0956797612469537
Weng, H. Y., Schuyler, B. S., and Davidson, R. J. (2017). “
The impact of compassion
training on the brain and prosocial behavior,”in Handbook of Compassion
Science, eds E. Seppala, E. Simon-Thomas, S. L. Brown, M. C. Worline, D.
Cameron, and J. Doty (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 133–
146.
Zaki, J., and Ochsner, K. N. (2012). The neuroscience of empathy: progress, pitfalls
and promise. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 675–
680. doi: 10.1038/nn.3085
Zald, D. H. (2003). The human amygdala and the emotional evaluation of sensory
stimuli. Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev. 41, 88–
123. doi: 10.1016/S0165-0173(02)
00248-5
Conflict of Interest Statement: RD serves on the board of directors for the
following non-profit organizations: Healthy Minds Innovations and the Mind
and Life Institute. HW serves as a Fellow for the Mind and Life Institute. No
donors, either anonymous or identified, have participated in the design, conduct,
or reporting of research results in this manuscript.
The other authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict
of interest.
Copyright © 2018 Weng, Lapate, Stodola, Rogers and Davidson. This is an open-
access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted,
provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply
with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
12
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 771
