 B R A I N I M A G I N G
Insights into neuroepigenetics through human histone
deacetylase PET imaging
Hsiao-Ying Wey,1* Tonya M. Gilbert,1* Nicole R. Zürcher,1 Angela She,2
Anisha Bhanot,1 Brendan D. Taillon,1 Fredrick A. Schroeder,1 Changing Wang,1
Stephen J. Haggarty,2 Jacob M. Hooker1†
Epigenetic dysfunction is implicated in many neurological and psychiatric diseases, including Alzheimer’s dis-
ease and schizophrenia. Consequently, histone deacetylases (HDACs) are being aggressively pursued as ther-
apeutic targets. However, a fundamental knowledge gap exists regarding the expression and distribution of
HDACs in healthy individuals for comparison to disease states. Here, we report the first-in-human evaluation of
neuroepigenetic regulation in vivo. Using positron emission tomography with [11C]Martinostat, an imaging probe
selective for class I HDACs (isoforms 1, 2, and 3), we found that HDAC expression is higher in cortical gray matter
than in white matter, with conserved regional distribution patterns within and between healthy individuals. Among
gray matter regions, HDAC expression was lowest in the hippocampus and amygdala. Through biochemical profil-
ing of postmortem human brain tissue, we confirmed that [11C]Martinostat selectively binds HDAC isoforms 1, 2,
and 3, the HDAC subtypes most implicated in regulating neuroplasticity and cognitive function. In human stem cell–
derived neural progenitor cells, pharmacologic-level doses of Martinostat induced changes in genes closely
associated with synaptic plasticity, including BDNF (brain-derived neurotrophic factor) and SYP (synaptophysin),
as well as genes implicated in neurodegeneration, including GRN (progranulin), at the transcript level, in concert
with increased acetylation at both histone H3 lysine 9 and histone H4 lysine 12. This study quantifies HDAC expres-
sion in the living human brain and provides the foundation for gaining unprecedented in vivo epigenetic infor-
mation in health and disease.
INTRODUCTION
Disorders of the central nervous system (CNS), including Alzheimer’s
disease (AD), schizophrenia, depression, and addiction, are increasingly
recognized to involve dysregulation of epigenetic machinery. Among all,
histone deacetylases (HDACs)—a family of chromatin-modifying en-
zymes that dynamically regulates gene transcription—are the most fre-
quently implicated (1, 2). A subset of HDACs has already been linked
to neuronal development, synaptic plasticity, and cognition (3, 4). For
example, postmortem human brain tissue analyses and in vivo rodent
studies exposed HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 as antagonists of learn-
ing and memory and contributors to AD and mood disorders (3, 5–9).
Genetic manipulations or pharmacologic inhibition of aberrant HDAC2
and HDAC3 activity rescued behavioral defects in rodent models of
both AD and mood disorders (6, 7, 10–14). HDAC inhibitors were also
proposed as a targeted treatment of frontotemporal lobar degeneration,
owing to mutations that cause haploinsufficiency of the progranulin-
encoding gene GRN (14). Collectively, these studies implicate a direct
relationship between the levels of class I HDACs (isoforms 1, 2, and 3)
and neuronal function.
In addition to the overall level of HDAC expression within the
brain, spatially localized variation of HDACs is also highly impactful
in neuronal plasticity, memory, and behavior. For example, intra-
hippocampal injection of short hairpin RNA against Hdac2 selectively
normalized HDAC2 levels and restored neuroplasticity-associated
gene transcription, synaptic density, and cognitive behavior in a mouse
model of AD (6). In contrast to the high level of hippocampal HDAC2
in animal models and postmortem human tissue from AD patients,
deficient HDAC2 expression was observed in the frontal cortex of post-
mortem AD tissue, highlighting the importance of tightly regulated lo-
calized HDAC expression (15). Analogously, focal genetic deletion of
Hdac3 in the hippocampus and the nucleus accumbens enhanced long-
term memory and acquisition of cocaine-associated place preference
in mice, respectively (5, 16). Although understanding of the full com-
pendium of genes under HDAC-dependent regulation in defined
regions of the brain is incomplete, HDAC2 chromatin immuno-
precipitation studies in hippocampal tissue have identified several
immediate-early genes (for example, BDNF and CDK5) involved in
learning and memory, as well as multiple genes involved in synaptic
plasticity (for example, SYP and SYT1) as downstream targets (3, 6, 17).
Collectively, these studies provide support that localized HDAC ex-
pression levels drive pivotal epigenetic mechanisms that modulate
neuronal function.
Although there is strong evidence for localized HDAC dysfunction
in CNS disease, epigenetic models cannot recapitulate dynamic human-
environment interactions and therefore may not accurately reflect
in vivo human biology. Moreover, until now, there has been no meth-
od to visualize in vivo epigenetic mechanisms in humans. We developed
the positron emission tomography (PET) epigenetic imaging agent,
[11C]Martinostat, previously described in rodents and nonhuman pri-
mates (NHPs) (12, 18, 19). Our previous work in rodents demonstrated
the specific and reversible binding properties of [11C]Martinostat and
that the agent engaged recombinant class I HDACs (isoforms 1, 2, and
3) and class IIb HDAC (isoform 6) with low nanomolar affinities (18).
Because [11C]Martinostat demonstrated excellent brain penetrance,
1Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, Mas-
sachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.
2Chemical Neurobiology Laboratory, Departments of Neurology and Psychiatry, Mas-
sachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author. Email: hooker@nmr.mgh.harvard.edu
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
10 August 2016
Vol 8 Issue 351 351ra106
1
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 it was used to determine whether clinically relevant HDAC inhibitors,
such as suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) and CI-994, crossed
the blood-brain barrier and exhibited target occupancy in rodents (12).
Most recently, we performed studies in NHPs to characterize the ki-
netic properties of [11C]Martinostat and to estimate nondisplaceable
binding of [11C]Martinostat with pharmacologic blockades in prepara-
tion for human studies (19). In addition to the brain, [11C]Martinostat
showed high specific binding and fast binding kinetics appropriate for
PET imaging in heart, pancreas, spleen, and kidneys (18, 19). Here, we
translate [11C]Martinostat for clinical research use and quantify hu-
man epigenetic regulation.
RESULTS
In vivo human PET imaging reveals conserved regional HDAC
expression patterns in the healthy brain
To visualize HDAC expression in the living human brain, we performed
[11C]Martinostat PET imaging on eight healthy volunteers (four males
and four females; mean age ± SD, 28.6 ± 7.6 years) (table S1). The uptake
of [11C]Martinostat reached a maximum at ~30 min after injection and
showed minimal decrease during the 90-min scan (fig. S1). The reten-
tion of radioactivity is a unique feature of [11C]Martinostat, which allows
for a stable quantification of HDAC expression levels. Regional heter-
ogeneity, such as different levels of [11C]Martinostat uptake between
gray and white matter tissues, was observed at the individual subject
level (Fig. 1). Quantitative analysis using compartmental modeling
on individual subjects’ dynamic PET data allowed us to determine the
distribution volume (VT), a measure of radiotracer binding that is nor-
malized to the activity present in circulating blood, and rate constants
describing the pharmacokinetics of [11C]Martinostat (fig. S1 and tables
S2 and S3). VT values were stable beyond 50 min, with less than 10%
variability when compared to the 90-min data (fig. S2).
Regional standardized uptake values from 60 to 90 min after radio-
tracer administration (SUV60-90 min), an image-based indicator of
binding to HDACs (Fig. 2A), correlated positively with VT values
(Fig. 2B). The image-based SUV60-90 min had less intersubject variabil-
ity [coefficient of variation (CV) is 11.2 to 19.2% across brain regions]
than the blood data–derived VT values (CV is 22.0 to 39.2% across
brain regions) (Fig. 2B). SUV60-90 min may therefore be an appropriate
surrogate outcome measurement for VT and can be used in future
studies to eliminate arterial blood sampling and reduce sample size
because of its smaller variation. As with all surrogate measures, vali-
dation relative to a full treatment of the data using arterial blood in
each patient population will be required.
Group-level analyses showed that the average gray matter SUV60-90 min
was nearly double that of white matter (Fig. 2C, fig. S3, and table S4),
and heterogeneous binding was observed among gray matter regions
examined. Besides the white matter, the lowest [11C]Martinostat up-
take was observed in the hippocampus and amygdala, and the highest was
observed in the putamen and cerebellum (Fig. 2C, fig. S3, and table S4).
To facilitate intersubject comparison of regional HDAC distribution, we
normalized regional SUV60-90 min to individual subjects’ white matter
SUV60-90 min as SUV60-90 min ratios (SUVR60-90 min). SUVR60-90 min
showed that the regional distribution patterns of [11C]Martinostat bind-
ing were consistent in all subjects (Fig. 2C) and on consecutive scans in
single subjects. In preliminary test/retest scans (3 hours apart) in the
same individual, SUVR60-90 min showed less than 3% variability (fig. S4).
Ex vivo biochemistry of postmortem tissue confirms
that Martinostat binds to HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3
in the healthy brain
To assess regional differences in [11C]Martinostat binding in the
human brain, we biochemically profiled postmortem brain tissue
from gray matter regions [superior frontal gyrus (SFG), dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, and anterior cingulate] and a white
matter region [corpus callosum (CC)] (table S5). Quantitative protein
levels of HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC6 were determined by
Western blotting (Fig. 3A). Significantly lower amounts of HDAC2
and HDAC3 were found in the CC relative to the SFG (Fig. 3B). No
significant differences in HDAC expression were noted among the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, or anterior cingulate—all
gray matter regions (Fig. 3C). The average expression levels of HDAC2,
HDAC3, and HDAC6 were similar in the SFG (0.12 to 0.16 pmol/mg
total protein), with the notable exception of HDAC1 (1.7 pmol/mg
total protein). Although high HDAC1 expression was observed across
all brain regions tested (Fig. 3), we cannot exclude the possibility that
these values are driven by postmortem neuronal death (20, 21).
HDAC2 and HDAC3 expression level differences between the SFG
and the CC could not be attributed to nuclear density, according to
Fig. 1. [11C]Martinostat images of all subjects show high cortical
binding and distinct gray-white matter differences. (A) [11C]Martinostat
(injected dose, 4.7 mCi; specific activity, 1.1 mCi/nmol) images averaged
from 60 to 90 min after radiotracer injection (SUV60-90 min; SUV = radio-
activity per injected dose per body weight) from a representative sub-
ject overlaid on anatomical magnetic resonance (MR) image. (B) [11C]
Martinostat SUVR60-90 min images of individual subjects. To facilitate in-
tersubject comparison of regional HDAC distribution, we normalized re-
gional SUV60-90 min to an individual subject’s white matter SUV60-90 min as
SUV60-90 min ratios (SUVR60-90 min). The SUVR60-90 min images were also co-
registered with an MNI152 standard human atlas brain.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
10 August 2016
Vol 8 Issue 351 351ra106
2
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 quantification of the number of nuclei per field of view in postmortem
baboon brain tissue (fig. S5). We observed that the CC had an
increased number of nuclei compared to the SFG, which suggested
that lower HDAC expression in the CC was not due to a depletion
of cells in this brain region (fig. S5). As nuclear size (area per nu-
cleus) was smaller in the CC than in the SFG, the total nuclear area
per field of view was equivalent between these regions, further re-
futing that HDAC expression levels are driven by nuclear density.
Thermal shift assays evaluate target engagement, such that inhib-
itor binding increases the thermal stability of a target protein, as
compared to a vehicle control (22, 23). To determine the HDAC iso-
form selectivity of Martinostat, thermal
shift assays were performed with clarified
human brain homogenate and increasing
concentrations of Martinostat. Martino-
stat stabilized HDAC1, HDAC2, and
HDAC3 in both the SFG and the CC at
nanomolar concentrations (Fig. 4A, with
individual biological replicates in fig.
S6). No significant stabilization of either
HDAC6 or HDAC8 (negative control)
was observed. The former suggests differ-
ences between the accessibility of endoge-
nous HDAC6 complex and Martinostat
binding, relative to recombinant protein
(18). To assess heterogeneity in HDAC
isoform selectivity across gray matter re-
gions, we compared SFG binding to the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, hippo-
campus, and anterior cingulate. On the
basis of thermal stabilization data, Marti-
nostat exhibited a relatively uniform
binding profile in gray matter with target
engagement observed at concentrations
around and above 0.160 mM (Fig. 4B,
with individual biological replicates in
figs. S7 to S9).
Competition autoradiography was
performed in postmortem baboon brain
tissue to compare the specific binding of
[11C]Martinostat in gray andwhitematter.
[11C]Martinostat binding in white matter
was more biased by nonspecific uptake
than in gray matter (Fig. 4C). Together,
our in vivo imaging and ex vivo bio-
chemistry data indicate that [11C]Martino-
stat binds to a subset of class I HDACs
(isoforms 1, 2, and 3) across the human
and baboon brains.
In vitro biochemistry of human
neural progenitor cells reveals
downstream targets of
Martinostat-bound HDACs
To link [11C]Martinostat uptake with
downstream HDAC substrate signaling
and gene expression, we treated human
stem cell–derived neural progenitor cells
with increasing concentrations of Martinostat. Acetylation levels of
established class I HDAC substrates, histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) and
histone H4 lysine 12 (H4K12), were determined using Western blotting
(3, 24). Treatment with 2.5 and 5.0 mM Martinostat increased H3K9 and
H4K12 acetylation levels as compared to vehicle control (Fig. 5A).
Treatment with 5.0 mM Martinostat elevated acetylation to a level
equivalent to or greater than 10 mM SAHA (Fig. 5A). Messenger RNA
(mRNA) transcript levels of memory-related (3, 6, 24), neuroplasticity-
related (3), and neurological disease–related genes (17) were measured
through quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Treatment with
2.5 and/or 5.0 mM Martinostat increased brain-derived neurotrophic
Fig. 2. Small intersubject variation of localized regional [11C]Martinostat binding in the human brain.
(A) Mean images (left) and standard deviation (inset, to the lower right of each composite image) of
SUV60-90 min from healthy volunteers (n = 8). The images are overlaid onto the MNI152 standard brain, where
x, y, and z indicate the coordinate of each image plane shown. (B) Correlation of regional VT values, derived
from a two-tissue compartmental model using metabolite-corrected arterial plasma as an input function and
SUV60-90 min. Data are means ± SD (n = 6 subjects), and each circle symbol represents a separate brain region
(n = 14 brain regions). P value determined with Pearson correlation analysis. (C) Regional SUV60-90 min and
SUV ratios (SUVR60-90 min) of cortical, subcortical, cerebellar, and white matter volumes of interest (VOIs).
Individual pairs of brain regions that are significantly different from each other are listed in table S4. Each
dashed line represents SUVR60-90 min from a single subject (n = 8).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
10 August 2016
Vol 8 Issue 351 351ra106
3
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 factor (BDNF), early growth response
protein 1 (EGR1), cyclin-dependent ki-
nase 5 (CDK5), synaptotagmin (SYT1),
synaptophysin (SYP), and progranulin
(GRN) expression compared to vehicle
control, but not frataxin (FXN) (Fig.
5B). Treatment with 2.5 mM Martinostat
elevated BDNF and SYP (about 20- and
10-fold, respectively) to a level equivalent
to or greater than 10 mM SAHA (Fig.
5B). Together, these results indicate
that Martinostat engages the subset
HDACs that deacetylate targets includ-
ing H3K9 and H4K12, to regulate
downstream genes important for neuro-
plasticity (BDNF, EGR1, CDK5, SYT1,
SYP, and GRN).
DISCUSSION
This first-in-human epigenetic imaging
study with [11C]Martinostat establishes
that HDACs are highly expressed through-
out the healthy brain with region-specific
distribution, including distinct differences between gray and white
matter and differences between cortical and subcortical gray matter
regions. On the basis of our previous in vitro profiling with recombi-
nant HDACs (18) and our ex vivo profiling with postmortem human
and baboon brain tissues, the [11C]Martinostat signal in the brain ori-
ginated from binding class I HDACs (isoforms 1, 2, and 3), which are
relevant to cognition, memory, and mood regulation (3, 13, 16, 25).
Notably, Martinostat stabilized these isoforms at a concentration of
~0.1 mM, which is consistent with the imaging-derived dissociation
constant (Kd) for [11C]Martinostat in the NHP brain (18). In contrast
Fig. 3. HDAC2 and HDAC3 expression lev-
els are higher in cortical gray matter than
in white matter. Whole-cell lysates were
prepared from postmortem human SFG and
CC (n = 3 replicate donor pools with two do-
nors per pool), as well as dorsolateral pre-
frontal cortex (DLPFC), hippocampus
(Hipp), and anterior cingulate (Ant Cing)
(n = 3 replicate pools with three donors
per pool). (A) Equivalent amounts of total
protein were compared to human recom-
binant HDAC standards through Western
blotting. #The HDAC2 recombinant standard
was tagged with glutathione S-transferase
(GST), resulting in increased molecular weight.
(B and C) Comparison of HDAC expression
between white matter (CC) and gray mat-
ter (SFG) regions (B) and among different
gray matter regions (C). HDAC immuno-
reactive band intensity values were normalized
to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
(GAPDH) intensity values. HDAC expression
levels were calculated per milligram of total
extracted protein. Solid lines represent mean ex-
pression values. Donor pools are denoted by
black, gray, and open circles. P values were
determined by unpaired t test (B) and ordi-
nary one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
(a = 0.05 with Tukey’s multiple comparisons
correction) (C).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
10 August 2016
Vol 8 Issue 351 351ra106
4
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 with previous in vitro recombinant inhibition data (18), Martinostat
did not appear to stabilize HDAC6 in the brain regions that we as-
sessed, although it is worth noting that the recombinant assay provided
a more than fivefold lower median inhibitory concentration for
HDAC6 when compared to isoforms 1, 2, and 3. At high concen-
trations, a-tubulin acetylation may be
increased by Martinostat, thus impli-
cating potential HDAC6 binding at
therapeutic-relevant concentrations.
Our imaging data revealed that in vivo
HDAC expression is higher in cortical
gray matter than in white matter, which
was confirmed for HDAC2 and HDAC3
by postmortem human tissue analyses.
We postulate that HDAC complexes in
each brain tissue type may affect the se-
lectivity of Martinostat and other HDAC
inhibitors, including those currently used
as U.S. Food and Drug Administration–
approved drugs. HDAC complex–
directed selectivity of HDAC inhibitors
has been shown previously through che-
moproteomic approaches (26, 27), and
additional work will be required to elu-
cidate the HDAC complexes most repre-
sented by the [11C]Martinostat signal.
Beyond regional differences in HDAC
distribution, the most striking observation
was the consistency of [11C]Martinostat
binding patterns between individual sub-
jects. Because epigenetic machinery, and
thus HDAC expression, is a highly dy-
namic process, we did not fully expect a
spatially conserved pattern of HDAC
expression between individuals. This
result not only suggests that HDAC ex-
pression is tightly regulated and may
represent a state function, but also re-
iterates the importance of localized levels
of HDACs as they directly relate to gene
transcription (1). We anticipate that re-
gional [11C]Martinostat uptake differ-
ences between healthy and diseased
individuals will be detectable given the
conversed baseline expression that we
have measured. The use of [11C]Marti-
nostat imaging may eventually enable
precision medicine approaches for dis-
ease stratification and treatment based
on epigenetic aberrations in the human
brain. As hippocampal HDAC2 over-
expression has been found in postmor-
tem brain tissue from AD patients (6),
[11C]Martinostat PET imaging holds
great potential for detecting aberrant
hippocampal HDAC expression and as-
sessing novel HDAC therapeutics in AD
patients.
Because we envision and will apply [11C]Martinostat to measure
HDAC expression in patient populations, it is critical that the out-
come measurements are reliable, reproducible, and noninvasive. By
comparing the standard deviation of the mean of VT and SUV60-90 min
across brain regions, we found that intersubject variability was smaller
Fig. 4. Martinostat engages HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 in the human brain. (A) Whole-cell lysates
were prepared from postmortem human SFG and CC (n = 3 replicate donor pools with two donors per
pool). Thermal shift assays were performed with increasing concentrations of Martinostat (0, 0.0032, 0.016,
0.080, 0.40, 2.0, and 10 mM). Thermal stabilization of HDACs 1, 2, 3, 6, and 8 was compared through West-
ern blotting with scaled immunoreactive band intensity values represented as an averaged heat map
(n = 3). The imaging-derived dissociation constant (Kd) for [11C]Martinostat in NHP brain is indicated by the
black arrow (19). See fig. S6 for original Western blotting data. (B) Whole-cell lysates were prepared from
postmortem human SFG (n = 3 replicate donor pools with two donors per pool), as well as dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, and anterior cingulate (n = 3 replicate donor pools with three donors
per pool). Thermal shift assays were performed with increasing concentrations of Martinostat (0, 0.16,
0.80, 4.0, 20, and 100 mM). Thermal stabilization of HDACs 1, 2, 3, 6, and 8 was compared through
Western blotting with scaled immunoreactive band intensity values represented as an averaged heat
map (n = 3). See figs. S7 to S9 for original Western blotting data. (C) Baboon brain (n = 1) was sectioned to
include gray matter and white matter regions in the same slice. Tissue was coincubated with ~100 mCi of
[11C]Martinostat and either 0 or 2 mM nonradiolabeled Martinostat. Grayscale autoradiographic images
were colored using a standard lookup table (royal scale in Image J) to reflect [11C]Martinostat intensity
(left). Region-specific baseline and blocking intensity values were quantitated from each slice (right). Data
are means ± SD (n = 22 0-mM slices, n = 10 2-mM slices; one image per slice; one region of interest per
brain region). P values were determined by ordinary two-way ANOVA (a = 0.05 with Sidak’s multiple com-
parisons correction).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
10 August 2016
Vol 8 Issue 351 351ra106
5
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 using SUV60-90 min analysis than VT. These results support the use of
SUV60-90 min in future studies to eliminate arterial blood sampling
when patient enrollment would be limited by the invasiveness and
risk of this procedure. Perhaps as important, PET studies with [11C]
Martinostat may be sufficiently powered with a smaller sample size
when SUV60-90 min is chosen as the outcome measurement instead of
VT. However, validation studies will be required to evaluate whether
SUVs are appropriate surrogates for VT values in different patient
populations.
To begin to connect HDAC imaging with [11C]Martinostat to gene
regulation in the human brain, we compared mRNA transcript level
changes elicited by pharmacologically relevant doses of Martinostat in
human stem cell–derived neural progenitor cells. The concentrations
of Martinostat used to treat neural progenitor cells were ~1000-fold
higher than tracer-level doses used for in vivo [11C]Martinostat imag-
ing. Tracer-level doses are intended to achieve low occupancy and thus
should not perturb HDAC enzyme activity and downstream gene ex-
pression. However, by using pharmacologically relevant doses for neural
progenitor cell studies, the downstream targets of Martinostat-bound
HDACs were revealed and provide insight into imaging signal in-
terpretations. For example, these data suggest that in regions where
[11C]Martinostat binding in the human brain is lowest, such as the
hippocampus, the levels of HDAC-regulated genes, such as BDNF, are
elevated. The hippocampus was previously shown to be consistently
enriched in BDNF (17, 28–31).
Besides genes implicated in memory and neuroplasticity, Martinostat
enhanced the mRNA expression of GRN encoding the glycoprotein
progranulin. GRN mutations are a major cause of autosomal domi-
nant frontotemporal lobar degeneration (14). The demonstration here
that Martinostat treatment increases GRN mRNA levels supports the
value of HDAC-targeted therapies as a disease-modifying treatment
for this type of dementia. Moreover, because HDAC inhibitors are
the subject of current clinical investigation for frontotemporal lobar
degeneration, measuring HDAC expression in the human brain with
[11C]Martinostat imaging may provide a critically needed tool for
determining optimal doses of therapeutics and for patient stratification
should levels of HDACs change in the disease state.
We recognize several limitations in our current study. First, the im-
aging data presented here are from a cohort of eight healthy subjects and
thus we cannot characterize changes in “normal” HDAC expression (for
example, as a function of age). Future studies will expand our imag-
ing cohort to include more healthy subjects as well as multiple HDAC
dysfunction-associated patient populations, including AD and schizo-
phrenia, to investigate the in vivo relevance of HDAC expression in
neurological and psychiatric diseases. Another limitation is that quan-
titative HDAC levels in postmortem brain tissue are relative to recombi-
nant HDAC standards and do not reflect the absolute values of HDAC
expression in the living brain, as postmortem HDAC levels may be
affected by artifacts such as postmortem interval. Additionally, owing
to the low throughput of thermal shift assays with Western blot–based
detection and limited tissue availability, we found it necessary to pool
multiple postmortem brain samples into three biological replicates,
rather than analyze individual thermal shift assays for each donor,
which may have revealed a higher variability of Martinostat selectivity.
Last, neural progenitor cell studies uncovered only a subset of down-
stream Martinostat-bound HDAC substrates and gene targets. Future
studies using acetyl proteomic profiling, RNA sequencing, and chemo-
proteomics are needed to fully understand the biological pathways
detected by [11C]Martinostat.
In conclusion, this first-in-human epigenetic imaging study reveals
that HDACs are highly expressed throughout the healthy brain with a
conserved regional distribution between individuals. Our study un-
covers region-specific variations in HDAC inhibitor binding, which
we postulate is due to differences between the HDAC complex iden-
tities in those regions. Together, our neuroimaging and biochemical
Fig. 5. Martinostat increases histone acetylation and gene expression
levels in human neural progenitor cells. Human neural progenitor cells
were treated with DMSO (Veh), Martinostat (MSTAT; 0.5, 2.5, or 5.0 mM),
and SAHA (10 mM) for 24 hours. (A) Whole-cell lysates were prepared (n =
3). #Because treatment with 5.0 mM Martinostat was toxic to cells, whole-
cell lysates from three replicates were combined into one pool to obtain
sufficient protein for this dose. Equivalent amounts of total protein were
compared through Western blotting. Histone acetylation immunoreactive
band intensity values were normalized to GAPDH intensity values. Data are
means ± SD (n = 3). P values compare drug treatments to Veh, de-
termined by repeated-measures two-way ANOVA (a = 0.05 with Dun-
nett’s multiple comparisons correction). (B) RNA was extracted (n = 3)
and converted into complementary DNA (cDNA). mRNA transcript levels of
memory/neuronal plasticity–related (BDNF, EGR1, CDK5, SYT1, and SYP) and
monogenic neurological disorder–related (GRN and FXN) genes were com-
pared through qPCR and normalized to GAPDH mRNA levels. Data are
means ± SEM (n = 3 cDNA per condition with three technical qPCR replicates
per cDNA). P values compare drug treatments to Veh, determined by
repeated-measures two-way ANOVA (a = 0.05 with Dunnett’s multiple
comparisons correction).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
10 August 2016
Vol 8 Issue 351 351ra106
6
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 experiments provide a critical foundation for how to quantify epigenetic
activity in the living brain and in turn accomplish HDAC inhibition in
the CNS as a therapy for human brain disorders.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
Our main research objective was to quantify in vivo regional HDAC
expression in the healthy human brain, using [11C]Martinostat PET.
As a first-in-human PET imaging study, a cohort of eight individuals
was included to evaluate intrasubject and intersubject variability of
[11C]Martinostat uptake. These are critical information for appropri-
ate power calculations when designing future studies. No data from
the eight subjects were excluded as outliers for [11C]Martinostat up-
take values. Regional VT and SUVs were the image-based endpoints
assessed. We furthered our imaging findings through ex vivo biochem-
istry to ascribe the HDAC subtype selectivity of Martinostat using hu-
man and NHP brain tissues. Thermal shift and HDAC expression
level assays included three biological replicates, with lysates pooled
from two to three human donors per replicate. Nuclear density and
autoradiographic assays included a minimum of four NHP brain
slices per region from one baboon (Papio anubis). For these assays,
we excised a contiguous section of baboon brain spanning a gray and
white matter boundary to remove external variables from our analyses.
The availability of an intact baboon brain is very rare; thus, we were
only able to access one biological replicate through multiple slices.
We also furthered our imaging findings through in vitro analyses of
Martinostat-dependent substrate acetylation and gene expression levels.
Acetylation and mRNA profiling assays included three biological repli-
cates of human neural progenitor cells. Imaging and biochemical studies
were not blinded.
Participants
Eight participants (four females and four males; mean age ± SD,
28.6 ± 7.6 years) were included in this study (eIND #123154). Partic-
ipants were healthy volunteers with no history of hepatic, renal, neu-
rological, or psychiatric disease and were not taking any prescription
medication, as evaluated by medical examinations. Participants had
not smoked tobacco products within the past 5 years and were not
using any illicit drugs, as assessed by a urine drug test (Discover 12
Panel Test Card, American Screening Corp). Additionally, a serum
pregnancy test (Sure-Vue serum hCG-STAT, Fisher HealthCare) was
performed for female participants to ensure no pregnancy at the time
of the scan. Participants provided written informed consent to take part
in the study, which was approved by the Institutional Review Board and
the Radioactive Drug Research Committee at Massachusetts General
Hospital. Volunteers were compensated for their participation in the study.
Radiosynthesis of [11C]Martinostat
[11C]Martinostat was synthesized as described in Supplementary
Methods.
MR/PET imaging
Participants had no magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or PET con-
traindications to safely undergo brain imaging. An arterial line (A-line)
was placed in the radial artery of one arm, and an intravenous catheter
was placed in the antecubital vein of the other arm. A licensed nuclear
medicine technologist administered [11C]Martinostat into the intra-
venous catheter as a manual bolus, and an experienced nurse practition-
er drew blood samples from the A-line during the scan to determine
plasma radioactivity and radioactive metabolites. Participants were
instructed to remain still for the total duration of each scan. PET and
MRI images were acquired on a 3T Siemens TIM Trio with a BrainPET
insert (Siemens). A PET-compatible circularly polarized transmit coil
and an eight-channel receive array coil were used for MRI data acqui-
sition. A high-resolution anatomical scan using a multi-echo MPRAGE
(magnetization-prepared rapid acquisition gradient echo) sequence [rep-
etition time (TR), 2530 ms; echo time 1 (TE1), 1.64 ms; TE2, 3.49 ms;
TE3, 5.35 ms; TE4, 7.21 ms; inversion time (TI), 1200 ms; flip angle, 7°;
and isotropic resolution, 1 mm] was acquired.
Dynamic PET image acquisition was initiated concomitant with
the start of intravenous bolus injection of ~5 mCi (4.8 ± 0.4 mCi
for the eight scans) [11C]Martinostat to the subject. PET data were ac-
quired for 90 min, stored in list mode format, and binned into 28 frames
of progressively longer duration (10 s × 8, 20 s × 3, 30 s × 2, 60 s ×
1, 120 s × 1, 180 s × 1, 300 s × 8, and 600 s × 4). The corresponding
images were reconstructed using the three-dimensional ordinary Poisson
ordered-subset expectation maximization (3D OP-OSEM) algorithm
with detector efficiency, decay, dead time, attenuation, and scatter cor-
rections applied. The attenuation correction map was derived using a
Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM)–based, pseudo–computed to-
mography method (32), which combines segmentation and atlas-based
approaches. Simultaneously collected MR sequences consisting of an
echo-planar imaging readout were used to measure subject motion
during the scan and an MR-based motion correction was applied to
the PET data (33). The final PET images were reconstructed into 153
slices with 256 × 256 pixels and a 1.25-mm isotropic voxel size, in the
units of radioactivity concentrations (becquerels per milliliter) and
SUVs (mean radioactivity per injected dose per weight). Three subjects
completed a second PET scan, which was accomplished 3 hours after
the first scan on the same day, using identical imaging methods.
Image analyses
Dynamic PET data were motion-corrected to a late time point image
(frame 20; 39 to 44 min after radiotracer injection) of the time series
using rigid body linear registration (6 df) implemented in FSL [FMRIB
(Oxford Centre for Functional MRI of the Brain) Software Library]
(MCFLIRT) (34). A PET mean image from the motion-corrected time
series was calculated for each subject and registered and resampled to the
subject’s T1-weighted structural scan (MPRAGE) using spmregister from
FreeSurfer (http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu) (35). The PET mean
image was further registered to the Montreal Neurological Institute
(MNI) space using a linear [FLIRT (FMRIB’s linear image registration
tool)] and a nonlinear [FNIRT (FMRIB’s nonlinear image registra-
tion tool)] algorithm implemented in FSL (http://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/
fsl) (36). Finally, dynamic PET images (in both radioactivity concen-
tration and SUV units) were normalized to the MNI space, using a
combined transformation matrix derived from the PET mean image,
for further analyses.
Kinetic modeling was performed using PMOD 3.4 (PMOD Tech-
nologies Ltd). Twenty-eight VOIs were defined according to the Auto-
mated Anatomical Labeling human brain atlas distributed with PMOD
(37). A two-tissue compartmental model was applied to the regional
time-activity curves (TACs) extracted from the VOIs and using the
metabolite-corrected arterial plasma as input function to derive VT
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
10 August 2016
Vol 8 Issue 351 351ra106
7
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 and microparameters describing the pharmacokinetics of the radio-
tracer (table S3). The following equation was used for compartmental
model fitting:
dCNDðtÞ
dt
¼ K1CP t
ð Þ �
k2 þ k3
ð
ÞCND t
ð Þ þ k4CS t
ð Þ
dCSðtÞ
dt
¼ k3CND t
ð Þ � k4CS t
ð Þ
where CP is the arterial input function, CND represents the nondis-
placeable compartment, CS represents the specific binding compart-
ment, and CND + CS is the radioactivity that we measured with PET.
The minimum scan duration required for stable VT value estima-
tion was also evaluated (fig. S2). An averaged SUV image (SUV60-90 min)
was calculated from 60 to 90 min after radiotracer injection. Regional
cortical VT and SUV60-90 min values were combined for cortical lobes
using a weighted average to reduce the total number of VOIs (resulting
in a total of 14 VOIs). Voxel-wise, group mean, and standard deviation
maps of the SUV60-90 min were calculated and overlaid on an MNI152
template brain after spatial smoothing with a 6-mm full width at half max-
imum Gaussian filter (Fig. 2A). In addition, SUV60-90 min values were nor-
malized to individual subjects’ white matter SUV60-90 min (SUVR60-90 min)
to evaluate intersubject variability for different VOIs (Fig. 2B).
Human tissue samples
Postmortem frozen human brain tissue was obtained from the Na-
tional Institutes of Health (NIH) NeuroBioBank; specifically, tissue
was obtained from the Harvard Brain Tissue Resource Center, Univer-
sity of Miami Brain Endowment Bank, Human Brain and Spinal Fluid
Resource Center, and Brain Tissue Donation Program at the University
of Pittsburgh Medical Center. For all donors, informed consent was ob-
tained from next of kin. Donor brains had a neuropathology diagnosis
of normal (table S5). Tissue lysates were prepared as described in Sup-
plementary Methods.
HDAC expression levels
Known concentrations of recombinant HDAC enzymes (Reaction Bi-
ology Corp KDA-21-365, KDA-21-277, and KDA-21-213; Abcam
ab82071) were diluted in twofold increments and compared to 12 mg
of total protein from human brain lysates (n = 3 replicate pools
per region) through Western blotting. Notably, recombinant HDAC2
contained a GST tag, which increased its detected size. Immuno-
reactive band intensity was quantified with ImageJ (Image Proces-
sing and Analysis in Java, NIH) (38). Standard curves were calculated
for each recombinant HDAC isoform with GraphPad Prism software,
and the concentrations of HDACs per lane of lysate were determined.
Histone acetylation changes in human neural progenitor
cells with Martinostat and SAHA
Human induced pluripotent stem cell–derived neural progenitor cells
from a healthy control subject fibroblast cell line GM08330 (Coriell In-
stitute for Medical Research) were generated as described in (39) and
cultured as described in (40) and Supplementary Methods. Cell pellets
from human neural progenitor cells (n = 3 per condition) were lysed
in radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (Boston BioProducts
#BP-115) with EDTA-free protease inhibitors (Sigma #4693159001)
and rocked at 4°C for 30 min. The lysate was centrifuged at 14,000 rpm
at 4°C for 25 min, and the supernatant was collected. Protein quanti-
fication was determined by a bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Scien-
tific #23227). Lysates were diluted to 800 ng/ml in RIPA buffer and
stored at −80°C until ready for use. H3K9 and H4K12 acetylation levels
were measured by Western blotting. Mean immunoreactive band inten-
sities from each replicate were quantified with ImageJ. Gene expression
changes were determined as described in Supplementary Methods.
Statistical analyses
Statistical tests were performed using GraphPad Prism (Prism6, GraphPad
Software Inc.). For PET imaging analyses, a nonparametric Friedman
test (a = 0.05 with Dunn’s multiple comparisons correction) was carried
out to compare SUV60-90 min between brain regions (Fig. 2 and table
S4). A Pearson correlation analysis was performed between VT and
SUV60-90 min values for the 14 VOIs (Fig. 2B) to evaluate whether an
image-based outcome measurement (SUV60-90 min) is an appropriate
surrogate to that estimated with the full kinetic modeling data (VT). Dif-
ferences in postmortem HDAC expression levels as well as differences
in nuclear density, size, and total area between the SFG and the CC
were evaluated with an unpaired t test (Fig. 3B and fig. S5). Differences
in postmortem HDAC expression levels between the dorsolateral pre-
frontal cortex, hippocampus, and anterior cingulate were evaluated with
an ordinary one-way ANOVA (a = 0.05 with Tukey’s multiple compar-
isons correction) (Fig. 3C). Differences in histone acetylation and
gene expression levels as compared to vehicle were evaluated with a
repeated-measures two-way ANOVA (a = 0.05 with Dunnett’s mul-
tiple comparisons correction) (Fig. 5). In autoradiographic assays, dif-
ferences between [11C]Martinostat baseline and blocking intensity
values, in gray matter and white matter, were evaluated with an ordi-
nary two-way ANOVA (a = 0.05 with Sidak’s multiple comparisons
correction) (Fig. 4C).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/8/351/351ra106/DC1
Methods
Fig. S1. TACs and compartmental model fitting (two-tissue compartmental model) results for
superior frontal cortex and white matter.
Fig. S2. Stability of outcome measurement (VT) as a function of scan duration.
Fig. S3. Regional SUV60-90 min from all brain regions analyzed.
Fig. S4. Same day test-retest reproducibility of [11C]Martinostat SUVR60-90 min.
Fig. S5. Nuclear density, size, and total area in postmortem baboon brain tissue.
Fig. S6. Martinostat thermal shift assay in human SFG and CC biological replicates 1, 2, and 3.
Fig. S7. Martinostat thermal shift assay across human gray matter biological replicate 1.
Fig. S8. Martinostat thermal shift assay across human gray matter biological replicate 2.
Fig. S9. Martinostat thermal shift assay across human gray matter biological replicate 3.
Table S1. Biometric information for PET imaging participants.
Table S2. Goodness of fit for one- and two-tissue compartmental models to regional PET data.
Table S3. Kinetic rate constants and regional VT for [11C]Martinostat.
Table S4. Statistical comparison of [11C]Martinostat between different brain regions.
Table S5. Sample information for postmortem human brain tissue.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. J. Penney, L.-H. Tsai, Histone deacetylases in memory and cognition. Sci. Signal. 7, re12
(2014).
2. M. Haberland, R. L. Montgomery, E. N. Olson, The many roles of histone deacetylases in
development and physiology: Implications for disease and therapy. Nat. Rev. Genet. 10,
32–42 (2009).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
10 August 2016
Vol 8 Issue 351 351ra106
8
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 3. J.-S. Guan, S. J. Haggarty, E. Giacometti, J.-H. Dannenberg, N. Joseph, J. Gao, T. J. F. Nieland,
Y. Zhou, X. Wang, R. Mazitschek, J. E. Bradner, R. A. DePinho, R. Jaenisch, L.-H. Tsai, HDAC2
negatively regulates memory formation and synaptic plasticity. Nature 459, 55–60 (2009).
4. S. J. Haggarty, L.-H. Tsai, Probing the role of HDACs and mechanisms of chromatin-mediated
neuroplasticity. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 96, 41–52 (2011).
5. J. Haettig, D. P. Stefanko, M. L. Multani, D. X. Figueroa, S. C. McQuown, M. A. Wood, HDAC
inhibition modulates hippocampus-dependent long-term memory for object location in a
CBP-dependent manner. Learn. Mem. 18, 71–79 (2011).
6. J. Gräff, D. Rei, J.-S. Guan, W.-Y. Wang, J. Seo, K. M. Hennig, T. J. F. Nieland, D. M. Fass, P. F. Kao,
M. Kahn, S. C. Su, A. Samiei, N. Joseph, S. J. Haggarty, I. Delalle, L.-H. Tsai, An epigenetic
blockade of cognitive functions in the neurodegenerating brain. Nature 483, 222–226
(2012).
7. M. Kurita, T. Holloway, A. García-Bea, A. Kozlenkov, A. K. Friedman, J. L. Moreno, M. Heshmati,
S. A. Golden, P. J. Kennedy, N. Takahashi, D. M. Dietz, G. Mocci, A. M. Gabilondo, J. Hanks,
A. Umali, L. F. Callado, A. L. Gallitano, R. L. Neve, L. Shen, J. D. Buxbaum, M. H. Han, E. J. Nestler,
J. J. Meana, S. J. Russo, J. González-Maeso, HDAC2 regulates atypical antipsychotic responses
through the modulation of mGlu2 promoter activity. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 1245–1254 (2012).
8. M. Jakovcevski, R. Bharadwaj, J. Straubhaar, G. Gao, D. P. Gavin, I. Jakovcevski, A. C. Mitchell,
S. Akbarian, Prefrontal cortical dysfunction after overexpression of histone deacetylase 1.
Biol. Psychiatry 74, 696–705 (2013).
9. J. Gräff, N. F. Joseph, M. E. Horn, A. Samiei, J. Meng, J. Seo, D. Rei, A. W. Bero, T. X. Phan, F. Wagner,
E. Holson, J. Xu, J. Sun, R. L. Neve, R. H. Mach, S. J. Haggarty, L.-H. Tsai, Epigenetic priming
of memory updating during reconsolidation to attenuate remote fear memories. Cell 156,
261–276 (2014).
10. A. Fischer, F. Sananbenesi, X. Wang, M. Dobbin, L.-H. Tsai, Recovery of learning and
memory is associated with chromatin remodelling. Nature 447, 178–182 (2007).
11. H. E. Covington III, I. Maze, Q. C. LaPlant, V. F. Vialou, Y. N. Ohnishi, O. Berton, D. M. Fass, W. Renthal,
A. J. Rush III, E. Y. Wu, S. Ghose, V. Krishnan, S. J. Russo, C. Tamminga, S. J. Haggarty, E. J. Nestler,
Antidepressant actions of histone deacetylase inhibitors. J. Neurosci. 29, 11451–11460
(2009).
12. F. A. Schroeder, M. C. Lewis, D. M. Fass, F. F. Wagner, Y.-L. Zhang, K. M. Hennig, J. Gale,
W.-N. Zhao, S. Reis, D. D. Barker, E. Berry-Scott, S. W. Kim, E. L. Clore, J. M. Hooker, E. B. Holson,
S. J. Haggarty, T. L. Petryshen, A selective HDAC 1/2 inhibitor modulates chromatin and gene
expression in brain and alters mouse behavior in two mood-related tests. PLOS One 8, e71323
(2013).
13. G. Rumbaugh, S. E. Sillivan, E. D. Ozkan, C. S. Rojas, C. R. Hubbs, M. Aceti, M. Kilgore,
S. Kudugunti, S. V. Puthanveettil, J. D. Sweatt, J. Rusche, C. A. Miller, Pharmacological se-
lectivity within class I histone deacetylases predicts effects on synaptic function and
memory rescue. Neuropsychopharmacology 40, 2307–2316 (2015).
14. B. Cenik, C. F. Sephton, C. M. Dewey, X. Xian, S. Wei, K. Yu, W. Niu, G. Coppola, S. E. Coughlin,
S. E. Lee, D. R. Dries, S. Almeida, D. H. Geschwind, F.-B. Gao, B. L. Miller, R. V. Farese Jr., B. A. Posner,
G. Yu, J. Herz, Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (vorinostat) up-regulates progranulin tran-
scription: Rational therapeutic approach to frontotemporal dementia. J. Biol. Chem. 286,
16101–16108 (2011).
15. K. W. Anderson, J. Chen, M. Wang, N. Mast, I. A. Pikuleva, I. V. Turko, Quantification of histone
deacetylase isoforms in human frontal cortex, human retina, and mouse brain. PLOS One 10,
e0126592 (2015).
16. M. Malvaez, S. C. McQuown, G. A. Rogge, M. Astarabadi, V. Jacques, S. Carreiro, J. R. Rusche,
M. A. Wood, HDAC3-selective inhibitor enhances extinction of cocaine-seeking behavior in
a persistent manner. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 2647–2652 (2013).
17. Y. Zheng, W. Fan, X. Zhang, E. Dong, Gestational stress induces depressive-like and anxiety-like
phenotypes through epigenetic regulation of BDNF expression in offspring hippocampus.
Epigenetics 11, 150–162 (2016).
18. C. Wang, F. A. Schroeder, H.-Y. Wey, R. Borra, F. F. Wagner, S. Reis, S. W. Kim, E. B. Holson,
S. J. Haggarty, J. M. Hooker, In vivo imaging of histone deacetylases (HDACs) in the
central nervous system and major peripheral organs. J. Med. Chem. 57, 7999–8009
(2014).
19. H.-Y. Wey, C. Wang, F. A. Schroeder, J. Logan, J. C. Price, J. M. Hooker, Kinetic analysis and
quantification of [11C]Martinostat for in vivo HDAC imaging of the brain. ACS Chem. Neurosci.
6, 708–715 (2015).
20. F. H. Bardai, V. Price, M. Zaayman, L. Wang, S. R. D’Mello, Histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1) is a
molecular switch between neuronal survival and death. J. Biol. Chem. 287, 35444–35453 (2012).
21. J. Y. Kim, S. Shen, K. Dietz, Y. He, O. Howell, R. Reynolds, P. Casaccia, HDAC1 nuclear export
induced by pathological conditions is essential for the onset of axonal damage. Nat. Neurosci.
13, 180–189 (2010).
22. D. Martinez Molina, R. Jafari, M. Ignatushchenko, T. Seki, E. A. Larsson, C. Dan, L. Sreekumar,
Y. Cao, P. Nordlund, Monitoring drug target engagement in cells and tissues using the
cellular thermal shift assay. Science 341, 84–87 (2013).
23. R. Jafari, H. Almqvist, H. Axelsson, M. Ignatushchenko, T. Lundbäck, P. Nordlund, D. Martinez Molina,
The cellular thermal shift assay for evaluating drug target interactions in cells. Nat. Protoc.
9, 2100–2122 (2014).
24. S. Peleg, F. Sananbenesi, A. Zovoilis, S. Burkhardt, S. Bahari-Javan, R. C. Agis-Balboa, P. Cota,
J. L. Wittnam, A. Gogol-Doering, L. Opitz, G. Salinas-Riester, M. Dettenhofer, H. Kang, L. Farinelli,
W. Chen, A. Fischer, Altered histone acetylation is associated with age-dependent memory
impairment in mice. Science 328, 753–756 (2010).
25. M. Kilgore, C. A. Miller, D. M. Fass, K. M. Hennig, S. J. Haggarty, J. D. Sweatt, G. Rumbaugh,
Inhibitors of class 1 histone deacetylases reverse contextual memory deficits in a mouse
model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropsychopharmacology 35, 870–880 (2010).
26. M. Bantscheff, C. Hopf, M. M. Savitski, A. Dittmann, P. Grandi, A. M. Michon, J. Schlegl,
Y. Abraham, I. Becher, G. Bergamini, M. Boesche, M. Delling, B. Dümpelfeld, D. Eberhard,
C. Huthmacher, T. Mathieson, D. Poeckel, V. Reader, K. Strunk, G. Sweetman, U. Kruse,
G. Neubauer, N. G. Ramsden, G. Drewes, Chemoproteomics profiling of HDAC inhibitors
reveals selective targeting of HDAC complexes. Nat. Biotechnol. 29, 255–265 (2011).
27. I. Becher, A. Dittmann, M. M. Savitski, C. Hopf, G. Drewes, M. Bantscheff, Chemoproteomics
reveals time-dependent binding of histone deacetylase inhibitors to endogenous repressor
complexes. ACS Chem. Biol. 9, 1736–1746 (2014).
28. C. Rossi, A. Angelucci, L. Costantin, C. Braschi, M. Mazzantini, F. Babbini, M. E. Fabbri, L. Tessarollo,
L. Maffei, N. Berardi, M. Caleo, Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is required for
the enhancement of hippocampal neurogenesis following environmental enrichment.
Eur. J. Neurosci. 24, 1850–1856 (2006).
29. T. Falkenberg, A. K. Mohammed, B. Henriksson, H. Persson, B. Winblad, N. Lindefors,
Increased expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor mRNA in rat hippocampus is
associated with improved spatial memory and enriched environment. Neurosci. Lett.
138, 153–156 (1992).
30. H. S. Phillips, J. M. Hains, M. Armanini, G. R. Laramee, S. A. Johnson, J. W. Winslow, BDNF mRNA is
decreased in the hippocampus of individuals with Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron 7, 695–702 (1991).
31. M. J. Hawrylycz, E. S. Lein, A. L. Guillozet-Bongaarts, E. H. Shen, L. Ng, J. A. Miller,
L. N. van de Lagemaat, K. A. Smith, A. Ebbert, Z. L. Riley, C. Abajian, C. F. Beckmann,
A. Bernard, D. Bertagnolli, A. F. Boe, P. M. Cartagena, M. M. Chakravarty, M. Chapin, J. Chong,
R. A. Dalley, B. David Daly, C. Dang, S. Datta, N. Dee, T. A. Dolbeare, V. Faber, D. Feng,
D. R. Fowler, J. Goldy, B. W. Gregor, Z. Haradon, D. R. Haynor, J. G. Hohmann, S. Horvath,
R. E. Howard, A. Jeromin, J. M. Jochim, M. Kinnunen, C. Lau, E. T. Lazarz, C. Lee, T. A. Lemon,
L. Li, Y. Li, J. A. Morris, C. C. Overly, P. D. Parker, S. E. Parry, M. Reding, J. J. Royall, J. Schulkin,
P. A. Sequeira, C. R. Slaughterbeck, S. C. Smith, A. J. Sodt, S. M. Sunkin, B. E. Swanson,
M. P. Vawter, D. Williams, P. Wohnoutka, H. Ronald Zielke, D. H. Geschwind, P. R. Hof,
S. M. Smith, C. Koch, S. G. N. Grant, A. R. Jones, An anatomically comprehensive atlas of the
adult human transcriptome. Nature 489 391–399 (2012).
32. D. Izquierdo-Garcia, A. E. Hansen, S. Förster, D. Benoit, S. Schachoff, S. Fürst, K. T. Chen,
D. B. Chonde, C. Catana, An SPM8-based approach for attenuation correction combining
segmentation and nonrigid template formation: Application to simultaneous PET/MR brain
imaging. J. Nucl. Med. 55, 1825–1830 (2014).
33. C. Catana, T. Benner, A. van der Kouwe, L. Byars, M. Hamm, D. B. Chonde, C. J. Michel, G. El Fakhri,
M. Schmand, A. G. Sorensen, MRI-assisted PET motion correction for neurologic studies in
an integrated MR-PET scanner. J. Nucl. Med. 52, 154–161 (2011).
34. M. Jenkinson, P. Bannister, M. Brady, S. Smith, Improved optimization for the robust and ac-
curate linear registration and motion correction of brain images. Neuroimage 17, 825–841
(2002).
35. A. M. Dale, B. Fischl, M. I. Sereno, Cortical surface-based analysis: I. Segmentation and sur-
face reconstruction. Neuroimage 9, 179–194 (1999).
36. S. M. Smith, M. Jenkinson, M. W. Woolrich, C. F. Beckmann, T. E. Behrens, H. Johansen-Berg,
P. R. Bannister, M. De Luca, I. Drobnjak, D. E. Flitney, R. K. Niazy, J. Saunders, J. Vickers, Y. Zhang,
N. De Stefano, J. M. Brady, P. M. Matthews, Advances in functional and structural MR image
analysis and implementation as FSL. Neuroimage 23 (suppl 1), S208–S219 (2004).
37. N. Tzourio-Mazoyer, B. Landeau, D. Papathanassiou, F. Crivello, O. Etard, N. Delcroix, B. Mazoyer,
M. Joliot, Automated anatomical labeling of activations in SPM using a macroscopic ana-
tomical parcellation of the MNI MRI single-subject brain. Neuroimage 15, 273–289
(2002).
38. C. A. Schneider, W. S. Rasband, K. W. Eliceiri, NIH Image to ImageJ: 25 years of image
analysis. Nat. Methods 9, 671–675 (2012).
39. S. D. Sheridan, K. M. Theriault, S. A. Reis, F. Zhou, J. M. Madison, L. Daheron, J. F. Loring,
S. J. Haggarty, Epigenetic characterization of the FMR1 gene and aberrant neurodevelop-
ment in human induced pluripotent stem cell models of fragile X syndrome. PLOS One 6,
e26203 (2011).
40. W.-N. Zhao, C. Cheng, K. M. Theriault, S. D. Sheridan, L.-H. Tsai, S. J. Haggarty, A high-
throughput screen for Wnt/b-catenin signaling pathway modulators in human iPSC-
derived neural progenitors. J. Biomol. Screen. 17, 1252–1263 (2012).
Acknowledgments: We are grateful to U. Mahmood, S. Stufflebeam, and O. Johnson-Akeju for
consenting participants, and to E. Pierce and O. Johnson-Akeju for placing the arterial line in par-
ticipants. We thank J. Sore, G. Gautam, K. Phan, and S. To for technical assistance in radiotracer
synthesis and G. Arabasz, S. Hsu, M. Wentworth, and R. Butterfield for assistance with MR/PET
imaging. We also thank G. Van de Bittner and M. Riley for assistance with autoradiographic
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
10 August 2016
Vol 8 Issue 351 351ra106
9
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 experiments and L. Rogers for technical assistance with HDAC density experiments. Postmortem
tissue was obtained from the NIH NeuroBioBank (requests #100 and #250). Funding: This re-
search received funding from the National Institute on Drug Abuse of the NIH under grant
numbers R01DA030321 (to J.M.H.) and K99DA037928 (to H-Y.W.). This research was also
supported by the Harvard/MGH Nuclear Medicine Training Program from the Department of
Energy under grants DE-SC0008430 (to H-Y.W., T.M.G., and C.W.) and HHSN-271-2013-00030C
(to the Harvard Brain Tissue Resource Center). This research was carried out at the Athinoula
A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging at Massachusetts General Hospital, using resources
provided by the Center for Functional Neuroimaging Technologies, P41EB015896, a P41 Bio-
technology Resource Grant supported by the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bio-
engineering, NIH. This work was conducted with support from Harvard Catalyst and the Harvard
Clinical and Translational Science Center (National Center for Research Resources and the Na-
tional Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, NIH Award UL1 TR001102) and financial con-
tributions from Harvard University and its affiliated academic healthcare centers. Additional
support was provided by the Bluefield Project to Cure Frontotemporal Dementia. This work also
involved the use of instrumentation supported by the NIH Shared Instrumentation Grant
Program, specifically grants S10RR017208, S10RR026666, S10RR022976, S10RR019933, and
S10RR023401. Author contributions: H-Y.W., T.M.G., S.J.H., C.W., and J.M.H. designed the study.
H-Y.W., N.R.Z., and A.B. collected in vivo human imaging data. H-Y.W. and N.R.Z. analyzed in vivo
human imaging data. T.M.G., B.D.T., and F.A.S. collected ex vivo human biochemical data. T.M.G.
collected ex vivo NHP biochemical data. T.M.G. and J.M.H. analyzed ex vivo human and NHP
biochemical data. A.S. collected in vitro human NPC data. A.S., S.J.H., and T.M.G. analyzed in vitro
human NPC data. H-Y.W., T.M.G., N.R.Z., and A.S. performed statistical analyses. H-Y.W., T.M.G.,
N.R.Z., A.S., A.B., F.A.S., C.W., S.J.H., and J.M.H. wrote and edited the manuscript. Competing
interests: The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily re-
present the official views of Harvard Catalyst, Harvard University, and its affiliated academic
healthcare centers, or the NIH. Intellectual property (IP) has been filed around [11C]Martinostat
by J.M.H., C.W., and F.A.S. A portion of this IP has been licensed. S.J.H. has financial interests in
Rodin Therapeutics and is an inventor on HDAC inhibitor-related IP licensed to this entity that
is unrelated to the present study. Data and materials availability: Tissues were provided by
the Harvard Brain Tissue Resource Center, University of Miami Brain Endowment Bank, Human
Brain and Spinal Fluid Resource Center, and Brain Tissue Donation Program at the University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center.
Submitted 4 November 2015
Accepted 7 July 2016
Published 10 August 2016
10.1126/scitranslmed.aaf7551
Citation: H.-Y. Wey, T. M. Gilbert, N. R. Zürcher, A. She, A. Bhanot, B. D. Taillon, F. A. Schroeder,
C. Wang, S. J. Haggarty, J. M. Hooker, Insights into neuroepigenetics through human histone
deacetylase PET imaging. Sci. Transl. Med. 8, 351ra106 (2016).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
10 August 2016
Vol 8 Issue 351 351ra106
10
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Insights into neuroepigenetics through human histone deacetylase PET imaging
Schroeder, Changing Wang, Stephen J. Haggarty and Jacob M. Hooker
Hsiao-Ying Wey, Tonya M. Gilbert, Nicole R. Zürcher, Angela She, Anisha Bhanot, Brendan D. Taillon, Fredrick A.
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaf7551
, 351ra106351ra106.
8
Sci Transl Med 
supporting its use in monitoring and understanding brain pathologies like Alzheimer's disease.
subset HDACs that regulate downstream genes important for neuroplasticity, memory, and neurodegeneration, 
derived neural progenitor cells, Martinostat engaged the
−
ightly regulated epigenetic processes. In human stem cell
humans. The authors saw surprisingly conserved regions of HDAC expression in the healthy brain, suggesting t
brain. Martinostat was previously tested in rodents and nonhuman primates, and here, it is used for the first time in
 
developed and applied an HDAC imaging probe, called Martinostat, to visualize HDAC expression in the living
 
. therefore
et al
but their dynamic contribution to human disease development over time is unknown. Wey 
regulates gene transcription. In neurological disorders, HDACs change expression in regions throughout the brain, 
Certain enzymes called histone deacetylases, or HDACs, are part of the epigenetic machinery that
Brain epigenetics revealed
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/351/351ra106
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2016/08/08/8.351.351ra106.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/447/eaao4953.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/360/6394/1239.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/338/338ra66.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/7/310/310ra169.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/348/348ra96.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/351/351ra106#BIBL
This article cites 40 articles, 10 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
