  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
King’s Research Portal 
 
DOI:
10.1111/jhn.12530
Document Version
Peer reviewed version
Link to publication record in King's Research Portal
Citation for published version (APA):
Whelan, K., Martin, L. D., Staudacher, H. M., & Lomer, M. C. E. (2018). The low FODMAP diet in the
management of irritable bowel syndrome: an evidence-based review of FODMAP restriction, reintroduction and
personalisation in clinical practice. Journal of human nutrition and dietetics : the official journal of the British
Dietetic Association, 31(2), 239-255. https://doi.org/10.1111/jhn.12530
Citing this paper
Please note that where the full-text provided on King's Research Portal is the Author Accepted Manuscript or Post-Print version this may
differ from the final Published version. If citing, it is advised that you check and use the publisher's definitive version for pagination,
volume/issue, and date of publication details. And where the final published version is provided on the Research Portal, if citing you are
again advised to check the publisher's website for any subsequent corrections.
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the Research Portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright
owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognize and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
•Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the Research Portal for the purpose of private study or research.
•You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
•You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the Research Portal
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact librarypure@kcl.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.
Download date: 05. Jun. 2019
 1 
 
The low FODMAP diet in the management of irritable bowel syndrome: 
an evidence-based review of FODMAP restriction, reintroduction and 
personalisation in clinical practice 
Kevin Whelan1, Lee D Martin1, Heidi M Staudacher1,2,3, Miranda C E Lomer 1,2,4 
1 King's College London, Department of Nutritional Sciences, School of Life Course 
Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences & Medicine, London, United Kingdom  
2 Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, Department of Gastroenterology, 
London, United Kingdom. 
3 University of Queensland, Faculty of Medicine, Princess Alexandra Southside 
Clinical Unit, Australia 
4 Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, Department of Nutrition and 
Dietetics, London, United Kingdom 
 
Short title: Implementing the low FODMAP diet 
Corresponding author: Prof Kevin Whelan, King's College London, Department of 
Nutritional Sciences, Franklin Wilkins Building, 150 Stamford Street, London, SE1 
9NH, United Kingdom, kevin.whelan@kcl.ac.uk 
Conflicts of interest: KW and MCEL are co-inventors of a mobile application relating 
to the low FODMAP diet. 
Authorship: KW, LDM and MCEL designed the review and wrote the paper. KW drew 
figure 1. All authors contributed to intellectual development of the paper, 
commented critically on draft versions and approved the final version submitted for 
publication. 
 2 
 
Abstract 
Dietary restriction of fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides 
and polyols (FODMAPs) is effective in the management of functional gastrointestinal 
symptoms that occur in irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). Numerous reviews have 
been published regarding the evidence for their restriction in the low FODMAP diet, 
however few reviews discuss the implementation of the low FODMAP diet in 
practice. The aim of this review is to provide practical guidance on patient 
assessment and the implementation and monitoring of the low FODMAP diet. 
Broadly speaking, the low FODMAP diet consists of three stages: FODMAP 
restriction; FODMAP reintroduction; and FODMAP personalisation and these can be 
covered in at least two dietetic appointments. The first appointment focuses on 
confirmation of diagnosis, comprehensive symptom and dietary assessment, 
detailed description of FODMAPs and their association with symptom induction, 
followed by counselling regarding FODMAP restriction. Dietary counselling should be 
tailored to individual needs and appropriate resources provided. At the second 
appointment, symptoms and diet are re-assessed and, if restriction has successfully 
reduced IBS symptoms, education is provided on FODMAP reintroduction to identify 
foods triggering symptoms. Following this, the patient can follow FODMAP 
personalisation whereby a less restrictive diet is consumed that excludes their 
personal FODMAP triggers and enables a more diverse dietary intake. This review 
provides evidence and practice guidance to assist in delivering high quality clinical 
service in relation to the low FODMAP diet.  
 
 3 
 
1.0 Introduction 
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a debilitating functional gastrointestinal disorder 
characterised by abdominal pain associated with a change in bowel habit and 
features of disordered defaecation. The global prevalence of IBS is 11.2% and it is 
more common in women and people under 50 years of age (1). It is associated with 
decreased quality of life (2) and lower self-rated health compared with other 
functional gastrointestinal disorders or chronic conditions such as asthma and 
rheumatoid arthritis (3). Thus, there is increased use of healthcare (4), significant 
interference with daily activities and increased absenteeism from work (5,6) 
compared to those without IBS.  
The pathophysiology of IBS involves a complex interaction between visceral 
hypersensitivity, dysmotility, dysbiosis of the gastrointestinal microbiota, alterations 
in the brain-gut axis and psychosocial factors (7). The management of IBS involves a 
range of approaches including lifestyle, psychological and pharmacological (8). 
However, pharmacological treatments generally only target one symptom of this 
multi-symptom syndrome and a technical review reported high levels of evidence for 
only one of nine pharmacological treatments for IBS (8). Consequently, dietary 
modification is increasingly used to manage symptoms of IBS.  
Dietary triggers are reported to be central to symptom generation in 50-84% of 
patients with IBS (2,9,10) and for many years dietary management focussed on altering 
specific dietary components (e.g. dietary fibre, lactose) (11,12). More recently, dietary 
restriction of fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides and 
polyols (FODMAPs) have been investigated in the management of functional gut 
symptoms in IBS. 
The mechanisms and efficacy of the low FODMAP diet have been reviewed in depth 
elsewhere (13). There have also been at least five systematic reviews of the low 
FODMAP diet broadly reporting improvements in abdominal pain, bloating and in 
some integrated symptom scores (14–18), However, some of these systematic reviews 
have included uncontrolled and before-and-after trials (16–18). To date there are at 
 4 
 
least 10 randomised controlled controls or randomised comparative trials of the low 
FODMAP diet, most of which demonstrate its efficacy compared with control, 
resulting in a clinical response in 50-80% of IBS patients (13) . These have varied from 
highly controlled feeding trials (19,20) to studies of the provision of dietary counselling 
by an experienced dietitian (21,22). However, a systematic review of the quality of 
randomised controlled trials of the low FODMAP diet identified limitations in their 
design, including high risk of bias for blinding of participants and outcome 
measurement, selection of control groups and objective evaluation of data (23). 
However, it is also recognised that ensuring participant blinding and identifying 
appropriate controls can be very challenging in dietary intervention trials (24). 
In view of the effectiveness demonstrated in these studies, the low FODMAP diet is 
now included in National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) guidelines 
for IBS management in primary care in the United Kingdom (UK) (25) and as ‘second 
line’ intervention by the British Dietetic Association guidelines 
(26). It is 
recommended that general ‘healthy eating for IBS’ advice (so-called ‘first line’ 
advice) be attempted prior to the low FODMAP diet, as two randomised comparative 
trials have shown this to be as effective as the low FODMAP diet for some symptom 
outcomes and is likely to be both easier to advise and easier to follow (27,28). 
The publication of research and guidelines recommending the use of the low 
FODMAP diet as second line advice has increased demand for dietitian-led low 
FODMAP services and a greater understanding of the low FODMAP diet is required 
among dietitians, gastroenterologists and general practitioners. However, given the 
large number of previously published trials, systematic reviews and guidelines in this 
area, extensive discussion of the mechanisms and evidence for the low FODMAP diet 
is beyond the scope of this review. However, few reviews actually describe this 
complex dietary intervention and how it is implemented in clinical practice. 
Therefore, the aim of this review is to provide practical guidance on assessment, 
implementation and monitoring of the low FODMAP diet and other practical aspects 
important for high quality clinical service delivery. 
 5 
 
The low FODMAP diet can be covered in at least two appointments with a dietitian 
who is trained in this area. The first appointment includes confirmation of IBS 
diagnosis and comprehensive nutritional assessment, including baseline symptom 
and dietary assessment. Therefore, prior to discussing the approach to implementing 
the low FODMAP diet, this review will first discuss the importance of taking a full and 
detailed assessment by a trained dietitian. 
2.0 Assessment and monitoring of dietary interventions in IBS  
Comprehensive assessment is central to all successful dietary management, and the 
basis for monitoring the effectiveness of the intervention. Assessment methods 
should be detailed, valid, relevant to patients and, where feasible, should mirror the 
outcome measures that are used in the research studies that underpin the dietary 
intervention in question.  
Anthropometry and biochemistry are important in IBS, for example anthropometric 
measurements should include weight, weight history, height, body mass index, 
whilst biochemical assessment may include tests to exclude other diagnoses (online 
supporting material, OSM1) and biochemical markers of nutritional status, where 
relevant. However, the clinical and dietary assessment of the patient with IBS are 
often the most demanding and are discussed below. 
2.1 Clinical assessment: diagnosis 
There is currently no diagnostic biomarker for IBS and symptoms overlap with other 
organic gastrointestinal and gynaecological conditions and as a result, IBS is often a 
diagnosis of exclusion of organic disease. This can understandably be perceived as 
unsatisfactory for some patients who are experiencing debilitating symptoms and 
therefore a positive diagnosis should be emphasised (25). Routine examinations and 
investigations should be undertaken by the referring clinician (gastroenterologist, 
general practitioner, family doctor) according to local guidelines to exclude organic 
causes of disease (e.g. inflammatory bowel disease, gastrointestinal cancer, coeliac 
disease). Tests for coeliac disease should be performed whilst following a gluten-
containing diet for at least six weeks. In addition, the doctor and dietitian should 
 6 
 
enquire about previous use and effectiveness of a gluten-free diet, in particular 
where there is suspicion of non-coeliac gluten sensitivity, for example in those with 
other manifestations (e.g. fatigue, ‘foggy mind’) (29). Suggestions for examinations 
and investigations based upon guidelines in the UK are summarised in online 
supporting material (OSM1). These also suggest that extensive additional tests (e.g. 
colonoscopy, abdominal ultrasound) are unnecessary unless other organic pathology 
is suspected and needs to be excluded (8,25,30).  
The recently revised Rome IV criteria should be used by the referring clinician 
(gastroenterologist, general practitioner, family doctor) and confirmed by the 
dietitian to identify the type of functional bowel disorder (e.g. IBS, functional 
bloating, functional diarrhoea) (31). For IBS to be diagnosed, the Rome IV criteria 
require the presence of recurrent abdominal pain (on average at least 1 day per 
week in the last 3 months) associated with two or more of; (i) pain related to 
defecation; (ii) associated with a change in frequency of stool; or (iii) associated with 
a change in form (appearance) of stool (Box 1) (31). In addition, the IBS subtype 
should be recorded which may be useful in both tailoring dietary counselling to 
specific symptoms and enabling dietitians to evaluate the effectiveness of the low 
FODMAP diet in different IBS sub-groups. The Rome IV classifications are IBS with 
constipation (IBS-C), IBS with diarrhoea (IBS-D), IBS with mixed symptoms (IBS-M) 
and IBS un-subtyped (IBS-U), with the process of classification displayed in Box 1.  
Although clinic experience suggests that the low FODMAP diet may well be effective 
in managing functional bowel disorders other than IBS (i.e. functional bloating, 
functional diarrhoea), the research evidence to date relates predominantly to its role 
in managing functional gut symptoms in IBS. 
 
2.2 Clinical assessment: past medical history and family history 
Information pertaining to past medical history and family history should be recorded 
in line with standard dietetic practice. Assessment of lifestyle factors such as 
employment, stress, social history and physical activity is important in order to 
determine their association with symptoms.  
 7 
 
Current and previous use of IBS medication (e.g. antispasmodics, laxatives, anti-
motility agents, tricyclics and selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors) and other 
treatments (cognitive behavioural therapy, hypnosis) and their effectiveness in 
managing symptoms is important to record in line with standard dietetic practice 
and may be important for decisions about future treatment options should dietary 
intervention be ineffective. 
It is important to ask regarding known allergies and intolerances (especially food) (26), 
whether food intolerance tests have been undertaken, whether clinically relevant 
(e.g. lactose breath test) or not (e.g. allergen-specific IgG, kinesiology). For example, 
commercially available food intolerance tests are not valid markers of food 
intolerance but are often used by patients to inappropriately guide dietary exclusion. 
Such tests have been reviewed elsewhere and patient re-education regarding 
appropriate food exclusion may be required (32). 
2.3 Clinical assessment: gastrointestinal symptoms, stool output and quality of life 
Objective clinical markers of symptom severity do not exist. Therefore, it is 
imperative to use valid and practical symptom-assessment tools to measure baseline 
symptoms and to monitor response to dietary intervention. Symptoms should be 
assessed in terms of their onset, duration, frequency, severity, pattern and impact 
on daily life. A variety of other assessment tools are available for use in IBS (Table 1). 
Global symptom severity questions are dichotomous response questions that are 
easy to administer and interpret (35). A range of examples are used in dietary 
intervention trials in IBS including ‘were your symptoms adequately controlled in this 
phase?’ (48) or ‘over the last seven days, have you had satisfactory relief of your gut 
symptoms?’ (21). A global symptom severity question is recommended as an outcome 
measures in IBS treatment trials (34,37,49) but may not be sensitive enough to measure 
the presence or change in impact of mild symptoms or minor changes in symptoms 
(50). Therefore, in addition to using global symptom severity questions, individual 
symptoms should also be measured.  
 8 
 
An example of a tool to measure the frequency and severity of gastrointestinal 
symptoms is the Gastrointestinal Symptom Rating Scale (GSRS). The GSRS consists of 
15 questions with a 4-point Likert scale response set (absent, mild, moderate, 
severe), thus measuring the presence/absence (and if measured daily, the 
frequency) and severity of symptoms. The symptoms contained on the original GSRS 
are abdominal pain, heartburn, acid regurgitation, sucking sensations in the 
epigastrum, nausea and vomiting, borborygmus (abdominal rumbling), abdominal 
distension (bloating), eructation (belching), flatulence, decreased and increased 
stool frequency, loose or hard stools, stool urgency and incomplete evacuation, 
although the terminology used have been updated through wider use. The GSRS has 
been validated in IBS (36) and has been used to assess symptom change in dietary 
intervention trials in IBS (21,51). The GSRS has been modified specifically for use in IBS, 
termed the GSRS-IBS which includes 13 items and a 7-point Likert scale response 
describing issues with symptoms including abdominal pain, diarrhoea, constipation 
and bloating (38).  
Several other tools result in a score to measure the severity of global IBS symptoms 
and as such are termed integrated symptom severity scores. The IBS Severity Scoring 
System (IBS-SSS) (40) is an integrated symptom severity score that includes questions 
relating to pain severity, days of pain, abdominal distension, satisfaction with bowel 
habit and quality of life. It is comprised of four 100 mm visual analogue scale 
questions and a question regarding stool frequency, totalling a maximum score of 
500 (higher score equates to greater symptoms). A reduction of at least 50 points or 
a reduction of 50% in the total score have been used to indicate a ‘minimally 
clinically important difference’ (40) indicative of a clinical response (52). The IBS-SSS 
has been recommended by some as a primary outcome measurement in drug trials 
(34) and dietary trials (34,41). Other integrated symptom severity scores for IBS are 
available, including the Functional Bowel Disorder Severity Index and IBS Symptom 
Questionnaire (35), however the most commonly used remains the IBS-SSS (35). 
Alteration in bowel habit is a diagnostic feature of IBS; hence stool frequency and 
consistency should always be measured. Stool frequency varies widely in the general 
population, however, abnormal stool frequency is sometimes considered to be less 
 9 
 
than 3 times a week or more than 3 times a day (53). Stool frequency may be 
recorded retrospectively using subjective Likert scales (e.g. less than once a week, 1-
3 times per week, etc). Both stool frequency and consistency can be recorded in 
clinical practice either retrospectively or prospectively using objective, albeit proxy, 
stool charts. The Bristol Stool Form Scale is a validated measure of stool consistency 
that incorporates seven verbal and pictorial descriptors of stool form (Type 1-2 hard, 
Types 3-5 normal, Types 6-7 loose) (43). It can be used to assess stool consistency at 
the initial and follow-up appointment and is also the recommended approach to 
subtyping in IBS (Box 1) (31). Although the Bristol Stool Form Scale is validated, there 
can be inaccuracies in assigning stools to their correct stool types, and this has been 
shown to be the case particularly at diagnostic boundaries, for example between 
hard and normal stools (i.e. differentiating Types 2 and 3) or between normal and 
loose stools (i.e. differentiating Types 5 and 6) (43). Other stool charts are available, 
for example the King’s Stool Chart (54), but are not validated in IBS.  
Quality of life measures the impact of IBS on patients’ lives, making it an important 
patient-reported outcome measure as well as important for health economic 
analysis and commissioning of health services.  
The most widely-used tools are the Short Form 36 Health Survey (SF-36), which is a 
generic questionnaire (i.e. not specific to IBS), and the IBS Quality of Life (IBS-QOL) 
questionnaire, which is specific to the impact of IBS (45). The latter includes domains 
on bodily pain, energy/fatigue and social functioning which are important in patients 
with IBS (55). Some evaluations of the low FODMAP diet have investigated its effect 
on quality of life (56), although few have done so in randomised controlled trials. 
2.4 Dietary assessment  
Several methods are used in the dietary assessment of patients with IBS and a 
combination of qualitative and semi-quantitative approaches should be adopted.   
Qualitative questions that elucidate food knowledge, food preferences, food 
access/availability, food cost, eating pattern, food group consumption and cooking 
methods should be determined (as in all dietetic consultations), together with 
 10 
 
identifying foods perceived to induce symptoms, current dietary restrictions and use 
of nutritional supplements, probiotics and prebiotics and complementary and 
alternative medicines. 
In terms of quantitative dietary assessment, some methods are very intensive and 
largely reserved for the research setting (e.g. duplicate diets, weighed intake), 
however, in clinical practice, the method of choice should enable an efficient but 
accurate assessment of current nutrient and FODMAP intake. Examples of 
techniques include a food diary, 24-hour recall or diet history, whilst a food 
frequency questionnaire that includes FODMAP intake has also been validated for 
assessment of individual FODMAP intake (57).  
3.0 Low FODMAP diet: implementing the intervention 
Research evidence and clinical expertise was used to develop an overview of the 
process of implementing a low FODMAP diet in clinical practice (Figure 1) (13,25,58–61). 
The low FODMAP diet refers to three important and distinct stages that occur across 
two to three clinical appointments: FODMAP restriction (initial appointment); 
FODMAP reintroduction (short-term follow up appointment); and FODMAP 
personalisation (long-term follow-up). 
In brief, the initial appointment can consist of a detailed assessment, explanation of 
the effects of FODMAPs followed by tailored dietary counselling regarding FODMAP 
restriction. At the second appointment, symptoms and diet are re-assessed and, if 
restriction has successfully reduced IBS symptoms, dietary counselling regarding 
FODMAP reintroduction should be undertaken to enable patients to identify specific 
FODMAP triggers and the doses that induce their symptoms. Finally, in the long 
term, which may or may not require a formal follow-up appointment, FODMAP 
personalisation occurs whereby a less restrictive diet is consumed that excludes 
FODMAPs that induce symptoms but enables a more diverse dietary intake.   
 11 
 
4.0 FODMAP restriction (initial appointment) 
Once a comprehensive clinical and dietary assessment has been conducted, as 
described earlier, and a clinical decision to intervene with a low FODMAP diet has 
been made, the first stage of the dietary intervention is FODMAP restriction. Most 
clinical trials investigate only the initial FODMAP restriction stage, but it is important 
for doctors, dietitians and patients to appreciate that this is not a “diet for life” but 
instead an approach to dramatically reduce FODMAP intake below the level at which 
they induce functional gut symptoms followed by a staged reintroduction and 
personalisation process (Figure 1). It is important that the dietitian emphasises these 
points at this initial appointment. 
Patients should receive an explanation regarding the principles of why FODMAPs can 
induce gastrointestinal symptoms (59,61). Verbal explanation alongside pictorial 
representation of the mechanisms of FODMAPs in the GI tract can be used to 
describe their effects.  
Briefly, studies using ileostomy models or MRI have shown that high FODMAP diets 
or high doses of specific FODMAPs (e.g. fructose, mannitol) result in increased 
luminal water in the small intestine (62–64). Furthermore, studies using breath testing 
or MRI have shown that high FODMAP diets or high doses of specific FODMAPs (e.g. 
oligosaccharides) increase colonic gas production as a result of fermentation by the 
microbiota (20,63). FODMAPs in such high doses have been shown to induce functional 
gut symptoms, such as pain, bloating and diarrhoea, which are believed to be the 
result of the increases in small intestinal water and colonic gas. However, not all 
people with IBS develop symptoms during FODMAP challenge and it is hypothesised 
that these symptoms occur only in those with visceral hypersensitivity, although 
lower pain thresholds and higher somatisation may also be involved (65). It is likely 
that there is a threshold at which increased colonic gas provokes symptoms and that 
this varies between patients and depends on factors such as the severity of visceral 
hypersensitivity, gastrointestinal motility, dietary constituents and stress, as well as 
differences in the type and dose of FODMAP consumed (13,20,63,65). 
 12 
 
4.1 FODMAPs in the diet  
Patients should be counselled regarding the food sources of each FODMAP and how 
these can be excluded from the diet, whilst avoiding a reduction in dietary quality. A 
brief, but far from exhaustive, list of examples of dietary sources of FODMAPs and 
review of their digestion and absorption is provided in Table 2. 
Oligosaccharides include fructans (major sources include wheat, onion and garlic) 
and -galacto-oligosaccharides (major sources include beans and pulses). All humans 
lack enzymes that hydrolyse these oligosaccharides, thus they are not digested or 
absorbed and on arrival in the colon are readily fermented by the colonic microbiota, 
in some cases producing gas (61).  
Lactose is a disaccharide found in milk and milk products. The enzyme lactase is 
required for hydrolysis allowing subsequent jejunal absorption of the constituent 
monosaccharides (galactose and glucose). There is an age specific genetic down-
regulation of lactase expression dependent on ethnicity (66). In those without 
sufficient lactase activity, lactose maldigestion can result in its fermentation by the 
colonic microbiota, leading to symptoms of bloating and flatulence in some 
susceptible individuals (66,67).  
Fructose is a monosaccharide that is incompletely absorbed in some people, and 
which results in increased small intestinal water (63). In contrast, consumption of 
glucose in conjunction with fructose enables glucose-fructose co-transport through 
the GLUT2 transporter, thus reducing the impact on small intestinal water (63). Where 
fructose is present in high concentrations (e.g. large volumes of fruit juice) or in 
excess of glucose (e.g. foods such as mango, fig, honey), this can lead to high levels 
of small intestinal fructose, increasing small intestinal water and in susceptible 
individuals can lead to functional gut symptoms (65). Therefore, in practice foods with 
high levels of fructose, or where fructose is present in excess of glucose, are 
excluded. Recent research has shown that artificial co-administration of glucose with 
fructose (e.g. adding glucose to fructose containing foods and drinks) does not 
reduce IBS symptoms and therefore should not be recommended to patients (68). 
 13 
 
Polyols, which include sorbitol (e.g. apple, pear), mannitol (e.g. mushroom, 
cauliflower) and xylitol (e.g. artificial sweetener in some sugar-free chewing gums 
and sweets) are passively absorbed along the small intestine depending on the 
molecular size, intestinal pore size, transit time and presence of gastrointestinal 
disease (61). There is evidence that very high doses of mannitol increases small 
intestinal water (64), and therefore polyols are also restricted during this initial stage 
of the low FODMAP diet.  
4.2 Resources to enhance dietary adherence  
Most of the randomised controlled trials showing clinical benefit of the low FODMAP 
diet were executed with dietary counselling provided by a dietitian trained in this 
approach (69). The provision of comprehensive counselling and suitable educational 
resources are thought to be positively associated with dietary adherence (41,51,60,70,71). 
Appropriate resources could cover the effects of FODMAPs in the GI tract, food 
sources of FODMAPs, appropriate low FODMAP alternatives and practical 
information such as food labelling, eating out, recipe adaptation and low FODMAP 
meal ideas. The resources that are available include written diet sheets, smart phone 
applications and cook books, as well as patient-led websites. Some online resources 
provide only brief lists of suitable and unsuitable foods that are insufficient to 
achieve adequate FODMAP restriction. Furthermore, it is important that any 
supportive information is supplementary to detailed dietary counselling from a 
dietitian, rather than the sole method of dietary education (69).  
Data on the FODMAP composition of foods are increasing and should be used as the 
basis to guide dietitians regarding which foods should be restricted in this initial 
stage of the low FODMAP diet (72–77). Numerous diet sheets and smart phone 
applications are available from a wide variety of sources, many of which incorporate 
up-to-date lists of suitable and unsuitable foods based upon FODMAP composition 
data. Mobile health technologies are increasingly used in dietetic practice (78). 
However, such data are predominantly limited to unprocessed food commodities, 
thus maintaining the need for patients to carefully read and interpret ingredient 
labels on pre-prepared food products. Dietitians should offer support and teaching 
regarding reading ingredient labels, whilst in some countries smartphone 
 14 
 
applications are available that scan ingredient labels for FODMAP-containing foods 
to assist people with IBS to categorise foods as being suitable or unsuitable. In 
addition, some foods have logos that certify when food products have been analysed 
and confirmed to be low FODMAP.  
Some nuances of FODMAP restriction should be explained to patients. For example, 
the fructan content of wheat is relatively low, but because it is eaten in large 
quantities (e.g. as bread or pasta) it contributes the largest amount of fructans to the 
diet (79) and therefore foods containing wheat as a major ingredient should be 
excluded. However, foods containing wheat as a minor ingredient, and therefore 
contain only very small amounts of fructans (e.g. sauces with wheat starch 
thickener), do not need to be excluded (60), and this should be explained in order to 
prevent unnecessary food restriction. In contrast, some ingredients are completely 
avoided, for example onion ingredients (e.g. dried onion, onion powder), as these 
are concentrated sources of fructans (74,75).  
Common reported barriers to adherence to the low FODMAP diet may include the 
increased cost of suitable alternative dietary products (e.g. wheat-free breads and 
cereals) (80), perceptions regarding low palatability of some specialist food products 
(51) and limited options for eating outside of the home (60,70). Therefore it is important 
that the dietitian addresses these potential challenges during dietary counselling, 
including discussing shopping, suitable alternatives, palatability, cooking and recipe 
modification during restriction stage of the low FODMAP diet. 
4.3 Duration of FODMAP restriction 
Randomised controlled trials of strict FODMAP restriction have lasted for up to six 
weeks (13), but have been shown to alter the gastrointestinal microbiota and may 
affect nutritional adequacy (21,81). Thus, only 4 weeks is recommended for clinical 
practice as this provides sufficient time for the majority of patients to achieve 
symptom improvement (59). However, clinical capacity, availability of dietetic 
expertise and patient choice may extend the duration, often increasing the FODMAP 
restriction stage up to 12 weeks (82).  
 15 
 
4.4 Personal application 
Where possible, dietary counselling should be tailored to the individual and there 
are occasions where lactose and/or fructose do not need to be restricted where 
there is clinical suspicion that these do not induce symptoms. Breath tests for 
lactose, fructose or polyol malabsorption have previously been recommended, 
however they are no longer indicated. False positives and false negatives are 
common and there is poor correlation between malabsorption and intolerance (51,77). 
Furthermore, they only measure colonic fermentation products and do not account 
for the effect of FODMAPs on small intestinal water (62–64).  
There may be cases where strict FODMAP restriction is inappropriate (e.g. patient’s 
ability to understand and comply, significant existing dietary restrictions). In such 
circumstances, dietitians may use their clinical judgement to implement a partial 
FODMAP restriction (i.e. restriction of only major FODMAP sources), although as yet 
there are no quality research studies to support such partial FODMAP restriction.  
At the end of the first appointment during which FODMAP restriction has been 
counselled, a summary of what has been discussed should be provided to enhance 
the learning experience. Importantly, dietitians should explain the need for patients 
to spend time reviewing the information provided and to plan how to incorporate 
FODMAP restriction into their dietary lifestyle, including planning shopping, day-to-
day adherence and food-related social activities.  
Generally, 45-60 minutes is required for a new one-to-one appointment to educate 
patients on FODMAP restriction (21,51,59,60,71) and this can present challenges for 
dietetic services that may be restricted on appointment duration. For such services, 
this is an opportunity to develop alternative delivery methods that enable greater 
capacity e.g. group education (82) or a series of shorter appointments.  
5.0 FODMAP reintroduction (short-term follow-up) 
The aim of FODMAP reintroduction is for individuals to identify which FODMAPs they 
can consume without exacerbating their IBS symptoms. FODMAP reintroduction 
involves staged, dosed, FODMAP challenges to assess tolerance with the aim of 
 16 
 
improving dietary variety and nutritional adequacy in the long term. Despite the 
importance of this stage of the low FODMAP diet, there is surprisingly little research 
to inform dietetic practice in this area and currently no randomised controlled trials. 
Therefore, what follows is a review of the limited research literature integrated with 
a description of best practice followed in our centre.  
It is good practice to follow-up all patients who have received dietary counselling for 
FODMAP restriction in order to prevent them from continuing FODMAP restriction 
for the long term. This is thought to be important as a small number of studies have 
reported that FODMAP restriction impacts both the gastrointestinal microbiota (21,81) 
and nutrient intake (21), although there is limited understanding of their long term 
consequences on health nor the effect of FODMAP reintroduction on these. A 
shorter second appointment with a dietitian of approximately 20-30 minutes in 
duration, between 4-12 weeks after the initial appointment, is the most widely used 
approach to begin the FODMAP reintroduction process (51,82).  
At this appointment, it is important to assess anthropometry and in particular body 
weight, as small amounts of weight loss have been reported during the FODMAP 
restriction stage (21). Clinical assessment should review changes in IBS-medication as 
well as symptoms, stool output and quality of life using the same validated tools 
used at baseline, as described earlier. Assessing the impact of FODMAP restriction on 
symptom frequency and severity will help to determine the success of the dietary 
intervention, direct the focus of the dietary assessment and allow the dietitian to 
undertake either continued restriction or initiate FODMAP reintroduction. Dietary 
assessment should assess adherence to the low FODMAP diet and assessment of 
nutritional adequacy should be both qualitative and semi-quantitative and targeted 
nutrients shown to be at risk during the low FODMAP diet (i.e. fibre, calcium, iron) 
(21). Dietary adherence can be measured using a Likert or visual analogue scale 
targeting FODMAP-containing foods, although validated scales specifically measuring 
adherence to the low FODMAP diet are not yet available. Following low FODMAP 
diet counselling from a dietitian, 64-77% of patients report high adherence rates 
(51,70,71). At this appointment it is also important to explore the acceptability of the 
 17 
 
low FODMAP diet in terms of cost, availability of suitable foods and impact on social 
activities. 
If symptoms have improved sufficiently for the patient, advice on FODMAP 
reintroduction should be provided. Clinical experience suggests there is variability in 
tolerance to different FODMAPs, as well as between individuals and within the same 
individual over time, and this should be explained during the follow-up appointment.  
The FODMAP reintroduction process involves maintaining strict FODMAP restriction 
whilst undergoing food challenges whereby a food high in one FODMAP is tested 
over 3 days at increasing doses (Figure 1). An individual challenge with a food high in 
only one FODMAP (e.g. mango) is used to identify individual tolerance to that whole 
group of FODMAPs (i.e. fructose). The exception is fructans, where variations in 
molecular structure result in variations in fermentation and gas generation (83), and 
therefore rather than one food being used as a challenge to represent all fructan-
containing foods, several foods are used (i.e. bread, onion, garlic). The foods used in 
the challenges are selected to ensure all types of FODMAPs are tested. However, 
there is limited research on the optimal number and order of foods to reintroduce 
and in practice these are selected based upon the clinical picture and dietary 
preferences. Suggested examples include bread, onions, garlic (fructans), lentils 
(GOS), milk (lactose), mango (fructose), apricot (sorbitol) and mushrooms (mannitol), 
together with foods containing combinations of FODMAPs (84).  
Prior to each subsequent food challenge, symptoms should be minimal, and this can 
be achieved with a washout period of strict FODMAP restriction for three days (59,85). 
The washout period prevents cumulative effects of previous challenges carrying over 
and impacting on symptoms during the next challenge, although if no symptoms 
occurred during the previous challenge, patients can choose to move straight to the 
next food challenge. Patients are encouraged to continue the series of individual 
food challenges with as many high FODMAP foods as appropriate to increase dietary 
variety and avoid unnecessary food restriction.  
 18 
 
If there is no impact of a food challenge on symptoms, then that food can be 
considered suitable to include in the patient's diet, but only once all the food 
challenges have been completed. If there is a substantial increase in symptoms 
during the 3-days of the challenge period, then the patient ceases the challenge. If 
symptoms are exacerbated, the patient will either be able to determine whether the 
food group should be avoided completely (for example, where severe symptoms 
occur on day 1), or whether small portions might be tolerated occasionally (for 
example, where mild symptoms only occur on day 3).  
Much of the research on patients’ sensitivity to individual FODMAPs investigates 
those given in the pure form as supplemental drinks, rather than in foods or meals. 
Symptom induction to both supplemental drinks and foods is likely to be susceptible 
to a high nocebo effect. However, the wide variation in impact of individual 
FODMAPs on IBS symptoms is also likely to be affected by the total FODMAP load 
consumed at one meal, other food components within the meal (e.g. fat, fibre), 
gastrointestinal transit time, visceral hypersensitivity and the gastrointestinal 
microbiota (13,65). In addition, lifestyle and stress are important contributors to 
symptoms in IBS in general and likely contribute to the variation in symptom 
exacerbation experienced within the same individual over time. Reassurance that 
high FODMAP foods are unlikely to have negative effects beyond symptom induction 
may be important to discuss at the follow up visit, especially if avoidance of 
FODMAP-containing food negatively affects the patient’s QOL.  
6.0 FODMAP personalisation (long term self-management) 
The aim of FODMAP personalisation is to increase dietary variety and improve 
nutritional adequacy whilst maintaining IBS symptom control. Most patients who 
have undertaken the reintroduction stage can adopt long-term self-management 
without a third appointment, however, in some cases, a third dietetic appointment 
may be needed to confirm nutritional adequacy and to clarify any concerns. 
FODMAP personalisation involves constructing a ‘modified-FODMAP diet’ whereby 
restriction is continued but those FODMAPs / foods that did not induce symptoms 
 19 
 
during the reintroduction stage are now included in the diet. This is described as the 
FODMAP personalisation stage as the quantities and types of FODMAPs able to be 
consumed vary depending upon individual tolerance to FODMAPs identified during 
the reintroduction stage. As near a diet to ‘normal’ should be encouraged during 
FODMAP personalisation, with a strong focus on patients following a healthy diet, 
achieving national dietary guidelines for macronutrients and micronutrients 
(including fibre) and importantly being able to choose a diverse diet that is enjoyable 
and does not restrict psychosocial aspects of the patient’s life (e.g. eating out, 
socialising). 
One study reported that 57% of patients experienced adequate symptom relief 
following such a ‘modified FODMAP diet’ after 6-18 months, including a sustained 
benefit in 70% of patients who reported adequate relief during initial FODMAP 
restriction (86). Another study reported satisfaction with symptoms in 72.1% of 
responders at a mean of 15.7 months follow-up (51). However, these studies lacked 
control groups, had high attrition rates, and only reported data in those who 
completed follow-up appointments and questionnaires, common difficulties in long 
term follow-up studies of dietary interventions (24). 
7.0 Specific considerations  
7.1 Inadequate symptom response 
Research indicates that approximately 50-80% of patients with IBS experience 
symptom relief following FODMAP restriction, meaning that 20-50% do not (13). 
Detailed, valid and repeated symptom assessment will identify which patients and 
which symptoms do not respond. Some patients may not respond due to poor 
adherence, which can be assessed at short-term follow-up. If adherence is 
suboptimal, and the patient wishes to re-attempt strict FODMAP restriction then 
addressing barriers to adherence and further follow-up should be provided. 
However, for patients who adhered strictly and yet did not experience symptom 
relief, then the low FODMAP diet has failed and should be ceased (87), at which point 
FODMAPs should be introduced back into the diet, with assessment of response to 
detect whether gastrointestinal symptoms worsen. In those having a small (albeit 
 20 
 
insufficient) response to FODMAP restriction, return to a normal diet should be done 
gradually to prevent abrupt worsening of symptoms.  
Where FODMAP restriction has failed to resolve symptoms, other dietary 
approaches can be attempted. Probiotics supplementation has been shown to be 
effective in some patients with IBS, with nine systematic reviews published thus far. 
However, response to probiotics varies greatly and can depend upon the strain used 
and symptoms experienced (88). A review and guidelines have recently been 
published indicating which probiotic strains and doses have been shown to be 
efficacious for which symptom (26,89). In addition, supplemental dietary fibre, in 
particular ispaghula/psyllium, may provide overall IBS symptom relief (11).  
Psychological factors and stress are known contributors to IBS symptoms and may 
have a greater impact on symptoms than diet in some patients (90). Thus, further 
dietary intervention may not be indicated and referral back to the referring clinician 
is advised. Non-dietary treatment options for IBS include cognitive behavioural 
therapy and hypnotherapy (91,92).  
Research is underway to identify markers that predict response to FODMAP 
restriction. Two studies have reported numerous bacterial groups that were 
different at baseline in those who subsequently experienced a clinical response to 
the low FODMAP diet (93,94), and a recent study has identified faecal volatile organic 
compounds profiles that predicted response to the low FODMAP diet with 100% 
accuracy (95). These approaches must be tested in external validation populations 
and further approaches that utilise readily accessible information to predict 
response are required.   
Finally, another potential explanation for the lack of response to FODMAP restriction 
may be that symptoms are, at least in part, the result of non-coeliac gluten 
sensitivity (29). Thus, in patients where there is clinical suspicion of gluten sensitivity, 
preliminary research suggests that a gluten-free diet may be trialled with some 
success (96), although intensive dietary education is required as adherence may be 
poorer in the absence of a confirmed diagnosis of coeliac disease (97). 
 21 
 
7.2 Nutritional adequacy 
Patients with IBS have similar dietary intakes compared with the general population 
and in general they meet dietary recommendations (98,99). However, some studies 
report avoidance of entire food groups and/or specific food types in people with IBS 
(2,9,10).  
Few studies have investigated the effect of the low FODMAP diet on nutritional 
adequacy in the short or long term, and these have been reviewed previously (13,100). 
One study showed that compared with habitual diet FODMAP restriction (following 
in-depth counselling from a dietitian) resulted in broadly similar micronutrient 
intakes, except for lower calcium intakes (21). Meanwhile another study showed that 
IBS patients who received no dietary counselling self-restricted their diet more than 
those who had been given detailed counselling and also had significantly lower 
calcium intakes, although the advice in the latter group was provided two years 
previously (101). Factors that may impair calcium intake during FODMAP restriction 
include: excessive restriction of dairy sources even when lactose does not 
exacerbate symptoms (e.g. small amounts of milk, yoghurt and cheese can be 
consumed whilst keeping lactose intakes low); and inadequate substitution of dairy 
sources of calcium with fortified substitutes (e.g. non-dairy alternative milk products 
based on soya, oat, rice and nuts).        
The low FODMAP diet significantly alters carbohydrate sources, (e.g. cereals and 
grains, fruit and vegetables). The low FODMAP diet has been shown to reduce fibre 
intakes in one study (102), but not in another (21). Patients should be advised to follow 
national recommendations for fruit and vegetable intake, unless other medical 
issues contraindicate this, and expert dietetic advice should be provided regarding 
selection of high-fibre, low-FODMAP fruit and vegetable, grains and cereals.  
7.3 Constipation 
The low FODMAP diet reduces small intestinal water (62) and some have expressed 
concern about exacerbation of constipation in patients with IBS (103). Despite this, 
there is some limited evidence that a low FODMAP diet may actually be effective for 
IBS-constipation (51,82). Patients may find improvement in constipation during 
 22 
 
FODMAP personalisation. Meta-analyses have shown that some fibre supplements 
are effective in managing constipation specifically (104) and IBS in general (11). 
Ensuring appropriate fibre sources or fibre supplementation with rice or oat bran or 
linseeds may therefore be appropriate (26,105). Finally, meta-analyses have shown that 
some probiotic strains are effective in managing constipation specifically (106) and IBS 
symptoms in general (107) and therefore dietitians and gastroenterologists should use 
guidelines to recommend specific probiotic strains to manage specific symptoms 
such as constipation (26,89,108). 
7.4 Changes to the gastrointestinal microbiota 
The low FODMAP diet affects the gastrointestinal microbiota (21,81,93). Some 
FODMAPs (e.g. inulin-type fructans and GOS) are prebiotics, which are defined as a 
‘substrate that is selectively utilized by host microorganisms conferring a health 
benefit’ 
(109). Supplements of fructans and GOS increase the numbers of 
bifidobacteria and some studies also show increases in other major groups such as 
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii (110,111). Thus, FODMAP restriction naturally reduces 
prebiotic intake that is presumed, at least in part, to be responsible for the impact on 
the gastrointestinal microbiota. A low FODMAP diet has been shown to reduce  
luminal bifidobacteria (21,81,94), F. prausnitzii (81) and reduce overall bacterial 
abundance (81). The significance of these alterations in microbiota are unclear as 
these studies only report short-term effects during FODMAP restriction and it is not 
known if these effects persist following FODMAP reintroduction and FODMAP 
personalisation in the long-term, whether they are related to symptom 
improvement nor whether these reductions lead to any detrimental effects on 
colonic health. Reintroduction of FODMAPs to tolerance may attenuate some of 
these alterations in the gut microbiota. Meanwhile a large randomised controlled 
trial demonstrated that probiotic co-administration was able to partially prevent 
some of the changes to the microbiota occurring during the low FODMAP diet (22). 
Further studies of FODMAP restriction combined with probiotic or prebiotic 
supplementation are warranted. 
 23 
 
7.5 Delivering an effective dietetic service 
There is an increasing demand for using the low FODMAP diet for IBS symptom 
management, however there is only evidence of clinical effectiveness with dietitian-
led education (69). The diet is a relatively new intervention and there is a limited 
supply of dietitians with appropriate expertise. Therefore, patients and clinicians 
have sought alternative educational methods such as online and written literature. 
However, these delivery methods have not been rigorously investigated and could 
lead to incomplete FODMAP restriction (and therefore lack of efficacy) or over-
restrictive dietary intake (and therefore nutritional inadequacy). Alternative 
approaches towards dietetic-led delivery of low FODMAP dietary counselling are 
therefore required. 
Dietitian-led low FODMAP group education has recently been evaluated in a non-
randomised study investigating clinical outcomes and economic cost compared with 
one-to-one dietetic education. Group education was shown to be as clinically 
effective as one-to-one education, and was inevitably less expensive (82). However, 
this study is limited by the lack of randomisation to the group versus one-to-one 
interventions 
(82). Alternatively, web-based symptom measurement alongside 
dietitian-led low FODMAP counselling has been tested and shown to improve 
symptoms compared to probiotics or no intervention (112). It is likely that web-based 
interventions may be acceptable in the IBS population (113).  
High quality research is urgently needed to determine the safety, effectiveness and 
cost for using alternative educational methods for administration of the low 
FODMAP diet.  
8.0 Conclusion  
The low FODMAP diet, delivered through dietitian-led dietary counselling, is 
effective in the management of functional gastrointestinal symptoms in IBS. It 
includes three important and distinct stages: FODMAP restriction; FODMAP 
reintroduction; and FODMAP personalisation and it is important that people with IBS 
do not follow a lifelong restriction. This review provides details of how to administer 
 24 
 
the diet and the aspects of patient care that need to be considered at each stage of 
the dietetic process. There are still many unanswered questions regarding the long-
term effects of a low FODMAP diet and educational methods that may be useful to 
achieve symptom control, thus further high quality research should focus on these 
areas. 
 
 25 
 
References  
1.  
Lovell RM, Ford AC. Global Prevalence of and Risk Factors for Irritable Bowel 
Syndrome: A Meta-analysis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012;10(7):712–721. 
2.  
Böhn L, Störsrud S, Törnblom H, Bengtsson U, Simrén M. Self-Reported Food-
Related Gastrointestinal Symptoms in IBS Are Common and Associated With 
More Severe Symptoms and Reduced Quality of Life. Am J Gastroenterol. 
2013;108(5):634–41.  
3.  
Spiegel BMR, Gralnek IM, Bolus R, Chang L, Dulai GS,er EA, et al. Clinical 
Determinants of Health-Related Quality of Life in Patients With Irritable Bowel 
Syndrome. Arch Intern Med. 2004;164(16):1773.  
4.  
Maxion-Bergemann S, Thielecke F, Abel F, Bergemann R. Costs of irritable 
bowel syndrome in the UK and US. Pharmacoeconomics. 2006;24(1):21–37.  
5.  
Hungin APS, Whorwell PJ, Tack J, Mearin F. The prevalence, patterns and 
impact of irritable bowel syndrome: an international survey of 40,000 
subjects. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2003;17(5):643–50.  
6.  
Hungin APS, Chang L, Locke GR, Dennis EH, Barghout V. Irritable bowel 
syndrome in the United States: prevalence, symptom patterns and impact. 
Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2005;21(11):1365–75.  
7.  
Jones MP, Chey WD, Singh S, Gong H, Shringarpure R, Hoe N, et al. A 
biomarker panel and psychological morbidity differentiates the irritable bowel 
syndrome from health and provides novel pathophysiological leads. Aliment 
Pharmacol Ther. 2014;39(4):426–37.  
8.  
Chang L, Lembo A, Sultan S. American Gastroenterological Association 
Institute Technical Review on the Pharmacological Management of Irritable 
Bowel Syndrome. Gastroenterology. 2014;147(5):1149–1172.e2.  
9.  
Hayes P, Corish C, O’Mahony E, Quigley EMM. A dietary survey of patients 
with irritable bowel syndrome. J Hum Nutr Diet. 2014;27(s2):36–47.  
 26 
 
10.  
Monsbakken KW, Vandvik PO, Farup PG. Perceived food intolerance in 
subjects with irritable bowel syndrome – etiology, prevalence and 
consequences. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2006 14;60(5):667–72.  
11.  
Moayyedi P, Quigley EMM, Lacy BE, Lembo AJ, Saito YA, Schiller LR, et al. The 
Effect of Fiber Supplementation on Irritable Bowel Syndrome: A Systematic 
Review and Meta-analysis. Am J Gastroenterol. 2014;109(9):1367–74.  
12.  
Vernia P, Ricciardi MR, Frandina C, Bilotta T, Frieri G. Lactose malabsorption 
and irritable bowel syndrome. Effect of a long-term lactose-free diet. Ital J 
Gastroenterol. 1995;27(3):117–21.  
13.  
Staudacher HM, Whelan K. The low FODMAP diet: recent advances in 
understanding its mechanisms and efficacy in irritable bowel syndrome. Gut. 
2017;66(8):1517–27.  
14.  
Marsh A, Eslick EM, Eslick GD. Does a diet low in FODMAPs reduce symptoms 
associated with functional gastrointestinal disorders? A comprehensive 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Nutr. 2016 17;55(3):897–906.  
15.  
Rao SSC, Yu S, Fedewa A. Systematic review: dietary fibre and FODMAP-
restricted diet in the management of constipation and irritable bowel 
syndrome. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2015;41(12):1256–70.  
16.  
Altobelli E, Del Negro V, Angeletti P, Latella G. Low-FODMAP Diet Improves 
Irritable Bowel Syndrome Symptoms: A Meta-Analysis. Nutrients. 
2017;9(9):940.  
17.  
Varjú P, Farkas N, Hegyi P, Garami A, Szabó I, Illés A, et al. Low fermentable 
oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides and polyols (FODMAP) diet 
improves symptoms in adults suffering from irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) 
compared to standard IBS diet: A meta-analysis of clinical studies. Stengel A, 
editor. PLoS One. 2017;12(8):e0182942.  
18.  
Zhan Y, Zhan Y, Dai S. Is a low FODMAP diet beneficial for patients with 
 27 
 
inflammatory bowel disease? A meta-analysis and systematic review. Clin 
Nutr. 2017 [in press].  
19.  
Halmos EP, Power VA, Shepherd SJ, Gibson PR, Muir JG. A Diet Low in 
FODMAPs Reduces Symptoms of Irritable Bowel Syndrome. Gastroenterology. 
2014;146(1):67–75.e5.  
20.  
Ong DK, Mitchell SB, Barrett JS, Shepherd SJ, Irving PM, Biesiekierski JR, et al. 
Manipulation of dietary short chain carbohydrates alters the pattern of gas 
production and genesis of symptoms in irritable bowel syndrome. J 
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010;25(8):1366–73.  
21.  
Staudacher HM, Lomer MCE, Anderson JL, Barrett JS, Muir JG, Irving PM, et al. 
Fermentable Carbohydrate Restriction Reduces Luminal Bifidobacteria and 
Gastrointestinal Symptoms in Patients with Irritable Bowel Syndrome. J Nutr. 
2012;142(8):1510–8.  
22.  
Staudacher HM, Lomer MCE, Farquharson FM, Louis P, Fava F, Franciosi E, et 
al. A Diet Low in FODMAPs Reduces Symptoms in Patients With Irritable Bowel 
Syndrome and A Probiotic Restores Bifidobacterium Species: A Randomized 
Controlled Trial. Gastroenterology. 2017;153(4):936–47.  
23.  
Krogsgaard LR, Lyngesen M, Bytzer P. Systematic review: quality of trials on 
the symptomatic effects of the low FODMAP diet for irritable bowel 
syndrome. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2017;45(12):1506–13.  
24.  
Staudacher HM, Irving PM, Lomer MCE, Whelan K. The challenges of control 
groups, placebos and blinding in clinical trials of dietary interventions. Proc 
Nutr Soc. 2017;76(3):203–12.  
25.  
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Irritable bowel syndrome 
in adults: diagnosis and management of irritable bowel syndrome in primary 
care. Clinical Guideline 61 Update 2015. 2015.  
26.  
McKenzie YA, Bowyer RK, Leach H, Gulia P, Horobin J, O’Sullivan NA, et al. 
 28 
 
British Dietetic Association systematic review and evidence-based practice 
guidelines for the dietary management of irritable bowel syndrome in adults 
(2016 update). J Hum Nutr Diet. 2016;29(5):549–75.  
27.  
Böhn L, Störsrud S, Liljebo T, Collin L, Lindfors P, Törnblom H, et al. Diet Low in 
FODMAPs Reduces Symptoms of Irritable Bowel Syndrome as Well as 
Traditional Dietary Advice: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Gastroenterology. 
2015;149(6):1399–1407.e2.  
28.  
Eswaran SL, Chey WD, Han-Markey T, Ball S, Jackson K. A Randomized 
Controlled Trial Comparing the Low FODMAP Diet vs. Modified NICE 
Guidelines in US Adults with IBS-D. Am J Gastroenterol. 2016;111(12):1824–
32.  
29.  
Molina-Infante J, Santolaria S, Sanders DS, Fernández-Bañares F. Systematic 
review: noncoeliac gluten sensitivity. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 
2015;41(9):807–20.  
30.  
Brandt LJ, Chey WD, Foxx-Orenstein AE, Quigley EMM, Schiller LR, Schoenfeld 
PS, et al. An Evidence-Based Position Statement on the Management of 
Irritable Bowel Syndrome. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009;104:S1–35.  
31.  
Lacy BE, Mearin F, Chang L, Chey WD, Lembo AJ, Simren M, et al. Bowel 
Disorders. Gastroenterology. 2016;150(6):1393–1407.e5.  
32.  
Lomer MCE. Review article: the aetiology, diagnosis, mechanisms and clinical 
evidence for food intolerance. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2015;41(3):262–75.  
33.  
Mangel A, Hahn B, Heath A, Northcutt A, Kong S, Dukes G, et al. Adequate 
Relief as an Endpoint in Clinical Trials in Irritable Bowel Syndrome. J Int Med 
Res. 1998;26(2):76–81.  
34.  
Irvine EJ, Whitehead WE, Chey WD, Matsueda K, Shaw M, Talley NJ, et al. 
Design of Treatment Trials for Functional Gastrointestinal Disorders. 
Gastroenterology. 2006;130(5):1538–51.  
 29 
 
35.  
Bijkerk CJ, Wit NJ, Muris JWM, Jones RH, Knottnerus JA, Hoes AW. Outcome 
measures in irritable bowel syndrome: comparison of psychometric and 
methodological characteristics. Am J Gastroenterol. 2003;98(1):122–7.  
36.  
Svedlund J, Sjödin I, Dotevall G. GSRS--a clinical rating scale for gastrointestinal 
symptoms in patients with irritable bowel syndrome and peptic ulcer disease. 
Dig Dis Sci. 1988;33(2):129–34.  
37.  
Spiegel B, Camilleri M, Bolus R, Andresen V, Chey WD, Fehnel S, et al. 
Psychometric Evaluation of Patient-Reported Outcomes in Irritable Bowel 
Syndrome Randomized Controlled Trials: A Rome Foundation Report. 
Gastroenterology. 2009;137(6):1944–1953.e3.  
38.  
Wiklund IK, Fullerton S, Hawkey CJ, Jones RH, Longstreth GF,er EA, et al. An 
irritable bowel syndrome-specific symptom questionnaire: development and 
validation. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2003;38(9):947–54.  
39.  
Bengtsson M, Ohlsson B, Ulander K. Development and psychometric testing of 
the Visual Analogue Scale for Irritable Bowel Syndrome (VAS-IBS). BMC 
Gastroenterol. 2007;7(1):16.  
40.  
Francis CY, Morris J, Whorwell PJ. The irritable bowel severity scoring system: 
a simple method of monitoring irritable bowel syndrome and its progress. 
Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 1997;11(2):395–402.  
41.  
Yao CK, Gibson PR, Shepherd SJ. Design of Clinical Trials Evaluating Dietary 
Interventions in Patients With Functional Gastrointestinal Disorders. Am J 
Gastroenterol. 2013;108(5):748–58.  
42.  
Lewis SJ, Heaton KW. Stool Form Scale as a Useful Guide to Intestinal Transit 
Time. Scand J Gastroenterol. 1997;32(9):920–4.  
43.  
Blake MR, Raker JM, Whelan K. Validity and reliability of the Bristol Stool Form 
Scale in healthy adults and patients with diarrhoea-predominant irritable 
bowel syndrome. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2016;44(7):693–703.  
 30 
 
44.  
Ware JE, Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36-item short-form health survey (SF-36). I. 
Conceptual framework and item selection. Med Care. 1992;30(6):473–83.  
45.  
McHorney CA, Ware JE, Raczek AE. The MOS 36-Item Short-Form Health 
Survey (SF-36): II. Psychometric and clinical tests of validity in measuring 
physical and mental health constructs. Med Care. 1993;31(3):247–63.  
46.  
Patrick DL, Drossman DA, Frederick IO, DiCesare J, Puder KL. Quality of life in 
persons with irritable bowel syndrome: development and validation of a new 
measure. Dig Dis Sci. 1998;43(2):400–11.  
47.  
Drossman DA, Patrick DL, Whitehead WE, Toner BB, Diamant NE, Hu Y, et al. 
Further validation of the IBS-QOL: a disease-specific quality-of-life 
questionnaire. Am J Gastroenterol. 2000;95(4):999–1007.  
48.  
Shepherd S, Parker F, Muir J, Gibson P. Dietary Triggers of Abdominal 
Symptoms in Patients With Irritable Bowel Syndrome: Randomized Placebo-
Controlled Evidence. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008;6(7):765–71.  
49.  
Camilleri M, Mangel AW, Fehnel SE, Drossman DA,er EA, Talley NJ. Primary 
Endpoints for Irritable Bowel Syndrome Trials: A Review of Performance of 
Endpoints. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2007;5(5):534–40.  
50.  
Whitehead WE, Palsson OS, Levy RL, Feld AD, VonKorff M, Turner M. Reports 
of &quot;Satisfactory Relief&quot; by IBS Patients Receiving Usual Medical 
Care Are Confounded by Baseline Symptom Severity and Do Not Accurately 
Reflect Symptom Improvement. Am J Gastroenterol. 2006;101(5):1057–65.  
51.  
de Roest RH, Dobbs BR, Chapman BA, Batman B, O’Brien LA, Leeper JA, et al. 
The low FODMAP diet improves gastrointestinal symptoms in patients with 
irritable bowel syndrome: a prospective study. Int J Clin Pract. 
2013;67(9):895–903.  
52.  
Corazziari E, Bytzer P, Delvaux M, Holtmann G, Malagelada JR, Morris J, et al. 
Clinical trial guidelines for pharmacological treatment of irritable bowel 
 31 
 
syndrome. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2003;18(6):569–80.  
53.  
Longstreth GF, Thompson WG, Chey WD, Houghton LA, Mearin F, Spiller RC. 
Functional Bowel Disorders. Gastroenterology. 2006;130(5):1480–91.  
54.  
Whelan K, Judd PA, Preedy VR, Taylor MA. Covert Assessment of Concurrent 
and Construct Validity of a Chart to Characterize Fecal Output and Diarrhea in 
Patients Receiving Enteral Nutrition. J Parenter Enter Nutr. 2008;32(2):160–8.  
55.  
Spiegel BMR. Patient-reported outcomes in gastroenterology: clinical and 
research applications. J Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2013;19(2):137–48.  
56.  
Pedersen N, Vegh Z, Burisch J, Jensen L, Ankersen DV, Felding M, et al. Ehealth 
monitoring in irritable bowel syndrome patients treated with low fermentable 
oligo-, di-, mono-saccharides and polyols diet. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 
;20(21):6680–4.  
57.  
Barrett JS, Gibson PR. Development and Validation of a Comprehensive Semi-
Quantitative Food Frequency Questionnaire that Includes FODMAP Intake and 
Glycemic Index. J Am Diet Assoc. 2010;110(10):1469–76.  
58.  
Barrett JS, Gibson PR. Fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, 
monosaccharides and polyols (FODMAPs) and nonallergic food intolerance: 
FODMAPs or food chemicals? Therap Adv Gastroenterol. 2012;5(4):261–8.  
59.  
Gibson PR, Shepherd SJ. Evidence-based dietary management of functional 
gastrointestinal symptoms: The FODMAP approach. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 
2010;25(2):252–8.  
60.  
Shepherd SJ, Gibson PR. Fructose Malabsorption and Symptoms of Irritable 
Bowel Syndrome: Guidelines for Effective Dietary Management. J Am Diet 
Assoc. 2006;106(10):1631–9.  
61.  
Shepherd SJ, Lomer MCE, Gibson PR. Short-Chain Carbohydrates and 
Functional Gastrointestinal Disorders. Am J Gastroenterol. 2013;108(5):707–
17.  
 32 
 
62.  
Barrett JS, Gearry RB, Muir JG, Irving PM, Rose R, Rosella O, et al. Dietary 
poorly absorbed, short-chain carbohydrates increase delivery of water and 
fermentable substrates to the proximal colon. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 
2010;31(8):874–82.  
63.  
Murray K, Wilkinson-Smith V, Hoad C, Costigan C, Cox E, Lam C, et al. 
Differential Effects of FODMAPs (Fermentable Oligo-, Di-, Mono-Saccharides 
and Polyols) on Small and Large Intestinal Contents in Healthy Subjects Shown 
by MRI. Am J Gastroenterol. 2014;109(1):110–9.  
64.  
Marciani L, Cox EF, Hoad CL, Pritchard S, Totman JJ, Foley S, et al. Postprandial 
Changes in Small Bowel Water Content in Healthy Subjects and Patients With 
Irritable Bowel Syndrome. Gastroenterology. 2010;138(2):469–477.e1.  
65.  
Major G, Pritchard S, Murray K, Alappadan JP, Hoad CL,ciani L, et al. Colon 
Hypersensitivity to Distension, Rather Than Excessive Gas Production, 
Produces Carbohydrate-Related Symptoms in Individuals With Irritable Bowel 
Syndrome. Gastroenterology. 2017;152(1):124–133.e2.  
66.  
Lomer MCE, Parkes GC, Sanderson JD. Review article: lactose intolerance in 
clinical practice - myths and realities. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2008;27(2):93–
103.  
67.  
Savaiano DA, Boushey CJ, McCabe GP. Lactose intolerance symptoms assessed 
by meta-analysis: a grain of truth that leads to exaggeration. J Nutr. 
2006;136(4):1107–13.  
68.  
Tuck CJ, Ross LA, Gibson PR, Barrett JS, Muir JG. Adding glucose to food and 
solutions to enhance fructose absorption is not effective in preventing 
fructose-induced functional gastrointestinal symptoms: randomised 
controlled trials in patients with fructose malabsorption. J Hum Nutr Diet. 
2017;30(1):73–82.  
69.  
O’Keeffe M, Lomer MC. Who should deliver the low FODMAP diet and what 
educational methods are optimal: a review. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 
 33 
 
2017;32:23–6.  
70.  
Gearry RB, Irving PM, Barrett JS, Nathan DM, Shepherd SJ, Gibson PR. 
Reduction of dietary poorly absorbed short-chain carbohydrates (FODMAPs) 
improves abdominal symptoms in patients with inflammatory bowel disease—
a pilot study. J Crohn’s Colitis. 2009;3(1):8–14.  
71.  
Staudacher HM, Whelan K, Irving PM, Lomer MCE. Comparison of symptom 
response following advice for a diet low in fermentable carbohydrates 
(FODMAPs) versus standard dietary advice in patients with irritable bowel 
syndrome. J Hum Nutr Diet. 2011;24(5):487–95.  
72.  
Prichard R, Rossi M, Muir J, Yao C, Whelan K, Lomer M. Fermentable 
oligosaccharide, disaccharide, monosaccharide and polyol content of foods 
commonly consumed by ethnic minority groups in the United Kingdom. Int J 
Food Sci Nutr. 2016;67(4):383–90.  
73.  
Biesiekierski JR, Rosella O, Rose R, Liels K, Barrett JS, Shepherd SJ, et al. 
Quantification of fructans, galacto-oligosacharides and other short-chain 
carbohydrates in processed grains and cereals. J Hum Nutr Diet. 
2011;24(2):154–76.  
74.  
Muir JG, Rose R, Rosella O, Liels K, Barrett JS, Shepherd SJ, et al. Measurement 
of Short-Chain Carbohydrates in Common Australian Vegetables and Fruits by 
High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC). J Agric Food Chem. 2009 
28;57(2):554–65.  
75.  
Muir JG, Shepherd SJ, Rosella O, Rose R, Barrett JS, Gibson PR. Fructan and 
Free Fructose Content of Common Australian Vegetables and Fruit. J Agric 
Food Chem. 2007;55(16):6619–27.  
76.  
Whelan K, Abrahmsohn O, David GJP, Staudacher H, Irving P, Lomer MCE, et 
al. Fructan content of commonly consumed wheat, rye and gluten-free 
breads. Int J Food Sci Nutr. 2011;62(5):498–503.  
 34 
 
77.  
Yao CK, Tan H-L, van Langenberg DR, Barrett JS, Rose R, Liels K, et al. Dietary 
sorbitol and mannitol: food content and distinct absorption patterns between 
healthy individuals and patients with irritable bowel syndrome. J Hum Nutr 
Diet. 2014;27:263–75.  
78.  
Chen J, Lieffers J, Bauman A, Hanning R, Allman-Farinelli M. The use of 
smartphone health apps and other mobile health (mHealth) technologies in 
dietetic practice: a three country study. J Hum Nutr Diet. 2017;30(4):439–52.  
79.  
Dunn S, Datta A, Kallis S, Law E, Myers CE, Whelan K. Validation of a food 
frequency questionnaire to measure intakes of inulin and oligofructose. Eur J 
Clin Nutr. 2011;65(3):402–8.  
80.  
Singh J, Whelan K. Limited availability and higher cost of gluten-free foods. J 
Hum Nutr Diet. 2011;24(5):479–86.  
81.  
Halmos EP, Christophersen CT, Bird AR, Shepherd SJ, Gibson PR, Muir JG. Diets 
that differ in their FODMAP content alter the colonic luminal 
microenvironment. Gut. 2015;64(1):93–100.  
82.  
Whigham L, Joyce T, Harper G, Irving PM, Staudacher HM, Whelan K, et al. 
Clinical effectiveness and economic costs of group versus one-to-one 
education for short-chain fermentable carbohydrate restriction (low FODMAP 
diet) in the management of irritable bowel syndrome. J Hum Nutr Diet. 
2015;28(6):687–96.  
83.  
Probert HM, Gibson GR. Investigating the prebiotic and gas-generating effects 
of selected carbohydrates on the human colonic microflora. Lett Appl 
Microbiol. 2002;35(6):473–80.  
84.  
Tuck C, Barrett J. Re-challenging FODMAPs: the low FODMAP diet phase two. J 
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017;32:11–5.  
85.  
Gibson PR, Shepherd SJ. Food Choice as a Key Management Strategy for 
Functional Gastrointestinal Symptoms. Am J Gastroenterol. 2012;107(5):657–
 35 
 
66.  
86.  
O’Keeffe M,sen C,tin L, Williams M, Seamark L, Staudacher HM, et al. Long-
term impact of the low-FODMAP diet on gastrointestinal symptoms, dietary 
intake, patient acceptability, and healthcare utilization in irritable bowel 
syndrome. Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2017 [in press].  
87.  
Barrett JS, Gibson P. Clinical Ramifications of Malabsorption of Fructose and 
Other Short-chain Carbohydrates. Pr Gastroenterol. 2007; 
http://www.neuroconcepts.memberlodge.org/Resources/Documents/FODMA
P Diet.pdf 
88.  
Whelan K. Editorial: The Importance of Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses 
of Probiotics and Prebiotics. Am J Gastroenterol. 2014;109(10):1563–5.  
89.  
McKenzie YA, Thompson J, Gulia P, Lomer MCE, (IBS Dietetic Guideline Review 
Group on behalf of Gastroenterology Specialist Group of the British Dietetic 
Association). British Dietetic Association systematic review of systematic 
reviews and evidence-based practice guidelines for the use of probiotics in the 
management of irritable bowel syndrome in adults (2016 update). J Hum Nutr 
Diet. 2016;29(5):576–92.  
90.  
Lackner JM, Gudleski GD, Thakur ER, Stewart TJ, Iacobucci GJ, Spiegel BM. The 
Impact of Physical Complaints, Social Environment, and Psychological 
Functioning on IBS Patients’ Health Perceptions: Looking Beyond GI Symptom 
Severity. Am J Gastroenterol. 2014;109(2):224–33.  
91.  
Ford AC, Quigley EMM, Lacy BE, Lembo AJ, Saito YA, Schiller LR, et al. Effect of 
Antidepressants and Psychological Therapies, Including Hypnotherapy, in 
Irritable Bowel Syndrome: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Am J 
Gastroenterol. 2014;109(9):1350–65.  
92.  
Peters SL, Yao CK, Philpott H, Yelland GW, Muir JG, Gibson PR. Randomised 
clinical trial: the efficacy of gut-directed hypnotherapy is similar to that of the 
low FODMAP diet for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome. Aliment 
 36 
 
Pharmacol Ther. 2016;44(5):447–59.  
93.  
Chumpitazi BP, Cope JL, Hollister EB, Tsai CM, McMeans AR, Luna RA, et al. 
Randomised clinical trial: gut microbiome biomarkers are associated with 
clinical response to a low FODMAP diet in children with the irritable bowel 
syndrome. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2015;42(4):418–27.  
94.  
Bennet SMP, Böhn L, Störsrud S, Liljebo T, Collin L, Lindfors P, et al. 
Multivariate modelling of faecal bacterial profiles of patients with IBS predicts 
responsiveness to a diet low in FODMAPs. Gut. 2017 [in press].  
95.  
Rossi M, Aggio R, Staudacher HM, Lomer MC, Lindsay JO, Irving P, et al. 
Volatile Organic Compounds in Feces Associate With Response to Dietary 
Intervention in Patients With Irritable Bowel Syndrome. Clin Gastroenterol 
Hepatol. 2017 [in press].  
96.  
Aziz I, Trott N, Briggs R, North JR, Hadjivassiliou M, Sanders DS. Efficacy of a 
Gluten-Free Diet in Subjects With Irritable Bowel Syndrome-Diarrhea Unaware 
of Their HLA-DQ2/8 Genotype. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016;14(5):696–
703.  
97.  
Silvester JA, Weiten D, Graff LA, Walker JR, Duerksen DR. Living gluten-free: 
adherence, knowledge, lifestyle adaptations and feelings towards a gluten-
free diet. J Hum Nutr Diet. 2016;29(3):374–82.  
98.  
Böhn L, Störsrud S, Simrén M. Nutrient intake in patients with irritable bowel 
syndrome compared with the general population. Neurogastroenterol Motil. 
2013;25(1):23.  
99.  
Williams EA, Nai X, Corfe BM. Dietary intakes in people with irritable bowel 
syndrome. BMC Gastroenterol. 2011 3;11(1):9.  
100.  Catassi G, Lionetti E, Gatti S, Catassi C. The Low FODMAP Diet: Many 
Questionks for a Catchy Acronym. Nutrients. 2017;9(3):292.  
101.  Ostgaard H, Hausken T, Gundersen D, El-Salhy M. Diet and effects of diet 
 37 
 
management on quality of life and symptoms in patients with irritable bowel 
syndrome. Mol Med Rep. 2012;5(6):1382–90.  
102.  Biesiekierski JR, Peters SL, Newnham ED, Rosella O, Muir JG, Gibson PR. No 
effects of gluten in patients with self-reported non-celiac gluten sensitivity 
after dietary reduction of fermentable, poorly absorbed, short-chain 
carbohydrates. Gastroenterology. 2013;145(2):320-8-3.  
103.  Tuck CJ, Muir JG, Barrett JS, Gibson PR. Fermentable oligosaccharides, 
disaccharides, monosaccharides and polyols: role in irritable bowel syndrome. 
Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014;8(7):819–34.  
104.  Christodoulides S, Dimidi E, Fragkos KC, Farmer AD, Whelan K, Scott SM. 
Systematic review with meta-analysis: effect of fibre supplementation on 
chronic idiopathic constipation in adults. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 
2016;44(2):103–16.  
105.  Cockerell KM, Watkins ASM, Reeves LB, Goddard L, Lomer MCE. Effects of 
linseeds on the symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome: a pilot randomised 
controlled trial. J Hum Nutr Diet. 2012;25(5):435–43.  
106.  Dimidi E, Christodoulides S, Fragkos KC, Scott SM, Whelan K. The effect of 
probiotics on functional constipation in adults: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am J Clin Nutr. 2014;100(4):1075–84.  
107.  Ford AC, Quigley EMM, Lacy BE, Lembo AJ, Saito YA, Schiller LR, et al. Efficacy 
of Prebiotics, Probiotics, and Synbiotics in Irritable Bowel Syndrome and 
Chronic Idiopathic Constipation: Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Am J 
Gastroenterol. 2014;109(10):1547–61.  
108.  Chey WD, Whelan K. Dietary guidelines for irritable bowel syndrome are 
important for gastroenterologists, dietitians and people with irritable bowel 
syndrome. J Hum Nutr Diet. 2016;29(5):547–8.  
109.  Gibson GR, Hutkins R, Sanders ME, Prescott SL, Reimer RA, Salminen SJ, et al. 
 38 
 
Expert consensus document: The International Scientific Association for 
Probiotics and Prebiotics (ISAPP) consensus statement on the definition and 
scope of prebiotics. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017;14(8):491–502.  
110.  Wilson B, Whelan K. Prebiotic inulin-type fructans and galacto-
oligosaccharides: definition, specificity, function, and application in 
gastrointestinal disorders. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017;32:64–8.  
111.  Roberfroid M, Gibson GR, Hoyles L, McCartney AL, Rastall R, Rowland I, et al. 
Prebiotic effects: metabolic and health benefits. Br J Nutr. 2010;104(S2):S1–
63.  
112.  Pedersen N, Andersen NN, Végh Z, Jensen L, Ankersen DV, Felding M, et al. 
Ehealth: Low FODMAP diet vs Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG in irritable bowel 
syndrome. World J Gastroenterol. 2014;20(43):16215.  
113.  Halpert A, Dalton CB, Palsson O, Morris C, Hu Y, Bangdiwala S, et al. What 
Patients Know About Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) and What They Would 
Like to Know. National Survey on Patient Educational Needs in IBS and 
Development and Validation of the Patient Educational Needs Questionnaire 
(PEQ). Am J Gastroenterol. 2007;102(9):1972–82.  
 
 
 
 39 
 
Box 1 Rome IV diagnostic criteria for irritable bowel syndrome and the approach 
the subtyping IBS.   
Rome IV Diagnostic Criteria for Irritable Bowel Syndrome 
Recurrent abdominal pain, on average, at least 1 day per week in the last three months, 
associated with two or more of the following criteria: 
1. Related to defecation 
2. Associated with a change in frequency of stool 
3. Associated with a change in form (appearance) of stool 
 
These criteria must be fulfilled for the last three months with symptom onset at least six 
months before diagnosis. 
 
Rome IV Diagnostic Criteria for IBS Subtypes 
IBS subtype should be classified for all patients. For epidemiology or clinical practice, this can 
be based upon retrospective estimate of the frequency of different stool types using the 
Bristol Stool Form Scale (BSFS). However, for clinical trials, subtyping should be based upon 
14 days of stool diary reports (Panel A).  
 
 
During assessment of IBS subtype, patients should not be receiving medication to treat 
bowel habit abnormalities (i.e. should occur off laxatives and antidiarrheal agents). IBS 
subtyping is more accurate when patients have at least 4 days of abnormal bowel habits per 
month and subtyping should be based on days where abnormal bowel habits occurred. The 
criteria for the different subtypes are described in the table below and in Panel B. 
 
 
Hard or lumpy stools 
(BSFS 1 or 2)  
Loose or watery stools 
(BSFS 6 or 7) 
IBS constipation (IBS-C) 
>25% of stools 
<25% of stools 
IBS diarrhoea (IBS-D) 
<25% of stools 
>25% of stools 
IBS mixed (IBS-M) 
>25% of stools 
>25% of stools 
IBS unclassified (IBS-U) 
<25% of stools 
<25% of stools 
 
 40 
 
 
Panels A and B are reproduced with permission from [31] Lacy B, Mearin F, Chang L, Chey 
WD, Lembo AJ, Simren M, Spiller R. Gastroenterology 2016;150:1393–1407. 
 
 
 41 
 
 
Figure 1. FODMAP intake and symptoms during the three stages of the low FODMAP diet 
Prior to dietary counselling from a dietitian, FODMAP intake in the habitual diet varies from 
day to day but is above the FODMAP tolerance threshold for that patient who therefore 
experiences functional gut symptoms. (i) During FODMAP restriction, total FODMAP intake 
is dramatically reduced to below the tolerance threshold and symptoms respond in 50-80% 
of patients. (ii) During FODMAP reintroduction, whilst continuing with FODMAP restriction, 
FODMAP-containing foods are used as challenges. Challenge foods are consumed in 
increasing amounts over a 3-day period whilst monitoring symptoms, with each 3-day 
period separated by at least 1 day depending upon symptom provocation. (iii) During 
FODMAP personalisation, FODMAP-containing foods that were successfully challenged can 
be reintroduced into the diet over the long term in order to increase dietary variety, whilst 
keeping the type and total amount of FODMAP intake below the tolerance threshold for 
that patient in order to limit functional gut symptoms. 
 42 
 
Table 1: Selection of assessment tools to measure gastrointestinal symptoms, stool form and quality of life in IBS 
Tool 
Description 
Validation and uses 
Global symptom 
question (33)  
Single question with dichotomous (yes/no) 
response to measures global symptoms (e.g. “Did 
you have adequate relief of your IBS symptoms?”)  
Validated to evaluate relief from pain/discomfort (33). Used 
as primary endpoint in clinical trials (34) and assessment of 
global symptomatology (35). However, complex series of 
symptoms must be operationalised into a single question 
and response. 
Gastrointestinal  
Symptom Rating 
Scale (GSRS) (36) 
15-item symptom questionnaire with a 4-point or 
7-point Likert scale for symptom severity 
Validated in IBS (36) and used in clinical outcome trials (37) 
and in low FODMAP dietary trials (21).  
Gastrointestinal  
Symptom Rating 
Scale  for IBS (GSRS-
IBS) (38) 
13-item symptom questionnaire using a 7 point 
Likert scale for symptom severity 
GSRS-IBS expanded on the previous GSRS to include 
symptoms characteristic of IBS (pain, diarrhoea, 
constipation, bloating, satiety). Validated for use in clinical 
trials of IBS in one study (33) 
Visual Analogue Scale 
for IBS (VAS-IBS) (39) 
9-item symptom questionnaire measuring the 
response of IBS symptoms to treatment. Scores 
are calculated for each item by measuring 
responses on a 100 mm VAS anchored with 0 
(very severe discomfort) and 100 (no discomfort 
at all)   
Not fully validated. Evaluated in female patients with IBS, 
for use in research and clinical practice (39) 
IBS Severity Scoring 
System (IBS-SSS) (40) 
Two-part questionnaire with first part consisting 
of 5 items regarding symptom severity. Each item 
generates a maximum score of 100 using VAS, 
leading to a total score of 500. Scores indicate IBS 
symptom severity i.e. mild (75-175), moderate 
(175-300) and severe (>300). A reduction of 50 
points or of 50% have been used to indicate a 
minimally clinically important difference in 
symptoms. 
Validated in IBS (40) and used as a primary outcome 
measure in drug trials (34) and dietary trials (34,41).  
 43 
 
Bristol Stool Form 
Scale (42) 
7-point scale with written and pictorial 
descriptors of stool form. Types 1-2 considered 
hard, Types 3-5 considered ‘normal’, Types 6-7 
considered loose/liquid. 
Validated as a measure of whole gut transit time. Used in 
clinical and research settings to measure stool form (42). 
Widely used in IBS research studies and generally valid 
against gold standards (43) 
36-Item Short-Form 
Health Survey (SF-36) 
(44) 
36-item health-related quality of life 
questionnaire using a multi item scale that 
measures eight health concepts each scored from 
0 (poor health) to 100 (optimal health)   
Validated in clinical practice and research (45). Generic 
measure often used in combination with a disease-specific 
measure of quality of life.  
IBS Quality of Life 
questionnaire (IBS-
QOL) (46) 
34-item IBS-specific quality of life questionnaire 
using a 5 point Likert scale. 
Validated in female patients with moderate to severe IBS 
(47). Preferred tool for establishing changes in IBS-specific 
quality of life (35) 
 
 
 
 
 44 
 
Table 2 Categories of FODMAPs, examples of their major sources and their digestion and absorption 
Categories of FODMAPs 
Examples of major sources 
Digestion and absorption process 
Oligosaccharides 
 
 
 
Fructans (oligofructose, inulin, fructo-
 
oligosaccharides (FOS)) 
Wheat, 
rye, 
onion, 
garlic, 
artichoke, low fat dairy products 
Humans lack enzymes to hydrolyse oligosaccharides so are 
no absorbed  
 
Galacto-oligosaccharides 
(GOS) 
 
(Raffinose, Stachyose) 
Pulses, legumes, some nuts 
Disaccharide 
 
 
 
Lactose 
Milk and milk products 
The enzyme lactase is required for hydrolysis and absorption 
in the small intestine. Lactase expression decreases over 
time following weaning depending on ethnicity  
Monosaccharide 
 
 
 
Fructose 
Mango, fig, honey, fructose corn 
syrup, 
sweetener 
in 
dairy 
products, jam 
Absorbed in the small intestine via GLUT5 and GLUT2 
transporters.  Glucose aids fructose absorption via GLUT2 
and in some individuals fructose malabsorption occurs when 
it is in excess of glucose or when there is a high fructose load 
Polyols 
 
 
 
Sorbitol 
Stoned fruit, apple 
Passive absorption along the length of the small intestine 
depending on molecular size, intestinal pore size, small 
intestinal transit time and presence of gastrointestinal 
disease 
 
Mannitol 
Cauliflower, mushroom 
 
Lactitol, xylitol, erythritol, maltitol 
Sugar free gum 
This table provides only examples of major sources of different FODMAPs. It is not a comprehensive list and is insufficient to form the 
basis of FODMAP restriction. 
 
 
 
