 EDITORIAL
Ensuring that Patients Receive Full Cardiac Pharmacotherapy
Services: A Pharmacist'
s Call to Arms
C Michael White
Whileclinicaltrials haveproventhat use of certaincardiovascular drugs improves morbidity and mortality, thesedrugs are not
widely used,they are by and large prescribed in suboptimal doses, and their benefitis further diminished by nonadherence.
Pharmacists have theability to improve thesurvival of patients with cardiovascular risks. Thiscanonlybeaccomplished through the
effortsof the individual pharmacist and the furtherdevelopment of health-system management services. Pharmacists needto
leverage theiraccess to patients, theirlargepatient base, andtheirknowledge of refill datesto improve patient care. Support and
development of more pharmacist-elirected anticoagulation, hyperlipidemia, andhypertension clinics arealsoneeded.
KEYWORDS:cardiovascular drugs, pharmacotherapy services.
AnnPharmacother 2006;40:2248-50.
Published Online, 31 Oct2006, www.theannals.com.DOI1 0.1345/aph.1 H379
Y
OU, the pharmacist, can impact countless lives every
year by ensuring that your patients receive cardiovas-
cular drugs associated with morbidity and mortalitybene-
fits, that correct dosages are being used, and that patients
are adherent. Major clinical trials, costing millions of dol-
lars and taking years to complete, have clearly identified
pharmacologic strategies proven to reduce the morbidity
and mortalityof patients with cardiovascularrisks.'
While
thesestudiesclearlyguide whichdrugs shouldbe used and
whatdose (or goal)to achieve,translating clinicaltrialevi-
dence into practicemethodshas been suboptimal.
Extent ofthe Problem
Atrialfibrillation is the leadingcause of stroke.'
Clinical.
trialshave proven that warfarinreduces stroke risk among
patients with paroxysmal or persistent atrial fibrillation.
However,data from the NationalDisease and Therapeutic
Index (NOT!) and the National AmbulatoryMedical Care
Surveys (NAMCS) found that only approximately 51 %
and 45%, respectively, of eligiblepatientswith atrialfibril-
lation received warfarin therapy.'
To make matters worse,
Author information provided attheendofthetext.
in an evaluationof 660 patientswith atrialfibrillation con-
ducted in 2000, patients taking warfarin achieved a thera-
peutic international normalized ratio only about 36-47%
of the time if they were treatedin a physician'
soffice.'
While several studies show mortality benefit in post-
myocardialinfarction (MI) patientsusing ~
-blockers,
long-
term use of these agents remains low.The National Com-
mitteefor Quality Assurance (NCQA) found that in 2004,
96%,94%, and 85% of patients in commercial health
plans, Medicare, and Medicaid, respectively,were given a
~
-blocker
after experiencingan MP However,the contin-
ued use of ~
-blockers
for 6 months after discharge from
the hospital was shown for only 67%,61 %, and 70% of
subjectsin commercialhealthplans,Medicare,and Medic-
aid, respectively.Long-term ~
-blocker
use is even lower.
In the NDTI and NAMCS surveys (year 2001 and 2000
data), the use of l3-blockers ranged from 38% to 40%!; a
sub-analysis from 2003 of HERS (Heartand Estrogen/pro-
gestinReplacementStudy) found that only 33% of women
received a ~
-blocker
for secondary prevention of a coro-
nary event.'
Even when ~
-blockers
are used, 52-89% of
patients in clinical practice are receiving doses post-MI
that are less than 50% of those studied in clinical trials."
While randomized trials have not specifically evaluated
2248 •
TheAnnalsof Pharmacotherapy
•
2006December, Volume 40
wwwtheannalscom
 the clinical implications of suboptimal dosing, it cannot
simply be assumed that the same degree of benefit is de-
rived as if studieddoseswere used.
In chronic heart failure (CHF), l3-blockers reduce over-
all mortality; however, inthe EFFECT (Enhanced Feed-
back for Effective Cardiac Treatment) study,of 1418 pa-
tients with CHF recently discharged from the hospital,
only 43%, 36%, and 28% of patientsat low, medium,and
high risk of death, respectively, received l3-blockers at the
90 day follow-up afterdischarge,"
Aspirin is an important therapy in patients with coro-
nary artery disease, reducing the risk of first MI among
those with coronary disease but without a previous MI or
reducing overall mortalityamong patientswith a previous
MI. However,thisover-the-counter therapywas employed
in only 44% of eligible patients with coronary disease in
2002, according to the NDTI! In the HERS trial, 83% of
women were receiving aspirinor another antiplateletdrug
for secondaryprevention of coronary disease.'
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors re-
duce overall mortalityin both post-MIand CHF patients.'
The HERS trial found that only 18% of women received
an ACE inhibitor for secondary prevention of a coronary
event.4 In the NDTI and NAMCS surveys, 38% and 41%
of patients with CHF were receiving therapy in 2002 and
1999,respectively.'
ACEinhibitorsarealso underdosed. In
a retrospectivestudy of 314 patients with CHF,only 22%
ofthose receiving an ACE inhibitorreceivedcurrentlyrec-
ommendeddoses.'
In an evaluationof 124971 membersof a managed-care
organization,only a minority of patientsreceivedadequate
lipid therapy.'
Of the 6538 patients with proven coronary
disease, 33% did not have theirlipid concentrations evalu-
ated and only 35% achieved their low-density lipoprotein
cholesterolgoal of less than 100mg/dl., In the multicenter
L-TAP (Lipid TreatmentAssessmentProject)study,4888
adults with dyslipidemiawho completed3 months of lipid
therapy were evaluated.? Overall,only 38% achieved their
goal lipid levels and, more disconcerting, only 18% of
those with established coronary disease achieved their
goals. The lackof goalattainmentlikelystemsfromunder-
utilizationof lipid-loweringtherapy (only 55% of women
in HERS received lipid-lowering therapy'
), underdosing,
and patientnonadherence.
The SeventhReportof the Joint National Committeeon
Prevention,Detection,Evaluation,and Treatmentof High
Blood Pressure, published in 2003, reported that from
1976 to 1980,only 10%of patientswith hypertension had
control of their blood pressureP From 1988 to 1991,this
improved to 29% but has since stagnated; from 1999 to
2000, the percentage was only 34%. This means that ap-
proximately two-thirds of patientswithhypertension in the
US do not have adequate blood pressure control, Even
worse,currently,only about 70% of people withhyperten-
sionknow that theyhave it and only59% are receivingan-
tihypertensive treatment.
In addition to physicians'
underutilization and under-
dosing of appropriatetherapy,patients themselves are not
fully adherent to treatment. In a study of the Duke Data-
bank for Cardiovascular Disease (DDCD) over the years
1995-2002, investigatorsevaluated the use of life-saving
medications for coronary artery disease and then ques-
tioned subjects about adherence." Overall, 83% used as-
pirin, but only 71% of the total population took the drug
regularly;61% used l3-blockers, but only 46% of the total
population tookthem regularly; and 54% used lipid-lower-
ing therapy, but only 44% of the total population used it
regularly. Investigators questioned the CHF population
aboutACE inhibitoruse and foundthat 51% of patientsre-
portedACE inhibitoruse, but only 39% of the total popu-
lationtook the drugsregularly.
Pharmacists as the Solution
Pharmacists in all areasof practiceare neededto impact
this problem related to cardiovascular drug use, as it has
practitioner-, patient-, and health system-related compo-
nents. Communitypharmacists have access to millionsof
patients,attain patients'
trust and respect (pharmacistsare
frequently rated either the first or second most trusted
healthprofessionals in the US), and are in the best position
to assess for nonadherence because they assign the refill
dates and are aware of expirationdates. Pharmacistscould
leverage this advantage to improve patient care. In the
community, blood pressure and lipid screenings can help
patients with unidentifiedhypertension or hyperlipidemia
receive the treatment they need. Educating patients about
bloodpressuregoalsand thenhavingpatientsmeasuretheir
bloodpressure at homeandkeepa bloodpressure logforre-
view can detect undertreatment or nonadherence. Periodic
point-of-care lipid checks in the pharmacycan also detect
undertreatment or nonadherence. Patients whodo notreceive
refills on time could be queried about adherence and be
counseled about the importanceof adhering to therapy.If
mild adverse effects are hampering adherence (eg, mild
dizziness 2 hours after carvediloltherapy) counseling(eg,
take the drug with food and not at the same time of day as
othervasoactive drugs) couldcorrect theproblem. Peoplenot
achieving theirgoalsdue to undertreatment couldbe referred
backto theirphysicians formoreaggressive therapy.
In all practice settings,patientsover the age of 60 years
withatrial fibrillation or younger patients withdiabetes melli-
tus,hypertension, CHF,or a history of thromboembolism can
be assessed andreferred to theirphysicians iftheyare notre-
ceivingwarfarin.Patientswho have had an MI can also be
assessed to ensurethattheyhavebeenprescribed [3-blockers,
ACE inhibitors,lipid-loweringtherapy,and/oraspirin.Pa-
tientswithCHF can be assessedto ensurethat they receive
www.theannals.com
TheAnnalsofPharmacotherapy
•
2006December, Volume 40
•
2249
 CMWhite
ACEinhibitors and ~
-blockers.
Forpatients whoeitherhave
CHForarepost-Ml,thedosages of thesedrugscanbeevalu-
atedand comparedwiththoseusedin clinicaltrialsand rec-
ommended in nationalguidelines.The ability to measure
bloodpressure andheartratecan helpto identify people with
hypotension or bradycardia in whommoreaggressive thera-
pywouldnotbe needed.
How closely is adherence to drug therapy associated
with mortalitybenefitpost-MIand in CHF? In the DDCD
study,consistent use of medications was associated with
25-58% lower mortality hazardratios,comparedwith spo-
radic use," In 1998,Chow and p2 describedthe impact of
clinical pharmacists attending rounds on a cardiac inten-
sive care unit over one month. Of the 86 successfulinter-
ventions,6% of the recommendations concernedinitiation
of agents with mortality benefitand 21% were recommen-
dations to increase the dose of these drugs to better coin-
cide withthoseassociated with mortality benefit.
We shouldalso not underestimate the value of pharma-
cist-run anticoagulation, lipid, and hypertension clinics,
which have been proven to increasethe percentageof pa-
tients achieving their respective goals versus standard of
care.2,lJ,l4 It is estimatedby NCQA that if all patients with
MIs had cholesterol controlratesequal to thoseof the best
healthplansin thecountry (thosein the 90% percentile for
control), up to 7200 additionallives could be saved annu-
ally. A summaryof key studiesvalidating that pharmacists
in the community, clinic, and hospital can positively im-
pact disease management, patient satisfaction, quality of
life,and healthcare costs is providedby the AmericanCol-
legeof ClinicalPharmacy,"
Finally,professionalpharmacy organizations and phar-
macy chains shoulddevelopcurricula,processes,and sup-
port materials to ensure that pharmacists'
involvement in
the areaof cardiacpharmacotherapy servicesis successful.
When these programsare successfully employed and data
are gathered,commercial healthplansand Medicaid/Medi-
care should pay for these services;In any case, we should
be involvedin doing this:livesdependon it.
C Michael White PharmD FCCPFCP, Associate Professor, School
of Pharmacy, Universityof Connecticut, Storrs, CT; Director, Car-
diac Pharmacology Service, Hartford Hospital, Hartford, CT
Reprints: Dr.White, Drug Information Center, HartfordHospital,
Hartford, CT06102·5037, fax860/545-2277, cmwhite@harthosp.org
References
l. StaffordRS,RadleyDC.The underutilization ofcardiacmedications of
proven benefit,1990to 2002.J Am Coli Cardiol 2003;41:56-61.
2. SamsaGP,MataeharDB,Goldstein LB,et aI.Qualityof anticoagulation
management among patients withatrial fibrillation: results froma review of
medical records from2 communities. ArchIntern Med2000;160:967-73.
3. National Committee forQuality Assurance. The stateofhealth carequality
2005: industry trends and analysis. wwwncqa.org(accessed2006Julll).
4. Vittinghoff E, Shlipak MG,Varosy PO,et al. Riskfactors andsecondary
prevention in womenwith heart disease:the Heartand Estrogen/pro-
gestinReplacement Study. AnnInternMed2003;138:81-9.
5. WhiteCM. Prevention of suboptimal beta-blocker treatmentin patients
withmyocardial infarction. AnnPharmacother 1999;33:1063-72.
DOl 10.1345/aph.l8395
6. LeeOS,1\1JV,Juurlink ON,et aI.Risktreatment mismatch inthe phar-
macotherapy of heartfailure. JAMA2005;294: 1240-7.
7. Brown-Luzier A, ForrestA, AdelmanM, HawariFI, SchentagJJ, Izzo
JL. Impactof angiotensin-converting enzymeinhibitorunderdosing on
rehospitalization rates in congestiveheart failure.Am J Cardiol 1998;
82:465-9.
8. StrakaRJ,Taheri R,CooperSL,TanAW,SmithAC.Assessment ofhy-
percholesterolemiacontrol in a managedcare organization.Pharma-
cotherapy 2001;21:818-27.
9. PearsonTA,LauroraI, Chu H, KafonekS. The lipidtreatmentassess-
mentproject(L-TAP): a multicenter surveyto evaluatethe percentages
of dyslipidemic patientsreceiving lipidloweringtherapyandachieving
low-densitylipoproteincholesterolgoals. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:
459-67.
10. Chobanian AV, Bakris GI, BlackHR, et aI.The seventh reportof theJoint
National Committee on prevention,detection,evaluation, andtreatment
of highblood pressure: theJNC7 report. JAMA2003;289:2560-72.
II. NewbyLK, LaPointNM, Chen AY, et aI.Long-termadherenceto evi-
dence-based secondary prevention incoronaryarterydisease.Circulation
2006;113:203-12.
12. White CM, Chow MSS. Cost impactand clinical benefits of focused
rounding in theintensive careunit.HospPharm1998;33:419-23.
13. FolstadJ, CaronMF,CioffiST,WhiteCM.Controlling hyperlipidemia:
theroleof pharmacist managed clinics. FedPract2003;20:20-8.
14. Schumock GT,ButlerMG,MeekPO, Vermuleulen LC, Arondekar BV,
BaumanJL. Evidence of theeconomic benefitof clinicalpharmacy ser-
vices: 1996-2000.Pharmacotherapy 2003;23:113-32.
15. AmericanCollegeof Clinical Pharmacy.Evidenceof the valueof the
pharmacist. www.accp.com/positionipaper6.pdf(accessed 2006Aug9).
EXTRAcro
Mientrasestudiosclfnicos a gran escala han demostrado que el uso de
ciertos medicamentoscardiovascularesmejoran la morbididady la
mortalidaddel paciente,su uso no es tan amplio como se esperarfa,y su
empleo en dosis sub-optimas y la faltade adherenciaaI tratamiento
contribuyena que los beneficiosfarmacol6gicosde estos medicamentos
estenIirnitados. Los farmaceuticos poseen la habilidadde mejorar la
supervivenciade estos pacientes.Para lograr este objetivo, se requiere
de los esfuerzosdel farmaceutico y del desarrollode buenos serviciosde
manejode la salud. Los farmaceuticos necesitanfomentar su facilitadde
acceso aI paciente,su mantenirnientode una amplia base de datos de
pacientes,y su conocirnientode las fechas de suministro de
medicamentosa los pacientes,todos esto contribuyendoa la mejora del
cuidado del paciente.La comunidad necesitamostrarsu apoyo aI
desarrollode mas farmaceuticos que trabajenen clfnicasde
anticoagulaci6n,hiperlipidernias,e hipertensi6n.
Encamaci6n C Suarez
Bien que des essais c1iniques aient preuve que l'
utilisation de certains
medicamentscardiovasculairesameliorent la morbiditeet la mortalite,
ils ne sont pas largementutilises,sont globalementprescritsaposologies
insuffisantes,et voient,de plus, leur beneficeencore diminue par la non
compliance.Les pharmaciens ont la capacite d'
ameliorer la survie de
ces patients.A cet effet,un effort doit eire fait du cote de chaque
pharmacien et du developpementde servicesdu systeme de sante. Nous
devons agir sur l'
amelioration de l'
acces des patients, leur prise en
charge,et la connaissancedes echeances de renouvellementde
delivrancespourameliorer Ie niveau de soins. Nous devons souteniret
developperdavantageles consultationspharmaceutiques dans
l'
anticoagulation, l'
hyperlipidemie,et l'
hypertension.
MichelLe Duff
2250 •
TheAnnals ofPharmacotherapy
•
2006December, Volume 40
wwwiheannalscom
