 EDITORIAL
2248
I
The Annals of Pharmacotherapy    I
2006 December, Volume 40
www.theannals.com
Y
ou, the pharmacist, can impact countless lives every
year by ensuring that your patients receive cardiovas-
cular drugs associated with morbidity and mortality bene-
fits, that correct dosages are being used, and that patients
are adherent. Major clinical trials, costing millions of dol-
lars and taking years to complete, have clearly identified
pharmacologic strategies proven to reduce the morbidity
and mortality of patients with cardiovascular risks.1 While
these studies clearly guide which drugs should be used and
what dose (or goal) to achieve, translating clinical trial evi-
dence into practice methods has been suboptimal. 
Extent of the Problem
Atrial fibrillation is the leading cause of stroke.1 Clinical
trials have proven that warfarin reduces stroke risk among
patients with paroxysmal or persistent atrial fibrillation.
However, data from the National Disease and Therapeutic
Index (NDTI) and the National Ambulatory Medical Care
Surveys (NAMCS) found that only approximately 51%
and 45%, respectively, of eligible patients with atrial fibril-
lation received warfarin therapy.1 To make matters worse,
in an evaluation of 660 patients with atrial fibrillation con-
ducted in 2000, patients taking warfarin achieved a thera-
peutic international normalized ratio only about 36–47%
of the time if they were treated in a physician’s office.2
While several studies show mortality benefit in post–
myocardial infarction (MI) patients using β-blockers, long-
term use of these agents remains low. The National Com-
mittee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) found that in 2004,
96%, 94%, and 85% of patients in commercial health
plans, Medicare, and Medicaid, respectively, were given a
β-blocker after experiencing an MI.3 However, the contin-
ued use of β-blockers for 6 months after discharge from
the hospital was shown for only 67%, 61%, and 70% of
subjects in commercial health plans, Medicare, and Medic-
aid, respectively. Long-term β-blocker use is even lower.
In the NDTI and NAMCS surveys (year 2001 and 2000
data), the use of β-blockers ranged from 38% to 40%1; a
sub-analysis from 2003 of HERS (Heart and Estrogen/pro-
gestin Replacement Study) found that only 33% of women
received a β-blocker for secondary prevention of a coro-
nary event.4 Even when β-blockers are used, 52–89% of
patients in clinical practice are receiving doses post-MI
that are less than 50% of those studied in clinical trials.5
While randomized trials have not specifically evaluated
Ensuring that Patients Receive Full Cardiac Pharmacotherapy
Services: A Pharmacist’s Call to Arms
C Michael White 
While clinical trials have proven that use of certain cardiovascular drugs improves morbidity and mortality, these drugs are not
widely used, they are by and large prescribed in suboptimal doses, and their benefit is further diminished by nonadherence.
Pharmacists have the ability to improve the survival of patients with cardiovascular risks. This can only be accomplished through the
efforts of the individual pharmacist and the further development of health-system management services. Pharmacists need to
leverage their access to patients, their large patient base, and their knowledge of refill dates to improve patient care. Support and
development of more pharmacist-directed anticoagulation, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension clinics are also needed. 
KEY WORDS: cardiovascular drugs, pharmacotherapy services.
Ann Pharmacother 2006;40:2248-50.
Published Online, 31 Oct 2006, www.theannals.com, DOI 10.1345/aph.1H379
Author information provided at the end of the text.
 
 at East Tennessee State University on June 12, 2015
aop.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 the clinical implications of suboptimal dosing, it cannot
simply be assumed that the same degree of benefit is de-
rived as if studied doses were used.
In chronic heart failure (CHF), β-blockers reduce over-
all mortality; however, in the EFFECT (Enhanced Feed-
back for Effective Cardiac Treatment) study, of 1418 pa-
tients with CHF recently discharged from the hospital,
only 43%, 36%, and 28% of patients at low, medium, and
high risk of death, respectively, received β-blockers at the
90 day follow-up after discharge.6
Aspirin is an important therapy in patients with coro-
nary artery disease, reducing the risk of first MI among
those with coronary disease but without a previous MI or
reducing overall mortality among patients with a previous
MI. However, this over-the-counter therapy was employed
in only 44% of eligible patients with coronary disease in
2002, according to the NDTI.1 In the HERS trial, 83% of
women were receiving aspirin or another antiplatelet drug
for secondary prevention of coronary disease.4
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors re-
duce overall mortality in both post-MI and CHF patients.1
The HERS trial found that only 18% of women received
an ACE inhibitor for secondary prevention of a coronary
event.4 In the NDTI and NAMCS surveys, 38% and 41%
of patients with CHF were receiving therapy in 2002 and
1999, respectively.1 ACE inhibitors are also underdosed. In
a retrospective study of 314 patients with CHF, only 22%
of those receiving an ACE inhibitor received currently rec-
ommended doses.7
In an evaluation of 124 971 members of a managed-care
organization, only a minority of patients received adequate
lipid therapy.8 Of the 6538 patients with proven coronary
disease, 33% did not have their lipid concentrations evalu-
ated and only 35% achieved their low-density lipoprotein
cholesterol goal of less than 100 mg/dL. In the multicenter
L-TAP (Lipid Treatment Assessment Project) study, 4888
adults with dyslipidemia who completed 3 months of lipid
therapy were evaluated.9 Overall, only 38% achieved their
goal lipid levels and, more disconcerting, only 18% of
those with established coronary disease achieved their
goals. The lack of goal attainment likely stems from under-
utilization of lipid-lowering therapy (only 55% of women
in HERS received lipid-lowering therapy4), underdosing,
and patient nonadherence. 
The Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on
Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High
Blood Pressure, published in 2003, reported that from
1976 to 1980, only 10% of patients with hypertension had
control of their blood pressure.10 From 1988 to 1991, this
improved to 29% but has since stagnated; from 1999 to
2000, the percentage was only 34%. This means that ap-
proximately two-thirds of patients with hypertension in the
US do not have adequate blood pressure control. Even
worse, currently, only about 70% of people with hyperten-
sion know that they have it and only 59% are receiving an-
tihypertensive treatment. 
In addition to physicians’ underutilization and under-
dosing of appropriate therapy, patients themselves are not
fully adherent to treatment. In a study of the Duke Data-
bank for Cardiovascular Disease (DDCD) over the years
1995–2002, investigators evaluated the use of life-saving
medications for coronary artery disease and then ques-
tioned subjects about adherence.11 Overall, 83% used as-
pirin, but only 71% of the total population took the drug
regularly; 61% used β-blockers, but only 46% of the total
population took them regularly; and 54% used lipid-lower-
ing therapy, but only 44% of the total population used it
regularly. Investigators questioned the CHF population
about ACE inhibitor use and found that 51% of patients re-
ported ACE inhibitor use, but only 39% of the total popu-
lation took the drugs regularly. 
Pharmacists as the Solution
Pharmacists in all areas of practice are needed to impact
this problem related to cardiovascular drug use, as it has
practitioner-, patient-, and health system–related compo-
nents. Community pharmacists have access to millions of
patients, attain patients’ trust and respect (pharmacists are
frequently rated either the first or second most trusted
health professionals in the US), and are in the best position
to assess for nonadherence because they assign the refill
dates and are aware of expiration dates. Pharmacists could
leverage this advantage to improve patient care. In the
community, blood pressure and lipid screenings can help
patients with unidentified hypertension or hyperlipidemia
receive the treatment they need. Educating patients about
blood pressure goals and then having patients measure their
blood pressure at home and keep a blood pressure log for re-
view can detect undertreatment or nonadherence. Periodic
point-of-care lipid checks in the pharmacy can also detect
undertreatment or nonadherence. Patients who do not receive
refills on time could be queried about adherence and be
counseled about the importance of adhering to therapy. If
mild adverse effects are hampering adherence (eg, mild
dizziness 2 hours after carvedilol therapy) counseling (eg,
take the drug with food and not at the same time of day as
other vasoactive drugs) could correct the problem. People not
achieving their goals due to undertreatment could be referred
back to their physicians for more aggressive therapy.
In all practice settings, patients over the age of 60 years
with atrial fibrillation or younger patients with diabetes melli-
tus, hypertension, CHF, or a history of thromboembolism can
be assessed and referred to their physicians if they are not re-
ceiving warfarin. Patients who have had an MI can also be
assessed to ensure that they have been prescribed β-blockers,
ACE inhibitors, lipid-lowering therapy, and/or aspirin. Pa-
tients with CHF can be assessed to ensure that they receive
The Annals of Pharmacotherapy    I
2006 December, Volume 40    I
2249
www.theannals.com
 at East Tennessee State University on June 12, 2015
aop.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 ACE inhibitors and β-blockers. For patients who either have
CHF or are post-MI, the dosages of these drugs can be evalu-
ated and compared with those used in clinical trials and rec-
ommended in national guidelines. The ability to measure
blood pressure and heart rate can help to identify people with
hypotension or bradycardia in whom more aggressive thera-
py would not be needed. 
How closely is adherence to drug therapy associated
with mortality benefit post-MI and in CHF? In the DDCD
study, consistent use of medications was associated with
25–58% lower mortality hazard ratios, compared with spo-
radic use.11 In 1998, Chow and I12 described the impact of
clinical pharmacists attending rounds on a cardiac inten-
sive care unit over one month. Of the 86 successful inter-
ventions, 6% of the recommendations concerned initiation
of agents with mortality benefit and 21% were recommen-
dations to increase the dose of these drugs to better coin-
cide with those associated with mortality benefit. 
We should also not underestimate the value of pharma-
cist-run anticoagulation, lipid, and hypertension clinics,
which have been proven to increase the percentage of pa-
tients achieving their respective goals versus standard of
care.2,13,14 It is estimated by NCQA that if all patients with
MIs had cholesterol control rates equal to those of the best
health plans in the country (those in the 90% percentile for
control), up to 7200 additional lives could be saved annu-
ally. A summary of key studies validating that pharmacists
in the community, clinic, and hospital can positively im-
pact disease management, patient satisfaction, quality of
life, and healthcare costs is provided by the American Col-
lege of Clinical Pharmacy.15
Finally, professional pharmacy organizations and phar-
macy chains should develop curricula, processes, and sup-
port materials to ensure that pharmacists’ involvement in
the area of cardiac pharmacotherapy services is successful.
When these programs are successfully employed and data
are gathered, commercial health plans and Medicaid/Medi-
care should pay for these services. In any case, we should
be involved in doing this: lives depend on it.
C Michael White PharmD FCCP FCP, Associate Professor, School
of Pharmacy, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT; Director, Car-
diac Pharmacology Service, Hartford Hospital, Hartford, CT
Reprints: Dr. White, Drug Information Center, Hartford Hospital,
Hartford, CT 06102-5037, fax 860/545-2277, cmwhite@harthosp.org
References
1. Stafford RS, Radley DC. The underutilization of cardiac medications of
proven benefit, 1990 to 2002. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;41:56-61.
2. Samsa GP, Matachar DB, Goldstein LB, et al. Quality of anticoagulation
management among patients with atrial fibrillation: results from a review of
medical records from 2 communities. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:967-73. 
3. National Committee for Quality Assurance. The state of health care quality
2005: industry trends and analysis. www.ncqa.org (accessed 2006 Jul 11).
4. Vittinghoff E, Shlipak MG, Varosy PD, et al. Risk factors and secondary
prevention in women with heart disease: the Heart and Estrogen/pro-
gestin Replacement Study. Ann Intern Med 2003;138:81-9.
5. White CM. Prevention of suboptimal beta-blocker treatment in patients
with myocardial infarction. Ann Pharmacother 1999;33:1063-72. 
DOI 10.1345/aph.18395
6. Lee DS, Tu JV
, Juurlink DN, et al. Risk treatment mismatch in the phar-
macotherapy of heart failure. JAMA 2005;294:1240-7.
7. Brown-Luzier A, Forrest A, Adelman M, Hawari FI, Schentag JJ, Izzo
JL. Impact of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor underdosing on
rehospitalization rates in congestive heart failure. Am J Cardiol 1998;
82:465-9. 
8. Straka RJ, Taheri R, Cooper SL, Tan AW, Smith AC. Assessment of hy-
percholesterolemia control in a managed care organization. Pharma-
cotherapy 2001;21:818-27.
9. Pearson TA, Laurora I, Chu H, Kafonek S. The lipid treatment assess-
ment project (L-TAP): a multicenter survey to evaluate the percentages
of dyslipidemic patients receiving lipid lowering therapy and achieving
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol goals. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:
459-67.
10. Chobanian A
V
, Bakris GI, Black HR, et al. The seventh report of the Joint
National Committee on prevention, detection, evaluation, and treatment
of high blood pressure: the JNC 7 report. JAMA 2003;289:2560-72.
11. Newby LK, LaPoint NM, Chen AY, et al. Long-term adherence to evi-
dence-based secondary prevention in coronary artery disease. Circulation
2006;113:203-12.
12. White CM, Chow MSS. Cost impact and clinical benefits of focused
rounding in the intensive care unit. Hosp Pharm 1998;33:419-23. 
13. Folstad J, Caron MF, Cioffi ST, White CM. Controlling hyperlipidemia:
the role of pharmacist managed clinics. Fed Pract 2003;20:20-8.
14. Schumock GT, Butler MG, Meek PD, Vermuleulen LC, Arondekar BV,
Bauman JL. Evidence of the economic benefit of clinical pharmacy ser-
vices: 1996–2000. Pharmacotherapy 2003;23:113-32. 
15. American College of Clinical Pharmacy. Evidence of the value of the
pharmacist. www.accp.com/position/paper6.pdf (accessed 2006 Aug 9). 
EXTRACTO
Mientras estudios clínicos a gran escala han demostrado que el uso de
ciertos medicamentos cardiovasculares mejoran la morbididad y la
mortalidad del paciente, su uso no es tan amplio como se esperaría, y su
empleo en dosis sub-óptimas y la falta de adherencia al tratamiento
contribuyen a que los beneficios farmacológicos de estos medicamentos
estén limitados. Los farmacéuticos poseen la habilidad de mejorar la
supervivencia de estos pacientes. Para lograr este objetivo, se requiere
de los esfuerzos del farmacéutico y del desarrollo de buenos servicios de
manejo de la salud. Los farmacéuticos necesitan fomentar su facilitad de
acceso al paciente, su mantenimiento de una amplia base de datos de
pacientes, y su conocimiento de las fechas de suministro de
medicamentos a los pacientes, todos esto contribuyendo a la mejora del
cuidado del paciente. La comunidad necesita mostrar su apoyo al
desarrollo de más farmacéuticos que trabajen en clínicas de
anticoagulación, hiperlipidemias, e hipertensión.
Encarnación C Suárez
RÉSUMÉ
Bien que des essais cliniques aient prouvé que l’utilisation de certains
médicaments cardiovasculaires améliorent la morbidité et la mortalité,
ils ne sont pas largement utilisés, sont globalement prescrits à posologies
insuffisantes, et voient, de plus, leur bénéfice encore diminué par la non
compliance. Les pharmaciens ont la capacité d’améliorer la survie de
ces patients. A cet effet, un effort doit être fait du côté de chaque
pharmacien et du développement de services du système de santé. Nous
devons agir sur l’amélioration de l’accès des patients, leur prise en
charge, et la connaissance des échéances de renouvellement de
délivrances pour améliorer le niveau de soins. Nous devons soutenir et
développer davantage les consultations pharmaceutiques dans
l’anticoagulation, l’hyperlipidémie, et l’hypertension.
Michel Le Duff
2250
I
The Annals of Pharmacotherapy    I
2006 December, Volume 40
www.theannals.com
CM White
 at East Tennessee State University on June 12, 2015
aop.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
