 Repair of Torn Avascular Meniscal Cartilage Using
Undifferentiated Autologous Mesenchymal Stem
Cells: From In Vitro Optimization to a First-in-Human
Study
MICHAEL R. WHITEHOUSE,a,b NICHOLAS R. HOWELLS,a,b MICHAEL C. PARRY,a,c ERIC AUSTIN,d
WAEL KAFIENAH,e KYLA BRADY,f ALLEN E. GOODSHIP,g JONATHAN D. ELDRIDGE,b,h ASHLEY W. BLOM,a,b
ANTHONY P. HOLLANDERf,i
Key Words. Mesenchymal stem cells • Meniscal cartilage • Tissue engineering • Cell therapy
ABSTRACT
Meniscal cartilage tears are common and predispose to osteoarthritis (OA). Most occur in the avas-
cular portion of the meniscus where current repair techniques usually fail. We described previously
the use of undifferentiated autologous mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) seeded onto a collagen
scaffold (MSC/collagen-scaffold) to integrate meniscal tissues in vitro. Our objective was to trans-
late this method into a cell therapy for patients with torn meniscus, with the long-term goal of
delaying or preventing the onset of OA. After in vitro optimization, we tested an ovine-MSC/colla-
gen-scaffold in a sheep meniscal cartilage tear model with promising results after 13 weeks,
although repair was not sustained over 6 months. We then conducted a single center, prospective,
open-label first-in-human safety study of patients with an avascular meniscal tear. Autologous
MSCs were isolated from an iliac crest bone marrow biopsy, expanded and seeded into the colla-
gen scaffold. The resulting human-MSC/collagen-scaffold implant was placed into the meniscal
tear prior to repair with vertical mattress sutures and the patients were followed for 2 years. Five
patients were treated and there was significant clinical improvement on repeated measures analy-
sis. Three were asymptomatic at 24 months with no magnetic resonance imaging evidence of
recurrent tear and clinical improvement in knee function scores. Two required subsequent menis-
cectomy due to retear or nonhealing of the meniscal tear at approximately 15 months after
implantation. No other adverse events occurred. We conclude that undifferentiated MSCs could
provide a safe way to augment avascular meniscal repair in some patients. Registration: EU Clinical
Trials Register, 2010-024162-22. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2017;6:1237–1248
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT
Each knee has two menisci (medial and lateral) that sit in between the articular cartilage surfa-
ces found at the ends of the upper-leg and lower-leg bones. Tears to the meniscus are a com-
mon injury caused by excessive twisting force to the knee. Current standard of care for
avascular meniscal tears requires surgical removal of the damaged tissue (meniscectomy). How-
ever, meniscectomy compromises knee function and leads to associated clinical consequences
such as knee replacement surgery and a negative impact on quality of life. The authors have
developed a therapy combining undifferentiated mesenchymal stem cells with a collagen scaf-
fold to drive healing of the meniscal tear, so avoiding meniscectomy. The preliminary clinical
data are encouraging and suggest for the first time that repair of avascular meniscal tears is
possible.
INTRODUCTION
The menisci are fibrocartilagenous structures in
the knee.They have a role in load distribution, sta-
bility, lubrication, proprioception, and nutrition of
articular cartilage [1–5]. Damage to meniscal carti-
lage is one of the most common knee injuries [6]
and loss of meniscal tissue predisposes to
osteoarthritis (OA) [7]. Only the outer portion of
the meniscus retains a blood supply in the adult
and is therefore capable of healing following a
tear. Vascularity of the meniscus extends in
between 10% and 25% from the periphery [8, 9].
The majority of meniscal tears occur in the avas-
cular inner zone and thus do not heal [10]. There-
fore, the standard treatment of symptomatic
aMusculoskeletal Research
Unit, School of Clinical
Sciences, eSchool of Cellular
and Molecular Medicine,
University of Bristol, Bristol,
United Kingdom; bAvon
Orthopaedic Centre,
Southmead Hospital, North
Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol,
United Kingdom; cOrthopaedic
Oncology Unit, Royal
Orthopaedic Hospital,
Birmingham, United Kingdom;
dCMT Laboratory, NHS Blood
and Transplant, Speke,
Liverpool, United Kingdom;
fInstitute of Integrative
Biology, University of
Liverpool, Liverpool, United
Kingdom; gInstitute of
Orthopaedics, University
College London, United
Kingdom; hDepartment of
Orthopaedics, Bristol Royal
Infirmary, University Hospitals
Bristol, Bristol, United
Kingdom; iAzellon Ltd, London,
United Kingdom
Correspondence: Anthony P.
Hollander Ph.D., Institute of
Integrative Biology, University of
Liverpool, Biosciences Building,
Crown Street, Liverpool L69
7ZB, United Kingdom.
Telephone: 44 (0)151 795 4413;
Fax: 144 (0)151 795 4408;
e-mail: A.Hollander@liverpool.
ac.uk
Received 20 April 2016; accepted
for publication 7 November 2016;
published Online First on 15
December 2016.
O
c AlphaMed Press
1066-5099/2016/$30.00/0
http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/sctm.16-0199
This is an open access article
under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License,
which permits use, distribution
and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original work is
properly cited.
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2017;6:1237–1248 www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
TISSUE ENGINEERING AND REGENERATIVE MEDICINE
 meniscal tears is to remove the damaged portion of the tissue
(partial meniscectomy). A method of enhancing the healing
potential of tears in the avascular portion of the meniscus would
decrease the need for partial meniscectomy and could in the long
run lead to a reduction in the incidence of OA.
In our previous in vitro studies, we developed the concept of
using cells seeded onto an open matrix to drive the integration of
soft tissues such as cartilage [11]. We went on to show that undif-
ferentiated mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) seeded onto a collagen
scaffold induced integration of two pieces of meniscal tissue and
improved tensile strength of the repair compared to controls [12].
Differentiation of the MSCs to chondrocytes reduced the potential
of the cells to integrate with meniscal tissue. Furthermore success-
ful meniscal healing required interaction between the implanted
cells and the resident meniscal chondrocytes [12], suggesting that
the MSCs were acting through their trophic capacity [13–17],
rather than through direct synthesis of new tissue.
In the current study, we have optimized the MSC/collagen scaf-
fold and developed it into a cell therapy suitable for clinical evalua-
tion.We describe progress through initial testing in an ovine model
to a first-in-human study to assess the feasibility, safety and clinical
outcome of treatment of patients with avascular meniscal tear.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Isolation and Expansion of Human Marrow-Derived
MSCs for In Vitro Studies
Bone marrow plugs were collected from the femoral heads of
patients undergoing total hip replacement. All patients gave their
informed consent and the study was carried out according to local
ethical guidelines. Cells were suspended in stem cell expansion
medium consisting of low glucose Dulbecco’s Modified Eagles
Medium supplemented with 10% (v/v) Foetal Bovine Serum (FBS,
Thermo Scientific Hyclone, Loughborough, UK, www.fishersci.co.
uk), 1% (v/v) Glutamax (Sigma), and 1% (v/v) P/S (Sigma, Poole,
UK, www.sigmaaldrich.com). The serum batch was selected to
promote the growth and differentiation of MSCs [18]. The
medium was supplemented also with 10 ng/ml FGF-2 (Peprotech,
London, UK, www.peprotech.com). This growth factor has been
previously shown to enhance the MSC proliferation rate in vitro
[19, 20], to retain MSCs as undifferentiated cells during prolifera-
tion [21, 22] and to enhance chondrogenic differentiation when
the FGF-2 expanded MSCs are subsequently exposed to differen-
tiation conditions [19, 20]. The cell suspension was separated
from any bone in the sample by repeated washing with media.
The cells were centrifuged at 500 g for 5 minutes and the superna-
tant/fat removed. The resulting cell pellet was resuspended in
medium, and then plated at a seeding density of between 1.5 and
2.0 3 105 nucleated cells per cm2. These flasks were incubated at
378C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 and 95% air. Four
days were allowed before the first medium change and then the
medium was changed every other day until adherent cells reached
90% confluence and were ready for passaging. MSCs were charac-
terized for multilineage differentiation and expression of MSC
markers CD105, CD90, and VCAM-1a and for lack for expression of
CD34, as previously described [22].
Preparation of Sheep Meniscal Cartilage
Natural Fibrocartilage cylinders (5.0 mm in diameter and 3.0 mm
thick) were harvested from the avascular (white zone) of ovine
menisci using a dermal biopsy punch. They were rinsed and incu-
bated with phosphate buffered saline (Invitrogen Ltd, Paisley, UK,
www.thermofisher.com) containing 10% (v/v) Penicillin G (10.000
units per ml)/Streptomycin (10.000 lg/ml) antibiotic mixture (P/S;
Sigma) and 1% (v/v) Amphotericin B (250 mg/ml; Sigma) for
20 minutes. Viability of the fibrocartilage disks was maintained by
culture in basic medium containing Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s
medium (DMEM, Sigma) with 10 mM Hepes buffer (Sigma), P/S,
1% (v/v) nonessential amino acids (NEAA; Sigma), 1% (v/v) Gluta-
max (Sigma), and 10% amphotericin B (Sigma) at 378C in a 5% CO2
environment. The explants were used in the integration experi-
ments within 3 days of culture.
Cell Seeding
Collagen Scaffolds (Ultrafoam Collagen Sponge; Bard, UK, www.
barduk.com) were cut into 6-mm diameter discs and seeded with
human MSCs at a concentration of 1 3 106 cells per cm2. The sus-
pension was loaded drop wise onto the scaffold placed in ultralow
attachment wells of a 24-well plate (Corning, Acton, USA). After 4
hours, 1.5 ml of expansion medium containing 10 ng/ml FGF-2
(Peprotech) was added and changed daily. Seeded scaffolds were
incubated for 48 hours at 378C in an orbital shaker at 50 rpm.
Differentiation Potential of Sheep MSCs
Sheep MSCs were grown in monolayer until 50%–70% confluent
prior to osteogenic differentiation or 100% confluent prior to adi-
pogenic differentiation. In both cases, control cells were then cul-
tured in a-MEM (Invitrogen) basal medium containing 10% FBS,
100 units per ml penicillin, 100 mg/ml streptomycin (all from
Sigma), and 2 mM Glutamax-I (Invitrogen). Cells stimulated to
undergo differentiation were cultured in basal medium containing
either Osteogenic Supplement or Adipogenic Supplement (R&D
Systems, Abingdon, UK, www.rndsystems.com) for 21 days. Fol-
lowing osteogenic differentiation cells were fixed in 70% ethanol
and stained with 40 mM alizarin red S (Sigma), pH4.1, for
5 minutes. Following adipogenic differentiation cells were fixed in
4% paraformaldehyde and stained with 0.3% oil red O (Sigma) for
30 minutes.
The chondrogenic capacity of sheep MSCs were assessed by
performing three-dimensional cartilage tissue engineering, as pre-
viously described [18, 22, 23]. Briefly, 300,000 cells were loaded
drop-wise onto 5 mm diameter 3 2 mm thick polyglycolic acid
scaffold discs (Biomedical Structures) which had been precoated
with 100 lg/ml fibronectin (Sigma). Constructs were then cul-
tured in chondrogenic differentiation medium consisting of
DMEM, containing 4,500 mg/l glucose (Sigma), supplemented
with 10 ng/ml transforming growth factor-b3 (TGF-b3; R&D Sys-
tems), 100 nM dexamethasone, 80 mM ascorbic acid 2-phosphate,
1 mM sodium pyruvate, 100 units per ml penicillin, 100 mg/ml
streptomycin (all from Sigma), 1% insulin-transferrin-selenium-G
(ITS), and 2 mM Glutamax-I (both from Invitrogen). After 7 days,
the medium was further supplemented with 10 mg/ml bovine
pancreatic insulin (Sigma) until the end of culture. The constructs
were incubated at 378C for a total of 35 days on a rotating plat-
form and medium was changed every 3 days.
Assembling and Culture of Constructs
Sandwich constructs of two ovine fibrocartilage discs interposed
with a seeded scaffold were assembled using skin clips (Fig. 1A,
1C) and cultured in vitro in ultralow attachment 6-well plates
(Corning, Acton, USA) in expansion medium with 10 ng/ml FGF-2
1238
Stem Cell Therapy for Meniscal Tears
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 (Peprotech) for 7 days followed by culture in an integration
medium consisting of high glucose DMEM containing 10% (v/v)
FBS (Thermo Scientific Hyclone), 1% (v/v), Glutamax, 1% (v/v) P/S,
insulin (10 lg/ml; Sigma), and ascorbate-6-phosphate (50 lg/ml;
Sigma) for 33 days. The medium was replenished twice every
week. The constructs were incubated at 378C on a rotating
Figure 1.
Potency testing of the mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)/collagen-scaffold in vitro. (A): Diagram of method for the in vitro potency
assay. Human MSCs are seeded onto collagen scaffold to create the MSC/collagen-scaffold which is then implanted between two discs of
sheep meniscal tissue. The three layers are clipped together using staples and then cultured for 40 days. (B): The presumed mode of action
of the MSC/collagen-scaffold, based on previous studies. Undifferentiated MSCs migrate out of the collagen membrane into the surrounding
meniscal tissue where their trophic interaction with endogenous meniscal cells leads to a remodeling across the interface between the
meniscal surfaces. (C): Macroscopic image of the MSC/collagen-scaffold potency assay system at the start (upper photograph) end (lower
photograph, postfixation for histology) of 40 days of culture. M 5 meniscus. Arrow shows position of MSC/collagen-scaffold. (D): Example of
successful integration of meniscal tissue in vitro with no histological evidence of a demarcating border. (E) Example of apposition of the
meniscal tissue in vitro with evidence for alignment of the implant with meniscal tissue but no loss of the demarcating border. (F): Example
of disintegration of the meniscal tissue in vitro with a complete lack of interaction between the two pieces of meniscus. For (D-F) the tissue
is stained with haematoxylin and eosin. Scale bar indicates 500 mM. Abbreviation: MSC, mesenchymal stem cell.
Whitehouse, Howells, Parry et al.
1239
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 platform throughout the culture period. At the end of culture, the
constructs were prepared for histological analysis by fixation in
10% (v/v) neutral buffered formalin.
Histological Analysis and Histomorphometry
Constructs fixed in 10% (v/v) neutral buffered formalin were
dehydrated and paraffin embedded. Samples were cut into 4-mm
sections and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) for the
study of morphological details. All histological sections were pho-
tographed using a digital spot camera (Diagnostics Instruments,
Sterling Heights, MI, USA, www.spotimaging.com) and histomor-
phometric analysis was performed using ImagePro Discovery soft-
ware (Media Cybernetics, Wokingham, UK). Two perpendicular
sections, one at the edge and another one at the center of each
construct were used for histomorphometric analysis. The entire
length of the implant/meniscus interface was measured with a
cursor using a computer mouse to assess the integration. The %
integration repair index was determined as we have previously
described [11, 12].
Preclinical Studies in Sheep
Thirty skeletally mature (>2 years old) female sheep were pur-
chased from an approved supplier and were assigned randomly to
one of three treatment groups: ovine-MSC/collagen-scaffold, scaf-
fold only (no cells) or suture only (no implant). There were five
animals in each group to provide appropriate statistical power
and the experiment included two replicates of each group, one
set with a 13-week end point and the other set with a 6-month
end point. Details of operative procedures for implantation of the
ovine-MSC/collagen-scaffold are described in the Supporting
Information.
Tumorogenicity
The tumorogenicty of human MSCs was assessed using the
anchorage-independent growth assay [24, 25]. When passage 0
and passage 2 MSCs had reached 80% confluence cells they were
trypsinised, counted and diluted to make a cell suspension con-
taining 1.5 3 105 cells per ml of growth media appropriate to the
cell. 2.5 ml of cell suspension was added to 5-ml seeding layer and
1.5-ml was pipetted onto each petri dish containing the soft agar
base layer. This gave a final seeding density of 5 3 104 cells per
ml. Five dishes were set up per cell line. The seeded petri dishes
were chilled for 20 minutes at 28C–88C and then transferred to a
humidified incubator at 378C, 5% CO2. Cells in agar were fed at
day 7 of the 14-day tumorigenicity test. On each occasion a
tumorigenicity test was set up for MSC aspirate cells, a corre-
sponding tumorigenicity test was established for HeLa (positive
control) and WI-38 (negative control) cells.
First-in-Human Trial of the Autologous MSC/Collagen-
Scaffold Implant
Details of the manufacture of the human autologous MSC/colla-
gen-scaffold implant are described in the Supporting Information.
Implantations in five patients were performed over an 8-month
period. All the patients were followed up for 24 months or until
failure of the implant, resulting in meniscectomy. Four patients
were male, the median age at surgery was 37 years (range of 30–
38). The median body mass index (BMI) was 25 kg/m2 (interquar-
tile range [IQR] 25–26). The mechanism of injury was low energy
in all cases with four occurring during activities of daily living and
one occurring during sporting activity. All patients had isolated
medial meniscal tears in the avascular zone with intact anterior
cruciate ligaments. The median passive flexion range of move-
ment was 1308 (1308–1308) in the affected knee. This compared
to a median passive flexion of 1408 (1308–1408) in the contralat-
eral knee. Four patients were employed in manual jobs and one in
a desk based job. The median duration of symptoms prior to
recruitment was 4 months (IQR, 2-6). Two patients were current
smokers with one an ex-smoker. According to the International
Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) descriptions, all meniscal
tears were complete; four were located in zone 2 of the meniscus
and one in zone 3. Three of the tears involved the posterior, mid,
and anterior third of the meniscus and two posterior and mid
third only. Three were bucket handle tears, one was a bucket han-
dle tear with a radial extension to the inner border of the menis-
cus and one was a vertical flap tear. All were nondegenerative
tears with a median length of 30 mm (IQR, 20–40).
Bone marrow was collected from patients as described in the
section below. Upon receipt at the manufacturing site each bone
marrow aspirate was mixed with 20 ml of freshly prepared Com-
plete
Medium
consisting
of
Dulbecco’s
Modified
Eagle’s
Medium—low glucose (DMEM LG; Sigma) containing 10% FBS
(Invitrogen), 4.5% Glutamax (Invitrogen) and 5 ng/ml FGF-2
(Peprotech). The resulting marrow-medium mix was distributed
between five 175-ml tissue culture flasks containing 24 ml of com-
plete media by the addition of 4 ml of mix per flask. Cultures were
incubated undisturbed for 4 days at 378C in 5% CO2 and 95% air.
After which time, the cells were maintained by media exchange
on days 4, 7, and 10. After 13 days, the unpassaged cells were har-
vested using 0.25% trypsin-EDTA (Invitrogen) and their identity
and purity confirmed by immunohistochemical analyses of posi-
tive and negative markers. Positive identity as MSCs required
>80% expression of both CD105 and CD90. Confirmation of purity
required <10% expression of CD34 and CD45, indicating minimal
contamination with haematopoietic stem cells. The cells were
then seeded onto a collagen matrix (Avitene Ultrafoam collagen
sponge, an absorbable hemostat derived from bovine corium and
consisting mainly of Type I collagen) at a dose of 106 cells per cm2
of scaffold material, and incubated at 378C in 5% CO2/air for
approximately 6 hours (range, 5–7.5 hours) after which the
sponge was immersed in hypothermosol (BioLife Solutions,
Bothell, WA, USA). The dose had been identified as optimal by
Pabbruwe et al. [11, 12].
RESULTS
Standardization and Optimization of MSC/Collagen-
Scaffold Technology In Vitro
Building on our previous work [11, 12], we established a standar-
dised in vitro potency assay for integration of meniscal cartilage
that we used for all optimization and validation studies (Fig. 1).
Using the potency assay we seeded human MSCs into the collagen
scaffold at a range of cell doses and identified the optimal dose in
the assay as 300 3 103 per scaffold, equivalent to a density of 1
3 106 MSCs per cm2 (Supporting Information Fig. S1A). Although
there was a significant dose-response relationship (one-way
ANOVA) there was a lower efficacy at higher seeding densities
with no significant integration at the highest two doses compared
with the unseeded control. The reason for this not known but
could be related to reduced cell motility hen MSCs are in contact
with each other at high density, so limiting their capacity to
1240
Stem Cell Therapy for Meniscal Tears
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 migrate into the surrounding tissue. This cell migration is an
important aspect of the mode of action of the construct as we
have previously described [11, 12]. Therefore the seeding density
of 1 3 106 MSCs per cm2 was adopted for all subsequent in vitro
experiments as well as for the preclinical and clinical studies. In
order to establish the minimum incubation time required for
MSCs to attach to the collagen scaffold, we made MSC/collagen-
scaffold constructs and measured the number of attached and
unattached cells at various time points after initial seeding and in
this way we estimated that a minimum of 5 hours of incubation at
378C is needed to achieve complete attachment of the MSCs to
the scaffold (Supporting Information Fig. S1B).
Validation of Sheep MSCs for use in Preclinical Testing
To avoid species-species effects that could confound the outcomes
if we were to use human MSCs in ovine preclinical testing and to
model the autologous nature of the therapeutic more accurately,
a homologous ovine construct was produced for use in the sheep
studies. Bone marrow stromal cells from ovine hip aspirates were
successfully isolated using adherence to tissue culture plastic and
once after harvesting they were found to have the capacity for
adipogenic and osteogenic differentiation (Supporting Information
Fig. S2A–S2D) as well as to create three-dimensional cartilage in a
standard chondrogenic tissue engineering protocol (Supporting
Information Fig. S2E). Using the standard potency assay for menis-
cal cartilage integration we tested ovine bone marrow derived
MSCs at the optimal cell density of 1 3 106 cells per cm2 and
found the results (Supporting Information Fig. S3) to be compara-
ble with our previous studies using human MSCs [12].
Preclinical Efficacy Studies
Groups of n 5 5 sheep were treated with ovine-MSC/collagen-
scaffold, collagen scaffold only or suture only (Fig. 2).Three out of
five sheep (60%) were successfully healed at 13 weeks compared
with no healing in any sheep in either of the control groups (Table
1 and Supporting Information Table S1).The difference in outcome
between the groups was significant (p< .0235; chi-squared test).
However by 24 weeks, none of these animals in any of the groups
were free of lesions (Table 1 and Supporting Information Table
S1), suggesting that any early repair was unable to survive long-
term in vivo loading of the stifle joint by the sheep.
Preclinical Toxicology Studies
In order to ascertain the safety of the MSC/collagen-scaffold we
measured the irritancy of the implant in different parts of the sti-
fle joint according to British Standard EN ISO 10993-6:2007. The
ovine-MSC/collagen-scaffold implant and the cell-free collagen
scaffold both caused moderate irritation to the meniscus at 13
weeks while suturing alone caused slight irritancy (Supporting
Information Table S2). There were no signs of irritancy of the
meniscus by 24 weeks and there was no irritation of the articular
cartilage, synovium or popliteal lymph nodes at any time point
(Supporting Information Table S2). As a further assessment of
safety, human MSCs were tested in vitro for tumorogenicity using
the anchorage-independent colony formation method. This
method determines the capacity of cells to proliferate and form
colonies when suspended in agar and prevented from attaching to
the plastic surface of the culture vessel. Tumor-forming cells will
grow well under these conditions whereas nontransformed cells
require attachment to the plastic surface for colony formation and
growth. Cells were tested at the end of passage 0 (equivalent to
the intended clinical therapeutic) and at the end of passage 2 (i.e.,
after further expansion in vitro well beyond the intended thera-
peutic product). There was no evidence of tumor-forming poten-
tial for human MSCs at either passage 0 or 2 whereas Hela cells
(positive control) were consistently tumor-forming and Wi-38 cells
(negative controls) were not (Supporting Information Table S3).
Production of Autologous Human-MSC/Collagen-
Scaffolds for Clinical Use
For the clinical study, Human MSCs were isolated from bone mar-
row that was seeded into tissue culture flasks and cultured in the
presence of FGF-2 for exactly 13 days, without passage. Under
these conditions it was possible to routinely generate an MSC
population that was free of contamination by red blood cells (Sup-
porting Information Fig. S4). In preliminary experiments, the har-
vested passage 0 MSCs were found to be positive for a range of
typical MSC cell-surface markers, including CD105, VCAM-1a, and
CD49a and free from contamination by haematopoetic stem cells
as judged by the low expression of CD34 (Supporting Information
Fig. S5). As the aim was to implant MSCs that were still undifferen-
tiated, we also monitored the expression of nucleostemin, which
we have previously shown to be uniquely expressed by undiffer-
entiated MSCs and downregulated upon differentiation [22].
MSCs produced using our protocol showed the typical nucleolar
location of nucleostemin (Supporting Information Fig. S5G). When
deriving MSCs for implantation in patients we used release criteria
that were agreed with the regulatory authorities. This included
the immunohistochemical detection of >80% cells positive for
two MSC markers, both CD105 and CD90 (Supporting Information
Fig. S6A, S6B). We also required immunohistochemical detection
of <10% cells positive for two haematopoetic stem cell markers,
CD45 and CD34. Immunohistochemical detection could be veri-
fied by Flow cytometry for all four of these markers (Supporting
Information Fig. S6C, S6D). Table 2 shows the characteristics of
MSCs produced from bone marrow from each of the five patients
taking part in the clinical trial, confirming that there was a good
cell yield, high viability and that the release criteria were achieved
in all five cases.
First-in-Human Trial Patient Outcomes
Arthroscopy was performed as described Under Materials and
Methods and as illustrated in Figure 3. A movie showing the
arthroscopic procedure in one of the patients can be seen in Sup-
porting Information (Online Video 1) and additional images of
meniscal tears before and after implantation of cell bandage are
shown in Supporting Information Figure S7. Of the five patients
treated, the implant survived without any further treatment
needed in three cases whereas two subsequently developed
recurrent symptoms (pain, swelling, and locking in the knee) at
around 15 months postimplantation in both cases, leading to
treatment with meniscectomy (Fig. 4A). In the first failed case, the
appearance at arthroscopy was consistent with a repeat tear at
the site of the meniscal repair. In the second failed case, the
appearance was consistent with partial healing of the tear in the
posterior portion of the tear but with no healing in the anterior
portion. In both these cases, the loose meniscal tissue was
removed and debrided to a stable rim. No patients reported any
serious adverse events or complications other than recurrence of
symptoms. In the two patients where the implant eventually
failed, the baseline (preimplantation) Tegner-Lysholm score and
range of motion (ROM) of the knee were slightly lower than for
Whitehouse, Howells, Parry et al.
1241
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 the three patients where the implant survived for the entire study
period (Fig. 4B). There was no difference in the IKDC score
between these groups.
The three patients who were successfully treated showed
improvements in all clinical scores over the first 12 months and
these changes were maintained between 12 and 24 months (Fig.
4C–4E). In contrast, the two patients in whom the implant failed
at 15 months showed no improvement in clinical scores between
the 6- and 12-month time points (Fig. 4C–4E). Interestingly, the
changes in Tegner-Lyshom score and ROM between baseline pre-
implantation measurement and 3 months postimplantation were
greater for the two patients where the implant failed than the
three patients who were successfully treated (Fig. 4F).
Supporting Information Table S4 shows the clinical scores of
the individual patients over time that were used for repeated
measures analysis. One patient in whom a meniscectomy was
required due to recurrent symptoms at 15 months postoperation
declined to provide clinical outcome scores at the 24-month fol-
low-up despite multiple invitations to do so and therefore was
excluded from the repeated measures analysis. When the
repeated measures for the remaining four patients were consid-
ered, there was significant clinical improvement as measured by
the IKDC score (p5 .002) and the Tegner Lysholm score
(p 5 .005).
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scans show that in the
three cases that did not undergo further arthroscopy at 12
Figure 2.
Sheep model for preclinical testing of the efficacy and safety of an ovine-mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)/collagen-scaffold. (A): A
full-depth lesion is created in the avascular zone of the anterior horn of the meniscus in a sheep stifle joint. (B): An ovine-MSC/collagen-scaf-
fold made using autologous MSCs is implanted into the fresh lesion and then sutured into position. (C): Macroscopic appearance of a sheep
meniscus 13 weeks after implantation of ovine-MSC/collagen-scaffold showing apparent failure of repair of the lesion. (D): Macroscopic
appearance of a sheep meniscus 13 weeks after implantation of ovine-MSC/collagen-scaffold showing apparently successful repair of the
lesion. (E): Example of failure of repair by ovine-MSC/collagen-scaffold 13 weeks after implantation. (F): Example of successful repair by
ovine-MSC/collagen-scaffold 13 weeks after implantation. For (E) and (F) the images are compilations of photographs of histological sections
of meniscus stained with toluidine blue (Final magnification 3100).
1242
Stem Cell Therapy for Meniscal Tears
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 months the menisci have not displaced and the abnormally high
signal, while persisting, appears to be diminishing with time. An
example of the MRI findings over time in one patient is shown in
Figure 5 and equivalent results for the other four patients can be
seen in Supporting Information (Figs. S8–S11).
DISCUSSION
Removal of a greater amount of meniscal tissue at meniscectomy
is associated with poorer long-term function [26] and thus
attempts to repair meniscal tears in the vascular zone are becom-
ing more common [27, 28]. Healing rates of 50% may be achieved
when repairing vascularized tears in the presence of concomitant
anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) repairs (which favors healing of
meniscal repairs) [27, 29]. A lower rate of healing is observed
when ACL repair is not performed at the same time, when medial
rather than lateral meniscal repair is performed and when repairs
in the avascular zone of the meniscus are performed [10, 30].
Here, we report the first series of isolated medial meniscal tears in
the avascular zone treated with MSC therapy. The treatment
appears to be safe and has some efficacy with three out of five
patients having resolution of symptoms 2 years after surgery. In
the three successfully treated patients, sequential postoperative
MRI scans show decreased signal intensity over time, which may
indicate healing. In all three survivors the MRI confirms that the
torn area has not displaced, again suggesting healing.
Therefore the proportion of patients in whom the avascular
tear was healed in this small-scale first-in-human study was similar
to the proportion of patients successfully treated for tears in the
vascularized meniscus using conventional repair methodology [27,
29]. The two patients in whom the implant failed had slightly
worse baseline clinical data and a more rapid increase in joint
function over the first 3 months of the study. In the preclinical
sheep model, there was a 60% success rate at 3 months but 100%
failure at 6 months. The sheep were free to load their stifle joints
from the moment after surgery, unlike the patients, who were
trained to gradually increase loading over a period of weeks.Taken
together, these observations highlight the potential importance of
mechanical factors in the final outcome of treatment and the
need to ensure an optimal postoperative rehabilitation regime in
any future studies.
Stem cell therapy is in its infancy and we are only gradually
understanding how best to use these cells in the clinical setting.
While much research effort has concentrated on understanding
how we can effectively differentiate MSCs to specific committed
lineages [23, 31–41], there has been growing interest in the trophic
effects of the undifferentiated cells mediated through secretion of
growth factors [13–17]. Based on our original in vitro observations
[12] we hypothesized that combining undifferentiated MSCs with a
collagen scaffold, we could deliver the cells directly into the site of
injury and maximize the chance of secreted trophic factors driving a
tissue repair response. The undifferentiated status of MSCs pre-
pared using our methodology was confirmed by the presence of
nucelostemin in a nucleolar location. Nucleostemin was discovered
as a nucleolar protein present in both embryonic and adult rat cen-
tral nervous system stem cells, and several human cancer cell lines.
It is abundantly expressed while the cells are proliferating in an
early, multipotential state, but it abruptly and almost entirely disap-
pears at the start of differentiation [42]. We subsequently showed
that it is similarly expressed in undifferentiated MSCs [22].The clini-
cal data reported here provide some support for our original
hypothesis and suggest that the predifferentiation of MSCs may
not be necessary for tissue repair.The effectiveness of undifferenti-
ated stem cells in healing the avascular meniscus suggests that a
similar approach could be used to heal injuries to other soft tissues.
While the work reported here is the first attempt to investi-
gate the short to medium-term effects of MSC/collagen-scaffolds
in an avascular meniscal cartilage repair setting, our longer-term
goal is to use this technology as a method for preventing the
development of OA. It has been understood for many years that
meniscectomy substantially increases the risk of developing OA in
the operated knee in both animal models [43–50] and in the
human clinical situation [51–58]. Furthermore, the degree of risk
of OA increases with increasing amount of meniscus that is
Table 1. Comparison of ovine-MSC/collagen scaffold with controls for the treatment of torn avascular meniscus in a sheep model
Treatment group
aNumber/proportion healed at 3 months
aNumber/proportion healed at 6 months
Ovine-MSC/collagen scaffold
3/5 (60%)*
0/5 (0%)
Collagen scaffold
0/5 (0%)
0/5 (0%)
Suture Only
0/5 (0%)
0/5 (0%)
Sheep were treated with ovine-MSC/collagen scaffold, collagen scaffold (cell-free membrane), or suture only and allowed to recover for either 13
weeks or 6 months. There were five sheep for each treatment group at each time point.
aResults shown as the number and proportion of sheep with no meniscal lesion in each group of five animals. Examples of macroscopic and histolog-
ical outcome can be seen in Figure 2 and raw data for all sheep can be seen in Supporting Information Table ST1. *p < .0235 compared with other
treatment groups at the 13-week time point (chi-squared test).
Table 2. Preimplantation cell production quality data for each patient
Patient
aConfluency at
harvest (%)
Total cell
yield (3106)
Cell viability
at harvest (%)
Immunohistochemistry scores
% CD1051 cellsb
% CD901 cellsb
% CD341 cellsc
% CD451 cellsc
1
90; 90
29.6
97.8
98
94
3
3
2
55; 70
13.3
98.8
96
94
1
6
3
50; 55
27.3
99.1
98.5
90.5
1
2.5
4
70; 70
10.5
99.5
98
82.5
0
2
5
80; 85
29.9
99.0
99
85.5
0
0.5
MSCs were isolated from bone marrow by culture on tissue culture plastic until the end of passage 0.
aResults shown as two separate readings by different observers.
bminimum of 80% 1 cells required for product release.
cno more than 10% 1 cells allowed for product release.
Whitehouse, Howells, Parry et al.
1243
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 removed [56, 58]. The menisci play a critical role in mechanical
stabilization of the knee and removal of substantial amounts of
meniscal tissue is thought to result in abnormal loading of the
articular cartilage that would otherwise be protected [58]. One
study [55] investigated 155 patients for 16 years postmeniscec-
tomy and estimated the risk of developing OA compared with the
general population. The relative risk was found to be 7.0 per year
for patients with degenerative tears and 2.7 for those with trau-
matic tears and in this study there was no apparent link to the
amount of tissue removed.
Given the above analysis, it seems reasonable to propose that
repair of meniscus may allow us to avoid removal of tissue that is
Figure 3.
Intraoperative arthroscopic images from one patient showing the method of implantation of human-mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs)/collagen-scaffold. (A): Photograph of a bucket handle tear in the white zone (avascular) meniscus with radial extension following
reduction of tear. (B): The first stage of treatment is positioning of a vertical mattress suture, loosely across the tear. (C): The human-MSC/col-
lagen-scaffold inserted through the arthroscope and then (D) inserted into the lesion (arrow). (E): The suture is pulled tight to close the
meniscal tissue around the human-MSC/collagen-scaffold. (F): Lesion site at the end of the implantation procedure with the human-MSC/col-
lagen-scaffold fixed in position in the middle of the sutured tear.
1244
Stem Cell Therapy for Meniscal Tears
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 likely to prevent, or at least delay, the development of OA. How-
ever, until now there has been no technology that could be used
to repair the majority of avascular meniscal tears and therefore
limited possibility to test the hypothesis. Since repair of red zone
(vascular) meniscal tears is now widely used, it may be possible to
predict the impact of meniscal repair on the incidence of OA in
this patient group. A few studies have indicated the potential for a
reduction in OA when the vascular meniscus is repaired rather
than removed [59–61], however, much larger studies will be
required to test this hypothesis properly. Therefore, future clinical
trials will need to assess both the short-term repair capability of
MSC/collagen-scaffold and the longer-term ability of the tech-
nique to reduce the risk of developing OA.
Because of the detrimental effects of mensicectomy, a num-
ber of experimental approaches have been taken to the treatment
of avascular meniscal tears. One paper has provided a meta-
analysis of the outcome of meniscal allograft in 44 clinical trials
[62], concluding that “meniscal allograft transplantation is a
Figure 4.
Assessment of the clinical outcome of human-mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)/collagen-scaffold therapy. (A): Survival of the
implanted human-MSC/collagen-scaffold was determined as length of time before mensicectomy, if needed. (B): Baseline knee function data.
The International Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) score, Tegner-Lysholm score and range of motion (ROM) were recorded for the
affected knee prior to surgery. Data are shown for the three patients in whom the implant survived for 24 months (bars marked S) and the
two patients in whom the implant failed and meniscectomy was required (bars marked F). Each bar shows the median and interquartile range
(IQR). (C–E): Changes in knee function scores over time postimplantation. The IKDC score (C), Tegner-Lysholm score (D) and ROM (E) were
recorded for the affected knee at multiple time-points postsurgery. In each graph data are shown separately for the three patients in whom
the implant survived for 24 months (squares) and the two patients in whom the implant failed (triangles). Each point shows the median and
IQR. (F): Changes in knee function scores from preimplantation to 3 months postimplantation. Data are shown for the three patients in
whom the implant survived for 24 months (bars marked S) and the two patients in whom the implant failed (bars marked F). Each bar shows
the median and IQR. Abbreviations: IKDC, International Knee Documentation Committee; ROM, range of motion.
Whitehouse, Howells, Parry et al.
1245
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 reliable solution for postmeniscectomy symptoms in selected
patients.” Similarly, Warth and Rodkey [63, 64] have recently sys-
tematically reviewed 13 studies in which partial meniscectomy
was augmented with implantation of cell-free collagen scaffolds,
concluding that the scaffolds provided some improvement com-
pared with mensicectomy alone. However, the common aspect to
both these above approaches is that they are used to manage the
effects of meniscectomy by replacing the meniscus altogether
(allograft) or replacing the removed tissue after partial meniscec-
tomy (collagen scaffolds). The method described here is the first
report in humans of an attempt to heal avascular tears as a way of
avoiding meniscectomy altogether. It remains to be established if
restoring the natural meniscus can prevent or delay the develop-
ment of OA more effectively than meniscal allograft or postmenis-
cectomy collagen scaffold implantation.
CONCLUSION
Undifferentiated autologous MSCs seeded onto collagen-scaffolds
can be safely implanted into patients with torn avascular meniscus
and show some potential for enhancing the regeneration of the
damaged meniscus in some patients, so avoiding the need for
meniscectomy.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was funded by Azellon Ltd and by grants from Inno-
vate UK.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
M.W.: Conception and design, Provision of study material or
patients, Collection and/or assembly of data, Data analysis and
interpretation, Manuscript writing, Final approval of manuscript,
Other - recruited the patients and undertook the bone marrow
harvest; N.H.: Conception and design, Provision of study material
or patients, Collection and/or assembly of data, Manuscript writ-
ing, Final approval of manuscript, Other - recruited the patients
and undertook the bone marrow harvest; M.P.: Provision of study
material or patients, Collection and/or assembly of data, Manu-
script writing, Final approval of manuscript, Other - recruited the
patients and undertook the bone marrow harvest; E.A.: Provision
of study material or patients, Collection and/or assembly of data,
Manuscript writing, Final approval of manuscript, developed the
Good Manufacturing Practice methodology for production of the
MSC/collagen-scaffold; W.K.: Collection and/or assembly of data,
Manuscript writing, Final approval of manuscript. Other –
designed and optimized the MSC/collagen-scaffold technology;
K.B.: Collection and/or assembly of data, Manuscript writing, Final
approval of manuscript; A.G.: Provision of study material or
patients, Manuscript writing, Final approval of manuscript; J.E.:
Provision of study material or patients, Manuscript writing, Final
approval of manuscript, Other - performed all implantation sur-
gery; A.B.: Conception and design, Data analysis and interpreta-
tion, Manuscript writing, Final approval of manuscript, Other -
had full access to all of the data in the study and takes responsibil-
ity for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analy-
sis; A.H.: Conception and design, Financial support, Manuscript
writing, Final approval of manuscript, Other - designed, developed
and optimised the MSC/collagen-scaffold technology used in this
study, developed the Good Manufacturing Practice methodology
for production of the MSC/collagen-scaffold.
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
A.P.H is a founder, director of and share-holder in Azellon Ltd, a
University of Bristol spin-out company. E.A.’s host institution (NHS
Blood and Transplant) was a paid contractor for work carried out
in the course of the study with funding received from Azellon.
M.R.W., N.R.H., M.C.P., J.D.E. and A.W.B.’s host institution (North
Bristol NHS Trust) received funding from Azellon for the costs of
the clinical study and research nurse support. M.R.W., N.R.H.,
M.C.P., E.A., J.D.E. and A.W.B. did not directly receive funding or
benefits in relation to the study. Neither funding organisation
reviewed, commented on or approved the manuscript prior to
submission. All authorshad full access to the data. Because of the
corresponding author’s conflict of interest with respect to Azellon
Ltd, A.B. acted as the guarantor, attests that the findings are a
true and accurate representation of the study and the final deci-
sion to submit was his.
Figure 5.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) evidence of meniscal
repair. Sequential coronal MRI images are show for one of the three
patients (patient 3) who were successfully treated using human-
mesenchymal stem cells/collagen-scaffold therapy. A Preoperative
image is shown in (A) with an arrow to indicate the torn meniscus.
Postoperative images were taken at 3 months (B), 6 months (C), 12
months (D), and 24 months (E). MRI data for the other four patients
can be seen in Supporting Information Figures S8–S11.
1246
Stem Cell Therapy for Meniscal Tears
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 REFERENCES
1
Seedhom BB, Dowson D, Wright V. Pro-
ceedings: Functions of the menisci. A prelimi-
nary study. Ann Rheum Dis 1974;33:111.
2
Gupte CM, Bull AM, Thomas RD et al.
The
meniscofemoral
ligaments:
Secondary
restraints to the posterior drawer. Analysis of
anteroposterior and rotary laxity in the intact
and posterior-cruciate-deficient knee. J Bone
Joint Surg Br 2003;85:765–773.
3
Kazemi M, Li LP, Savard P et al. Creep
behavior of the intact and meniscectomy knee
joints. J Mech Behav Biomed Mater 2011;4:
1351–1358.
4
Renstrom P, Johnson RJ. Anatomy and
biomechanics of the menisci. Clin Sports Med
1990;9:523–538.
5
Assimakopoulos AP, Katonis PG, Agapitos
MV et al. The innervation of the human menis-
cus. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1992:232–236.
6
Clayton RA, Court-Brown CM. The epide-
miology of musculoskeletal tendinous and lig-
amentous injuries. Injury 2008;39:1338–1344.
7
Muthuri SG, McWilliams DF, Doherty M
et al. History of knee injuries and knee osteo-
arthritis: A meta-analysis of observational
studies.
Osteoarthritis
Cartilage
2011;19:
1286–1293.
8
Arnoczky SP, Warren RF. Microvascula-
ture of the human meniscus. Am J Sports Med
1982;10:90–95.
9
Cipolla M, Cerullo G, Puddu G. Microvas-
culature of the human medial meniscus: Oper-
ative findings. Arthroscopy 1992;8:522–525.
10
Kimura M, Shirakura K, Hasegawa A
et al. Second look arthroscopy after meniscal
repair. Factors affecting the healing rate. Clin
Orthop Relat Res 1995;314:185–191.
11
Pabbruwe MB, Esfandiari E, Kafienah W
et al. Induction of cartilage integration by a
chondrocyte/collagen-scaffold implant. Bioma-
terials 2009;30:4277–4286.
12
Pabbruwe MB, Kafienah W, Tarlton JF
et al. Repair of meniscal cartilage white zone
tears
using
a
stem
cell/collagen-scaffold
implant. Biomaterials 2010;31:2583–2591.
13
Murphy MB, Moncivais K, Caplan AI.
Mesenchymal
stem
cells:
Environmentally
responsive therapeutics for regenerative med-
icine. Exp Mol Med 2013;45:e54.
14
Ruetze M, Richter W. Adipose-derived
stromal cells for osteoarticular repair: Trophic
function versus stem cell activity. Expert Rev
Mol Med 2014;16:e9.
15
Duscher D, Barrera J, Wong VW et al.
Stem cells in wound healing: The future of
regenerative medicine? A mini-review. Geron-
tology 2016;62;216–225.
16
Trounson A, McDonald C. Stem cell
therapies in clinical trials: Progress and chal-
lenges. Cell Stem Cell 2015;17:11–22.
17
Lee T. Stem cell therapy independent of
stemness. World J Stem Cells 2012;4:120–124.
18
Kafienah W, Mistry S, Dickinson S et al.
Three-dimensional cartilage tissue engineering
using adult stem cells from osteoarthritis
patients. Arthritis Rheum 2007;56:177–187.
19
Bianchi G, Banfi A, Mastrogiacomo M
et al. Ex vivo enrichment of mesenchymal cell
progenitors by fibroblast growth factor 2. Exp
Cell Res 2003;287:98–105.
20
Solchaga LA, Penick K, Porter JD et al.
FGF-2 enhances the mitotic and chondrogenic
potentials of human adult bone marrow-
derived mesenchymal stem cells. J Cell Physiol
2005;203:398–409.
21
Martin I, Muraglia A, Campanile G et al.
Fibroblast growth factor-2 supports ex vivo
expansion and maintenance of osteogenic pre-
cursors from human bone marrow. Endocri-
nology 1997;138:4456–4462.
22
Kafienah W, Mistry S, Williams C et al.
Nucleostemin is a marker of proliferating stro-
mal stem cells in adult human bone marrow.
STEM CELLS 2006;24:1113–1120.
23
Kafienah W, Mistry S, Perry MJ et al.
Pharmacological regulation of adult stem cells:
Chondrogenesis can be induced using a syn-
thetic inhibitor of the retinoic acid receptor.
STEM CELLS 2007;25:2460–2468.
24
Macpherson I, Montagnier L. Agar sus-
pension culture for the selective assay of cells
transformed by polyoma virus. Virology 1964;
23:291–294.
25
Thierbach R, Steinberg P. Automated
soft
agar
assay
for
the
high-throughput
screening of anticancer compounds. Anal Bio-
chem 2009;387:318–320.
26
Hede A, Larsen E, Sandberg H. The long
term outcome of open total and partial menis-
cectomy related to the quantity and site of
the meniscus removed. Int Orthop 1992;16:
122–125.
27
Abrams GD, Frank RM, Gupta AK et al.
Trends in meniscus repair and meniscectomy
in the United States, 2005-2011. Am J Sports
Med 2013;41:2333–2339.
28
Montgomery SR, Zhang A, Ngo SS et al.
Cross-sectional analysis of trends in meniscec-
tomy and meniscus repair. Orthopedics 2013;
36:e1007–1013.
29
Cannon WD, Jr., Vittori JM. The inci-
dence of healing in arthroscopic meniscal
repairs
in
anterior
cruciate
ligament-
reconstructed knees versus stable knees. Am J
Sports Med 1992;20:176–181.
30
Paxton
ES,
Stock
MV,
Brophy
RH.
Meniscal repair versus partial meniscectomy:
A systematic review comparing reoperation
rates
and
clinical
outcomes.
Arthroscopy
2011;27:1275–1288.
31
Bobick BE, Chen FH, Le AM et al. Regu-
lation of the chondrogenic phenotype in cul-
ture. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today 2009;
87:351–371.
32
Kafienah W, Jakob M, Demarteau O
et al. Three dimensional tissue engineering of
hyaline cartilage: Comparison of adult nasal
and articular chondrocytes. Tissue Eng 2002;8:
817–826.
33
Yang XB, Roach HI, Clarke NM et al.
Human osteoprogenitor growth and differen-
tiation on synthetic biodegradable structures
after surface modification. Bone 2001;29:523–
531.
34
Pound JC, Green DW, Chaudhuri JB
et al. Strategies to promote chondrogenesis
and osteogenesis from human bone marrow
cells and articular chondrocytes encapsulated
in polysaccharide templates. Tissue Eng 2006;
12:2789–2799.
35
Sengers BG, Dawson JI, Oreffo RO.
Characterisation
of
human
bone
marrow
stromal
cell
heterogeneity
for
skeletal
regeneration strategies using a two-stage col-
ony assay and computational modelling. Bone
2010;46:496–503.
36
Larsen KH, Frederiksen CM, Burns JS
et al. Identifying a molecular phenotype for
bone marrow stromal cells with in vivo bone-
forming capacity. J Bone Miner Res 2010;25:
796–808.
37
Frank O, Heim M, Jakob M et al. Real-
time quantitative RT-PCR analysis of human
bone marrow stromal cells during osteogenic
differentiation in vitro. J Cell Biochem 2002;
85:737–746.
38
Caplan AI, Bruder SP. Mesenchymal
stem cells: Building blocks for molecular medi-
cine in the 21st century. Trends Mol Med
2001;7:259–264.
39
Russell KC, Lacey MR, Gilliam JK et al.
Clonal analysis of the proliferation potential of
human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
as a function of potency. Biotechnol Bioeng
2011;108:2716–2726.
40
Davis LA, Zur Nieden NI. Mesodermal
fate decisions of a stem cell: The Wnt switch.
Cell Mol Life Sci 2008;65:2658–2674.
41
Mirmalek-Sani SH, Tare RS, Morgan SM
et al. Characterization and multipotentiality of
human fetal femur-derived cells: Implications
for skeletal tissue regeneration. STEM CELLS
2006;24:1042–1053.
42
Tsai RY, McKay RD. A nucleolar mecha-
nism controlling cell proliferation in stem cells
and cancer cells. Genes Dev 2002;16:2991–
3003.
43
Beveridge JE, Shrive NG, Frank CB.
Meniscectomy causes significant in vivo kine-
matic changes and mechanically induced focal
chondral lesions in a sheep model. J Orthop
Res 2011;29:1397–1405.
44
Laurent D, O’Byrne E, Wasvary J et al. In
vivo MRI of cartilage pathogenesis in surgical
models of osteoarthritis. Skeletal Radiol 2006;
35:555–564.
45
Lindhorst E, Vail TP, Guilak F et al. Lon-
gitudinal characterization of synovial fluid bio-
markers in the canine meniscectomy model of
osteoarthritis. J Orthop Res 2000;18:269–280.
46
Elliott DM, Guilak F, Vail TP et al. Tensile
properties of articular cartilage are altered by
meniscectomy in a canine model of osteoar-
thritis. J Orthop Res 1999;17:503–508.
47
Messner K, Fahlgren A, Ross I et al.
Simultaneous changes in bone mineral density
and articular cartilage in a rabbit meniscec-
tomy model of knee osteoarthrosis. Osteoar-
thritis Cartilage 2000;8:197–206.
48
Howell DS, Carreno MR, Pelletier JP
et al. Articular cartilage breakdown in a lapine
model of osteoarthritis. Action of glycosami-
noglycan polysulfate ester (GAGPS) on proteo-
glycan degrading enzyme activity, hexuronate,
and cell counts. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1986;
213:69–76.
49
Colombo C, Butler M, O’Byrne E et al. A
new model of osteoarthritis in rabbits. I.
Development of knee joint pathology follow-
ing lateral meniscectomy and section of the
fibular collateral and sesamoid ligaments.
Arthritis Rheum 1983;26:875–886.
50
Meacock SC, Bodmer JL, Billingham ME.
Experimental
osteoarthritis
in
guinea-pigs.
J Exp Pathol (Oxford) 1990;71:279–293.
Whitehouse, Howells, Parry et al.
1247
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 51
Ericsson YB, Tjornstrand J, Tiderius CJ
et al. Relationship between cartilage glycos-
aminoglycan content (assessed with dGEM-
RIC) and OA risk factors in meniscectomized
patients.
Osteoarthritis
Cartilage
2009;17:
565–570.
52
Mills PM, Wang Y, Cicuttini FM et al.
Tibio-femoral cartilage defects 3-5 years fol-
lowing arthroscopic partial medial meniscec-
tomy. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2008;16:1526–
1531.
53
Englund M, Lohmander LS. Patellofe-
moral osteoarthritis coexistent with tibiofe-
moral
osteoarthritis
in
a
meniscectomy
population. Ann Rheum Dis 2005;64:1721–
1726.
54
Englund M, Paradowski PT, Lohmander
LS. Association of radiographic hand osteoar-
thritis with radiographic knee osteoarthritis
after meniscectomy. Arthritis Rheum 2004;50:
469–475.
55
Englund M, Roos EM, Lohmander LS.
Impact of type of meniscal tear on radiographic
and symptomatic knee osteoarthritis: A sixteen-
year followup of meniscectomy with matched
controls. Arthritis Rheum 2003;48:2178–2187.
56
Englund M, Lohmander LS. Risk factors
for symptomatic knee osteoarthritis fifteen to
twenty-two years after meniscectomy. Arthri-
tis Rheum 2004;50:2811–2819.
57
Roos H, Lauren M, Adalberth T et al.
Knee osteoarthritis after meniscectomy: Prev-
alence of radiographic changes after twenty-
one years, compared with matched controls.
Arthritis Rheum 1998;41:687–693.
58
Papalia R, Del Buono A, Osti L et al.
Meniscectomy as a risk factor for knee osteoar-
thritis: A systematic review. Br Med Bull 2011;99:
89–106.
59
Sommerlath KG. Results of meniscal
repair and partial meniscectomy in stable
knees. Int Orthop 1991;15:347–350.
60
Stein T, Mehling AP, Welsch F et al.
Long-term outcome after arthroscopic menis-
cal repair versus arthroscopic partial menis-
cectomy for traumatic meniscal tears. Am J
Sports Med 2010;38:1542–1548.
61
Mezhov V, Teichtahl AJ, Strasser R et al.
Meniscal pathology - the evidence for treat-
ment. Arthritis Res Ther 2014;16:206.
62
Elattar M, Dhollander A, Verdonk R
et al. Twenty-six years of meniscal allograft
transplantation: Is it still experimental? A
meta-analysis
of
44
trials.
Knee
Surg
Sports
Traumatol
Arthrosc
2011;19:147–
157.
63
Warth RJ, Rodkey WG. Resorbable col-
lagen scaffolds for the treatment of meniscus
defects: A systematic review. Arthroscopy
2015;31:927–941.
64
Lubowitz JH. Editorial commentary: Col-
lagen meniscal scaffolds. Arthroscopy 2015;
31:942–943.
See www.StemCellsTM.com for supporting information available online.
1248
Stem Cell Therapy for Meniscal Tears
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
