 Response to the editorial by Dr Geraghty  
 
Journal of Health Psychology 2017 DOI: 10.1177/1359105316688953 
 
Peter D White 
Trudie Chalder 
Michael Sharpe 
Brian J Angus 
Hannah L Baber 
Jessica Bavinton 
Mary Burgess 
Lucy V Clark 
Diane L Cox 
Julia C DeCesare 
Kimberley A Goldsmith 
Anthony L Johnson 
Paul McCrone 
Gabrielle Murphy 
Maurice Murphy 
Hazel O’Dowd 
Laura Potts 
Rebacca Walwyn 
David Wilks 
 
 
Abstract 
 
This article is written in response to the linked editorial by Dr Geraghty about the adaptive 
Pacing, graded Activity and Cognitive behaviour therapy; a randomised Evaluation (PACE) 
trial, which we led, implemented and published. The PACE trial compared four treatments for 
people diagnosed with chronic fatigue syndrome. All participants in the trial received 
specialist medical care. The trial found that adding cognitive behaviour therapy or graded 
exercise therapy to specialist medical care was as safe as, and more effective than, adding 
adaptive pacing therapy or specialist medical care alone. Dr Geraghty has challenged these 
findings. In this article, we suggest that Dr Geraghty’s views are based on 
misunderstandings and misrepresentations of the PACE trial; these are corrected. 
 
 
Keywords   
 
chronic fatigue syndrome, clinical trials, cognitive behaviour therapy, graded exercise 
therapy, treatment 
 
 
The PACE trial compared four treatments for people diagnosed with chronic fatigue 
syndrome (CFS) (White et al., 2011). A recent editorial about this trial (Geraghty, 2016) 
contains a number of inaccuracies which we now correct. 
 
1.  Dr Geraghty states that ‘… there are accepted scientific procedures and standards that 
appear to have been neglected, or bypassed, by the PACE-Trial team’, although he has not 
said which procedures and standards we neglected or bypassed. The trial was extensively 
peer reviewed by the Medical Research Council, which funded it. It followed the consolidated 
standards of reporting Trials (CONSORT) guidance on how to report and conduct a high-
quality trial (http://www.consort-statement.org/). A Research Ethics Committee gave ethical 
 approval, and it was overseen throughout by the independent Trial Steering Committee and 
Data Monitoring and Ethics Committee; patient members sat on the Trial Management and 
Steering Committees. The protocol was published some 3 years before the analysis began, 
and 4 years before the first outcome paper was published (White et al., 2007). The papers 
reporting the trial findings were peer reviewed before their publication in high-impact 
journals, such as The Lancet (White et al., 2011). So far, we have published 16 papers from 
the trial (http://www.wolfson.qmul.ac.uk/current-projects/pace-trial), as well as contributing 
data to an individual patient data Cochrane Collaboration review, which has been submitted 
for publication. 
 
 
2.  We reject the accusation that our ‘actions have arguably caused distress to patients’, for 
which Dr Geraghty offers no evidence. People with CFS and/or myalgic encephalomyelitis 
(ME) want treatments that help them to improve (Action for ME, 2011). In this ME charity 
member survey of National Health Service (NHS) clinics, 85 per cent of those surveyed 
wanted the charity to campaign to save these services and 92 per cent wanted more such 
services; 46 per cent had received cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) and 65 per cent 
thought that CBT should be made available; 31 per cent had received graded exercise 
therapy (GET) and 48 per cent thought it should be made available (Action for ME, 2011). 
The PACE trial simply confirmed what previous smaller trials had already found (Edmonds et 
al., 2004; Price et al., 2008): that patients are more likely to get better with either CBT or 
GET than with other treatments or usual care. 
 
 
3.  We reject the suggestion that the fact that we use these therapies for our patients and 
have tested them in previous trials is ‘a major source of investigator bias’. Clinical research 
often arises from questions thrown up by clinical practice. The clinicians among us have 
dedicated their careers to care for thousands of patients with CFS/ME and we always want 
the best for them. We are therefore obliged to conduct trials to test the effectiveness and 
cost-effectiveness of treatments that we use. If Dr Geraghty’s proposal, that trials should 
only be conducted by investigators with no previous experience of an illness and its 
treatments, was followed, it would prevent any clinician or researcher from attempting to 
replicate or refute the results of their earlier trials. While steps should always be taken to 
minimise bias, as we did, this suggestion is not sensible. 
 
 
4.  In our long-term follow-up paper, we reported that the benefits of CBT and GET were 
maintained some 2 years after treatment (Sharpe et al., 2015). Dr Geraghty suggests that 
‘The trial authors have since [the paper was published] argued that the SMC and APT 
groups [who improved over the follow up period], probably went to get CBT or GET privately 
after the end of the formal trial’. The reality is that we clearly reported within the paper the 
numbers of participants who went on to receive the additional therapies (most commonly 
CBT and GET), which were offered by trial NHS therapists to all participants who needed 
and wanted further help. 
 
 
5.  Regarding our paper on recovery, Dr Geraghty stated that we defined it partially on the 
basis of ‘a patient reporting feeling “better” or “much better”’ when in reality ratings of overall 
health as ‘much better’ or ‘very much better’ counted towards being considered recovered on 
this measure. 
 
 
6.  Dr Geraghty is also incorrect in his comments about the repeated use of the Freedom of 
Information Act (FOIA) to obtain trial information – ‘the PACE authors … refused to release 
 data partly on the grounds that they viewed requesters as vexatious patients …’. Of the 46 
FOIA requests that Queen Mary University of London have received, only 2 requests (not 
the requesters) were considered vexatious by the University; this view was confirmed by the 
Information Commissioner on appeal (Information Commissioner Office, 2016a, 2016b). 
 
 
7.  We have repeatedly addressed the criticisms made in the editorial of the methods and 
analyses used in the PACE trial. These can be found in blogs (Wessely, 2015; White, 2016), 
journal correspondence and as answers to frequently asked questions on the PACE trial 
website (http://www.wolfson.qmul.ac.uk/current-projects/pace-trial#patients). 
 
 
8.  In the editorial, Dr Geraghty makes two criticisms which we have not previously 
addressed. In the first one, he states that ‘the effectiveness of cognitive behaviour therapy 
(CBT) and graded exercise therapy (GET), …, fell by two thirds’ in a reanalysis of some of 
the trial data and concludes that these ‘have left us with two versions of “truth” concerning 
the trial’s findings – the published analysis versus the recent analysis’. This is incorrect. 
Effectiveness was measured by comparing the mean scores for each of the two primary 
outcomes between treatment groups; the effect sizes varied between 0.5 and 0.8 (moderate 
effect sizes), depending on the different comparisons (White et al., 2011). In his editorial, Dr 
Geraghty has compared two different things: one is a secondary post hoc analysis from the 
main paper, in which we reported the proportions of participants who improved by a clinically 
useful amount in both the primary outcomes (an improvement of 8 or more points for 
physical function and 2 points for fatigue), which equated to 61 per cent for CBT and 59 per 
cent for GET (White et al., 2011). The other is our reanalysis of some of the trial data 
comparing the proportions of participants who met a composite threshold for improvement 
(either improving by 50% on the primary outcomes or meeting a threshold for improvement) 
(Goldsmith et al., 2016). Using this composite outcome, 21 per cent improved with GET and 
20 per cent with CBT; significantly more than with adaptive pacing therapy (APT) (9%) or 
specialist medical care (SMC) alone (10%) (Goldsmith et al, 2016). Dr Geraghty suggests 
that the effectiveness fell from 61 per cent by one analysis method to 20 per cent when using 
another method. It is no surprise that fewer participants are regarded as improved if more 
stringent criteria are applied. Since this has nothing to do with efficacy, it made no difference 
to our interpretation that ‘CBT and GET can safely be added to SMC to moderately improve 
outcomes for chronic fatigue syndrome, but APT is not an effective addition’ (White et al., 
2011). The later analysis mentioned by Dr Geraghty was described in our original protocol 
and then abandoned for the definitive analysis plan after statistical advice (Walwyn et al., 
2013). This was because we accepted that using composite outcomes was complex, difficult 
to interpret and incongruent with expert views (Senn and Julious, 2009). We changed this 
analysis with oversight committee approvals and before outcome data were examined 
(Walwyn et al., 2013; White et al., 2011). 
 
 
9.  The second criticism concerned our secondary analysis paper about recovery (White et 
al., 2013). Dr Geraghty states that ‘… some trial participants had reached the level required 
to be classified as improved or recovered at trial entry’. This is incorrect; 3/640 (<1%) of 
participants had scores within the normal population ranges for both fatigue and physical 
function at trial entry, which was only one of the criteria necessary to be considered as 
recovered. To meet the criteria for recovery, a participant also had to have met additional 
criteria: no longer be considered a case of CFS (using the trial definition of CFS) and rated 
their overall health as ‘much’ or ‘very much’ better compared to trial entry. No participants 
met the full criteria for recovery at trial entry. 
 
 
 10.  Regarding comments on the release of trial data, we wish to clarify that one of the main 
reasons for our refusal to provide individual patient data to members of the public (following 
a FOIA request) was that we did not have the consent of our participants to make their data 
publicly available. We were also concerned that patients might be personally identified by 
releasing their data. We support sharing data for the benefit of medical research and 
ultimately of patients (White et al., 2016), as long as it is subject to certain guarantees – 
principally concerning confidentiality and an agreement not to attempt to identify participants. 
This is an ethical position, respecting patients’ rights, as we are required to do by research 
governance and the data protection act, and has been repeatedly supported by the 
Information Commissioner and Information Tribunal on all but one occasion. 
 
 
We stand firmly by the findings of the PACE trial, which, along with other studies, provide 
patients, healthcare professionals, and commissioners with the best evidence that both CBT 
and GET are safe and effective treatments for this chronic and disabling illness. Others 
share this view (National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2011; NHS Choices, 
2011; The Lancet, 2011, 2015). These findings are good news for patients who, in our 
experience, just want to get better. Of course, we need further trials, not only of CBT and 
GET but also other treatments. To this end, we hope that editorials such as that by Dr 
Geraghty do not discourage others from doing such research. 
 
 
 
References 
 
Action for ME (2011) You say ‘Save our services!’ Interaction 77: 4–5.  
  
Edmonds M, McGuire H, Price JR (2004) Exercise therapy for chronic fatigue syndrome. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 3: CD003200.  
  
Geraghty KJ (2016) PACE-Gate: When clinical trial evidence meets open data access. 
Journal of Health Psychology. Epub ahead of print 1 November. DOI: 
10.1177/1359105316675213.  
  
Goldsmith KA, White PD, Chalder T, (2016) The PACE trial: Analysis of primary outcomes 
using composite measures of improvement. Available at: 
www.wolfson.qmul.ac.uk/images/pdfs/pace/PACE_published_protocol_based_analysis_final
_8th_Sept_2016.pdf  
  
Information Commissioner Office (2016a) Freedom of Information Act 2000 Decision Notice. 
Reference FS50600710, 29 March. Available at: https://ico.org.uk/media/action-weve-
taken/decision-notices/2016/1623988/fs50600710.pdf  
 
Information Commissioner Office (2016b) Freedom of Information Act 2000 Decision Notice. 
Reference FS50609018, 9 March. Available at: https://ico.org.uk/media/action-weve-
taken/decision-notices/2016/1623721/fs50609018.pdf  
 
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (2011) Review of Clinical Guideline 
(CG53) – Chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis (or encephalopathy): 
Diagnosis and management of chronic fatigue syndrome, myalgic encephalomyelitis (or 
encephalopathy) in adults and children. Available at: 
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg53/evidence/review-decision-2011-546258781  
  
NHS Choices (2011) Therapies ‘moderately improve’ CFS. Available at: 
http://www.nhs.uk/news/2011/02February/Pages/therapies-moderately-improve-CFS.aspx  
   
Price JR, Mitchell E, Tidy E, . (2008) Cognitive behaviour therapy for chronic fatigue 
syndrome in adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 3: CD001027.  
 
Senn S, Julious S (2009) Measurement in clinical trials: A neglected issue for statisticians? 
Statistics in Medicine 28: 3189–3209.  
  
Sharpe M, Goldsmith KA, Johnson AL, . (2015) Rehabilitative treatments for chronic fatigue 
syndrome: Long-term follow-up from the PACE trial. The Lancet Psychiatry 2(12): 1067–
1074.  
  
The Lancet (2011) Editorial: Patients’ power and PACE. The Lancet 377(9780): 1808.  
  
The Lancet (2015) Editorial: What’s in a name? Systemic Exertion Intolerance Disease 
385(9969): 663.  
  
Walwyn R, Potts L, McCrone P, . (2013) A randomised trial of adaptive pacing therapy, 
cognitive behaviour therapy, graded exercise, and specialist medical care for chronic fatigue 
syndrome (PACE): Statistical analysis plan. Trials 14: 386.  
  
Wessely S (2015) The PACE Trial for chronic fatigue syndrome: Choppy seas but a 
prosperous voyage. Available at: http://www.nationalelfservice.net/other-health-
conditions/chronic-fatigue-syndrome/the-pace-trial-for-chronic-fatigue-syndrome-choppy-
seas-but-a-prosperous-voyage/  
  
White PD, Sharpe MC, Chalder T, .; PACE Trial Group (2007) Protocol for the PACE trial: A 
randomised controlled trial of adaptive pacing, cognitive behaviour therapy, and graded 
exercise, as supplements to standardised specialist medical care versus standardised 
specialist medical care alone for patients with the chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic 
encephalomyelitis or encephalopathy. BioMed Central Neurology 7: 6.  
  
White PD, Goldsmith KA, Johnson AL, . (2011) PACE trial management group. Comparison 
of adaptive pacing therapy, cognitive behaviour therapy, graded exercise therapy, and 
specialist medical care for chronic fatigue syndrome (PACE): A randomised trial. The Lancet 
377: 823–836.  
  
White PD, Goldsmith KA, Johnson AL, . (2013) Recovery from chronic fatigue syndrome 
after treatments given in the PACE trial. Psychological Medicine 43(10): 2227–2235.  
  
White PD (2016) If my team’s research on ME is rejected, the patients will suffer. The 
Guardian. 30 September. Available at: 
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/30/me-chronic-fatigue-syndrome-
patients-suffer-put-off-treatments-our-research  
 
White PD, Chalder T, Sharpe M (2016) Releasing patient data from the PACE trial for 
chronic fatigue syndrome. In: BMJ Blogs, 10 October. Available at: 
http://blogs.bmj.com/bmj/2016/09/22/peter-white-et-al-releasing-patient-data-from-the-pace-
trial-for-chronic-fatigue-syndrome/ 
