 Recent research on Gulf War illness and other health problems 
in veterans of the 1991 Gulf War: Effects of toxicant exposures 
during deployment
Roberta F. Whitea,*, Lea Steeleb, James P. O’Callaghanc, Kimberly Sullivand, James H. 
Binnse, Beatrice A. Golombf, Floyd E. Bloomg, James A. Bunkerh, Fiona Crawfordi, Joel C. 
Gravesj, Anthony Hardiek, Nancy Klimasl, Marguerite Knoxm, William J. Meggsn, Jack 
Mellingo, Martin A. Philbertp, and Rachel Grashowq
Roberta F. White: rwhite@bu.edu; Lea Steele: Lea_Steele@baylor.edu; James P. O’Callaghan: jdo5@cdc.gov; Kimberly 
Sullivan: tty@bu.edu; James H. Binns: Binns.Jim@gmail.com; Beatrice A. Golomb: bgolomb@popmail.ucsd.edu; Floyd E. 
Bloom: fbloom@bloomsciassocs.net, fbloom@scripps.edu; James A. Bunker: desert-storm1991@outlook.com; Fiona 
Crawford: fcrawford@RFDN.ORG; Joel C. Graves: joelcgraves@gmail.com; Anthony Hardie: 
anthony.d.hardie@gmail.com; Nancy Klimas: nklimas@nova.edu; Marguerite Knox: marguerite.l.knox.mil@mail.mil; 
William J. Meggs: meggsw@ecu.edu; Jack Melling: jmelling@ptd.net; Martin A. Philbert: Philbert@umich.edu; Rachel 
Grashow: r.grashow@neu.edu
aDepartment of Environmental Health, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, MA, 
United States
bBaylor University Institute of Biomedical Studies, Waco, TX, United States
cMolecular Neurotoxicology, Toxicology & Molecular Biology Branch (MS-3014), Health Effects 
Laboratory Division, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention – NIOSH, Morgantown, WV, 
United States
dBoston University School of Public Health, Department of Environmental Health, Boston, MA, 
United States
eResearch Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans’ Illnesses, Phoenix, AZ, United States
fUniversity of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, United States
gMolecular & Integrative Neuroscience Department, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, 
United States
hNational Gulf War Resource Center, Topeka, KS, United States
iDirector, TBI Research Program, Roskamp Institute, Sarasota, FL, United States
jCaptain, U.S. Army, Retired, Crestview, FL, United States
kVeterans for Common Sense, Bradenton, FL, United States
lInstitute for Neuro-Immune Medicine, Nova Southeastern University, Miami, FL, United States
mMcEntire Joint National Guard Base, Eastover, SC, United States
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
*Corresponding author: Department of Environmental Health, Boston University School of Public Health, 715 Albany St., T4W, 
Boston, MA 02118, United States. 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Published in final edited form as:
Cortex. 2016 January ; 74: 449–475. doi:10.1016/j.cortex.2015.08.022.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 nDepartment of Emergency Medicine, 3ED311, The Brody School of Medicine, East Carolina 
University School of Medicine, Greenville, NC, United States
oU.S. Government Accountability Office, Salisbury, Wiltshire, UK
pSchool of Public Health, Ann Arbor, MI, United States
qNortheastern University, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Boston, MA, 
United States
Abstract
Veterans of Operation Desert Storm/Desert Shield – the 1991 Gulf War (GW) – are a unique 
population who returned from theater with multiple health complaints and disorders. Studies in the 
U.S. and elsewhere have consistently concluded that approximately 25–32% of this population 
suffers from a disorder characterized by symptoms that vary somewhat among individuals and 
include fatigue, headaches, cognitive dysfunction, musculoskeletal pain, and respiratory, 
gastrointestinal and dermatologic complaints. Gulf War illness (GWI) is the term used to describe 
this disorder. In addition, brain cancer occurs at increased rates in subgroups of GW veterans, as 
do neuropsychological and brain imaging abnormalities.
Chemical exposures have become the focus of etiologic GWI research because nervous system 
symptoms are prominent and many neurotoxicants were present in theater, including 
organophosphates (OPs), carbamates, and other pesticides; sarin/cyclosarin nerve agents, and 
pyridostigmine bromide (PB) medications used as prophylaxis against chemical warfare attacks. 
Psychiatric etiologies have been ruled out.
This paper reviews the recent literature on the health of 1991 GW veterans, focusing particularly 
on the central nervous system and on effects of toxicant exposures. In addition, it emphasizes 
research published since 2008, following on an exhaustive review that was published in that year 
that summarizes the prior literature (RACGWI, 2008).
We conclude that exposure to pesticides and/or to PB are causally associated with GWI and the 
neurological dysfunction in GW veterans. Exposure to sarin and cyclosarin and to oil well fire 
emissions are also associated with neurologically based health effects, though their contribution to 
development of the disorder known as GWI is less clear. Gene-environment interactions are likely 
to have contributed to development of GWI in deployed veterans. The health consequences of 
chemical exposures in the GW and other conflicts have been called “toxic wounds” by veterans. 
This type of injury requires further study and concentrated treatment research efforts that may also 
benefit other occupational groups with similar exposure-related illnesses.
Keywords
Gulf War illness; Pesticide; Organophosphates; Sarin; Cyclosarin; Veterans’ health
1. Introduction
The 1991 Gulf War (GW) was fought by a multinational coalition that formed to oppose 
Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait in 1990. The coalition included nearly 700,000 U.S. troops as well 
White et al.
Page 2
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 as military personnel from the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, and France, with over 30 
partnering countries. It began with a build-up of troops in the region (Operation Desert 
Shield) prior to the actual conflict (Operation Desert Storm), which included a six-week air 
campaign and four days of ground fighting before a ceasefire was declared on February 28, 
1991. This was followed by the return of the majority of the troops by the spring of 1991. 
There were few casualties on the winning side. The GW was remarkable for the numbers of 
chemical exposures experienced by troops, including the low-level chemical warfare agents 
released by the destruction of Iraqi facilities, extensive spraying and use of pesticides, 
medications given prophylactically to protect troops against hazardous exposures, and 
hundreds of oil well fires set by the Iraqi troops as they withdrew from Kuwait.
Within a year of return from the GW, it became apparent that troops were suffering from a 
variety of symptoms that were difficult to explain by health care providers, who did not 
recognize a typical medical illness in the veterans. Initially dubbed “GW syndrome” by the 
press, this disorder appeared to affect many, but not all, GW veterans. Fatigue, widespread 
pain, cognitive and memory problems, skin rashes, gastrointestinal and respiratory 
difficulties were commonly reported, but not every veteran afflicted by GW illness (GWI) 
presented with identical symptoms. Intensive research was initiated to characterize the 
disorder, understand its prevalence, investigate likely causes, and explore possible 
mechanisms of disease. Although the troops and some health care providers immediately 
suspected that chemical exposures were the cause of the condition, others ascribed GWI to 
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) or other psychiatric conditions, or to the usual 
consequence of all wars. Effective treatments for GWI have been elusive but recently a 
treatment research effort has begun to flourish.
This paper explores the characteristics of GWI, its definition and prevalence (Epidemiology 
of GWI), the conditions in theater that may have caused GWI and specific indictors of 
nervous system dysfunction (Persistent Health Effects in GW Veterans in Relation to 
Deployment Experiences and Exposures), physiological mechanisms underlying GWI 
(Neuropathology of GWI) and experimental models of GWI and its causation (Animal 
Models of GWI Etiology and Pathology). It also summarizes current evidence related to a 
variety of neurological outcomes in addition to GWI that have been significantly associated 
with self-reported or modeled chemical exposures encountered by veterans during the GW. 
The paper is based on a recent summary of GWI research, Gulf War illness and the health of 
Gulf War veterans: Research update and recommendations, 2009–2013 (RACGWI, 2014), 
which our group authored. The paper and its tables focus on the literature appearing since 
2008, with occasional briefer summaries or tables on research published prior to 2008.
2. The epidemiology of GWI
2.1. Case definitions and prevalence
Research on GWI has relied on a number of differing definitions of the disorder, including 
chronic multisymptom illness (CMI, Fukuda et al., 1998), the Kansas GWI definition 
(Steele, 2000), the Haley syndrome criteria (Haley, Kurt, & Hom, 1997) and adaptations of 
these approaches. CMI has been used the most commonly in epidemiologic research to date. 
GW veterans who meet criteria for CMI must report one or more symptoms that have been 
White et al.
Page 3
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ongoing for at least six months in two of three categories, which include musculoskeletal 
pain (symptom list: joint pain, joint stiffness, muscle pain); mood-cognition (feeling 
depressed, feeling moody, feeling anxious, trouble sleeping, difficulty remembering or 
concentrating, trouble with word finding), and fatigue. CMI can be categorized as “severe” 
if the veteran rates each defining symptom as severe or “mild-moderate” for milder 
complaints. This case definition was recommended for clinical use by a recent IOM panel 
(IOM, 2014). The Kansas definition of GWI requires that cases have moderately severe or 
multiple chronic symptoms in at least three of six categories: fatigue/sleep problems, pain, 
neurological/cognitive/mood symptoms, respiratory complaints, gastrointestinal problems or 
skin symptoms (Steele, 2000). Veterans who have severe psychiatric disorders or other 
medical conditions that might predict similar symptoms are excluded. The 2014 IOM report 
on GWI case definitions recommended that this definition be used for research purposes 
(IOM, 2014). The Haley syndromes were originally developed using factor analytic 
evaluation of symptom data from a Seabees unit and include three symptom complexes. 
Syndrome 1 (Impaired cognition) is characterized by problems with attention, memory, and 
sleep along with depression. Syndrome 2 (Confusion/ataxia) involves problems with 
thinking and balance. Syndrome 3 (Neuropathic pain), is defined by joint and muscle pain.
Each of these definitions has particular strengths and weaknesses. The mild form of CMI is 
broad and overly inclusive, resulting in high prevalence rates even in control populations, 
though the severe form appears to be more specific to GWI (Nisenbaum, Barrett, Reyes, & 
Reeves, 2000). The Kansas criteria predict GWI at rates that appear to be consistent with 
those seen across multiple GW populations but can potentially exclude veterans with some 
concurrent medical disorders who may also have GWI. The Haley syndromes are quite 
narrow and underestimate the occurrence of the disorder but may allow highly specific 
characterization of veterans who meet criteria for a syndrome. When used in research, use of 
one of these definitions at least provides a basis for understanding the health characteristics 
of GWI cases being described. Many studies have not included any clear definition of how 
GWI was diagnosed among cases, a serious problem for the literature on this disorder. The 
ultimate goal of a consensus case definition for GWI has been advocated, which would lead 
to greater clarity in GWI research (RACGWI, 2014).
Because the individual symptoms seen in GWI can occur commonly in the general 
population, it is important to identify the excess rates of such symptoms in the GW veteran 
population, that is, the proportion of 1991 GW veterans who experienced multiple chronic 
symptoms over and above the “background” rate of these symptoms seen in contemporary 
veterans who did not deploy to the GW theater. Using the definitions of GWI described 
above, the 2008 RAC report compared the rates of the symptoms of the disorder in deployed 
GW veterans with those seen in control groups to provide a consistent methodology for 
estimating the prevalence of symptomatic illness attributable to GW service across studies.
Table 1 provides prevalence data from nine investigations that used this approach and three 
studies that provide estimates only for GW veterans. Seven of ten estimates indicated excess 
rates of symptomatology to be in the 25–32% range across multiple populations when using 
the more general case definitions for GWI (CMI, Kansas), while the more narrowly focused 
factor analytic case definitions such as the Haley criteria produced lower estimates of the 
White et al.
Page 4
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 disorder. Longitudinal studies have consistently indicated that GWI rates and symptom 
frequencies reported by veterans have remained fairly constant, with no overall 
improvement over time (Hotopf et al., 2003; Ozakinci, Hallman, & Kipen, 2006; Proctor et 
al., 1998; Wolfe, Proctor, Erickson, & Hu, 2002).
2.2. Neurological conditions
Rates of neurological conditions that have been evaluated among deployed GW veterans 
compared to nondeployed controls include amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), brain 
cancer, seizures, neuritis and neuralgia, migraine headaches, multiple sclerosis (MS) and 
Parkinson’s disease (PD). The literature appearing on these disorders since 2008 is 
summarized in Table 2.
The neurological disorder that was first identified as occurring at increased rates in GW 
veterans was ALS. Prior to 2008, several studies had reported an excess rate of ALS among 
deployed GW veterans relative to nondeployed controls (Coffman, Horner, Grambow, & 
Lindquist, 2005; Horner et al., 2008). Some findings suggested that age of onset might be 
earlier in this population (Haley, 2003). However, Horner et al. (2008) reported that the 
increased rate of ALS in GW versus nondeployed veterans was maintained only for the first 
10 years after the war, peaking in 1996, suggesting a time-limited ALS “outbreak” in GW 
veterans (Horner et al., 2008). ALS risk was also reportedly related to specific locations of 
affected troops in theater (Miranda, Galeano, Tassone, Allen, & Horner, 2008). Two studies 
appearing since 2008 have examined the occurrence of ALS. One paper compared the 
characteristics of ALS in GW-deployed and era nondeployed veterans, concluding that age, 
site of onset and symptom presentation were similar in the two groups but that ventilator-
free survival time was shorter in the GW-deployed ALS patients (Kasarskis et al., 2009). A 
second study concluded that there was no excess mortality from ALS in deployed GW 
veterans compared to nondeployed era controls (Barth, Kang, Bullman, & Wallin, 2009).
Two studies have found excess rates of death due to brain cancers among GW veterans who 
were identified by Department of Defense (DoD) exposure models as having been possibly 
exposed to nerve gas agents during/following the demolition of the weapons depot in 
Khamisiyah, Iraq, in March of 1991 (Barth et al., 2009; Bullman, Mahan, Kang, & Page, 
2005). Veterans exposed to the highest levels of contaminants from oil well fires were also 
reported to have increased rates of brain cancer deaths (Barth et al., 2009).
The VA’s 2005 national longitudinal survey of nearly 9,000 GW era veterans published in 
2009 (Kang et al., 2009) found that deployed veterans reported being diagnosed with 
repeated seizures, neuralgia or neuritis, and stroke at greater rates than nondeployed era 
controls. Most of these conditions had also been reported at excess rates by GW veterans in 
VA’s 1996 national survey. Although these conditions were self-reported, medical record 
reviews for both the 1996 and 2005 VA national surveys indicated a high percent agreement 
(93–96%) between medical records and veteran-identified reasons for clinic visits and 
hospital stays (Kang et al., 2009; Kang, Mahan, Lee, Magee, & Murphy, 2000).
Increased rates of migraine headaches have been reported for some time among GW 
deployed veterans relative to controls (Gray, Reed, Kaiser, Smith, & Gastanaga, 2002; Kang 
White et al.
Page 5
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 et al., 2000; Steele, 2000; Unwin et al., 1999). In GW veterans who met clinical criteria for 
chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS), 64% were diagnosed with migraine headaches, which is a 
rate similar to nonveteran subjects with CFS and significantly higher than that seen in 
sedentary controls (Rayhan, Ravindran, & Baraniuk, 2013).
There are no reliable data on incidence or prevalence of MS or PD among veterans of the 
1991 GW specifically. As noted in Table 2, a paper published in 2009 (Barth et al., 2009) 
concluded that GW veterans, overall, did not have higher mortality rates due to these 
disorders, compared to non-deployed era veterans. A study of MS in veterans who served in 
the military between 1990 and 2007 and had applied for disability compensation identified 
increased MS rates in women, African Americans, and Army veterans compared to other 
groups but did not focus specifically on deployed veterans of the 1991 GW (Wallin et al., 
2012). A later report indicated that rates of MS were not significantly different between GW 
veterans and nondeployed veterans in this convenience cohort (Wallin et al., 2014). Neither 
mortality data nor the number of veterans seeking disability benefits for MS provides a valid 
indication of whether GW veterans have been affected by excess rates of MS or most other 
neurological disorders since the war. Determining the impact of MS and other neurological 
disorders on GW veterans requires clear prevalence figures derived from well-designed 
research that utilizes population-based samples of GW veterans and appropriate comparison 
groups. It is also important to determine if rates of these disorders differ in GW veteran 
subgroups in connection with exposures or other deployment characteristics.
Reports summarizing the research on health problems in GW veterans have repeatedly 
emphasized that it is essential that studies intended to evaluate rates of illness and 
diagnosable diseases in GW veterans determine those rates in appropriate veteran 
subgroups, defined by particular exposures, locations in theater, or other relevant factors 
(RACGWI, 2008, 2014). It is now well understood that deployment exposures and 
experiences encountered by GW veterans were not uniform across theater. General analyses 
that combine all GW veterans into a single group will underestimate or completely obscure 
important findings associated with exposures that affected only a subgroup of veterans. This 
has been well illustrated, for example, by studies identifying excess rates of brain cancer 
mortality (Barth et al., 2009), brain structure and cognitive alterations (Chao, Abadjian, 
Hlavin, Meyerhoff, & Weiner, 2011; Heaton et al., 2007; Proctor, Heaton, Heeren, & White, 
2006) and respiratory disease (Cowan, Lange, Heller, Kirkpatrick, & DeBakey, 2002) 
among veteran subgroups who had the greatest exposure to nerve agents or oil fire smoke 
during the GW.
2.3. Psychiatric and psychological disorders
Deployment related stress, PTSD and other psychiatric conditions were extensively studied 
in GW veterans immediately after their complaints of increased ill health became known. 
Population-based studies indicated that rates of diagnosed PTSD in GW veterans were about 
3–6%, compared to a rate of 25–32% for GWI (RACGWI, 2008). When combat stressors, 
self-reported stress reactions and exposures to other stressful events in theater were 
quantified, these variables did not explain or predict diagnosis of GWI (RACGWI, 2008, p. 
78). The 2010 IOM report on GWI concluded: “The excess of unexplained medical 
White et al.
Page 6
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 symptoms reported by deployed GW veterans cannot be reliably ascribed to any known 
psychiatric disorder” (IOM, 2010, p. 109).
Research studies investigating PTSD since 2008 are summarized in Table 3. These studies 
have concluded that PTSD symptom severity was associated with poorer physical health 
after deployment (Hassija, Jakupcak, Maguen, & Shipherd, 2012), that exposure to war 
casualties was associated with greater mental health decline (Gade & Wenger, 2011) and 
that combat exposure was related to PTSD, depressive symptoms and alcohol abuse (Hassija 
et al., 2012). Problem drinking in the GW population was found to be associated with PTSD, 
major depression and multisymptom illness (Coughlin, Kang, & Mahan, 2011). National 
Guard/Reservists and troops on active duty scored higher on PTSD rating scales and 
reported increased perceived threats and difficult living and working environments while 
deployed than comparison service men and women (Vogt, Samper, King, King, & Martin, 
2008).
The literature on neuroimaging and PTSD in deployed GW veterans mirrors PTSD findings 
in other veteran populations, including neuropathological and hormonal changes. GW 
veterans with PTSD were found in one study to have smaller hippocampal volumes on brain 
imaging than controls without PTSD (Apfel et al., 2011). Diminished hippocampal volume, 
metabolic activity changes and enhanced hormonal response to dexamethasone were 
reported in a second study of GW veterans diagnosed with PTSD (Yehuda et al., 2010). GW 
veterans diagnosed with combat-related PTSD showed smaller volume, area and thickness 
values in the hippocampal gyrus, superior temporal cortex, lateral orbital frontal cortex and 
pars orbitalis brain regions when compared to veterans without PTSD in a third investigation 
(Woodward, Schaer, Kaloupek, Cediel, & Eliez, 2009). Although these studies suggest that 
PTSD should be assessed and accounted for when evaluating neuroimaging outcomes in 
GW veterans, none of the reported studies controlled for potential nerve agents or other 
relevant environmental exposures that should also be assessed when evaluating magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) outcomes in this population.
Overall, research on PTSD and other psychiatric disorders among GW veterans shows lower 
rates of these conditions than are found in veterans of other wars and far lower than the 
prevalence of GWI. However, related physiology and predictors of PTSD occurrence and 
severity are similar.
3. Research on persistent health effects in GW veterans in relation to 
deployment experiences and exposures
Exposures in the GW theater that have been suspected of contributing to long-term health 
effects after the war include pesticides, depleted uranium munitions, airborne contaminants 
from the Kuwaiti oil well fires, chemical nerve agents, the anthrax vaccine and multiple 
vaccinations, widespread use of pyridostigmine bromide (PB) as a prophylactic measure 
against possible nerve agent exposure, chemical resistant coating (CARC) paint, and other 
hazards such as psychologically stressful conditions and heat. Military personnel commonly 
experienced multiple exposures in different combinations, for which possible interactive or 
synergistic effects have not been determined in human populations. One of the central 
White et al.
Page 7
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 challenges in evaluating risk factors for GW-related health outcomes involves a paucity of 
data on the types and doses of exposures experienced by veterans in theater. Initial research 
efforts on exposure–outcome relationships in this population were forced to rely on self-
report, which can be subject to bias. To address this concern, the U.S. DoD sponsored a 
number of intensive efforts to provide simulations, modeled estimates and detailed 
investigations in an effort to better characterize wartime exposures in different locations and 
military units. These include estimates of nerve agent exposures following demolitions at the 
massive munitions depot at Khamisiyah, Iraq, in March of 1991; modeled estimates of levels 
of airborne contaminants from the hundreds of Kuwaiti oil well fires; determinations of 
radiation and heavy metal exposures associated with depleted uranium munitions, and in-
depth investigations that provided detailed information on the use of pesticides and PB in 
theater. The hazards that have been studied most extensively with regard to health outcomes 
in this population include psychological stressors, pesticides, PB, sarin/cyclosarin, vaccines, 
depleted uranium and oil well fires.
Early exposure-related studies in the deployed GW veteran population were often 
problematic, due to analytic limitations that led to errors in interpretation of study findings. 
Such problems arose when studies that assessed myriad potential risk factors for GWI failed 
to control for confounding due to effects of concurrent exposures. Such studies typically 
reported that all, or most, GW experiences and exposures evaluated were significantly 
associated with GWI (RACGWI, 2008). In contrast, studies that evaluated individual GWI 
risk factors, while controlling for effects of other exposures, invariably identified a limited 
number of significant risk factors for GWI. Across all studies and populations, when 
confounding effects of concurrent exposures are considered, pesticide and PB use during the 
GW have been consistently identified as significant risk factors for GWI.
3.1. Pesticide exposures
As detailed elsewhere (DOD, 2001), GW personnel were often exposed to high levels of a 
variety of pesticides and insect repellants in theater. After adjusting for effects of concurrent 
exposures, significant associations between self-reported pesticide exposure and GWI, 
variously defined, have been identified in six of the seven different GW veteran populations 
in which they have been evaluated (RACGWI, 2008; Steele et al., 2012). Pesticide 
exposures were associated with GWI as defined by the Haley syndrome criteria in veterans 
from a single Navy unit (Haley & Kurt, 1997), CMI in Air Force veterans (Nisenbaum et al., 
2000), study-specific criteria among Navy Seabees (Gray et al., 2002), overall symptom 
severity among United Kingdom GW veterans (Cherry et al., 2001a, 2001b), and 
gastrointestinal and/or neuropsychological symptoms in Danish GW veterans (Ishoy, 
Suadicani, Guldager, Appleyard, & Gyntelberg, 1999; Ishoy, Suadicani, Guldager, 
Appleyard, Hein, et al., 1999; Suadicani, Ishoy, Guldager, Appleyard, & Gyntelberg, 1999). 
In a more recent study, Steele et al. (2012) also found an association between pesticide 
exposures and GWI for veterans who had served in different locations in theater. In addition, 
two studies have reported dose–response effects in the association between pesticide 
exposures and GWI (Cherry et al., 2001b; Haley & Kurt, 1997).
White et al.
Page 8
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 3.2. PB
The 1991 GW is the only conflict in which PB was widely used by military personnel as a 
prophylactic measure intended to protect against effects of possible nerve gas attacks 
(Golomb, 1999). Self-reported PB use has also been consistently linked to ill health in GW 
veteran populations (see Table 4). Use of PB and/or experiencing side effects from PB were 
significantly associated with Haley syndrome symptomatology (Haley, Kurt, et al., 1997), 
with study-specific criteria for GWI among Navy Seabees (Gray et al., 2002), CMI in U.S. 
Air Force (Nisenbaum et al., 2000) and Army (Wolfe et al., 2002) veterans, a study-specific 
diagnosis of GWI in Oregon veterans (Spencer et al., 2001), and overall symptom severity in 
U.K. GW veterans (Cherry et al., 2001b). In a more recent study, PB use was associated 
with a significantly elevated risk for GWI (OR = 3.5) among GW veterans who were located 
in forward areas in theater (Steele et al., 2012). Overall, self-reported PB use has been 
identified as a significant risk factor for GWI in all seven populations in which it has been 
evaluated, after adjusting for the effects of other exposures. Three studies have reported 
dose–response effects for GWI in relation to PB use (Cherry et al., 2001b; Spencer et al., 
2001; Wolfe et al., 2002), and two have identified dose–response effects in relation to side 
effects from PB use (Cherry et al., 2001b; Haley & Kurt, 1997).
3.3. Chemical warfare agents
Several studies have linked sarin/cyclosarin exposure to central nervous system outcomes. 
The 2008 RAC report summarized studies from Boston investigators that examined the 
relationship between brain outcomes and DoD models of sarin/cyclosarin nerve gas agent 
exposures resulting from the demolition of the Khamisiyah, Iraq, weapons depot in March 
1991. This modeling provided a dose exposure estimate across three days as well as 
identification of U.S. troops who were likely in the area. Investigators found that reduced 
performance on neurobehavioral tests (Proctor et al., 2006) and smaller white matter 
volumes on brain imaging (Heaton et al., 2007) were associated with nerve gas agent 
exposure in a dose-dependent manner, with higher exposures predicting poorer performance 
and less overall brain white matter.
The findings of associations between DoD models of sarin/ cyclosarin exposure and MRI 
and behavioral outcomes have received support from recent investigations. In the first, gray 
matter and hippocampal volumes were found to be smaller in Khamisiyah-exposed veterans 
versus non-exposed veterans, and reduced white matter volume measured on a 1.5 T MRI 
was associated with poorer performance on neurobehavioral tests of executive and 
visuospatial functions (Chao, Rothlind, Cardenas, Meyerhoff, & Weiner, 2010). A second 
study from Chao et al. using a 4.0 T MRI and a different study sample found that total gray 
and total white matter volumes were both significantly reduced in Khamisiyah-exposed 
veterans, though findings were inconsistent regarding exposure-related cognitive differences 
(Chao et al., 2011). An additional study evaluating neurobehavioral outcomes found slower 
motor function speeds among Khamisiyah-exposed veterans compared to non-exposed 
(Toomey et al., 2009).
Two studies have reported significantly increased rates of death due to brain cancer among 
veterans who were located within the nerve agent plume area defined by DoD models of the 
White et al.
Page 9
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Khamisiyah demolitions. The earlier study, reporting on mortality through 2000, identified a 
nearly two-fold increase in brain cancer deaths in exposed veterans (Bullman et al., 2005). 
The observed increase was further supported by a 2009 VA study that evaluated mortality 
rates through 2004, which found a nearly three-fold increase in brain cancer deaths among 
veterans with the highest level of exposure to the Kuwaiti oil well fires and nerve agents 
associated with the Khamisiyah plume (Barth et al., 2009).
In a large national study, Haley et al. (2013) explored the relationship between chemical 
agent exposures and GWI. This group reported an increased risk for GWI defined as CMI or 
the Haley syndromes associated with hearing chemical alarms in theater, a proxy for 
possible nerve agent exposure. A significant dose–response effect in which veterans who 
reported hearing more alarms had greater risk for GWI was reported in this study. In 
contrast, this study reported no association between GWI and modeled exposure to the 
Khamisiyah plume, which contained these agents. A study of Kansas City-area GW veterans 
did not reveal associations between hearing chemical alarms and risk for GWI (Steele et al., 
2012).
In summary, the literature appearing prior to 2008 and since then clearly supports a link 
between adverse neurological outcomes and sarin/cyclosarin in populations of GW veterans 
with exposure to these agents. The link between such exposures and GWI remains unclear, 
perhaps because studies on the issue over time have assessed nerve gas agent exposure in 
different ways (self-report, chemical alarms, Khamisiyah models) and defined GWI 
differently.
Only limited evidence is available regarding exposures to and health effects of other 
chemical warfare agents known to have been present in theater. A study published in 2013 
tracked meteorological patterns in the region and indicated that U.S. troops may have been 
exposed to both nerve and blister agents as fallout from the Coalition bombing of chemical 
storage sites in 1991, during the early days of the air campaign (Tuite & Haley, 2013). This 
possibility had previously been raised by multiple sources, including Czech and other 
Coalition partners who reported chemical detections in northern Saudi Arabia in January of 
1991, with related evidence summarized in a 2004 report from the U.S. Government 
Accountability Office (U.S. Department of Defense Office of the Special Assistant for Gulf 
War Illnesses, 1998; U.S. General Accounting Office, 2004). Chemical detection monitors 
used during the war had limited capabilities for detecting mustard gas, but government 
reports have verified the presence of mustard gas at chemical manufacturing and storage 
sites in Iraq (U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, Persian Gulf War Illnesses Task Force, 
2002) and in munitions stored at the Khamisiyah weapons depot (U.S. Department of 
Defense Office of the Special Assistant for Gulf War Illnesses, 2002). A 2012 study 
described a mechanism by which mustard gas may have interacted with other exposures in 
theater in contributing to long-term health effects in GW veterans (Brimfield, 2012). 
However, there are no reports in the literature providing systematic evaluation of the effects 
of mustard gas on the health of GW veterans.
White et al.
Page 10
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 3.4. Other exposures and chemical mixtures
Previous evidence that links GWI to individual vaccines and/or the total number of vaccines 
received by GW veterans is quite limited (Research Advisory Committee, 2008). Prior to 
2008, one study identified a significant association between GWI and the number of 
vaccines received after controlling for the effects of other exposures in theater (Cherry et al., 
2001b). A 2009 Australian study reported a weak association between health symptoms 
affecting GW veterans and the number of vaccines received, but no associations with 
vaccines reported in military records (Kelsall et al., 2009). Similarly, no associations 
between GWI and vaccines received in theater were reported in a 2012 study of Kansas 
City-area veterans (Steele et al., 2012). Some investigators have suggested that certain 
vaccines used during the GW contained squalene, which potentially gave rise to antibodies 
that might be associated with GWI (Asa, Cao, & Garry, 2000). However, a 2009 study 
found no association between diagnosis of CMI and the presence of squalene antibodies in 
Navy Seabees who served in the GW (Phillips et al., 2009).
Earlier studies provided mixed conclusions on the long-term health effects of exposures 
resulting from the hundreds of Kuwaiti oil well fires that burned between February and 
November, 1991, but close proximity to oil well fires was not ruled out as a risk factor for 
GWI (Research Advisory Committee, 2008). Two recent studies have provided additional 
evidence supporting long-term health effects in veteran subgroups that were most highly 
exposed to oil well fire smoke. A study of Kansas City-area GW veterans identified a 
significantly increased risk for GWI among GW veterans exposed to oil well fire smoke 
among personnel in forward areas in theater (Steele et al., 2012). Exposure to airborne 
pollutants from the Kuwaiti oil well fires has also been associated with increased risk for 
death due to brain cancer (Barth et al., 2009).
Multiple investigations have identified a high degree of overlap or clustering among GW 
exposures, indicating that personnel with some exposures (e.g., certain pesticides) were also 
much more likely to have additional exposures of concern (e.g., other pesticides, PB Boyd et 
al., 2003; Cherry et al., 2001b; Fricker et al., 2000; Steele et al., 2012). Most veterans 
experienced exposures to chemical mixtures in theater, and a large body of research using 
animal models has demonstrated persistent effects from combinations of GW exposures not 
seen with individual exposures. However, effects of these complex exposures have been 
minimally evaluated in GW veterans and remain unknown. Improved modeling of the 
contributions of individual and combined exposures would inform the assessment of mixed 
exposures as causes of GWI, as would the development of biomarkers of past exposures to 
specific chemicals of interest.
3.5. Genetic factors
Genetic vulnerabilities to chemicals present in theater likely played a role in the post-
deployment health of individual veterans (IOM, 2010; RACGWI, 2014). A recently 
published population study of 304 GW veterans identified a significant gene–exposure 
interaction in a subgroup of veterans with GWI. This study found that veterans with less 
active genetic variants of the butyrylcholinesterase enzyme were at substantially greater risk 
White et al.
Page 11
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 for GWI if they used PB compared to veterans with these genotypes who did not use PB 
(Steele, Lockridge, Gerkovich, Cook, & Sastre, 2015).
4. Neuropathology of GWI
Because the most prominent symptoms of GWI are so clearly related to nervous system 
function and because GW veterans were exposed to several well-known neurotoxicants in 
theater, research has focused on the nervous system in attempts to identify the underlying 
neuropathological mechanisms of the disorder. Other systems, including the immune, 
respiratory, and gastrointestinal systems, have also received attention, though to a lesser 
extent. We will focus here on the known neuropathological and neurofunctional correlates of 
GWI, mentioning other systems when they are found on the pathway to nervous system 
effects.
4.1. Neuroimaging
Early research using MRI and electroencephalography (EEG) methods tended to compare ill 
and healthy GW veterans and to use insensitive clinical visual interpretation of images, 
finding few differences (Amato et al., 1997; Haley, Hom, et al., 1997; Lee, Bale, & Gabriel, 
2005; Levine et al., 2006; Newmark & Clayton, 1995). Since 2008, 16 additional peer-
reviewed EEG and neuroimaging papers have appeared, with more sophisticated 
methodology and closer attention to exposure–outcome relationships. Table 5 summarizes 
two papers that describe exposure-related neuroimaging findings in GW veterans. Table 6 
summarizes 13 additional studies that utilized imaging and EEG to characterize structural 
and functional alterations in relation to symptomatic illness in GW veterans.
Research prior to 2009 using magnetic resonance spectroscopy reported lower levels of 
several metabolites (choline, creatine, N-acetylaspartate [NAA]) using proton magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy (H-MRS) in the brainstems and basal ganglia in GW veterans who 
met Haley criteria for diagnosis of GWI (Haley et al., 2000) and lowered NAA/creatine 
ratios in basal ganglia (Meyerhoff, Lindgren, Hardin, Griffin, & Weiner, 2001) and 
hippocampus (Menon, Nasrallah, Reeves, & Ali, 2004). Research conducted by Weiner 
(2005) identified brain metabolic abnormalities in choline/creatine ratios in GW veterans 
meeting Haley Syndrome 2 (Confusion-ataxia) criteria for GWI (Weiner, 2005). However, a 
later study (Weiner et al., 2011) failed to confirm this finding: NAA, creatine and choline 
levels did not differ significantly in symptomatic versus asymptomatic GW veterans 
(Weiner et al., 2011). Rayhan, Raksit, et al. (2013), Rayhan, Ravindran, et al. (2013) and 
Rayhan, Stevens, et al. (2013) assessed lactate metabolite levels in the prefrontal cortex 
prior to and after an exercise challenge in ill GW veterans, finding that pre-exercise lactate 
level was associated with memory performance pre-and post-exercise. A single-photon 
emission computer tomography (SPECT) method that injects a radioactive tracer to produce 
a 3-D representation of metabolic activity in the brain was used to evaluate cerebral blood 
flow in 21 subjects diagnosed with Haley Syndrome 2 (Confusion-ataxia) compared to 17 
military controls; significantly lower cerebral blood flow in the caudate, globus pallidus, 
putamen and posterior hypothalamus was seen in the ill veterans (Haley et al., 2009).
White et al.
Page 12
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Because exposures experienced by GW veterans in theater included many chemicals that act 
on the cholinergic system (sarin, cyclosarin, organophosphates – OPs, PB; Golomb, 2008), 
one approach to imaging in this population employed physostigmine infusions to challenge 
the cholinergic system and evaluate the challenge effects. Table 6 summarizes three recent 
investigations utilizing physostigmine challenge. Using MRS probes, Li et al. (2011) 
detected abnormal cerebral blood flow through the hippocampus before the physostigmine 
challenge, and after the challenge veterans with Haley Syndromes 2 (Confusion-ataxia) and 
3 (Neuropathic pain) showed significantly abnormal increases in regional cerebral blood 
flow in the hippocampus of both hemispheres. A second physostigmine challenge study 
failed to find any decrease in brain activity in symptomatic GW veterans; instead, GWI 
patients showed either no change or increased cerebral blood flow after physostigmine 
injection, with changes being statistically significantly different from sedentary control 
veterans. Differences were most significant in the hippocampus, amygdala, caudate and 
thalamic areas after physostigmine injection (Liu et al., 2011). Similar elevated cerebral 
blood flow results with physostigmine challenge were also reported in a study using SPECT 
methodology (Haley et al., 2009).
Reduced white and gray matter volumes in cortical areas have been consistently reported in 
structural MRI studies of ill GW veterans (Chao et al., 2011, 2010; Rayhan, Stevens, et al., 
2013; Rosenzweig, Bodi, & Nashef, 2012). Reduced signaling was also seen in the 
thalamus, caudate, hippocampus, globus pallidus and putamen (Calley et al., 2010; Haley et 
al., 2009; Li et al., 2011). As noted above and in Table 6, Chao et al. (2011) found that GWI 
and CMI diagnoses significantly predicted volume changes in sarin and cyclosarin-exposed 
subjects.
Several studies have used functional MRI (fMRI) to assess functional anomalies and white 
matter integrity using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). For example, Rayhan, Raksit, et al. 
(2013), Rayhan, Ravindran, et al. (2013) and Rayhan, Stevens, et al. (2013) reported that 
fatigue, pain and hyperalgesia were associated with diminished white matter integrity in GW 
veterans with CMI or CFS (Rayhan, Stevens, et al., 2013). Axial diffusivity in the right 
inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus specifically predicted CMI diagnosis in this study. In 
addition, civilian controls and ill GW veterans exposed to exercise revealed two distinct 
GWI phenotypes. One subgroup displayed orthostatic tachycardia while the other developed 
hyperalgesia. Imaging results on both groups showed signs of brain atrophy when compared 
to controls and altered working memory compensation in brain areas that were different 
from controls. In a second study, fMRI scanning of 53 symptomatic GW veterans showed 
significant signal changes in the thalamic and caudate regions in Haley Syndrome 2 
(Confusion-ataxia) subjects when compared to other symptomatic veterans and healthy 
controls. Furthermore, the Haley Syndrome 2 group’s performance on a semantic learning 
task was associated with signal change in the caudate areas bilaterally (Calley et al., 2010).
Responses to an innocuous heat stimulus in symptomatic and control GW veterans was 
investigated using fMRI methodology in a study by Gopinath et al. (2012). Compared to 
Haley Syndrome 3 (Neuropathic pain) patients and controls, patients with Haley Syndromes 
1 (Impaired cognition) and 2 (Confusion-ataxia) showed significantly reduced brain activity 
in the insula, somatosensory areas S1 and S2, the medial prefrontal cortex, supplementary 
White et al.
Page 13
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 motor area, premotor cortex and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. An investigation using a 
working memory challenge task during fMRI concluded that symptomatic GW veterans 
showed distinctive prefrontal cortical activity when compared to civilian controls consistent 
with impairments in central executive processing (Hubbard et al., 2013).
Using an EEG task that measures hyperarousability, (Tillman et al., 2012) significant 
associations were found between P1 latency and amplitude in veterans with Haley 
Syndrome diagnoses 2 (Confusion-ataxia) and 3 (Neuropathic pain) when compared to 
healthy controls and Haley Syndrome 1 (Impaired cognition) subjects. GW veterans with 
Syndromes 1 and 2 showed P3a amplitudes that were significantly different from controls 
and Syndrome 3 subjects. In a follow-up study, significantly lower P3b amplitudes were 
seen in all three syndrome groups when compared to controls (Tillman et al., 2013).
As a group, studies that utilize imaging and EEG probes when investigating veterans with 
GWI defined in various ways and when assessing GW veterans with sarin/cyclosarin 
exposure consistently identify structural and electrical abnormalities in the central nervous 
system: 14 of the 15 papers published since 2008 and summarized in Tables 5 and 6 support 
this conclusion.
4.2. Neurocognition
GWI symptoms commonly include complaints about memory and concentration as well as 
dysregulated mood. These symptoms have been systematically investigated in this 
population through neuropsychological assessments in order to provide objective, quantified 
and standardized measurements of specific brain and behavioral functions. Early research 
comparing deployed GW veterans and nondeployed era veterans found that affective and 
mood complaints often differentiated the two groups, with greater dysphoria among the 
deployed veterans. However, overall comparisons between deployed and nondeployed era 
veterans generally failed to reveal cognitive differences in the two groups. Significant 
differences tended to emerge only in research that compared deployed veterans with and 
without GWI and that compared veterans who experienced specific exposures in theater to 
deployed veterans who did not experience these exposures.
Several investigations published prior to 2009 concluded that visuospatial and motor skills 
were poorer and greater dysphoria was evident in deployed veterans with GWI compared to 
healthy GW veterans (Anger et al., 1999; Axelrod & Milner, 1997; Binder et al., 1999; 
Bunegin, Mitzel, Miller, Gelineau, & Tolstykh, 2001; Lange, Van Niekerk, & Meyer, 2001; 
Storzbach et al., 2000; Storzbach, Rohlman, Anger, Binder, & Campbell, 2001; Sullivan et 
al., 2003). A subgroup of GW veterans who were markedly slower on psychomotor tasks 
was identified in one study, suggesting that there may be subgroups within the GWI 
population who are markedly impaired (Anger et al., 1999; Storzbach et al., 2001). Self-
reported exposure to PB was found to be associated with poorer performance on tests 
assessing executive function and with greater mood complaints (Sullivan et al., 2003; White 
et al., 2001). Self-reported exposure to chemical and biological warfare agents predicted 
greater difficulty on neuropsychological tests that assess memory and attention as well as 
poorer affective function among deployed veterans (White et al., 2001). And modeled sarin 
and cyclosarin exposure experienced by GW veterans in relation to the Khamisiyah 
White et al.
Page 14
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 demolition was associated with poorer performance on tests of psychomotor speed and 
visuospatial skills (Proctor et al., 2006).
Table 7 lists four neuropsychological assessment studies published since 2008. Toomey et 
al. (2009) identified differences between deployed and nondeployed veterans in a large 
study (N = 1061 deployed, N = 1128 nondeployed), with deployed veterans showing slower 
motor speed and worse attention. Also noted in this study was poorer performance on 
neuropsychological tests within certain domains that was associated with specific self-
reported exposures. Sustained attention was poorer in veterans with self-reported exposure 
to contaminated food and water, verbal memory performance was worse among veterans 
who reported being at Khamisiyah (and presumably exposed to sarin/cyclosarin), visual 
memory was poorer in veterans with self-reported CARC paint exposure, and motor speed 
was slower among veterans who reported being near SCUD missiles (Toomey et al., 2009). 
As already summarized, Chao et al. found relationships between modeled exposure to nerve 
gas agents from the Khamisiyah demolition and cognition in one study that was related to 
volumetric MRI measures (Chao et al., 2010) but cognitive findings from a second 
investigation were inconsistent (Chao et al., 2011; see Table 6). A small investigation that 
assessed 25 deployed and 16 nondeployed veterans reported no differences in cognitive 
outcomes, but measures assessing quality of life and mood did differentiate the two groups 
(Wallin et al., 2009). This study must be viewed with caution given low power to detect 
differences between groups. In another study, a GO-NOGO task was administered while 
veterans with self-reported cognitive problems underwent EEG and results were compared 
to control GW veterans; the veterans with cognitive complaints were less able to inhibit 
inappropriate responses than the controls (Tillman et al., 2010). A face-name paradigm was 
used by Odegard et al. (2013) to compare performance among GW veterans with the Haley 
syndromes and healthy controls. Haley Syndrome 3 (Neuropathic pain) veterans performed 
worse than those with Haley Syndrome 1 (Impaired cognition) and healthy controls.
4.3. Autonomic nervous system (ANS)
ANS dysregulation in GW veterans was noted in several early studies reviewed in the 2008 
RAC report. Findings included significant differences between symptomatic and healthy 
veterans in relation to 24-h heart rate variability (HRV; Haley et al., 2004; Stein et al., 
2004), increased HRV in symptomatic veterans after exposure to diesel vapors (Fiedler et 
al., 2004), differential blood pressure, heart rate, and symptomatic responses with tilt table 
testing (Clauw, 2001; Davis, Kator, Wonnett, Pappas, & Sall, 2000; Lucas, Armenian, 
Debusk, Calkins, & Rowe, 2005; Sastre & Cook, 2004) and blunted blood pressure response 
to cognitive stressors (Peckerman et al., 2003, 2000). No statistical differences were 
identified in tests of sympathetic skin response and airway pressure response (Sharief et al., 
2002).
A more recent study identified several significant ANS differences between GW veterans 
meeting criteria for the three Haley syndromes and controls. GW veterans meeting any of 
the three syndrome criteria scored worse than controls on the Autonomic Symptom Profile 
questionnaire, due to higher self-reports of gastrointestinal distress, sleep and urinary 
dysfunction and orthostatic intolerance. They also received higher Composite Autonomic 
White et al.
Page 15
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Severity scores, and Syndrome 2 (Confusion-ataxia) veterans showed significantly reduced 
sweat response. This study also found diminished night-time HRV in all three syndrome 
groups (Haley et al., 2013).
4.4. Neuroendocrine function
Although clinical neuroendocrine disorders have not typically been observed in GW 
veterans, a series of studies conducted by Golier and colleagues investigated hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis parameters in GW veterans for over a decade. This work 
revealed that cortisol suppression in response to dexamethasone was significantly related to 
musculoskeletal symptoms and was more pronounced in GW veterans reporting PB use 
(Golier, Legge, & Yehuda, 2006; Golier, Schmeidler, Legge, & Yehuda, 2006). In addition, 
this line of research consistently revealed patterns of HPA-axis functioning in GW veterans 
that are distinct from those seen in other conditions, including depression, PTSD and CFS 
(Golier, Caramanica, & Yehuda, 2012; Golier, Schmeidler, Legge, & Yehuda, 2007; Golier, 
Schmeidler, & Yehuda, 2009). Preliminary findings relevant to other hypothalamic–pituitary 
parameters were recently reported by clinical investigators in the U.K., who identified a 
variety of abnormalities in blood hormone levels, most prominently gonadotropin releasing 
hormone, in a small series of symptomatic GW veterans (Wakil, Sathyapalan, & Atkin, 
2011).
4.5. Mitochondrial dysfunction
Some GW-related exposures, such as organophosphates (OPs), can be toxic to mitochondria, 
producing symptoms such as fatigue and brain, muscle, gastrointestinal (GI), sleep and 
autonomic dysfunction, all symptoms that are seen in GWI (Odegard et al., 2013). 
Phosphocreatine is a back-up energy source for muscle that is depleted during exercise, and 
the speed of recovery is dependent on the rate of mitochondrial ATP synthesis. Post-exercise 
phosphocreatine recovery rate (PCr-R) assessed using 31-phosphorus magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy has been confirmed as a robust measure of mitochondrial defects in vivo 
(Thompson, Kemp, Sanderson, & Radda, 1995). A case–control study compared PCr-R in 
veterans with GWI and in age-, sex- and ethnicity-matched controls. A significant PCr-
prolongation indicating delayed recovery was seen in the veterans with GWI, supporting the 
study hypothesis that mitochondrial dysfunction is a mechanism of GWI (Koslik, Hamilton, 
& Golomb, 2014).
5. Animal models of GWI etiology and pathology
Animal studies have identified biological effects of GW exposures and combinations of 
exposures that were previously unknown. The evidence concerning these effects has 
burgeoned since 2008, with new animal models of GWI evaluating persistent and delayed 
effects of exposures in theater. It is axiomatic that animals are not humans and conclusions 
from animal studies must be used as clues that can be further investigated in appropriate 
human research. However, the outcomes from animal studies are important because data on 
exposure–outcome relationships can be collected rapidly and efficiently to provide 
mechanistic insights.
White et al.
Page 16
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Animal models have been used to characterize the effects of pesticides, PB, insect 
repellants, nerve agents and stress, either administered alone or in combination. Multiple 
studies published prior to 2008 established that neurobiological effects of low-dose sarin 
exposure resulted in delayed and persistent effects in animals (Henderson et al., 2002; 
RACGWI, 2008). Early animal models of PB established that this drug can adversely affect 
nerve function (Drake-Baumann & Seil, 1999; Hudson, Foster, & Kahng, 1985) and can also 
have gastrointestinal (Kluwe, Page, Toft, Ridder, & Chung, 1990), muscular (Adler, 
Deshpande, Foster, Maxwell, & Albuquerque, 1992), immune (Peden-Adams et al., 2004) 
and cardiovascular (Bernatova, Babal, Grubbs, & Morris, 2006) effects. Rodents given PB 
over time showed a number of locomotor, learning and behavioral deficits (Abou-Donia, 
Dechkovskaia, Goldstein, Bullman, & Khan, 2002; Abou-Donia et al., 2001; van Haaren et 
al., 2001), despite showing no overt signs of cholinergic toxicity or illness. Three studies in 
rodent models found that the adverse effects of PB were enhanced by stressors (Abdel-
Rahman, Abou-Donia, El-Masry, Shetty, & Abou-Donia, 2004; Abdel-Rahman, Shetty, & 
Abou-Donia, 2002; Friedman et al., 1996). Other studies showed reduced levels of 
acetylcholin-esterase (AChE) in the brains of animals given PB and exposed to stressors 
(Baireddy, Mirajkar, Nallapaneni, Singleton, & Pope, 2007; Sinton, Fitch, Petty, & Haley, 
2000). PB administered with the nerve agent sarin produced locomotor deficits (Abou-Donia 
et al., 2002; Scremin et al., 2003), EEG abnormalities (van Helden et al., 2004), changes in 
HRV (Scremin et al., 2003) and increased markers of oxidative stress in urine (Shih, Hulet, 
& McDonough, 2006).
Since 2008, a large number of animal studies have built on earlier findings, further 
elaborating relationships between GW theater exposures and the symptoms of GWI. This 
work is summarized in Table 8. It has focused on behavior, cognition, neurotransmission 
and intracellular signaling; molecular and cellular disruptions of axonal transport, and 
genomic and proteomic profiling to identify previously unknown targets of GW exposures.
5.1. Altered behavior, cognitive function, neurotransmission and intracellular signaling
OPs have been shown to inhibit the enzyme AChE and can covalently bind 
organophosphorylate serine residues throughout the body. Mice exposed to low doses of PB, 
a carbamate medication that is also an AChE inhibitor, and permethrin (PER; a pyrethroid-
based pesticide) showed elevated levels of the reservoir compounds necessary for 
acetylcholine synthesis (Abdullah et al., 2013). Ten days of chlorpyrifos (CPF) exposure in 
combination with PB and PER increased basal acetylcholine levels in the brains of six-
month old mice. Within the dentate gyrus, exposed mice had reduced immunostaining for a 
marker of immature neuronal cells and a synaptic vesicle protein (Ojo et al., 2013). In 
addition, there was an increase in astrogliosis within the prefrontal cortex and a reduction in 
several vascular injury markers within the whole brain homogenates in exposed mice 
compared to controls. Animal models also showed impairments in spatial navigation and 
memory after GWI-related exposures (Parihar, Hattiangady, Shuai, & Shetty, 2013). 
Combined stress and pesticide exposure chronically over four weeks produced significant 
increases in glial-related inflammation, reduced neuronal growth in the hippocampus and 
reduced overall hippocampal volume at testing two months post-exposure (Parihar et al., 
2013).
White et al.
Page 17
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Hippocampal synaptic transmission and reduced neuronal spine density were observed at 
three months post CPF exposure by Speed et al. (2012). These data support the hypothesis 
that acute exposures to CPF at low dosages can produce long lasting changes to brain areas 
involved in cognition without producing obvious signs of cholinergic toxicity. Exposure to 
CPF, PER and PB produced changes in K+ channel kinetics and excitability in muscle pain 
receptors, even though no behavioral changes were seen (Nutter, Jiang, & Cooper, 2013). 
Exposure of mice to PB and DEET for two weeks followed by exposure to the sarin 
surrogate, diisopropylfluorophosphate (DFP), or exposure to one week of CPF, resulted in 
deficits in signaling through glutamatergic receptors in the striatum (Torres-Altoro et al., 
2011). Exposure of mice to DFP also results in neuroinflammation in multiple brain areas, 
effects which are markedly exacerbated by prior exposure to corti-costerone as a stressor 
surrogate (O’Callaghan, Kelly, Locker, Miller, & Lasley, 2015). Taken together, evidence 
from animal studies suggests that subtle brain changes at the neuronal signaling and 
structural levels could underlie some of the symptoms experienced by GW veterans. Month-
long exposures to permethrin, PB and DEET with and without a brief exposure to restraint 
stress produced mood and cognitive changes in animal models and was consistent with 
neuro-inflammatory changes in hippocampal brain areas (Parihar et al., 2013).
OPs have been shown to disrupt multiple functions beyond those linked strictly to AChE. 
While AChE inhibition from exposures that occurred in the GW (e.g., sarin and CPF) have 
been implicated in the etiology of GWI (Golomb, 2008), other studies have identified 
additional secondary pathways of OP effects apparently unrelated to inhibition of AChE (see 
review; Terry, 2012). A notable non-cholinergic target of OPs is the process of axonal 
transport, a key nervous system function for transporting molecules (e.g., RNA and proteins) 
and subcellular organelles (e.g., mitochondria and synaptic vesicles) through the cytoplasm 
of axons (Terry, 2012). OPs can affect axonal transport directly through altering microtubule 
structure by binding to tubulin required for transport function (Grigoryan et al., 2008). This 
and similar covalent interaction of OPs with proteins to alter their function is not limited to 
binding to serine residues, because tyrosine is also bound by OP esters (Grigoryan et al., 
2009), suggesting effects on energy metabolic/mitochondrial function at dosages too low to 
inhibit AChE. The direct consequences of OP binding (e.g., CPF) on transport has been 
visualized in vitro and shown to affect movement of mitochondria within the axon at 
concentrations below those that inhibit AChE (Middlemore-Risher, Adam, Lambert, & 
Terry, 2011). Effects of OPs on axonal transport were accompanied by changes in behavior 
associated with impairments in attention, memory and other aspects of cognition after 
exposure of rats to the OP CPF and the sarin surrogate DFP (Terry, 2012). Thus, axonal 
transport disruption by OPs relevant to exposures in the 1991 GW can result in deficits in 
cognition in animal models that resemble symptoms in ill veterans. As with most animal 
models of GWI studied to date, future evaluations of GW exposures on axonal transport 
would benefit from combined exposures at low levels. Nevertheless, studies that have been 
conducted since 2008 clearly indicate that low levels of OPs can adversely affect a key CNS 
process that may serve as a partial mechanistic explanation for symptoms associated with 
GWI.
White et al.
Page 18
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Chronic exposures to PB and PER and to PB, PER, DEET and restraint stress to recapitulate 
exposures that occurred in the GW were applied in a in a mouse model by Abdullah and 
colleagues (Abdullah et al., 2011, 2012, 2013). Results revealed novel effect domains. 
Phospholipids key to lipid metabolism, axonal transport and endocrine and immune function 
were implicated. These effects were accompanied by behavioral findings indicating sensory, 
motor and memory impairments as well as subtle effects on glial morphology suggestive of 
underlying neuropathology and/or neuroimmune alterations. Together these data show the 
value of obtaining a broader perspective of the effect domains associated with exposure to 
GW-related agents. These studies serve as a template to discover additional pathways and 
systems disrupted by GW-related exposures.
In summary, animal models of GW-relevant exposures to individual chemicals, chemical 
mixtures, and chemicals plus other stressors have demonstrated alterations in nervous 
system outcomes (behavior, cognition, neurotransmission, intracellular signaling, molecular 
and cellular disruptions of axonal transport); liver and cardiovascular function; genomic, 
proteomic, lipidomic and metabolomic profiles, and mitochondrial changes. These studies 
have confirmed hypotheses that exposures are important in the development and expression 
of GWI symptomatology, that health effects due to exposures and exposure mixtures are 
often delayed and that persistent effects can be seen long after exposure has ended.
6. Conclusions/discussion
6.1. Prevalence and case definitions of GWI and other disorders affecting GW veterans
The disorder known as GWI has been investigated systematically since the early 1990’s. 
Prevalence has been most validly characterized as the excess of diagnostic indicators of the 
disorder in deployed GW veterans relative to veterans who served during the same period 
but did not deploy to the GW. The two most commonly used case definitions are CMI 
(Fukuda et al., 1998) and the Kansas definition (Steele, 2000). Using these two definitions, 
prevalence of GWI is estimated to be about 25–32% in deployed GW veterans (RACGWI, 
2008, 2014). Application of the more narrowly defined Haley criteria (Haley, Kurt, et al., 
1997) tends to result in much lower prevalence estimates for GWI. Although these 
definitions have frequently been characterized as “symptom-based” and not related to 
known medical diagnoses, GWI symptoms are consistent with those seen in chemically 
induced toxic injuries and residual encephalopathies (Baker et al, 1985) and are associated 
with a range of objectively-measured biological alterations. Prognosis for recovery is 
understudied but appears to be poor.
Neurological disorders also occur in GW veterans. They may occur in connection with GWI 
(e.g., migraine headaches, neuritis or neuralgia) or as separate disorders, possibly occurring 
on a continuum with GWI. ALS, stroke, brain cancer and seizures have been identified at 
excess rates in deployed GW veterans, and brain cancer has been related to specific 
chemical exposures in theater. Given the presence of white matter anomalies in some 
subgroups of GW veterans, there has been concern that MS might also occur at higher rates 
in this population. However, the data required to draw valid conclusions about MS have not 
been systematically collected or analyzed. Because PD is also sometimes seen in patient 
White et al.
Page 19
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 groups with chemical exposures, this disorder also remains a condition of concern; the status 
of knowledge about GW deployment-related PD is similar to that of MS.
Studies evaluating psychiatric disorders among deployed GW veterans have consistently 
shown that combat and other psychological stressors are associated with PTSD, anxiety, 
depression and alcohol abuse. However, psychological stressors are not significant 
predictors of GWI diagnosis and PTSD occurs at much lower rates in the deployed GW 
population than GWI. While some patients with GWI report dysphoria and sleep problems, 
these may reflect neuropathological effects of GW exposures (organic affective symptoms) 
and/or the consequences of being chronically ill with a debilitating condition for many 
years.
6.2. Etiology of GWI and neurological dysfunction
Across all studies and populations and since the earliest findings appeared linking self-
reported exposures to diagnosis of GWI, two types of theater-related exposures have been 
consistently identified as risk factors for the disorder: exposures to pesticides and PB use. In 
research controlling for concurrent exposures, pesticide exposures were significantly 
associated with GWI in six of seven GW populations evaluated, and PB exposure was 
significantly associated in all seven of the populations studied. In addition, research that 
assessed the relationship between degree of exposure to pesticides and PB has consistently 
identified significant positive dose–effect relationships between degree of exposure and 
likelihood of GWI diagnosis (greater exposure is associated with higher likelihood of GWI 
diagnosis). Further evidence on the long-term residual effects of pesticides and PB carried 
out many years after the war using neurocognitive and neuroendocrine assays suggests 
significant sequelae of these exposures: neurocognitive research has shown that higher 
exposures to PB and pesticides are associated with decrements in cognitive function and 
they are also associated with alterations in HPA parameters in investigations of 
neuroendocrine function. Multiple studies using animal models of PB and pesticide 
exposure (individually and in combination with other exposures) have identified persistent 
and delayed structural changes in the brain and CNS as well as neurobehavioral dysfunction 
that are consistent with the symptomatology associated with GWI. And the profiles of 
symptoms and decrements in neurocognitive function identified in GW veterans parallel 
those seen in dozens of studies of occupational groups exposed to pesticides and pesticide 
mixtures. Taken together, these multiple lines of evidence suggest that exposure to 
pesticides and PB use are causally associated with GWI and other neurological 
consequences in GW veterans.
Research evaluating the relationship between exposure to the nerve agents sarin and 
cyclosarin and ill health in deployed veterans has consistently shown that modeled exposure 
to these agents is associated with structural brain differences on MRI (especially total white 
and grey matter volumes), with neurocognitive outcomes and with mortality due to brain 
cancer. The limited evidence on the relationships between these exposures and diagnosis of 
GWI has been inconsistent and inconclusive. More research on these exposures is needed to 
determine if they are causative for GWI.
White et al.
Page 20
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Exposure to oil well fire smoke has also been less well studied and may be linked to GWI, 
respiratory disorders and brain cancer mortality, but more research is needed to make 
conclusions. The research to date on vaccines is also limited, with inadequate evidence to 
persuasively support a link between GWI and specific types of vaccines or the number of 
vaccines received.
6.3. Pathobiology of GWI and neurological and neuroimmune function in GW veterans
Because GWI is a multi-system illness, human studies on pathobiology have been difficult 
to pursue, particularly with regard to basic underlying mechanisms that may induce multiple 
symptoms and types of dysfunction. There is clear neurological pathology in this population. 
Studies of veterans with GWI defined in various ways and in veterans exposed to nerve gas 
agents that utilize varying imaging and EEG probes consistently identify structural and 
electrical abnormalities in the central nervous system: 14 of the 15 papers published since 
2008 support this conclusion, as does a sizable literature published earlier. Similarly, 
neurocognitive research on GW veterans has consistently revealed exposure-related 
dysfunction among deployed GW veterans and differences between ill and healthy GW 
veterans suggestive of structural and functional CNS pathology.
Some GWI symptoms imply ANS involvement and early research consistently suggested 
that ANS dysfunction was prominent in GWI. This has been less well studied recently, but 
remains a likely contributing factor in the pathobiology of the disorder.
Neuroendocrine and immune dysregulation have also been reported in a number of studies, 
including those using protocols that demonstrate pronounced differences after exercise and 
other challenges. Specific patterns of altered HPA-axis functioning that are quite distinct 
from other conditions, including PTSD, have been reported in a long line of research. And 
one recent study has provided evidence of significant mitochondrial dysfunction in veterans 
with GWI. Further studies are warranted to determine the exact nature of identified 
alterations, which may lead to treatment options.
6.4. Animal models of GWI and theater exposures
Research on animal models of GW exposures and of GWI has contributed a great deal to our 
understanding of the exposure–outcome relationships and underlying mechanisms of GWI 
and other health issues in deployed GW veterans. These studies have examined the acute, 
chronic, and lasting residual effects of single and mixed exposures to PB, OPs, permethrin, 
DEET, nerve gas agents and experimental stressors on CNS outcomes. Results have shown 
both delayed and persistent effects (including effects seen an extended time after exposure 
has ended) on behavior, cognition, neurotransmission, intracellular signaling, and molecular 
and cellular transport in the CNS as well as liver and cardiovascular function, mitochondrial 
function, and genomic, proteomic, lipidomic and metabolomic profiles. Genomic and 
proteomic surveys have implicated phospholipids essential to lipid metabolism, axonal 
transport and endocrine and immune function. These effects were seen in the context of 
sensory, motor and memory impairments and changes in glial morphology. Taken together, 
the animal research supports the plausibility of the occurrence of multi-system health 
complaints existing long after exposure as well as underlying neuropathological and 
White et al.
Page 21
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 neuroimmune mechanisms of GWI and other disorders and dysfunctions in exposed GW 
veterans.
6.5. The bottom line
The research data to date on health in GW veterans converge to support these conclusions:
•
Between one-fourth and one-third of deployed GW veterans are affected by a 
disorder characterized by chronic symptoms involving multiple body systems; this 
condition is best identified by the term GWI.
•
This disorder was caused by toxicant exposures, individually or in combination, 
that occurred in the GW theater. At present, research most clearly and consistently 
links pesticide and PB exposures to GWI, while exposures to low-level nerve gas 
agents, contaminants from oil well fires, multiple vaccinations, and combinations 
of these exposures cannot be ruled out.
•
In addition to GWI, deployed GW veterans suffer from a variety of neurological 
disorders, alone or in combination with GWI. ALS, brain cancer, stroke, migraine 
headaches, neuritis and neuralgia have all been reported as occurring at higher rates 
in this population. Rates of disorders such as MS and PD are unknown and further 
intensive research is needed to determine whether they are elevated in GW 
veterans. This should include studies focused on GW veteran subgroups classified 
by individual exposures or geographic locations in theater.
•
Neurological disorders as well as alterations in brain structure and function have 
been linked to specific exposures in theater, including nerve gas agents, PB and oil 
well fires
•
The state of knowledge on the health of deployed GW veterans supports the 
conclusion that they are suffering from persistent pathology due to chemical 
intoxication (sometimes referred to by veterans as “toxic wounds”).
•
Further research into the mechanisms and etiology of the health problems of GW 
veterans is critical to developing biomarkers of exposure and illness and preventing 
similar problems for military personnel in future deployments; this information is 
also critical for developing new treatments for GWI and related neurological 
dysfunction.
•
Given the similarity of the health problems of GW veterans and those of other 
occupational groups with OP exposures (e.g., insecticide applicators, farmers, 
sheep dippers, nursery workers, chemical plant workers), the identification of 
treatments for the GW veteran population will have far-reaching implications for 
treating other groups of ill patients for whom no effective treatments have been 
identified.
Acknowledgments
This paper is based on the 2014 report Gulf War illness and the health of Gulf War veterans: Research update and 
recommendations, 2009–2013 (RACGWI, 2014). The paper authors were also authors on the report.
White et al.
Page 22
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
Abdel-Rahman A, Abou-Donia S, El-Masry E, Shetty A, Abou-Donia M. Stress and combined 
exposure to low doses of pyridostigmine bromide, DEET, and permethrin produce neurochemical 
and neuropathological alterations in cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum. Journal of 
Toxicology and Environmental Health, Part A. 2004; 67(2):163–192. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1080/15287390490264802. [PubMed: 14675905] 
Abdel-Rahman A, Shetty AK, Abou-Donia MB. Disruption of the blood-brain barrier and neuronal 
cell death in cingulate cortex, dentate gyrus, thalamus, and hypothalamus in a rat model of Gulf-
War syndrome [Research Support, Non-U.S.Gov’t]. Neurobiology of Disease. 2002; 10(3):306–
326. [PubMed: 12270692] 
Abdullah L, Crynen G, Reed J, Bishop A, Phillips J, Ferguson S, et al. Proteomic CNS profile of 
delayed cognitive impairment in mice exposed to Gulf War agents [Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, 
Non-P.H.S.]. Neuromolecular Medicine. 2011; 13(4):275–288. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s12017-011-8160-z. [PubMed: 21986894] 
Abdullah L, Evans JE, Bishop A, Reed JM, Crynen G, Phillips J, et al. Lipidomic profiling of 
phosphocholine-containing brain lipids in mice with sensorimotor deficits and anxiety-like features 
after exposure to Gulf War agents [Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov’t]. Neuromolecular Medicine. 
2012; 14(4):349–361. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12017-012-8192-z. [PubMed: 22798222] 
Abdullah, L.; Evans, JE.; Montague, H.; Reed, JM.; Moser, A.; Crynen, G., et al. Chronic elevation of 
phosphocholine containing lipids in mice exposed to Gulf War agents pyridostigmine bromide and 
permethrin. Neurotoxicology and Teratology. 2013. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ntt.2013.10.002
Abou-Donia MB, Dechkovskaia AM, Goldstein LB, Bullman SL, Khan WA. Sensorimotor deficit and 
cholinergic changes following coexposure with pyridostigmine bromide and sarin in rats [Research 
Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S]. Toxicological Sciences. 2002; 66(1):148–158. [PubMed: 
11861982] 
Abou-Donia MB, Goldstein LB, Dechovskaia A, Bullman S, Jones KH, Herrick EA, et al. Effects of 
daily dermal application of DEET and epermethrin, alone and in combination, on sensorimotor 
performance, blood-brain barrier, and blood-testis barrier in rats. Journal of Toxicology and 
Environmental Health, Part A. 2001; 62(7):523–541. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1080/152873901300007824. [PubMed: 11289702] 
Adler M, Deshpande SS, Foster RE, Maxwell DM, Albuquerque EX. Effects of subacute 
pyridostigmine administration on mammalian skeletal muscle function. Journal of Applied 
Toxicology. 1992; 12(1):25–33. [PubMed: 1564249] 
Amato AA, McVey A, Cha C, Matthews EC, Jackson CE, Kleingunther R, et al. Evaluation of 
neuromuscular symptoms in veterans of the Persian Gulf War. Neurology. 1997; 48(1):4–12. 
[PubMed: 9008485] 
Anger WK, Storzbach D, Binder LM, Campbell KA, Rohlman DS, McCauley L, et al. 
Neurobehavioral deficits in Persian Gulf veterans: evidence from a population-based study. 
Portland Environmental Hazards Research Center [Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov’t, Non-
P.H.S]. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society. 1999; 5(3):203–212. [PubMed: 
10217920] 
Apfel BA, Ross J, Hlavin J, Meyerhoff DJ, Metzler TJ, Marmar CR, et al. Hippocampal volume 
differences in Gulf War veterans with current versus lifetime posttraumatic stress disorder 
symptoms. Biological Psychiatry. 2011; 69(6):541–548. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.
2010.09.044. [PubMed: 21094937] 
Asa PB, Cao Y, Garry RF. Antibodies to squalene in Gulf War syndrome [Research Support, Non-
U.S. Gov’t, P.H.S.]. Experimental and Molecular Pathology. 2000; 68(1):55–64. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1006/exmp.1999.2295. [PubMed: 10640454] 
Axelrod BN, Milner IB. Neuropsychological findings in a sample of operation desert storm veterans. 
The Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences. 1997; 9(1):23–28. [PubMed: 
9017525] 
Baireddy P, Mirajkar N, Nallapaneni A, Singleton N, Pope CN. Effects of combined, multiple stressors 
on pyridostigmine-induced acute toxicity in rats. Archives of Toxicology. 2007; 81(4):283–289. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00204-006-0144-7. [PubMed: 16944100] 
White et al.
Page 23
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Baker EL, White RF, Murawaski BJ. Clinical evaluation of neurobehavioral effects of occupational 
exposure to organic solvents and lead. International Journal of Mental Health. 1985; 14:135–158.
Barth SK, Kang HK, Bullman TA, Wallin MT. Neurological mortality among U.S. veterans of the 
Persian Gulf War: 13-year follow-up [Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. American 
Journal of Industrial Medicine. 2009; 52(9):663–670. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ajim.20718. 
[PubMed: 19585544] 
Bernatova I, Babal P, Grubbs RD, Morris M. Acetylcholinesterase inhibition affects cardiovascular 
structure in mice [Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S]. Physiological Research. 2006; 
55(Suppl 1):S89–S97. [PubMed: 17177630] 
Binder LM, Storzbach D, Anger WK, Campbell KA, Rohlman DS. of the Portland Environmental O. 
M. Portland Environmental Hazards Research C. Subjective cognitive complaints, affective 
distress, and objective cognitive performance in Persian Gulf War veterans. Archives of Clinical 
Neuropsychology. 1999; 14(6):531–536. [PubMed: 14590580] 
Blanchard MS, Eisen SA, Alpern R, Karlinsky J, Toomey R, Reda DJ, et al. Chronic multisymptom 
illness complex in Gulf War I veterans 10 years later [Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. 
American Journal of Epidemiology. 2006; 163(1):66–75. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwj008. 
[PubMed: 16293719] 
Boyd KC, Hallman WK, Wartenberg D, Fiedler N, Brewer NT, Kipen HM. Reported exposures, 
stressors, and life events among Gulf War Registry veterans. Journal of Occupational and 
Environmental Medicine. 2003; 45(12):1247–1256. [PubMed: 14665810] 
Bozkurt A, Yardan T, Ciftcioglu E, Baydin A, Hakligor A, Bitigic M, et al. Time course of serum 
S100B protein and neuron-specific enolase levels of a single dose of chlorpyrifos in rats [Research 
Support, Non-U.S.Gov’t]. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology & Toxicology. 2010; 107(5):893–898. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-7843.2010.00593.x. [PubMed: 20456333] 
Brimfield AA. Chemicals of military deployments: revisiting Gulf War Syndrome in light of new 
information. Progress in Molecular Biology and Translational Science. 2012; 112:209–230. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-415813-9.00007-6. [PubMed: 22974741] 
Bullman TA, Mahan CM, Kang HK, Page WF. Mortality in US Army Gulf War veterans exposed to 
1991 Khamisiyah chemical munitions destruction [Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. 
American Journal of Public Health. 2005; 95(8):1382–1388. http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.
2004.045799. [PubMed: 16043669] 
Bunegin L, Mitzel HC, Miller CS, Gelineau JF, Tolstykh GP. Cognitive performance and 
cerebrohemodynamics associated with the Persian Gulf Syndrome [Comparative Study]. 
Toxicology and Industrial Health. 2001; 17(4):128–137. [PubMed: 12479508] 
Calley CS, Kraut MA, Spence JS, Briggs RW, Haley RW, Hart J Jr. The neuroanatomic correlates of 
semantic memory deficits in patients with Gulf War illnesses: a pilot study [Research Support, 
U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Brain Imaging and Behavior. 2010; 4(3–4):248–255. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/s11682-010-9103-2. [PubMed: 20824394] 
Cardona AE, Pioro EP, Sasse ME, Kostenko V, Cardona SM, Dijkstra IM, et al. Control of microglial 
neurotoxicity by the fractalkine receptor [Comparative Study, Research Support, N.I.H., 
Extramural, Non-U.S.Gov’t]. Nature Neuroscience. 2006; 9(7):917–924. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1038/nn1715. [PubMed: 16732273] 
Chao LL, Abadjian L, Hlavin J, Meyerhoff DJ, Weiner MW. Effects of low-level sarin and cyclosarin 
exposure and Gulf War Illness on brain structure and function: a study at 4T [Research Support, 
N.I.H., Extramural, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Neurotoxicology. 2011; 32(6):814–822. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro.2011.06.006. [PubMed: 21741405] 
Chao LL, Rothlind JC, Cardenas VA, Meyerhoff DJ, Weiner MW. Effects of low-level exposure to 
sarin and cyclosarin during the 1991 Gulf War on brain function and brain structure in US veterans 
[Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Neurotoxicology. 2010; 31(5):
493–501. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro.2010.05.006. [PubMed: 20580739] 
Cherry N, Creed F, Silman A, Dunn G, Baxter D, Smedley J, et al. Health and exposures of United 
Kingdom Gulf war veterans. Part I: the pattern and extent of ill health. Occupational and 
Environmental Medicine. 2001a; 58(5):291–298. [PubMed: 11303077] 
White et al.
Page 24
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cherry N, Creed F, Silman A, Dunn G, Baxter D, Smedley J, et al. Health and exposures of United 
Kingdom Gulf war veterans. Part II: the relation of health to exposure. Occupational and 
Environmental Medicine. 2001b; 58(5):299–306. [PubMed: 11303078] 
Clauw DJ. Potential mechanisms in chemical intolerance and related conditions. Annals of the New 
York Academy of Sciences. 2001; 933:235–253. [PubMed: 12000024] 
Coffman CJ, Horner RD, Grambow SC, Lindquist J. Estimating the occurrence of amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis among Gulf War (1990–1991) veterans using capture-recapture methods. 
Neuroepidemiology. 2005; 24(3):141–150. http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/000083297, 83297 [pii]. 
[PubMed: 15650320] 
Corbel V, Stankiewicz M, Pennetier C, Fournier D, Stojan J, Girard E, et al. Evidence for inhibition of 
cholinesterases in insect and mammalian nervous systems by the insect repellent deet 
[Comparative Study, Research Support, Non-U.S.Gov’t]. BMC Biology. 2009; 7:47. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1186/1741-7007-7-47. [PubMed: 19656357] 
Coughlin SS, Kang HK, Mahan CM. Alcohol use and selected health conditions of 1991 Gulf War 
veterans: survey results, 2003–2005. Preventing Chronic Disease. 2011; 8(3):A52. [PubMed: 
21477492] 
Cowan DN, Lange JL, Heller J, Kirkpatrick J, DeBakey S. A case-control study of asthma among U.S. 
Army Gulf War veterans and modeled exposure to oil well fire smoke. Military Medicine. 2002; 
167(9):777–782. [PubMed: 12363171] 
Davis SD, Kator SF, Wonnett JA, Pappas BL, Sall JL. Neurally mediated hypotension in fatigued Gulf 
War veterans: a preliminary report. The American Journal of the Medical Sciences. 2000; 319(2):
89–95. [PubMed: 10698092] 
DOD, U. S. Pesticides environmental exposure report. 2001
Drake-Baumann R, Seil FJ. Effects of exposure to low-dose pyridostigmine on neuromuscular 
junctions in vitro [Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Muscle and Nerve. 1999; 22(6):
696–703. [PubMed: 10366222] 
Fiedler N, Giardino N, Natelson B, Ottenweller JE, Weisel C, Lioy P, et al. Responses to controlled 
diesel vapor exposure among chemically sensitive Gulf War veterans [Comparative Study, 
Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S., P.H.S.]. Psychosomatic Medicine. 2004; 66(4):588–
598. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/01.psy.0000127872.53932.75. [PubMed: 15272108] 
Fricker, RD.; Reardon, E.; Spektor, DM.; Cotton, SK.; Hawes-Dawson, J.; Pace, JE., et al. Pesticide 
use during the Gulf War: A survey of Gulf War veterans. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation; 
2000. 
Friedman A, Kaufer D, Shemer J, Hendler I, Soreq H, Tur-Kaspa I. Pyridostigmine brain penetration 
under stress enhances neuronal excitability and induces early immediate transcriptional response. 
Nature Medicine. 1996; 2(12):1382–1385.
Fukuda K, Nisenbaum R, Stewart G, Thompson WW, Robin L, Washko RM, et al. Chronic 
multisymptom illness affecting Air Force veterans of the Gulf War. Journal of the American 
Medical Association. 1998; 280(11):981–988. joc71162 [pii]. [PubMed: 9749480] 
Gade DM, Wenger JB. Combat exposure and mental health: the long-term effects among US Vietnam 
and Gulf War veterans. Health Economics. 2011; 20(4):401–416. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hec.
1594. [PubMed: 20336640] 
Golier JA, Caramanica K, Yehuda R. Neuroendocrine response to CRF stimulation in veterans with 
and without PTSD in consideration of war zone era [Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, U.S. 
Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2012; 37(3):350–357. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.psyneuen.2011.07.004. [PubMed: 21813244] 
Golier JA, Legge J, Yehuda R. The ACTH response to dexamethasone in Persian Gulf War veterans. 
Annals of the New York Academy of Science. 2006; 1071:448–453. http://dx.doi.org/10.1196/
annals.1364.040. 
Golier JA, Schmeidler J, Legge J, Yehuda R. Enhanced cortisol suppression to dexamethasone 
associated with Gulf War deployment [Comparative Study, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, 
U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2006; 31(10):1181–1189. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2006.08.005. [PubMed: 17049422] 
White et al.
Page 25
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Golier JA, Schmeidler J, Legge J, Yehuda R. Twenty-four hour plasma cortisol and 
adrenocorticotropic hormone in Gulf War veterans: relationships to posttraumatic stress disorder 
and health symptoms [Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Biological 
Psychiatry. 2007; 62(10):1175–1178. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.04.027. [PubMed: 
17612507] 
Golier JA, Schmeidler J, Yehuda R. Pituitary response to metyrapone in Gulf War veterans: 
relationship to deployment, PTSD and unexplained health symptoms [Research Support, N.I.H., 
Extramural, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2009; 34(9):1338–1345. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.psyneuen.2009.04.004. [PubMed: 19446401] 
Golomb BA. A review of the scientific literature as it Pertains to Gulf War illnesses: Pyridostigmine 
bromide. 1999; 2
Golomb BA. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and Gulf War illnesses. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2008; 105(11):4295–4300. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0711986105. [PubMed: 18332428] 
Gopinath K, Gandhi P, Goyal A, Jiang L, Fang Y, Ouyang L, et al. FMRI reveals abnormal central 
processing of sensory and pain stimuli in ill Gulf War veterans. Neurotoxicology. 2012; 33(3):
261–271. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro.2012.01.014. [PubMed: 22327017] 
Gray GC, Reed RJ, Kaiser KS, Smith TC, Gastanaga VM. Self-reported symptoms and medical 
conditions among 11,868 Gulf War-era veterans: the Seabee Health Study [Research Support, U.S. 
Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2002; 155(11):1033–1044. [PubMed: 
12034582] 
Grigoryan H, Li B, Anderson EK, Xue W, Nachon F, Lockridge O, et al. Covalent binding of the 
organophosphorus agent FP-biotin to tyrosine in eight proteins that have no active site serine 
[Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Non-U.S. Gov’t, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Chemico-
Biological Interactions. 2009; 180(3):492–498. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cbi.2009.03.018. 
[PubMed: 19539807] 
Grigoryan H, Schopfer LM, Thompson CM, Terry AV, Masson P, Lockridge O. Mass spectrometry 
identifies covalent binding of soman, sarin, chlorpyrifos oxon, diisopropyl fluorophosphate, and 
FP-biotin to tyrosines on tubulin: a potential mechanism of long term toxicity by 
organophosphorus agents [Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. 
Chemico-Biological Interactions. 2008; 175(1–3):180–186. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cbi.
2008.04.013. [PubMed: 18502412] 
Haley RW. Excess incidence of ALS in young Gulf War veterans. Neurology. 2003; 61(6):750–756. 
[PubMed: 14504316] 
Haley RW, Charuvastra E, Shell WE, Buhner DM, Marshall WW, Biggs MM, et al. Cholinergic 
autonomic dysfunction in veterans with Gulf War illness: confirmation in a population-based 
sample [Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, U.S. Gov’t, Non-
P.H.S.]. Journal of the American Medical Association Neurology. 2013; 70(2):191–200. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.596. [PubMed: 23407784] 
Haley RW, Hom J, Roland PS, Bryan WW, Van Ness PC, Bonte FJ, et al. Evaluation of neurologic 
function in Gulf War veterans. A blinded case-control study [Research Support, Non-U.S.Gov’t]. 
Journal of the American Medical Association. 1997; 277(3):223–230. [PubMed: 9005272] 
Haley RW, Kurt TL. Self-reported exposure to neurotoxic chemical combinations in the Gulf War. A 
cross-sectional epidemiologic study [Research Support, Non-U.S.Gov’t]. Journal of the American 
Medical Association. 1997; 277(3):231–237. [PubMed: 9005273] 
Haley RW, Kurt TL, Hom J. Is there a Gulf War Syndrome? Searching for syndromes by factor 
analysis of symptoms. Journal of the American Medical Association. 1997b; 277(3):215–222. 
[PubMed: 9005271] 
Haley RW, Marshall WW, McDonald GG, Daugherty MA, Petty F, Fleckenstein JL. Brain 
abnormalities in Gulf War syndrome: evaluation with 1H MR spectroscopy. Radiology. 2000; 
215(3):807–817. [PubMed: 10831703] 
Haley RW, Spence JS, Carmack PS, Gunst RF, Schucany WR, Petty F, et al. Abnormal brain response 
to cholinergic challenge in chronic encephalopathy from the 1991 Gulf War. Psychiatry Research. 
2009; 171(3):207–220. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pscychresns.2008.05.004. [PubMed: 19230625] 
White et al.
Page 26
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Haley RW, Vongpatanasin W, Wolfe GI, Bryan WW, Armitage R, Hoffmann RF, et al. Blunted 
circadian variation in autonomic regulation of sinus node function in veterans with Gulf War 
syndrome [Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov’t, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S., U.S. Gov’t, P.H.S.]. 
American Journal of Medicine. 2004; 117(7):469–478. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amjmed.
2004.03.041. [PubMed: 15464703] 
Hassija CM, Jakupcak M, Maguen S, Shipherd JC. The influence of combat and interpersonal trauma 
on PTSD, depression, and alcohol misuse in U.S. Gulf War and OEF/OIF women veterans 
[Research Support, Non-U.S.Gov’t]. Journal of Traumatic Stress. 2012; 25(2):216–219. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1002/jts.21686. [PubMed: 22522738] 
Heaton KJ, Palumbo CL, Proctor SP, Killiany RJ, Yurgelun-Todd DA, White RF. Quantitative 
magnetic resonance brain imaging in US army veterans of the 1991 Gulf War potentially exposed 
to sarin and cyclosarin. Neurotoxicology. 2007; 28(4):761–769. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro.
2007.03.006. S0161-813X(07)00053-8 [pii]. [PubMed: 17485118] 
Henderson RF, Barr EB, Blackwell WB, Clark CR, Conn CA, Kalra R, et al. Response of rats to low 
levels of sarin [Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2002; 
184(2):67–76. [PubMed: 12408950] 
Horner RD, Grambow SC, Coffman CJ, Lindquist JH, Oddone EZ, Allen KD, et al. Amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis among 1991 Gulf War veterans: evidence for a time-limited outbreak. 
Neuroepidemiology. 2008; 31(1):28–32. http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/000136648, 000136648 [pii]. 
[PubMed: 18535397] 
Hotopf M, David AS, Hull L, Nikalaou V, Unwin C, Wessely S. Gulf war illness–better, worse, or just 
the same? A cohort study [Comparative Study, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov’t, U.S. Gov’t, 
Non-P.H.S.]. British Medical Journal. 2003; 327(7428):1370. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.
327.7428.1370. [PubMed: 14670878] 
Hubbard N, Hutchison JL, Motes MA, Shokri-Kojori E, Bennett IJ, Brigante RM, et al. Central 
executive dysfunction and Deferred prefrontal processing in veterans with Gulf War illness. 
Clinical Psychological Science. 2013; 1(4)
Hudson CS, Foster RE, Kahng MW. Neuromuscular toxicity of pyridostigmine bromide in the 
diaphragm, extensor digitorum longus, and soleus muscles of the rat [In Vitro, Research Support, 
U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Fundamental and Applied Toxicology. 1985; 5(6 Pt 2):S260–S269. 
[PubMed: 4092893] 
Iannacchione VG, Dever JA, Bann CM, Considine KA, Creel D, Carson CP, et al. Validation of a 
research case definition of Gulf War illness in the 1991 US military population [Comparative 
Study, Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S., Validation Studies]. Neuroepidemiology. 2011; 
37(2):129–140. http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/000331478. [PubMed: 21986258] 
IOM. Gulf War and Health: Health effects of serving in the Gulf War. Vol. 8. Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press; 2010. 
IOM. Chronic multisymptom illness in Gulf War Veterans: Case definitions Reexamined. Washington, 
DC: National Academies Press; 2014. 
Ishoy T, Suadicani P, Guldager B, Appleyard M, Gyntelberg F. Risk factors for gastrointestinal 
symptoms. The Danish Gulf War study. Danish Medical Bulletin. 1999; 46(5):420–423. [PubMed: 
10605621] 
Ishoy T, Suadicani P, Guldager B, Appleyard M, Hein HO, Gyntelberg F. State of health after 
deployment in the Persian Gulf. The Danish Gulf War study. Danish Medical Bulletin. 1999; 
46(5):416–419. [PubMed: 10605620] 
Jiang W, Duysen EG, Hansen H, Shlyakhtenko L, Schopfer LM, Lockridge O. Mice treated with 
chlorpyrifos or chlorpyrifos oxon have organophosphorylated tubulin in the brain and disrupted 
microtubule structures, suggesting a role for tubulin in neurotoxicity associated with exposure to 
organophosphorus agents [Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Non-U.S. Gov’t, U.S. Gov’t, 
Non-P.H.S.]. Toxicological Science. 2010; 115(1):183–193. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/toxsci/
kfq032. 
Kang HK, Li B, Mahan CM, Eisen SA, Engel CC. Health of US veterans of 1991 Gulf War: a follow-
up survey in 10 years [Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Journal of Occupational and 
Environmental Medicine. 2009; 51(4):401–410. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/JOM.
0b013e3181a2feeb. [PubMed: 19322107] 
White et al.
Page 27
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Kang HK, Mahan CM, Lee KY, Magee CA, Murphy FM. Illnesses among United States veterans of 
the Gulf War: a population-based survey of 30, 000 veterans. Journal of Occupational and 
Environmental Medicine. 2000; 42(5):491–501. [PubMed: 10824302] 
Kasarskis EJ, Lindquist JH, Coffman CJ, Grambow SC, Feussner JR, Allen KD, et al. Clinical aspects 
of ALS in Gulf War veterans [Research Support, Non-U.S.Gov’t]. Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. 
2009; 10(1):35–41. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17482960802351029. [PubMed: 18792848] 
Kelsall HL, McKenzie DP, Sim MR, Leder K, Forbes AB, Dwyer T. Physical, psychological, and 
functional comorbidities of multisymptom illness in Australian male veterans of the 1991 Gulf 
War [Research Support, Non-U.S.Gov’t]. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2009; 170(8):1048–
1056. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwp238. [PubMed: 19762370] 
King LA, King DW, Bolton EE, Knight JA, Vogt DS. Risk factors for mental, physical, and functional 
health in Gulf War veterans [Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Journal of Rehabilitation 
Research and Development. 2008; 45(3):395–407. [PubMed: 18629748] 
Kluwe WM, Page JG, Toft JD, Ridder WE, Chung H. Pharmacological and toxicological evaluation of 
orally administered pyridostigmine in dogs [Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. 
Fundamental and Applied Toxicology. 1990; 14(1):40–53. [PubMed: 2307321] 
Koslik HJ, Hamilton G, Golomb BA. Mitochondrial dysfunction in Gulf War illness revealed by 
31Phosphorus Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy: a case-control study. PLoS One. 2014; 
9(3):e92887. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0092887. [PubMed: 24675771] 
Lange G, Van Niekerk A, Meyer BJ. Detection of an artifact on lumbar SPECT [Case Reports]. 
Clinical Nuclear Medicine. 2001; 26(5):446–448. [PubMed: 11317027] 
Lee HA, Bale AJ, Gabriel R. Results of investigations on Gulf War veterans [Comparative Study]. 
Clinical Medicine. 2005; 5(2):166–172. [PubMed: 15847011] 
Levine PH, Richardson PK, Zolfaghari L, Cleary SD, Geist CE, Potolicchio S, et al. A study of Gulf 
War veterans with a possible deployment-related syndrome [Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-
P.H.S.]. Archives of Environmental and Occupational Health. 2006; 61(6):271–278. http://
dx.doi.org/10.3200/AEOH.61.6.271-278. [PubMed: 17967750] 
Li X, Spence JS, Buhner DM, Hart J Jr, Cullum CM, Biggs MM, et al. Hippocampal dysfunction in 
Gulf War veterans: investigation with ASL perfusion MR imaging and physostigmine challenge 
[Research Support, Non-U.S.Gov’t]. Radiology. 2011; 261(1):218–225. http://dx.doi.org/10.1148/
radiol.11101715. [PubMed: 21914840] 
Liu P, Aslan S, Li X, Buhner DM, Spence JS, Briggs RW, et al. Perfusion deficit to cholinergic 
challenge in veterans with Gulf War Illness [Comparative Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, 
Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Neurotoxicology. 2011; 32(2):
242–246. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro.2010.12.004. [PubMed: 21147163] 
Lucas KE, Armenian HK, Debusk K, Calkins HG, Rowe PC. Characterizing Gulf War illnesses: 
neurally mediated hypotension and postural tachycardia syndrome [Research Support, N.I.H., 
Extramural, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. American Journal of Medicine. 2005; 118(12):1421–1427. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amjmed.2005.06.034. [PubMed: 16378804] 
Menon PM, Nasrallah HA, Reeves RR, Ali JA. Hippocampal dysfunction in Gulf War Syndrome. A 
proton MR spectroscopy study [Comparative Study, Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. 
Brain Research. 2004; 1009(1–2):189–194. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2004.02.063. 
[PubMed: 15120596] 
Meyerhoff D, Lindgren J, Hardin D, Griffin J, Weiner M. Metabolic abnormalities in the brain of 
subjects with Gulf War illness [abstract]. Proceedings of the International Society for Magnetic 
Resonance in Medicine. 2001; 9:994.
Middlemore-Risher ML, Adam BL, Lambert NA, Terry AV Jr. Effects of chlorpyrifos and 
chlorpyrifos-oxon on the dynamics and movement of mitochondria in rat cortical neurons 
[Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural]. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. 
2011; 339(2):341–349. http://dx.doi.org/10.1124/jpet.111.184762. [PubMed: 21799050] 
Miranda ML, Galeano AO, Tassone E, Allen KD, Horner RD. Spatial analysis of the etiology of 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis among 1991 Gulf War veterans. Neurotoxicology. 2008; 29(6):964–
970. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro.2008.05.005.S0161-813X(08)00098-3 [pii]. [PubMed: 
18573277] 
White et al.
Page 28
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Newmark J, Clayton WL 3rd. Persian Gulf illnesses: preliminary neurological impressions. Military 
Medicine. 1995; 160(10):505–507. [PubMed: 7501199] 
Nisenbaum R, Barrett DH, Reyes M, Reeves WC. Deployment stressors and a chronic multisymptom 
illness among Gulf War veterans. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease. 2000; 188(5):259–266. 
[PubMed: 10830562] 
Nutter TJ, Jiang N, Cooper BY. Persistent Na(+) and K(+) channel dysfunctions after chronic exposure 
to insecticides and pyridostigmine bromide. Neurotoxicology. 2013; 39:72–83. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuro.2013.08.006.S0161-813X(13)00130-7 [pii]. [PubMed: 23994030] 
O’Callaghan, JP.; Kelly, KA.; Locker, AR.; Miller, DB.; Lasley, SM. Corticosterone primes the 
neuroinflammatory response to DFP in mice: potential animal model of Gulf War illness. Journal 
of Neurochemistry. 2015. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jnc.13088
Odegard TN, Cooper CM, Farris EA, Arduengo J, Bartlett J, Haley R. Memory impairment exhibited 
by veterans with Gulf War illness. Neurocase. 2013; 19(4):316–327. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1080/13554794.2012.667126. [PubMed: 22519425] 
Ojo, JO.; Abdullah, L.; Evans, J.; Reed, JM.; Montague, H.; Mullan, MJ., et al. Exposure to an 
organophosphate pesticide, individually or in combination with other Gulf War agents, impairs 
synaptic integrity and neuronal differentiation, and is accompanied by subtle microvascular injury 
in a mouse model of Gulf War agent exposure. Neuropathology. 2013. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
neup.12061
Ozakinci G, Hallman WK, Kipen HM. Persistence of symptoms in veterans of the First Gulf War: 5-
year follow-up [Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Non-U.S. Gov’t, U.S. Gov’t, P.H.S]. 
Environmental Health Perspectives. 2006; 114(10):1553–1557. [PubMed: 17035142] 
Parihar VK, Hattiangady B, Shuai B, Shetty AK. Mood and memory deficits in a model of Gulf War 
illness are linked with reduced neurogenesis, partial neuron loss, and mild inflammation in the 
hippocampus. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2013; 38(12):2348–2362. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
npp.2013.158. npp2013158 [pii]. [PubMed: 23807240] 
Peckerman A, Dahl K, Chemitiganti R, LaManca JJ, Ottenweller JE, Natelson BH. Effects of 
posttraumatic stress disorder on cardiovascular stress responses in Gulf War veterans with 
fatiguing illness [Comparative Study Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Autonomic 
Neuroscience. 2003; 108(1–2):63–72. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1566-0702(03)00155-3. 
[PubMed: 14614966] 
Peckerman A, LaManca JJ, Smith SL, Taylor A, Tiersky L, Pollet C, et al. Cardiovascular stress 
responses and their relation to symptoms in Gulf War veterans with fatiguing illness [Research 
Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S]. Psychosomatic Medicine. 2000; 62(4):509–516. [PubMed: 
10949096] 
Peden-Adams MM, Dudley AC, EuDaly JG, Allen CT, Gilkeson GS, Keil DE. Pyridostigmine 
bromide (PYR) alters immune function in B6C3F1 mice [Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-
P.H.S]. Immunopharmacology and Immunotoxicology. 2004; 26(1):1–15. [PubMed: 15106728] 
Phillips CJ, Matyas GR, Hansen CJ, Alving CR, Smith TC, Ryan MA. Antibodies to squalene in US 
Navy Persian Gulf War veterans with chronic multisymptom illness [Research Support, U.S. 
Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Vaccine. 2009; 27(29):3921–3926. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.
2009.03.091. [PubMed: 19379786] 
Proctor SP, Harley R, Wolfe J, Heeren T, White RF. Health-related quality of life in Persian Gulf War 
veterans. Military Medicine. 2001; 166(6):510–519. [PubMed: 11413729] 
Proctor SP, Heaton KJ, Heeren T, White RF. Effects of sarin and cyclosarin exposure during the 1991 
Gulf War on neurobehavioral functioning in US army veterans. Neurotoxicology. 2006; 27(6):
931–939. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro.2006.08.001. S0161-813X(06)00192-6 [pii]. 
[PubMed: 16982099] 
Proctor SP, Heeren T, White RF, Wolfe J, Borgos MS, Davis JD, et al. Health status of Persian Gulf 
War veterans: self-reported symptoms, environmental exposures and the effect of stress [Clinical 
Trial, Comparative Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-
P.H.S]. International Journal of Epidemiology. 1998; 27(6):1000–1010. [PubMed: 10024195] 
RACGWI, RACoGWVI. Gulf War illness and the health of Gulf War veterans: Scientific findings and 
recommendations. Washington, D.C: U.S. Government Printing Office; 2008. 
White et al.
Page 29
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 RACGWI, RACoGWVI. Gulf War illness and the health of Gulf War veterans: Research update and 
recommendations, 2009–2013. Washington, D.C: U.S. Government Printing Office; 2014. 
Rayhan RU, Raksit MP, Timbol CR, Adewuyi O, Vanmeter JW, Baraniuk JN. Prefrontal lactate 
predicts exercise-induced cognitive dysfunction in Gulf War Illness. American Journal of 
Translational Research. 2013; 5(2):212–223. [PubMed: 23573365] 
Rayhan RU, Ravindran MK, Baraniuk JN. Migraine in gulf war illness and chronic fatigue syndrome: 
prevalence, potential mechanisms, and evaluation. Frontiers in Physiology. 2013; 4:181. http://
dx.doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2013.00181. [PubMed: 23898301] 
Rayhan RU, Stevens BW, Timbol CR, Adewuyi O, Walitt B, VanMeter JW, et al. Increased brain 
white matter axial diffusivity associated with fatigue, pain and hyperalgesia in Gulf War illness 
[Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. PLoS One. 2013; 8(3):e58493. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0058493. [PubMed: 23526988] 
Research Advisory Committee. Gulf War illness and the health of Gulf War veterans: Scientific 
findings and recommendations. Washington, DC: U.S. Goverment Printing Office; 2008. 
Rosenzweig I, Bodi I, Nashef L. Comorbid multiple sclerosis and TDP-43 proteinopathy in a gulf war 
sea captain [Case Reports; Letter]. The Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences. 
2012; 24(1):E41–E42. http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/appi.neuropsych.11030066. [PubMed: 
22450645] 
Sastre, A.; Cook, MR. Autonomic dysfunction in Gulf War Veterans. MD: Fort Detrick; 2004. 
Scremin OU, Shih TM, Huynh L, Roch M, Booth R, Jenden DJ. Delayed neurologic and behavioral 
effects of subtoxic doses of cholinesterase inhibitors [Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-
P.H.S.]. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. 2003; 304(3):1111–1119. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1124/jpet.102.044818. [PubMed: 12604688] 
Sharief MK, Priddin J, Delamont RS, Unwin C, Rose MR, David A, et al. Neurophysiologic analysis 
of neuromuscular symptoms in UK Gulf War veterans: a controlled study [Clinical Trial, 
Research Support, Non-U.SGov’t]. Neurology. 2002; 59(10):1518–1525. [PubMed: 12451190] 
Shih TM, Hulet SW, McDonough JH. The effects of repeated low-dose sarin exposure. Toxicology 
and Applied Pharmacology. 2006; 215(2):119–134. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.taap.2006.02.003. 
[PubMed: 16556454] 
Sinton CM, Fitch TE, Petty F, Haley RW. Stressful manipulations that elevate corticosterone reduce 
blood-brain barrier permeability to pyridostigmine in the rat. Toxicology and Applied 
Pharmacology. 2000; 165(1):99–105. [PubMed: 10814558] 
Smith, BN.; Wang, JM.; Vogt, D.; Vickers, K.; King, DW.; King, LA. Gulf War illness: 
symptomatology among veterans 10 Years after deployment. Journal of Occupational and 
Environmental Medicine. 2012. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/JOM.0b013e318270d709
Speed HE, Blaiss CA, Kim A, Haws ME, Melvin NR, Jennings M, et al. Delayed reduction of 
hippocampal synaptic transmission and spines following exposure to repeated subclinical doses 
of organophosphorus pesticide in adult mice [Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. 
Toxicological Science. 2012; 125(1):196–208. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/toxsci/kfr253. 
Spencer PS, McCauley LA, Lapidus JA, Lasarev M, Joos SK, Storzbach D. Self-reported exposures 
and their association with unexplained illness in a population-based case-control study of Gulf 
War veterans. Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine. 2001; 43(12):1041–1056. 
[PubMed: 11765675] 
Steele L. Prevalence and patterns of Gulf War illness in Kansas veterans: association of symptoms 
with characteristics of person, place, and time of military service [Comparative Study, Research 
Support, Non-U.S.Gov’t]. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2000; 152(10):992–1002. 
[PubMed: 11092441] 
Steele L, Lockridge O, Gerkovich MM, Cook MR, Sastre A. Butyrylcholinesterase genotype and 
enzyme activity in relation to Gulf War illness: preliminary evidence of gene-exposure 
interaction from a case-control study of 1991 Gulf War veterans. Environmental Health. 2015; 
14(4) http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1476-069X-14-4, 1476-069X-14-4 [pii]. 
Steele L, Sastre A, Gerkovich MM, Cook MR. Complex factors in the etiology of Gulf War illness: 
wartime exposures and risk factors in veteran subgroups [Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-
White et al.
Page 30
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 P.H.S.]. Environmental Health Perspectives. 2012; 120(1):112–118. http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/
ehp.1003399. [PubMed: 21930452] 
Stein PK, Domitrovich PP, Ambrose K, Lyden A, Fine M, Gracely RH, et al. Sex effects on heart rate 
variability in fibromyalgia and Gulf War illness [Comparative Study, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S., 
U.S. Gov’t, P.H.S.]. Arthritis Rheumatism. 2004; 51(5):700–708. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/art.
20687. [PubMed: 15478168] 
Storzbach D, Campbell KA, Binder LM, McCauley L, Anger WK, Rohlman DS, et al. Psychological 
differences between veterans with and without Gulf War unexplained symptoms. Portland 
Environmental Hazards Research Center [Comparative Study Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, 
Non-P.H.S.]. Psychosomatic Medicine. 2000; 62(5):726–735. [PubMed: 11020103] 
Storzbach D, Rohlman DS, Anger WK, Binder LM, Campbell KA. Neurobehavioral deficits in Persian 
Gulf veterans: additional evidence from a population-based study. Environmental Research. 
2001; 85(1):1–13. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/enrs.2000.4100. S0013935100941008 [pii]. 
[PubMed: 11161646] 
Suadicani P, Ishoy T, Guldager B, Appleyard M, Gyntelberg F. Determinants of long-term 
neuropsychological symptoms. The Danish Gulf War study. Danish Medical Bulletin. 1999; 
46(5):423–427. [PubMed: 10605622] 
Sullivan K, Krengel M, Proctor SP, Devine S, Heeren T, White RF. Cognitive functioning in 
treatment-seeking Gulf War Veterans: pyridostigmine bromide use and PTSD. Journal of 
Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment. 2003; 25(2):9.
Terry AV Jr. Functional consequences of repeated organophosphate exposure: potential non-
cholinergic mechanisms [Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Review]. Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics. 2012; 134(3):355–365. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2012.03.001. 
[PubMed: 22465060] 
Thompson CH, Kemp GJ, Sanderson AL, Radda GK. Skeletal muscle mitochondrial function studied 
by kinetic analysis of postexercise phosphocreatine resynthesis. Journal of Applied Physiology 
(1985). 1995; 78(6):2131–2139.
Tillman GD, Calley CS, Green TA, Buhl VI, Biggs MM, Spence JS, et al. Visual event-related 
potentials as markers of hyperarousal in Gulf War illness: evidence against a stress-related 
etiology [Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Psychiatry Research. 
2013; 211(3):257–267. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pscychresns.2012.08.004. [PubMed: 
23149040] 
Tillman GD, Calley CS, Green TA, Buhl VI, Biggs MM, Spence JS, et al. Event-related potential 
patterns associated with hyperarousal in Gulf War illness syndrome groups [Research Support, 
N.I.H., Extramural, Non-U.S. Gov’t, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Neurotoxicology. 2012; 33(5):
1096–1105. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro.2012.06.001. [PubMed: 22691951] 
Tillman GD, Green TA, Ferree TC, Calley CS, Maguire MJ, Briggs R, et al. Impaired response 
inhibition in ill Gulf War veterans [Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Non-U.S. Gov’t]. 
Journal of the Neurological Sciences. 2010; 297(1–2):1–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.
2010.07.021. [PubMed: 20719339] 
Toomey R, Alpern R, Vasterling JJ, Baker DG, Reda DJ, Lyons MJ, et al. Neuropsychological 
functioning of U.S. Gulf War veterans 10 years after the war [Multicenter Study, Research 
Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society. 
2009; 15(5):717–729. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S1355617709990294. [PubMed: 19640317] 
Torres-Altoro MI, Mathur BN, Drerup JM, Thomas R, Lovinger DM, O’Callaghan JP, et al. 
Organophosphates dysregulate dopamine signaling, glutamatergic neurotransmission, and induce 
neuronal injury markers in striatum [In Vitro, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, N.I.H., 
Intramural, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S., U.S. Gov’t, P.H.S.]. Journal of Neurochemistry. 2011; 
119(2):303–313. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07428.x. [PubMed: 21848865] 
Tuite JJ, Haley RW. Meteorological and intelligence evidence of long-distance transit of chemical 
weapons fallout from bombing early in the 1991 Persian Gulf War. Neuroepidemiology. 2013; 
40(3):160–177. http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/000345123. [PubMed: 23257977] 
U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, Persian Gulf War Illnesses Task Force. Chemical warfare agent 
issues during the Persian Gulf War: Office of the Director of Central Intelligence. 2002
White et al.
Page 31
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 U.S. Department of Defense Office of the Special Assistant for Gulf War Illnesses. Case Narrative: 
Czech and French reports of possible chemical agent detections. Washington, D.C: 1998. 
U.S. Department of Defense Office of the Special Assistant for Gulf War Illnesses. Final Report. 
Washington, D.C: 2002. Case narrative: U.S. demolition operations at Khamasiyah. 
U.S. General Accounting Office. Gulf War Illnesses: DOD’s Conclusions About U.S. Troops’ 
exposure cannot be adequately supported. Washington: D.C: 2004. 
Unwin C, Blatchley N, Coker W, Ferry S, Hotopf M, Hull L, et al. Health of UK servicemen who 
served in Persian Gulf War. Lancet. 1999; 353(9148):169–178. [PubMed: 9923871] 
Unwin C, Hotopf M, Hull L, Ismail K, David A, Wessely S. Women in the Persian Gulf: lack of 
gender differences in long-term health effects of service in United Kingdom Armed Forces in the 
1991 Persian Gulf War [Comparative Study, Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. 
Military Medicine. 2002; 167(5):406–413. [PubMed: 12053850] 
van Haaren F, Haworth SC, Bennett SM, Cody BA, Hoy JB, Karlix JL, et al. The effects of 
pyridostigmine bromide, permethrin, and DEET alone, or in combination, on fixed-ratio and 
fixed-interval behavior in male and female rats [Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S., U.S. 
Gov’t, P.H.S.]. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. 2001; 69(1–2):23–33.
van Helden HP, Vanwersch RA, Kuijpers WC, Trap HC, Philippens IH, Benschop HP. Low levels of 
sarin affect the EEG in marmoset monkeys: a pilot study [Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-
P.H.S.]. Journal of Applied Toxicology. 2004; 24(6):475–483. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jat.1001. 
[PubMed: 15558834] 
Vogt DS, Samper RE, King DW, King LA, Martin JA. Deployment stressors and posttraumatic stress 
symptomatology: comparing active duty and National Guard/ Reserve personnel from Gulf War 
I. Journal of Traumatic Stress. 2008; 21(1):66–74. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jts.20306. [PubMed: 
18302185] 
Wachen JS, Shipherd JC, Suvak M, Vogt D, King LA, King DW. Posttraumatic stress 
symptomatology as a mediator of the relationship between warzone exposure and physical health 
symptoms in men and women. Journal of Traumatic Stress. 2013; 26(3):319–328. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1002/jts.21818. [PubMed: 23695839] 
Wakil A, Sathyapalan T, Atkin SL. Pituitary hypophysitis and gulf war syndrome: a case series and 
hypothesis. Clinical Endocrinology (Oxford). 2011; 75(2):272–274. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.
1365-2265.2011.04025.x. [PubMed: 21521294] 
Wallin MT, Culpepper WJ, Coffman P, Pulaski S, Maloni H, Mahan CM. Veterans Affairs Multiple 
Sclerosis Centres of Excellence Epidemiology G. The Gulf War era multiple sclerosis cohort: age 
and incidence rates by race, sex and service [Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov’t, U.S. Gov’t, 
Non-P.H.S.]. Brain. 2012; 135(Pt 6):1778–1785. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/aws099. 
[PubMed: 22628389] 
Wallin MT, Kurtzke JF, Culpepper WJ, Coffman P, Maloni H, Haselkorn JK, et al. Multiple sclerosis 
in gulf war era veterans. 2. Military deployment and risk of multiple sclerosis in the first gulf 
war. Neuroepidemiology. 2014; 42(4):226–234. http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/000360701, 
000360701 [pii]. [PubMed: 24862835] 
Wallin MT, Wilken J, Alfaro MH, Rogers C, Mahan C, Chapman JC, et al. Neuropsychologic 
assessment of a population-based sample of Gulf War veterans. Cognitive and Behavioral 
Neurology. 2009; 22(3):155–166. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/WNN.0b013e3181b278e8. [PubMed: 
19741325] 
Weiner, M. Magnetic resonance and spectroscopy of the human brain in Gulf War illness. Fort 
Detrick, MD: U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command; 2005. 
Weiner M, Meyerhoff D, Neylan TC, Hlavin J, Ramage ER, McCoy D, et al. The relationship between 
Gulf War illness, brain N-acetylaspartate, and post-traumatic stress disorder [Research Support, 
N.I.H., Extramural, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Military Medicine. 2011; 176(8):896–902. 
[PubMed: 21882779] 
White RF, Proctor SP, Heeren T, Wolfe J, Krengel M, Vasterling J, et al. Neuropsychological function 
in Gulf War veterans: relationships to self-reported toxicant exposures [Research Support, U.S. 
Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. American Journal of Industrial Medicine. 2001; 40(1):42–54. [PubMed: 
11439396] 
White et al.
Page 32
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Wolfe J, Proctor SP, Erickson DJ, Hu H. Risk factors for multisymptom illness in US Army veterans 
of the Gulf War [Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Journal of Occupational and 
Environmental Medicine. 2002; 44(3):271–281. [PubMed: 11911029] 
Woodward SH, Schaer M, Kaloupek DG, Cediel L, Eliez S. Smaller global and regional cortical 
volume in combat-related posttraumatic stress disorder [Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov’t, U.S. 
Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Archives of General Psychiatry. 2009; 66(12):1373–1382. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2009.160. [PubMed: 19996042] 
Yehuda R, Golier JA, Bierer LM, Mikhno A, Pratchett LC, Burton CL, et al. Hydrocortisone 
responsiveness in Gulf War veterans with PTSD: effects on ACTH, declarative memory 
hippocampal [(18)F]FDG uptake on PET [Randomized Controlled Trial, N.I.H., Extramural, 
U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. Psychiatry Research. 2010; 184(2):117–127. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.pscychresns.2010.06.010. [PubMed: 20934312] 
White et al.
Page 33
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
White et al.
Page 34
Table 1
Population-based prevalence estimates: chronic symptomatic illness in 1991 Gulf War veterans and nondeployed era veterans.
Study
Gulf War veterans assessed
Year(s) of assessment
Case definition used
Prevalence in 
Gulf War 
veterans
Prevalence in 
nondeployed 
veterans
Excess illness 
in Gulf War 
veterans
Fukuda et al., 1998
1,155 Air Force veterans
1995
CMI
45%
15%
30%
Unwin et al., 1999
4,428 U.K. male veterans
1998
CMI (modified)
62%
36%
26%
Steele, 2000
1,548 Kansas veterans
1998
Kansas GWI
CMI
34%
47%
8%
20%
26%
27%
Proctor, Harley, Wolfe, 
Heeren, & White, 2001
180 New England Army veterans
1994–1996
CMI (modified)
65%
33%
32%
Unwin et al., 2002
226 U.K. female veterans
1998
CMI (modified)
64%
35%
29%
Blanchard et al., 2006
1,035 U.S. veterans
1999–2001
CMI (modified)a
29%
16%
13%
King, King, Bolton, Knight, & 
Vogt, 2008
357 U.S. veterans
2001
CMI
54%
not evaluated
–
Kang, Li, Mahan, Eisen, & 
Engel, 2009
6,111 U.S. veterans
2005
VA-defined multisymptom illnessb
37%
12%
25%
Kelsall et al., 2009
1,381 Australian veterans
2000–2002
Australian factor definition
26%
16%
10%
Iannacchione et al., 2011
5,699 U.S. veterans
2007–2009
Haley factor definition (3 syndromes 
combined)
14%
4%
10%
Smith et al., 2012
317 U.S. veterans
2001
CMI
50%c
34%c
not evaluated
–
Steele, Sastre, Gerkovich, & 
Cook, 2012
646 Kansas City area veterans
2000
CMI
45%
not evaluated
–
Abbreviations: CMI = chronic multisymptom illness, as defined in Fukuda et al. (1998); Kansas GWI = Kansas Gulf War illness as defined in Steele (2000); VA = Department of Veterans Affairs.
aCMI modification replaced fatigue criterion with fatigue lasting >24 h after exertion.
bUnexplained multisymptom illness defined as multiple types of symptoms occurring together, not explained by medical/psychiatric diagnoses.
cUnweighted sample prevalence = 50% (prevalence estimate weighted to reflect general population = 34%).
(Table adapted from RACGWI, 2014).
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
White et al.
Page 35
Table 2
Studies reporting on diagnosable neurological conditions in Gulf War veterans.
Study
Groups studied
Outcome(s)
Key findings
Barth et al., 2009
621,902 GWV, 746,248 
NDV
Mortality due to brain cancer, MS, PD, 
and ALS
GWV potentially exposed to nerve agents 
over multiple days and GWV with greatest 
exposure to oil well fires had significantly 
higher rates of brain cancer mortality. 
Overall, mortality due to brain cancer, PD, 
MS, ALS similar in GWV and NDV.
Kang et al., 2009
6,111 GWV, 3,859 NDV
Diagnosed medical conditions reported 
by veterans
Compared to NDV, GWV reported 
significantly higher rates of repeated seizures, 
neuralgia/neuritis, and stroke.
Kasarskis et al., 
2009
43 deployed GWV with 
ALS, 66 nondeployed 
GWV with ALS
ALS age of onset, site of onset, atypical 
symptom features, ventilator-free 
survival time
No differences between ALS symptoms, age 
and site of onset similar for deployed GWV 
versus nondeployed. Ventilator-free survival 
time post-diagnosis was significantly shorter 
in deployed GWV.
Wallin et al., 
2012
2,691 veterans who served 
in the military between 
1990 and 2007, and had 
applied for VA benefits for 
MS
MS incidence by age, sex, race and 
branch of service
No determination of MS rates specifically in 
relation to 1991 Gulf War era or deployment. 
MS incidence was significantly higher in 
females than males, blacks versus other races, 
and in Air Force and Army veterans versus 
other branches.
Rayhan, Raksit, 
et al., 2013; 
Rayhan, 
Ravindran, et al., 
2013; Rayhan, 
Stevens, et al., 
2013
50 symptomatic GWV, 39 
CFS patients, 45 sedentary 
controls
Structured headache evaluation
Statistically similar proportions of GWV 
(64%) and CFS (82%) patients affected by 
migraines; both significantly greater than 
controls (13%).
Wallin et al., 
2014
387 GWV and 1,454 NDV 
who filed for disability 
benefits due to MS and 
ODD
MS incidence in GW-era veterans by 
age, sex, race and branch of service
MS incidence estimates (using entire active 
duty population of GWV and NDV as 
denominators), indicated no significant MS 
differences between GWV and NDV.
Abbreviations: GWV = Gulf War veterans; NDV = nondeployed veterans; ALS = amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; PD = Parkinson’s disease, MS = 
multiple sclerosis; CFS = chronic fatigue syndrome, ODD = other demyelinating disease.
(Table adapted from RACGWVI, 2014).
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
White et al.
Page 36
Table 3
Studies reporting on psychiatric and psychological disorders in Gulf War veterans.
Study
Groups studied
Outcome(s)
Key findings
Vogt et al., 2008
81 active duty GWV and 230 
NG/R GWV
DRRI, PTSS
High PT and DLWE scores on the DRRI and PTSS were 
significantly stronger for active duty women and NG/R 
men.
Woodward et al., 
2009
50 PTSD+ (13 GWV and 37 VV) 
and 47 PTSD− (23 GWV and 24 
VV)
Cortical volume 
measured using MRI
Subjects with combat-related PTSD showed significantly 
smaller cerebral cortical volume, thickness and area 
compared to PTSD-controls.
Yehuda et al., 
2010
12 PTSD + GWV and 9 PTSD-
GWV
Plasma ACTH 
changes, declarative 
memory, MRI, PET, 
DST
PTSD + group showed significantly greater cortisol and 
ACTH suppression. Hippocampal volume difference and 
greater hippocampal metabolic activity seen in PTSD + 
GWV. No memory differences were seen.
Apfel et al., 2011
82 GWV with lifetime PTSD, 44 
GWV with current PTSD, 38 
GWV with MDD, 80 PTSD-
GWV
Hippocampal volume 
measured using MRI
GWV with chronic PTSD had smaller hippocampal 
volume than GWV without current PTSD. Current PTSD 
symptoms were associated with significantly reduced 
hippocampal volume.
Coughlin et al., 
2011
6,111 deployed GWV, 3,859 
nondeployed veterans
Alcohol use, PTSD, 
MDD
Problem drinking was significantly and positively 
associated with PTSD and MDD
Gade & Wenger, 
2011
1035 GWV, 3452 VV
MCS
Exposure to war casualties but not combat overall was 
associated with mental health decline. Negative effects 
of combat were larger for GWV compared to VV.
Hassija et al., 2012
87 GWV and 43 OIF/OEF 
veterans
PSS, DSS, alcohol 
misuse
Combat exposure was significantly associated with PSS, 
DSS and alcohol misuse.
Wachen et al., 
2013
317 GWV
PSS, PCL, PHS
Significant associations between post-deployment 
physical health and PSS in all symptom categories. PSS 
score was more strongly related to physical health for 
subjects with lower warzone exposures, but also 
significant for high warzone exposures.
Abbreviations: GWV = Gulf War veterans; MDD = major depressive disorder; PTSD = post-traumatic stress disorder; PTSD+ = meets the criteria 
for current PTSD resulting from one or more military trauma; PTSD− = did not meet criteria for PTSD, either current or lifetime; MRI = magnetic 
resonance imaging; MSI = multisymptom illness; MCS = Mental Component Summary; VV = Vietnam veterans; OEF = Operation Enduring 
Freedom; OIF = Operation Iraqi Freedom, PSS = post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity; DSS = depressive symptom severity; PTSS = 
post-traumatic stress symptomatology; DRRI = Deployment Risk and Resilience Inventory; PT = perceived threat; DLWE = difficult living and 
working environment; NG/R = National Guard/Reserve; PCL = Post-traumatic Stress Disorder Checklist; PHS = physical health symptoms; ACTH 
= adrenocorticotropic hormone; PET = positron emission tomography; DST = dexamethasone suppression test.
(Table adapted from RACGWVI, 2014).
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
White et al.
Page 37
Table 4
Association of pyridostigmine bromide and pesticide exposures with symptomatic illness in Gulf War veteran populations.
Study
Gulf War veterans studied
Symptomatic illness evaluated
Association of exposure with symptomatic 
illness (adjusted for effects of other 
exposures)
Additional information
PB
Pesticides, repellants
Haley & Kurt, 1997
249 GWV Navy Seabees
Haley syndromes
+1
+
PB side effects “dose response” effect; 
DEET dose response effect
Ishoy, Suadicani, 
Guldager, Appleyard, & 
Gyntelberg, 1999
686 Danish GWV
Gastrointestinal and/or 
neuropsychological symptoms
na
+
Nisenbaum et al., 2000
1,002 Air Force GWV
CMI
+
+
Cherry et al., 2001b
7,971 U.K. GWV
Overall symptom severity
+2
+
PB dose response effect; Pesticide dose 
response effect
Spencer et al., 2001
1,119 GWV from 
Washington, Oregon
Gulf War unexplained illness (study 
defined)
+
−
PB dose response effect; DEET was only 
pesticide evaluated in model
Gray et al., 2002
3,831 GWV Navy Seabees
Gulf War illness (study defined)
+
+
Wolfe et al., 2002
945 Army GWV
CMI
+
na
PB dose response effect
Steele et al., 2012
304
Kansas GWI
+
+
PB association most pronounced in 
forward deployed GWV
Abbreviations: PB = pyridostigmine bromide; GWV = Gulf War veterans; CMI = chronic multisymptom illness, as defined in Fukuda et al. (1998); Kansas GWI = Kansas Gulf War illness as defined in 
Steele (2000); DEET = NIN-diethyl-meta-toluamide.
+ = statistically significant association; − = association not statistically significant; na = not assessed.
Notes:
1association with PB side effects only,
2association with PB use and PB side effects.
(Table adapted from RACGWVI, 2008).
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
White et al.
Page 38
Table 5
Studies assessing exposures associated with health outcomes in Gulf War veterans.
Study
Groups studied
Exposure(s)
Method(s)
Key findings
Neurological and neuropsychological
Toomey et al., 
2009
1,061 deployed GWV; 
1,128 nondeployed veterans
PB, pesticides, vaccines, IG injections, 
oil well fire smoke
Neuropsychological testing
Deployed GWV had significantly lower scores on tests of verbal 
memory, verbal learning, motor speed, and attention than 
nondeployed. Specific exposure in Khamisiyah was negatively 
correlated with motor speed.
Chao et al., 
2010
40 exposed GWV, 40 
unexposed GWV
Sarin and cyclosarin
MRI, neuropsychological testing
Significantly reduced gray matter and hippocampal volumes in 
sarin and cyclosarin exposed subjects. White matter volume was 
associated with executive function and visuospatial abilities in 
exposed veterans.
Chao et al., 
2011
64 exposed GWV, 64 
unexposed GWV
Sarin and cyclosarin
MRI, neuropsychological testing
Sarin/cyclosarin exposed GWV showed sign. reduced total gray 
and white matter volumes compared to unexposed controls. 
GWI/CMI diagnosis sign. predicted gray and white matter 
volumes in sarin/cyclosarin exposed subjects. Exposed GWV 
performed sign. worse on a continuous performance test of 
attention, but better on psychomotor function (Trailmaking Test A 
and Grooved Pegboard).
Cancer mortality
Barth et al., 
2009
621,902 GWV, 746,248 
nondeployed veterans
Sarin/cyclosarin Oil well fire 
contaminants
Brain cancer mortality, brain cancer, 
ALS, MS, PD
Significant increase in brain cancer mortality among GWV in 
sarin exposure area ≥ 2 days; sign. dose response effect for 
number of days of exposure. Oil fire associated with sign. increase 
in brain cancer mortality among exposed Army GWV, compared 
to non-exposed. No interaction found between oil well fires and 
sarin exposure.
Health status
Kelsall et al., 
2009
698 Australian GWV
Vaccines
Total symptom number, SF-12 
physical component, GHQ-12 case 
status
Number of self-reported vaccines weakly associated with total 
number of symptoms and poorer health; relationship not seen with 
recorded vaccination number.
Genotyping
Steele et al., 
2015
144 GWI cases, 160 GWV 
controls
Exposures or exposure indicators with 
possible cholinergic effects (PB, 
pesticides, hearing chemical alarms)
Association of BChE genotype with 
GWI gene–exposure interactions
No association of BChE genotype overall with GWI; significant 
gene–exposure interaction for PB only; GWV with less active 
BChE variants (KK, A, F heterozygotes) who used PB had 
significantly greater GWI risk (OR = 40.0) than GWV with more 
active UU & UK genotypes (OR = 2.7)
GWI and CMI
Phillips et al., 
2009
175 male U.S. Navy 
Seabees GWV
Vaccines (squalene antibodies)
CMI
Similar proportions of CMI (55%) and healthy (51%) GWV were 
positive for squalene antibodies (p = .71).
Steele et al., 
2012
304 Kansas City area GWV
PB, pesticides, vaccines, oil well fire 
smoke, chemical alarms
GWI
Pesticide use significantly associated with GWI for veterans who 
were in Iraq or Kuwait and for veterans in support areas. Use of 
PB, close proximity to exploded SCUD missile and exposure to 
oil well fire smoke significantly associated with GWI for 
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
White et al.
Page 39
Study
Groups studied
Exposure(s)
Method(s)
Key findings
personnel in forward areas only; GWI not associated with serving in combat, hearing chemical alarms. 
personnel in forward areas only; GWI not associated with serving in combat, hearing chemical alarms.
Haley et al., 
2013
8,020 GWV
Chemical alarms, DoD-modeled 
Khamisiyah exposure area
GWI
GWI was significantly associated in a dose–response manner with 
hearing chemical alarms but not with exposure to Khamisiyah 
plume
Abbreviations: GWV = Gulf War veterans; GWI = Gulf War illness; PB = pyridostigmine bromide pills; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; IG = immunoglobulin; ACTH = adrenocorticotropic hormone; 
CRF = corticotrophin-releasing factor; CMI = chronic multisymptom illness; SF-12 = Short-Form Health Survey 12 items; PCS = Physical Component Summary Score; GHQ-12 = General Health 
Questionnaire; DoD = Department of Defense, ALS = amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; PD = Parkinson’s disease; MS = multiple sclerosis; SCUD = Subsonic Cruise Unarmed Decoy; BChE = 
butyrylcholinesterase.
(Table adapted from RACGWVI, 2014).
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
White et al.
Page 40
Table 6
EEG and brain imaging findings in symptomatic Gulf War veterans.
Study
Groups studied
Method(s)
Key findings
MRI and SPECT
Haley et al., 2009
21 GWV with Haley 
syndromes, 17 veteran 
controls
SPECT
Syndrome 2 showed significantly lower resting nrCBF compared 
to controls and other syndrome groups. Reduction most apparent 
in caudate head, globus pallidus, putamen and posterior thalamus. 
Subjects with Syndrome 2 showed elevated nrCBF while other 
groups showed reduced nrCBF after physostigmine stimulation.
Weiner et al., 2011
81 symptomatic GWV, 101 
intermediate GWV, 97 
deployed veteran controls
MRI, MRS
No significant differences in NAA and NAA metabolites in the 
basal ganglia and pons between symptomatic and control 
veterans.
Rayhan, Raksit, et 
al., 2013; Rayhan, 
Ravindran, et al., 
2013; Rayhan, 
Stevens, et al., 2013
15 symptomatic GWV, 11 
veteran and civilian controls
fMRI, MRS
Prefrontal lactate levels prior to exercise predicted whether 
symptomatic GWV showed increased or decreased memory test 
scores.
Physostigmine challenge test
Li et al., 2011
35 GWV with Haley 
syndromes, 13 veteran 
controls
MRI-based ASL
Abnormal hippocampal CBF persists in symptomatic GWV at 
baseline. Patients with Syndromes 2 and 3 showed significantly 
increased bilateral rCBF in hippocampi after physostigmine 
stimulation.
Liu et al., 2011
33 GWV with Haley 
syndromes, 14 
nonsymptomatic veteran 
controls
MRI-based ASL
Expected physostigmine decrease in CBF was absent in 
symptomatic GWV, who showed either no change or increased 
CBF after cholinergic challenge. Physostigmine response 
differences between GWV and controls most pronounced in 
amygdala, hippocampus, caudate and thalamus.
Structural MRI
Calley et al., 2010
53 GWV with Haley 
syndromes, 16 
nonsymptomatic deployed 
GWV
fMRI
Significant signal change increase in the thalamic region and 
signal change decrease in the caudate in Syndrome 2 subjects 
compared to Syndrome 1 and controls. Syndrome 2 subjects 
showed significantly positive association between reaction time 
on SORT task and percent signal change in bilateral caudate 
heads. Syndrome 1 and 3 subjects performed significantly worse 
on SORT compared to deployed controls.
Chao et al., 2011
64 GWV with suspected sarin 
or cyclosarin exposure 
matched to 64 unexposed 
GWV
MRI
Sarin and cyclosarin exposed GWV showed significantly reduced 
total gray and white matter volumes compared to unexposed 
controls. GWI/CMI diagnosis significantly predicted gray and 
white matter volumes in sarin and cyclosarin exposed subjects. 
No dose–response relationships seen.
fMRI
Gopinath et al., 2012
40 GWV with Haley 
syndromes, 14 veteran 
controls
fMRI
In response to innocuous heat, subjects with Syndromes 1 and 2 
showed significantly reduced activation in the insula, S1, S2, 
SMA, medial PPC, IPL, premotor cortex and DMPFC in 
compared to controls. Syndrome 1 and 2 exhibited significantly 
more activation to innocuous heat in the ventral anterior 
cingulate.
Hubbard et al., 2013
96 symptomatic GWV, 44 
matched controls
fMRI
Significant differences were seen between groups for prefrontal 
cortex activity during a working memory task, indicating that 
GWVs allocate high demand working memory loads differently 
from controls.
Rayhan, Raksit, et 
al., 2013; Rayhan, 
Ravindran, et al., 
2013; Rayhan, 
Stevens, et al., 2013
28 symptomatic GWV, 10 
civilian controls
fMRI
The GWI post-exercise orthostatic tachycardia subgroup showed 
brainstem atrophy and baseline working memory compensation in 
the vermis. The other GWI subgroup exhibited hyperalgesia in 
response to exercise, and had baseline working memory 
compensation in the basal ganglia when compared to controls. 
GWV showed impaired working memory compared to controls.
Rayhan, Raksit, et 
al., 2013; Rayhan, 
Ravindran, et al., 
31 GWV with CFS and CMI, 
12 sedentary control veterans
fMRI
In GWV diagnosed with CMI or CFS, white matter integrity loss 
was identified in cortico-cortical and corticospinal areas. Changes 
in axial diffusivity in the IFOF significantly different between 
controls and CFS/CMI GWV.
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
White et al.
Page 41
Study
Groups studied
Method(s)
Key findings
2013; Rayhan, 
Stevens, et al., 2013
EEG
Tillman et al., 2012
20 GWV with Haley 
syndromes, 8 deployed 
asymptomatic GWV
ERP from EEG
Haley syndrome group predicted P1 amplitude, P1 latency, with 
longer latencies in syndromes 2 and 3 compared to controls and 
Syndrome 1. Mean P3a amplitudes significantly different 
between syndromes 1 and 2 compared to controls and syndrome 
3.
Tillman et al., 2013
22 GWV with Haley 
syndromes, 8 deployed 
asymptomatic GWV
ERP from EEG
Significantly lower P3b amplitudes in 3 syndrome groups 
compared to controls in an oddball attention task.
Abbreviations: GWV = Gulf War veterans; PTSD = post-traumatic stress disorder; SORT = Semantic object retrieval test; MRI = magnetic 
resonance imaging; fMRI = functional magnetic resonance imaging; GWI = Gulf War illness; CMI = chronic multisymptom illness; CSF = 
cerebrospinal fluid; S1 = Primary somatosensory cortex; S2 = Secondary somatosensory cortex; SMA = supplementary motor area; PPC = 
posterior parietal cortex; IPL = inferior parietal lobule; DMPFC = dorsomedial prefrontal cortex; SPECT = Single Photon Emission Computed 
Tomography; nrCBF = normalized regional cerebral blood flow; rCBF = regional cerebral blood flow; ASL = arterial spin labeling; CFS = chronic 
fatigue syndrome; IFOF = inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus; MRS = magnetic resonance spectroscopy; MS = multiple sclerosis; EEG = 
electroencephalogram; ERP = event related potential; NAA = N-acetyl aspartate; VV = Vietnam veterans; PHG = parahippocampal gyrus; STC = 
superior temporal cortex; OFC = orbital frontal cortex; PO = pars orbitalis.
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
White et al.
Page 42
Table 7
Neurocognitive findings in Gulf War veterans.
Study
Groups studied
Key findings
Odegard et 
al., 2013
10 GWV Haley Syndrome 1; 
12 GWV Haley Syndrome 2; 
11 GWV Haley Syndrome 3; 
14 GWV well controls
Control GWV and GWV with Haley Syndrome 1 provided significantly more recall 
responses to face-name items than GWVs with Haley Syndrome 3. Memory performance 
was related to activation in the left hippocampus.
Tillman et 
al., 2010
25 GWV with major cognitive 
complaints; 23 matched GWV 
controls
The experimental group had significantly more false positives and significantly fewer hits 
than the control group suggesting inhibition difficulties. The mean P3 amplitude of the 
patient group was significantly lower than the control group, and also demonstrated a 
condition effect with decreased amplitude during the NOGO condition.
Toomey et 
al., 2009
1,061 deployed GWV; 1128 
nondeployed GWV
Eight factors were generated accounting for 68% of variance including verbal memory, 
attention/working memory, visual memory, executive functioning, perceptual motor speed, 
visual organization, motor speed, and sustained attention. With a cutoff of 2 SD below the 
mean the deployed group performed worse on motor speed and sustained attention. The 
deployed group performed significantly worse on Trails B compared to the nondeployed 
group. Self-reported exposure to contaminated food or water was a significant predictor of 
performance in sustained attention. Khamisiyah exposure was a significant predictor of 
verbal memory performance, CARC/paint and receipt of IG were significant predictors of 
visual memory performance, and SCUD missiles and vaccines of motor speed 
performance.
Wallin et al., 
2009
25 deployed GWV with CDC 
defined GWI; 16 deployed 
GWV without CDC defined 
GWI
No significant differences were found between GWI cases and controls in assessed 
cognitive domains. GWI cases and controls mean scores were both within normal limits 
compared to population based normative samples. GWI cases mean scores were all lower 
than controls. GWI cases were significantly more impaired on measures of mood and 
quality of life.
Abbreviations: GWV = Gulf War veteran; CARC = chemical agent resistant coating; IG = immunoglobulin; SD = standard deviation; CDC = 
Centers for Disease Control.
(Table adapted from RACGWVI, 2014).
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
White et al.
Page 43
Table 8
Studies using animal and in Vitro models of Gulf War illness and related diseases.
Study
Model
Parameter(s) evaluated exposure
Key findings
Abdullah et al., 
2011
Mouse
PB, PER
Exposed mice demonstrated significantly increased 
anxiety behavior, memory impairment and psychomotor 
dysfunction. After 150 days of exposure, significant 
increases in astrogliosis were seen in exposed mice. 
Proteomic analysis showed significant expression 
alterations for proteins that regulate lipid metabolism, 
molecular transport, and endocrine and immune 
function.
Abdullah et al., 
2012
Mouse
PB, PER, DEET, stress
Significant increases in ether-containing PC, diacyl, PC 
and SM lipids, indicating altered transport, uptake, 
storage and synthesis in ACh pathways in the brain. 
Anxiety-like behavior was increased in exposed mice, 
especially in females. Sensorimotor deficits were also 
significantly associated with exposure, as was 
astrogliosis.
Abdullah et al., 
2013
Mouse
PB, PER
Exposed mice had elevated brain levels of PC and SM 
phospholipid species, particularly those containing ether 
PC. Brain catalase staining was higher in exposed than 
control mice. Lyso-platelet activating factors 
(precursors of inflammatory lipid mediators) were 
decreased in the brain and blood from exposed 
compared to control mice.
Bozkurt et al., 
2010
Rat
CPF
Single CPF dose led to significant short term (12 h) 
changes in glial and neuronal markers in serum. 
Immediate significant changes in body weight and 
temperature persisted for approximately 168 h.
Cardona et al., 
2006
Rat
CPF
CPF significantly inhibited AChE and APF enzymatic 
activity even when signs of acute toxicity were absent. 
Striatum and brainstem areas showed slowed AChE 
recovery after CPF exposure.
Corbel et al., 
2009
Insect and mouse 
cultured tissue
DEET
DEET application to insect CNS neuronal preparation 
produced significant initial increase in neuronal 
electrophysiological activation, followed by a 
significant decrease, indicating changes in synaptic 
transmission and inhibition of cholinesterase activity.
Grigoryan et al., 
2008
Bovine protein isolate
Sarin, soman, CPO, DFP, FP-biotin
Pesticide agents bind covalently to tubulin, a protein 
required for neuronal transport, putatively creating 
axonal transport deficits.
Grigoryan et al., 
2009
Bovine, human, porcine 
and murine protein 
isolate
FP-biotin
OP esters bind to tyrosine in proteins across different 
species. OP-reactive proteins include enzymes with and 
without active serine sites.
Grigoryan et al., 
2009
Bovine, human, 
porcine, murine protein 
isolate
DFP, CPO
OP esters covalently bind to lysine in albumin, keratin, 
actin, tubulin and transferrin in a number of mammalian 
species.
Jiang et al., 2010
Mouse
CPF, CPO
Microtubules isolated from brain tissue from exposed 
mice showed fewer associated proteins than control 
mice, and microtubules from exposed mice were 
significantly smaller in comparison to controls. Mice 
brains show CPO-labeled tubulin after injections of 
nontoxic doses of CPF or CPO.
Middlemore-
Risher et al., 
2011
Rat
CPF, CPO
Mitochondrial length, number and axonal movement 
were decreased in central nervous system neurons in 
rats exposed to CPF or CPO when compared to 
controls.
Nutter et al., 
2013
Rat
CPF, PER, PB
After exposure, K+ channel kinetics were altered in 
vascular pain receptors, with significant increases in 
electrophysiological excitability. No behavioral 
differences were noted between exposed and control 
animals, nor were significant effects seen in Na+ 
channel activity.
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
White et al.
Page 44
Study
Model
Parameter(s) evaluated exposure
Key findings
O’Callaghan et 
al., 2015
Mouse
DFP, DEET, CORT
Pretreatment with CORT greatly increased 
neuroinflammatory responses to DFP. Minocycline 
(anti-inflammatory) suppressed DFP + CORT 
neuroinflammation.
Ojo et al., 2013
Mouse
CPF, PB, PER
Exposure to CPF alone or in combination with PB and 
PER reduced synaptic function by reducing 
hippocampal synaptophysin and impairing cell 
differentiation in the dentate gyrus, with altered basal 
ACh levels throughout the brain.
Parihar et al., 
2013
Rat
DEET, PER, PB, stress
Exposure to low doses of DEET, PER and PB increased 
disordered mood and cognitive behaviors. Rats exposed 
to pesticides and stress showed significantly reduced 
hippocampal volume and neuron growth, and increased 
CNS inflammation.
Speed et al., 2012
Mouse
CPF
Mice injected with CPF showed a short term increase in 
synaptic transmission in the CA3–CA1 hippocampal 
region. After three months, decreased spine density in 
the hippocampus and reduced synaptic activity was 
seen in exposed versus control mice.
Torres-Altoro et 
al., 2011
Mouse
CPF, sarin, PB, DEET, DFP
CPF and PB altered dopaminergic and glutamatergic 
synaptic transmission in vivo and slice preparations. 
Combined PB/DEET/DFP exposure stimulated aberrant 
brain specific protein expression in the striatum and 
hippocampus.
Abbreviations: PB = pyridostigmine bromide; PER = permethrin; DEET = N,N-diethyl-meta-toluamide; PC = phosphatidylcholine; SM = 
sphingomyelin; ACh = acetylcholine; DU = depleted uranium; CPF = chlorpyrifos; CNS = central nervous system; CPO = chlorpyrifos oxon; DFP 
= diisopropylfluorophosphate; FP-biotin = 10-fluoroethoxyphosphinyl-N-biotinamidopentyldecanamide; OP = organophosphorus; AChE = 
acetylcholinesterase; APF = acylpeptide hydrolase; LV = left ventricular; TH = tyrosine hydroxylase; PC = phosphatidylcholine; SM = 
sphingomyelin; DU = depleted uranium; ROS = reactive oxygen species; CORT = corticosterone.
(Table adapted from RACGWVI, 2014).
Cortex. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 24.
