  
 
Pa
ge 1 
 
Bypassing particle-mediated adverse injection reactions through shape 
modification and erythrocyte ‘hitch-hiking’  
 
 
Peter P. Wibroe,1 Aaron C. Anselmo,2 Per H. Nilsson,3 Vivek Gupta,4 Rudolf 
Urbanics,5 Janos Szebeni,5 A. Christy Hunter,6 Samir Mitragotri,2 Tom Eirik 
Mollnes,3,7,8 Seyed Moein Moghimi1,9,10* 
 
 
1Nanomedicine Laboratory, Centre for Pharmaceutical Nanotechnology and 
Nanotoxicology, Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Universitetsparken 2, DK-2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark 
 
2University of California at Santa Barbara, Department of Chemical Engineering and 
Center for Bioengineering, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA 
 
3Department of Immunology, Oslo University Hospital Rikshospitalet, and K.G. Jebsen 
IRC, University of Oslo, 0372 Oslo, Norway 
 
4School of Pharmacy, Keck Graduate Institute, 535 Watson Drive, Claremont, CA 
91711, USA 
 
5Nanomedicine Research and Education Center, Semmelweis University, Budapest & 
SeroScience Ltd, Budapest, Hungary 
 
6Leicester School of Pharmacy, De Montfort University, The Gateway, Leicester LE1 
9BH, UK 
 
7Reserach Laboratory, Nordland Hospital, 8092 Bodø, and K.G. Jebsen TREC, 
University of Tromsø, 9037 Tromsø, Norway 
 
8Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research, Norwegian University of Science and 
Technology, 7491 Trondheim, Norway 
 
9Nano-Science Center, University of Copenhagen, Universitetsparken 5, DK-2100 
Copenhagen Ø, Denmark 
 
10School of Medicine, Pharmacy and Health, Durham University, Queen’s Campus, 
Stockton-on-Tees TS17 6BH, United Kingdom 
 
*Corresponding author: School of Medicine, Pharmacy and Health, Durham 
University, 
Queen’s 
Campus, 
Stockton-on-Tees 
TS17 
6BH; 
moein.moghimi@gmail.com; seyed.m.moghimi@durham.ac.uk 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Pa
ge 2 
 
Intravenously injected nanopharmaceuticals induce adverse cardiopulmonary 
reactions in sensitive human subjects and these reactions are reproducible in pigs. 
The underlying mechanisms are poorly understood, but a role for both the 
complement system and reactive macrophages has been implicated. Here we 
show the dominance and importance of early pulmonary intravascular 
macrophage clearance kinetics in adverse particle-mediated cardiopulmonary 
distress in pigs and irrespective of complement activation. Delaying particle 
recognition by macrophages within the first few minutes of injection overcome 
adverse reactions in pigs. This was achieved by two independent approaches: (i) 
changing 
particle 
geometry 
from 
a 
spherical 
shape 
(which 
trigger 
cardiopulmonary distress) to either rod- or disk-shape morphology and (ii) by 
physically adhering spheres to the surface of erythrocytes. These approaches 
bypasses particle surface engineering approaches to prevent robust macrophage 
recognition as well as the use of immunological or pharmacological modulators to 
reduce/overcome nanomedicine related adverse cardiopulmonary distress. 
 
Intravenous administration of liposomal and polymeric nanopharmaceuticals is 
known to incite autonomic, muco-cutaneous and cardiopulmonary reactions in some 
human patients1-5. Symptoms include fever, chills, wheezing, facial swelling, flushing, 
rash, coughing, shortness of breath, tachypnea, hypertension/hypotension and chest and 
back pain. These symptoms range from light to severe and are not initiated by pre-
existing allergen-reactive immunoglobulins (e.g., IgE type antibodies)4,5.  
The underlying mechanism(s) behind intravenous injection reactions to 
nanopharmaceuticals is poorly understood. Inadvertent activation of the complement 
system, which is the first line of the body’s defence against foreign intruders, has been 
suggested to be a causal factor4,5. Liberated complement anaphylatoxins C3a and C5a 
can modulate the function of responder immune cells such as mast cells, neutrophils, 
basophils, eosinophils and macrophages causing rapid release of a secondary mediators 
that negatively affect the cardiovascular system4,6,7. Nanopharmaceutical-mediated 
cardiopulmonary responses in sensitive human subjects are reproducible in pigs, which 
include a massive increase in pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP) and decline in the 
systemic arterial pressure (SAP)8. Moreover, earlier studies have shown a role for 
Kommentert [TEM1]: Either or – I would not include 
the slash 
  
 
Pa
ge 3 
 
complement activation and particularly C5a in the development of cardiopulmonary 
distress in pigs9.  
Unlike humans, pigs (and sheep) have resident pulmonary intravascular 
macrophages (PIMs)10,11. PIMs instantaneously ingest intravenously injected particles 
and subsequently release large quantities of thromboxane A2 (TxA2), prostaglandins 
and 
prostacyclins 
that 
correlate 
with 
periods 
of 
peak 
vasoconstriction, 
bronchoconstriction and pulmonary hypertension11. Furthermore, earlier studies have 
demonstrated that newborn lambs prior to developing PIMs show no changes in PAP 
after particle injection12. Within two weeks of birth, lambs develop a population of 
PIMs, which is accompanied by increased lung accumulation of injected particles with 
a concomitant increase in PAP and TxA2 production12. Collectively, these observations 
suggest that PIMs on robust phagocytosis may induce anaphylaxis. Complement 
anaphylatoxins may further modulate the function of PIMs as well as other immune 
cells and aggravate cardiopulmonary reactions13. For instance, C5a can synergistically 
enhance Toll-like receptor-induced production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and 
further promote TxA2 release14. In line with the role of macrophages in anaphylaxis, a 
recent hypothesis has suggested that human subjects who are sensitive to 
nanopharmaceutical administration presumably have a subset of highly responsive 
resident macrophages in pulmonary circulation15. Indeed, there are suggestions of 
induction of pulmonary macrophages in subjects with liver abnormalities and other 
hepato-pulmonary diseases10,11,16,17. 
Accordingly, methods to circumvent robust macrophage association and 
internalization may present an attractive mean to limit nanopharmaceutical-mediated 
cardiopulmonary distress. Surface modification of nanoparticles with poly(ethylene 
glycol) (PEG) is a well-established strategy to combat rapid macrophage interception18. 
Kommentert [TEM2]: I would avoid parenthesis here 
– either delete sheep or include in full without 
parenthesis. 
  
 
Pa
ge 4 
 
Unfortunately, acute adverse injection reactions with PEGylated liposomes and 
nanoparticles still persist in some human subjects as well as in pigs4,5,8,9,18-20. Indeed, 
PEGylated particles can not only trigger complement activation18-22, but they are also 
prone to rapid recognition by a subset of monocyte/macrophage populations 
independent of opsonization processes23,24.  
If macrophages in the pulmonary circulation play an important role in 
anaphylaxis, then it is imperative to prevent particle-macrophage interaction within the 
first few minutes of injection where reactions typically develop. Recently, it was shown 
that particle shape could be a pivotal parameter in combating recognition by 
macrophages25-28. Parallel to these attempts, particle ‘hitch-hiking’ on erythrocytes also 
afford protection to robust particle ingestion by macrophages in contact with the 
blood29,30. Here, we employ these strategies, which may be applicable to different 
clinical scenarios and show that by leveraging both particle shape modifications and 
erythrocyte ‘hitch-hiking’, dampening or overcoming particle-mediated adverse 
cardiopulmonary reactions on bolus injection occurs.  
 
Particle shape. We utilized carboxylated polystyrene particles of spherical, prolate 
ellipsoidal (rods), and oblate ellipsoidal (disks) shapes bearing a comparable range of 
Gaussian curvatures (Figure 1). We assessed propensity of these particles to 1) incite 
complement in pig31 and human blood21,22, and 2) induce haemodynamic disturbances 
in vivo in the pig model8,9. 
The results in Figure 2a&b show the effect of the particle shape on time-
dependent complement activation in the pig blood. Complement activation was 
monitored through measurements of sC5b-9 (a nonlytic soluble marker of the terminal 
pathway of the complement system and a sensitive measure of the activation of the 
  
 
Pa
ge 5 
 
whole complement cascade) and anaphykatoxin C5a21,22,32, relative to a zymosan (an 
established potent activator of the complement system) response. Absolute values of 
complement activation products are given in Supplementary Figure S1. We compared 
complement activation at an equivalent surface area for each particle type (~14,500 
mm2/mL of blood). Spheres (500 nm) did not incite complement within the first 5 min 
of incubation. At later time-points some complement activation occurred, which was 
statistically significant (Figure 2a&b). Similar to spheres, rods and disks did not induce 
complement activation within the first 5 min, but later complement activation was 
robust and more profound than spheres. Since stretching spheres at high temperature 
generated rods and disks, these conditions may have created complement-activating 
surface domains due to altered polystyrene re-packaging and configuration. Indeed, 
alterations in polymer configuration can incite complement through different 
pathways.33 
We further observed a similar time-dependent complement activation (through 
measurements of C3bc, C3a, C5a and sC5b-9) profile by the particles in the human 
blood, but unlike pig blood complement activation by all particles were comparable at 
late time points (Supplementary Figure S2). The reasons for these differences are not 
clear, but may be related to differences in protein corona on particles in pig and human 
blood and subsequent complement activation by adsorbed proteins. Since these 
particles did not trigger complement activation instantaneously in porcine and human 
blood, we next assessed haemodynamic responses on particle injection in pigs.  
 
Particles were injected intravenously at an equivalent surface area (~114,300 
mm2/20 kg body weight) into pigs in a total volume of 5-10 mL over 30s to 2 min and 
they showed a different trend in cardiopulmonary responses. Immediately on injection, 
spheres elevated PAP with a concomitant decline in SAP (Figure 2c & d). 
  
 
Pa
ge 6 
 
Haemodynamic disturbances, however, were restored within 5 min of injection. These 
haemodynamic responses were comparable to a 0.5 mg/kg zymosan dose 
(Supplementary Figure S3), but unlike spheres, zymosan is a potent and an 
instantaneous activator of the complement system8,21,22. However, administration of the 
prostaglandin inhibitor indomethacin attenuated zymosan- and sphere-induced rises in 
PAP (Supplemenatry Figure S3). In contrast to spheres, neither rods nor disks induced 
notable cardiopulmonary disturbances and minute PAP rises were peaked slightly later 
(Figure 2c). Afterwards, PAP rises were returned to background level by 10 min and 
there were no further elevation at 20 min post injection, despite the fact that rods and 
disks induced notable complement activation in pig blood from 10 min onward. The 
shape-dependent cardiopulmonary distress differences in pigs were also reflected by 
the ability of the spheres to elevate thromboxane B2 (TxB2), an inactive metabolite of 
the vasoconstrictor TxA2 released predominantly by macrophages, at the peak level of 
PAP34 (Figure 2e).  
These observations indicate that perturbations in haemodynamic parameters 
may be complement-independent and could be related to kinetics of particle clearance 
by PIMs. Accordingly, robust particle removal from the blood (as in spheres or 
zymosan particles) may initiate cardiopulmonary disturbances. Next, we used 
rhodamine-labelled particles to compare their clearance rates from the porcine 
circulation on intravenous injection at an equivalent particle number (1.5 x 1011 
particles/20 kg body weight). The results in Figure 3 show that both rods and disks 
circulate longer than spheres. Notably, a large proportion of spheres are cleared from 
the blood within 2 min of injection compared with rods and disks, which coincide with 
peak PAP and TxB2 levels. These findings corroborate with the suggestion that 
immediate and robust particle phagocytosis by PIMs may largely control the magnitude 
  
 
Pa
ge 7 
 
of cardiopulmonary responses15. Thus, to further show a role for PIMs in 
cardiopulmonary distress responses, we performed a second set of experiments in pigs 
where the majority of PIMs were depleted by prior administration of clodronate-
encapsulated liposomes35 (Figure 4). Indeed, on PIM depletion, carboxylated sphere 
(injected at 1.5 x 1011 particle/20 kg body weight)-mediated PAP and TxB2 rises were 
dramatically dampened. Furthermore, similar observations were obtained on injection 
of other particle types such as sulfated polystyrene particles (500 nm in size and at 1.5 
x 1011 particle/20 kg body weight) and PEGylated liposomes (200 nm in size and 10 
mg total lipid/20 kg body weight) following PIM depletion (Figure 4).  
We further used radiolabelled particles to investigate their clearance kinetics 
and biodistribution in the mouse model, which physiologically do not possess PIMs. 
The results showed similar particle shape-dependent blood clearance profile as in pigs 
(Supplementary Figure S4). After 10 min of injection the blood concentration of all 
three particle types were similar and corresponded to <10% of the administered dose. 
Biodistribution analysis confirmed eventual particle confinement to the murine 
macrophage-rich organs (liver and spleen) (Supplementary Figure S4) and 
irrespective of particle shape.  
The intravenous route of administration rapidly exposes particles to the lung 
capillaries36, thereby placing the particles in direct and immediate contact with 
pulmonary macrophages in pigs. The dimensions of rods and disks used in this study, 
however, are not sufficiently large (i.e., they are not in micron-range dimensions) to 
allow conditions of shear flow and vascular anatomy to modulate particle dynamics and 
orientation in the systemic circulation37,38. Therefore, it is highly plausible that rods and 
disks of current dimensions assume random orientation in the blood, where an end-on 
(for rods) or edge-on (for disks) approach (high curvature domains) may overcome 
Kommentert [TEM3]: How do you explain this? 
  
 
Pa
ge 8 
 
rapid sensing and recognition by macrophages, thereby explaining their slower 
clearance rate from the blood compared with spheres. Accordingly, only a fraction of 
rods and disks are sensed by PIMs at a typical blood circulation round, which correlate 
with low PAP rises.  
In agreement with this notion, J774 macrophages under static conditions also 
showed the trend of significantly faster uptake of spheres compared with rods and disks 
in the first minute of mixing, followed by comparable uptake levels at all later time 
points where particles have settled and macrophages have the opportunity to engulf 
particles of different orientations (Supplementary Figure S5). The slower clearance 
rate of rods and disks by PIMs may have therefore triggered a desensitization process39, 
and consequentially prevented the release of secondary mediators responsible for 
initiating cardiopulmonary distress. Clinical studies have shown that slowing the 
infusion rate of nanomedicines decreases the magnitude of adverse reactions in 
sensitive human subjects4,5. A plausible explanation for this phenomenon is the reduced 
rate of particle presentation to the putative induced pulmonary macrophages in sensitive 
subjects15. Finally, our results may also explain why administration of a recently 
designed artificial phospholipid disk-shaped particle did not incite adverse 
cardiopulmonary distress in pigs, as they may have been cleared from the blood at a 
slow rate by PIMs40. 
 
Particle ‘hitch-hiking’ on erythrocytes. Earlier, it was shown that adsorption of 
particles of different sizes (e.g., 110-1100 nm) and surface functionalities (e.g., 
carboxyl, amine, aldehyde and polyethylene amine) to erythrocytes occur, which 
subsequently improve their circulation times29,30. Since PIMs played a central role in 
injection reactions to particles, we reasoned that a transient delay in extraction of 
Kommentert [TEM4]: I suggest a new para here –  
  
 
Pa
ge 9 
 
spherical particles by macrophages through erythrocyte ‘hitch-hiking’ may dampen 
haemodynamic disturbances. To test this hypothesis we first used larger (750 nm) 
carboxylated polystyrene spheres to induce more efficient complement activation18,21. 
The results in Figure 4a-d show association of carboxylated spheres to both human 
and pig erythrocytes in the absence of plasma, which remain bound upon plasma 
restoration. The results further shows that spheres in free form or attached to 
erythrocytes induce comparable complement activation (Figure 4e). On intravenous 
injection, erythrocyte ‘hitch-hiked’ particles did not elevate PAP considerably, but 
unbound particles induced a substantial rise in PAP (Figure 4f). The low PAP 
responses with ‘hitch-hiked’ systems may have been caused by the presence of the 30% 
unbound particles to erythrocytes (Figure 4c). These haemodynamic observations were 
also reproducible with poor complement activating 500 nm spheres bound to 
erythrocytes (Supplementary Figure S6), which additionally highlight detection of 
increased thromboxane levels on administration of unbound particles as opposed to 
‘hitch-hiked’ particles. Taken together, these results imply that erythrocyte ‘hitch-
hiking’ decreases particle-mediated cardiopulmonary distress by avoiding early 
interactions with macrophages irrespective of complement activation.  
Finally, we suggest that erythrocyte ‘hitch-hiking’ may serve an alternative 
approach for alleviating adverse injection reaction to currently available spherically-
shaped polymeric drug carriers such as poly(cyanoacrylate) and poly(DL-lactide-co-
glycolide) and their derivative thereof1,41. Indeed, these particles can adhere to 
erythrocytes in the absence of plasma and remain bound on plasma restoration30.  
 
Conclusions. We showed for a set of different-shaped polystyrene particles how the 
kinetics of macrophage clearance dictates the extent of cardiopulmonary responses 
  
 
Pag
e 10 
 
irrespective of complement activation. Robust particle interaction with macrophage 
appears to be an important factor in the development of adverse injection reactions, 
which is presumably regulated by the type of macrophage receptor(s) and associated 
signalling. Although, the identity of these receptors remains unknown, we dampened 
cardiopulmonary distress in pigs by two independent approaches that attenuated rapid 
particle-macrophage interactions. The first approach was to use particles displaying rod 
or disk morphologies with dimensions below 500 nm. The second approach resolved 
adverse injection reaction to spherical particles through their prior adherence to 
erythrocytes. These strategies avoided the use of immunological or pharmacological 
manipulations42,43 and did not require prior particle surface modification with 
polymers33,44,45. These ‘simple-by-design’ approaches may be extended to PRINT 
technology (Particle Replication in Non-wetting Templates)46 for identification of other 
geometries and particle dimensions for overcoming injection-related reactions. Even 
with spherically shaped particles, erythrocyte “hitch-hiking” may provide a viable 
clinical solution for nanomedicine administration and salvage the use of currently 
available polymeric-based drug carriers for different therapeutic interventions. Finally, 
we suggest that PIMs act as ballerinas in particle-mediated injection reactions, while 
the exact role of complement needs to be explored in detail. Although inadvertent 
complement activation may still play a role in injection reactions, our observations, 
however, suggest that in vitro complement assessment alone may not be a sufficiently 
sensitive approach to predict adverse injection reactions, and for preselecting patients 
for safe administration of nanopharmaceuticals.  
  
 
 
  
 
Pag
e 11 
 
Methods 
 
Preparation and characterization of particles 
Plain carboxylated polystyrene particles of 200, 500 and 750 nm and sulfated 
polystyrene particles (500 nm) were purchased from Polysciences Inc. (Warrington, 
PA). For some studies FITC- or rhodamine-labelled carboxylated polystyrene particles 
were used. The 200 nm particles were stretched into rods and disks either by a one-
dimensional or two-dimensional film stretching method, respectively, as previously 
described27. Briefly, 1013 polystyrene spheres were first embedded into a hot water 
soluble polyvinyl alcohol film (10% w/v in water) with 2% (w/v) glycerol. Films were 
then mounted and mechanically stretched in either one or two dimensions in oil at 
120°C. Films were then dissolved in 70°C water for 2 hours and then centrifuged at 
8,000 g to isolate the particles. Particle suspensions were centrifuged in water 10 more 
times and finally passed through a 170 µm filter. Scanning electron micrographs were 
taken on an FEI XL40 and imaged at 5-10 kV acceleration voltage at 5 mm working 
distance.  
PEGylated liposomes (100 and 200 nm, respectively) resembling Doxil in 
lipid composition and doxorubicin content were prepared as described before32. Size 
analysis was performed by Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis following sample dilution 
(x106) with 10 mM NaCl and monitored with an LM20 NanoSight mounted with a blue 
(405 nm) laser (Malvern Instruments, UK) using the Nanosight 2.3 software for data 
analysis32. 
 
In vitro complement activation in whole blood 
For activation of the complement system, blood was drawn from healthy human 
subjects according to local approved protocols and individual consent into blood tubes 
containing the anticoagulant lepirudin (Refludan®, Hoechst, Frankfurt am main, 
Germany), which does not affect complement system47. Pig blood was also collected in 
lepirudin blood tubes. Measurements on human whole blood (WB) were based on three 
individual donors.  Measurements on pig WB were done in three different experiments 
using blood from a healthy pig. Particle concentration was normalized to yield constant 
exposed surface area. Briefly, 20 μL particles, PBS or zymosan (0.2 mg/mL) were 
added to WB corresponding to a volume of ~80 μL plasma (i.e 160 μL human WB and 
120 μL Pig WB) and incubated at 37°C for a range of time points (1-30 min) followed 
by dilution in cold diluent containing EDTA to stop complement activation. After 
centrifugation, human C3bc and sC5b-9 was quantified by ELISA as described 
elsewhere48. Pig sC5b-9 determination was done as described earlier31. Human and pig 
C5a was quantified using commercial available kits (Hycult, Uden, the Netherlands). 
For particles bound to erythrocytes, the blood was pretreated as stated below.  
 
Interaction between C3a and particles 
In addition to the complement markers above, C3a was also included to assess 
complement activation. However, due to a reduced level of measured C3a in plasma 
when particles were present, a potential interaction between C3a and particles was 
investigated. Purified human C3a (Hycult, Uden, The Netherlands) was mixed with a 
pool of human EDTA-treated plasma from 9 donors, reaching final C3a concentrations 
of 0-5400 ng/mL. This concentration range was selected to mimic the concentrations 
reached in zymosan-induced in vitro complement responses. Accordingly, the three 
particle shapes were introduced in amounts mimicking the incubations for in vitro 
complement activation. After 30 min incubation at 37°C, particles were pelleted and 
Kommentert [TEM5]: This cannot be correct. We 
never use pools of human whole blood (only of serum 
and plasma) in order not to have incompatibility 
reactions. 
  
 
Pag
e 12 
 
the concentration of C3a in the supernatant was measured by ELISA (Hycult, Uden, 
the Netherlands) and compared with plasma samples incubated without particles.  
 
Haemodynamic measurements in pigs 
In vivo studies were performed on Yorkshire pigs (23-27 kg). This method has 
previously been fully detailed and validated, and approved by Semmelweis University 
Animal Subject Review Committee8,9,42. Briefly, each pig was randomly selected and 
initially sedated with 40 mg/kg ketamine and then anesthetized with sodium 
pentobarbital (25-150 mg/h). A catheter was advanced into the right jugular vein and 
into the pulmonary artery for measurement of PAP and SAP. A second catheter was 
placed through the right femoral artery into the distal aorta, measuring systemic arterial 
pressure. Electrocardiogram and respiratory output was also continuously recorded and 
blood samples were drawn through the left jugular vein before and following particle 
injection to monitor blood markers. For particles bound to erythrocytes, blood samples 
were initially drawn into lepirudin tubes and used for erythrocyte isolation. Particles 
were administered through the left jugular vein in a total volume of 5-10 mL in injection 
saline. For treatment with indomethacin, PBS was slowly added to a solution of 6.5 
mg/mL in ethanol, to reach a final indomethacin concentration of 2.6 mg/mL in 40% 
ethanol. A total dose of 1 mg/kg was slowly administered to the pigs 10-15 min before 
particle injection. In some experiments, particles were injected 24 h after PIM 
depletion. The latter was achieved with 4 intravenous infusions of clodronate-
encapsulated multi-lamellar egg phosphatidylcholine/cholesterol (mole ratio 7:3) 
liposomes of 800-1700 nm range (corresponding to 1.0 g clodronate/10 kg body 
weight) once every 12 h35. Control animals received an equal volume of empty 
liposomes. Fifteen random biopsy lung specimens per animal (n = 2 pigs per group) 
were selected for assessment of PIMs stained by Monastral blue (injected intravenously 
at a dose of 5mg/kg in saline 1 h before particle administration)35. Slides, after fixation 
in 10% buffered formalin and subsequent dehydration and paraffin embedding were 
sectioned into 4-5 µM thickness and then de-parrafinized, rehydrated and stained with 
eosin. Finally, slides were analysed for the number of positive PIM cells per high-
powered field.  
Thromboxane B2 was measured from the extracted blood plasma samples using 
a commercial thromboxane B2 Express EIA kit (Cayman Chemical, Ann Arbor, MI).  
 
Attachment and characterization of particles to erythrocytes 
Freshly drawn WB samples were centrifuged at 1,200 g for 7 min to pellet cells. 
Plasma was removed and stored for later use, and buffy coat was discarded. 
Erythrocytes were then washed in PBS 3 times. No haemolysis was observed during 
the handling. The final erythrocyte number was counted (Tali Image cytometer, 
Invitrogen USA) and mixed with particles dispersed in PBS in an erythrocyte:particle 
ratio of ~2:1 which was found to be optimal, and incubated 37°C for 30 min to allow 
particle adhesion. Lepirudin-anticoagulated plasma was then added enabling 
complement activation to occur, following the procedure described above. For 
preparations with unbound particles, erythrocytes were first incubated in presence of 
PBS, then reconstituted with plasma, and finally mixed with particles before 
complement activation. All samples were thereby treated identically, with the exception 
of the time of particle addition. When particles were absent, PBS was used to achieve 
constant volume. Samples with bound particles also contained some particles that were 
free. Thus, samples and injections with “bound” particles contained the same amount 
Kommentert [TEM6]: Include city and state (2-letter), 
USA not necessary 
Kommentert [TEM7]: Needs explanation: – before 
complement activation? Did not the particles bind to 
the red cells in this system after plasma and particles 
are substituted? 
  
 
Pag
e 13 
 
of particles than “unbound” particles, although not all of them were physically bound 
to cells. 
Characterization of the interaction between particles and erythrocytes were 
made on samples after activation, and inhibition of the complement system. For 
scanning electron microscopy, samples were diluted with 4% formaldehyde, and left at 
room temperature overnight. Thereafter a small volume was left drying on a silicon 
wafer and gently washed with water. After complete evaporation, a 20 nm gold layer 
was applied (Leica EM SCD005), and monitored using a JSM-6320F scanning electron 
microscope at 10 kV. 
For FACS characterization, reacted complement samples were diluted in PBS 
to a total erythrocyte dilution of 104 and monitored on a BD FACSArray flow cytometer 
with flow rate of 0.5 μL/s and side scatter threshold of 3,000.  
For light microscopy, samples were placed between two cover slips, and 
monitored on a Leica AF6000LX microscope using a 63x and 100x oil immersion 
objective (NA. 1.46) with a 1.6 magnification in DIC mode. Two filters (Ex BP 475/40 
nm and Em BP 530/50 nm) were used to detect FITC-labelled spheres, and a 
background subtraction was made on all images to reduce dust-induced noise.  
 
 
In vivo circulation and biodistribution studies  
The blood clearance of rhodamine-labelled particles (spheres, rods and disks) 
was monitored after a single intravenous injection (1.5 x 1011 particles/25kg body 
weight) into pigs (n=2). At selected time points blood samples were removed and 
analysed for the presence of particles. The blood concentration of particles was 
estimated from blood samples containing known quantities of labelled particles. 
In some experiments, spheres, rods and disks were radiolabelled with 3H-oleic 
acid (Moravek Biochemicals) for biodistribution studies in mice. Briefly, 20% w/v 
particle suspension in water was added to a solution containing 100 µL [3H]-oleic acid, 
100 μL ethanol, and 25 μL tetrahydrofuran for 30 min with constant rotation. Particles 
were washed ten times at 15,000 g for 30 min via centrifugation to remove 
unincorporated tritium and re-suspended in saline prior to injection. For circulation and 
biodistribution studies, 5x109 radiolabeled particles were injected via tail vein into 
randomly grouped healthy female BALB/c mice (18-20 g). At specified time points, 
blood was drawn and mice were sacrificed via CO2 overdose. Known weights of blood, 
liver, spleen, kidney, heart, lungs, brain, and skin were harvested and dissolved 
overnight at 60 °C in 5 mL of Solvable (Perkin Elmer). The next day, Ultima Gold 
(Perkin Elmer) was added to dissolved organ samples and [3H] content was measured 
using a TriCarb 2100TR scintillation counter. All mouse protocols were approved by 
the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at the University of 
California, Santa Barbara, CA). 
 
In vitro macrophage uptake  
Radiolabelled particles of different shapes were prepared as described above. 
J774 macrophages were cultured in standard cell culture conditions (37oC in 5% CO2) 
in high glucose DMEM (ATCC), 10% FBS, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. 1.5x104 
J774 cells per well were seeded for 24 h in a 96-well plate. Prior to the experiment, 
particles were resuspended in DMEM containing 20% (v/v) fresh BALB/c serum, at 
0.1 mg/mL and introduced to plated J774 cells following removal of DMEM containing 
FBS and penicillin/streptomycin and 3 washes with PBS. At specified time points, 
particle solutions were removed from cells, and cells were washed 3x with PBS to 
Kommentert [TEM8]: Need explanation. Was 
complement activation inhibited? 
Kommentert [TEM9]: City and country 
  
 
Pag
e 14 
 
remove unbound or non-internalized particles. Cells were immediately incubated at 
60°C for 1 h in 5 mL of Solvable and then analyzed (as described above) for [3H] 
content. 
 
 
  
 
Pag
e 15 
 
Acknowledgements  
SMM acknowledges financial support by the Danish Agency for Science, Technology 
and Innovation (Det Strategiske Forskningsråd), reference 09-065746. Financial 
support for the complement studies was obtained from the European Community's 
Seventh Framework Programme under grant agreement number 602699 (DIREKT). 
We acknowledge Nader Payemi (University of Copenhagen) in assisting with scanning 
electron microscopy studies and Hycult Biotech for providing the pig C5a ELISA kit. 
 
Authors Contribution 
PPW and SMM conceived the idea. PPW performed complement activation studies in 
human blood and characterized particle-erythrocyte interactions. PPW and RU 
contributed to in vivo porcine studies and TxB2 measurements. SM and ACA designed 
particles 
and 
macrophage 
and 
biodistribution 
studies. 
ACA 
synthesized 
and characterized 
polystyrene 
particles, 
conducted 
in 
vivo 
circulation 
and biodistribution studies in mice as well as in vitro uptake studies in J774 cells. VG 
conducted 
in 
vivo 
circulation 
and 
biodistribution 
studies 
in 
mice. 
PN performed complement activation studies in pig blood. All authors discussed and 
analyzed data. PPW and SMM wrote the paper with contributions from all co-authors. 
 
Additional information 
Supplementary information is available in the online version of the paper. 
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to SMM. 
 
Competing interests. The authors declare no competing financial interest. 
 
 
Kommentert [TEM10]: Specify that all co-authors 
“critically revised the manuscript” as stated in the 
Vancouvers? 
  
 
Pag
e 16 
 
References 
1 
Kattan, J. et al. Phase I clinical trial and pharmacokinetic evaluation of doxorubicin 
carried by polyisohexylcyanoacrylate nanoparticles. Invest. New Drugs 10, 191-199 
(1992). 
2 
Laing, R. B., Milne, L. J., Leen, C. L., Malcolm, G. P. & Steers, A. J. Anaphylactic 
reactions to liposomal amphotericin. Lancet 344, 682 (1994). 
3 
Uziely, B. et al. Liposomal doxorubicin: antitumor activity and unique toxicities during 
two complementary phase I studies. J. Clin. Oncol. 13, 1777-1785 (1995). 
4 
Moghimi, S. M., Wibroe, P. P., Helvig, S. Y., Farhangrazi, Z. S. & Hunter, A. C. 
Genomic perspectives in inter-individual adverse responses following nanomedicine 
administration: The way forward. Adv. Drug Deliver. Rev. 64, 1385-1393 (2012). 
5 
Szebeni, J. Complement activation-related pseudoallergy: a stress reaction in blood 
triggered by nanomedicines and biologicals. Mol. Immunol. 61, 163-173, (2014). 
6 
Kastl, S. P. et al. In human macrophages the complement component C5a induces the 
expression of oncostatin M via AP-1 activation. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 28, 
498-503 (2008). 
7 
Woodruff, T. M., Nandakumar, K. S. & Tedesco, F. Inhibiting the C5-C5a receptor 
axis. Mol. Immunol 48, 1631-1642 (2011). 
8 
Szebeni, J. et al. A porcine model of complement-mediated infusion reactions to drug 
carrier nanosystems and other medicines. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 64, 1706-1716 (2012). 
9 
Szebeni, J. et al. Complement activation-related cardiac anaphylaxis in pigs: role of 
C5a anaphylatoxin and adenosine in liposome-induced abnormalities in ECG and heart 
function. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 290, H1050-1058 (2006). 
10 
Warner, A. E. Pulmonary intravascular macrophages. Role in acute lung injury. Clin. 
Chest Med. 17, 125-135 (1996). 
11 
Schneberger, D., Aharonson-Raz, K. & Singh, B. Pulmonary intravascular 
macrophages and lung health: what are we missing? Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol. 
Physiol. 302, L498-503 (2012). 
12 
Longworth, K. E., Westgate, A. M., Grady, M. K., Westcott, J. Y. & Staub, N. C. 
Development of pulmonary intravascular macrophage function in newborn lambs. J. 
Appl. Physiol. 73, 2608-2615 (1992). 
13 
Csukás, D., Urbanics, R., Wéber, G., Rosivall, L. & Szebeni, J. Pulmonary 
intravascular macrophages: prime suspects as cellular mediators of porcine CARPA. 
Eur. J. Nanomed. 7, 27-36 (2015). 
14 
Zhang, X. et al. Regulation of Toll-like receptor-mediated inflammatory response by 
complement in vivo. Blood 110, 228-236 (2007). 
15 
Moghimi, S. M. Complement propriety and conspiracy in nanomedicine: perspective 
and a hypothesis. Nucleic Acid Ther. doi:10.1089/nat.2015.0587(2016). 
16 
Keyes, J. W., Jr., Wilson, G. A. & Quinonest, J. D. An evaluation of lung uptake of 
colloid during liver imaging. J. Nucl. Med. 14, 687-691 (1973). 
17 
Imarisio, J. J. Liver scan showing intense lung uptake in neoplasia and infection. J. 
Nucl. Med. 16, 188-190 (1975). 
18 
Moghimi, S. M. et al. Complement activation cascade triggered by PEG-PL engineered 
nanomedicines and carbon nanotubes: the challenges ahead. J. Control. Release 146, 
175-181, (2010). 
19 
Chanan-Khan, A. et al. Complement activation following first exposure to pegylated 
liposomal doxorubicin (Doxil): possible role in hypersensitivity reactions. Ann. Oncol. 
14, 1430-1437 (2003). 
20 
Szebeni, J. et al. Liposome-induced complement activation and related 
cardiopulmonary distress in pigs: factors promoting reactogenicity of Doxil and 
AmBisome. Nanomedicine 8, 176-184 (2012). 
21 
Moghimi, S. M., Hamad, I., Andresen, T. L., Jorgensen, K. & Szebeni, J. Methylation 
of the phosphate oxygen moiety of phospholipid-methoxy(polyethylene glycol) 
  
 
Pag
e 17 
 
conjugate prevents PEGylated liposome-mediated complement activation and 
anaphylatoxin production. FASEB J. 20, 2591-2593 (2006). 
22 
Andersen, A. J. et al. Single-walled carbon nanotube surface control of complement 
recognition and activation. ACS Nano 7, 1108-1119 (2013). 
23 
Moghimi, S. M. & Murray, J. C. Poloxamer-188 revisited: a potentially valuable 
immune modulator? J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 88, 766-768 (1996).  
24 
Laverman, P., Carstens, M. G., Storm, G. & Moghimi, S. M. Recognition and clearance 
of methoxypoly(ethyleneglycol)2000-grafted liposomes by macrophages with 
enhanced phagocytic capacity. Implications in experimental and clinical oncology. 
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1526, 227-229 (2001). 
25 
Kolhar, P. et al. Using shape effects to target antibody-coated nanoparticles to lung and 
brain endothelium. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, 10753-10758, (2013). 
26 
Lu, Z. S., Qiao, Y., Zheng, X. T., Chan-Park, M. B. & Li, C. M. Effect of particle shape 
on phagocytosis of CdTe quantum dot-cystine composites. MedChemComm 1, 84-86 
(2010). 
27 
Champion, J. A. & Mitragotri, S. Role of target geometry in phagocytosis. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 103, 4930-4934 (2006). 
28 
Geng, Y. et al. Shape effects of filaments versus spherical particles in flow and drug 
delivery. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2, 249-255 (2007). 
29 
Chambers, E. & Mitragotri, S. Prolonged circulation of large polymeric nanoparticles 
by non-covalent adsorption on erythrocytes. J. Control. Release 100, 111-119 (2004). 
30 
Anselmo, A. C. et al. Delivering nanoparticles to lungs while avoiding liver and spleen 
through adsorption on red blood cells. ACS Nano 7, 11129-11137 (2013). 
31 
Jansen, J. H., Hogasen, K. & Mollnes, T. E. Extensive complement activation in 
hereditary porcine membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis type II (porcine dense 
deposit disease). Am. J. Pathol. 143, 1356-1365 (1993). 
32 
Wibroe, P. P., Ahmadvand, D., Oghabian, M. A., Yaghmur, A. & Moghimi, S. M. An 
integrated assessment of morphology, size, and complement activation of the 
PEGylated liposomal doxorubicin products Doxil®, Caelyx®, DOXOrubicin, and 
SinaDoxosome. J. Control. Release 221, 1-8 (2016). 
33 
Hamad, I. et al. Distinct polymer architecture mediates switching of complement 
activation pathways at the nanosphere-serum interface: implications for stealth 
nanoparticle engineering. ACS Nano 4, 6629-6638 (2010). 
34 
Montalescot, G. et al. Evaluation of thromboxane production and complement 
activation during myocardial ischemia in patients with angina pectoris. Circulation 84, 
2054-2062 (1991). 
35 
Gaca, J. G. et al. Prevention of acute lung injury in swine: depletion of pulmonary 
intravascular macrophages using liposomal clodronate. J. Surg. Res. 112, 19-25 (2003) 
36 
Moghimi, S. M., Hunter, A. C. & Andresen, T. L. Factors controlling nanoparticle 
pharmacokinetics: an integrated analysis and perspective. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. 
Toxicol. 52, 481-503 (2012). 
37 
Decuzzi, P. et al. Size and shape effects in the biodistribution of intravascularly injected 
particles. J. Control. Release 141, 320-327 (2010). 
38 
Decuzzi, P., Lee, S., Bhushan, B. & Ferrari, M. A theoretical model for the margination 
of particles with blood vessels. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 33, 179-190 (2005). 
39 
Castells, M. Desensitization for drug allergy. Curr. Opin. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 6, 
476-481 (2006). 
40 
Bugna, S. et al. Surprising lack of liposome-induced complement activation by 
artificial 1,3-diamidophospholipids in vitro. Nanomedicine 12, 845-849 (2016). 
41 
Moghimi, S. M. Recent devlopments in polymeric nanoparticle engineering and their 
applications in experimental and clinical oncology. Anti-Cancer Agent. Med. Chem. 6, 
553-561 (2006). 
42 
Szebeni, J. et al. Hemodynamic changes induced by liposomes and liposome-
encapsulated hemoglobin in pigs: a model of pseudollargic cardiopulmonary reactions 
  
 
Pag
e 18 
 
to liposomes. Role of complement and inhibition by soluble CR1 and anti-C5a 
antibody. Circulation 99, 2302-2309 (1999). 
43 
Meszaros, T. et al. Factor H inhibits complement activation induced by liposomal and 
micellar drugs and the therapeutic antibody rituximab in vitro. Nanomedicine 
doi:10.1016/j.nano.2015.11.019 (2016).  
44 
Wu, Y. Q. et al. Protection of nonself surfaces from complement attack by factor H-
binding peptides: implications for therapeutic medicine. J. Immunol. 186, 4269-4277 
(2011). 
45 
Rodriguez, P. L. et al. Minimal “self” peptides that inhibit phagocytic clearance and 
enhance delivery of nanoparticles. Science 339, 971-975 (2013). 
46  
Perry, J. L., Herlihy, K. P., Napier, M. E. & Desimone, J. M. PRINT: a novel platform 
toward shape and size specific nanoparticle theranostics. Acc. Chem. Res. 44, 990-998 
(2011). 
47 
Mollnes, T. E. et al. Essential role of the C5a receptor in E-coli-induced oxidative burst 
and phagocytosis revealed by a novel lepirudin-based human whole blood model of 
inflammation. Blood 100, 1869-1877 (2002). 
 
48 
Bergseth, G. et al. An international serum standard for application in assays to detect 
human complement activation products. Mol. Immunol. 56, 232-239 (2013). 
 
 
  
 
Pag
e 19 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Graphical and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) representation of 
spheres, rods, and disks. a: True relative size and shape with colours representing 
Gaussian curvature (assuming rods and disks as prolate and oblate spheroids, 
respectively). b-d: SEM images of spheres (b), rods (c) and disks (d). Scale bars: 500 
nm. 
 
 
  
 
Pag
e 20 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Changes in complement activation in pig blood and pig haemodynamic 
parameters after exposure to spheres (circles), rods (triangles) and disks (squares). a & 
b: Time-dependent complement activation in pig whole blood shown as percentage of 
formed sC5b-9 and C5a, respectively, relative to a 0.2 mg/mL zymosan response. 
Values are given as mean ± s.d., n=3 (sC5b-9: p<0.01 for spheres and disks at 10 and 
30 min, and p<0.001 for rods at 10 and 30 min compared with control/background 
level). Complement activation by particles was compared on an equivalent surface area 
of ~14,500 mm2/mL of blood. Absolute values of complement activation products are 
presented in Supplementary Figure S1. c: Time-dependent changes in pulmonary 
arterial pressure (PAP) on particle injection. Particles (given on an equivalent surface 
  
 
Pag
e 21 
 
area of ~114,300 mm2/20 kg body weight) were injected at zero time. Inset: Integrated 
area under the curve (AUC) of the changes in PAP during the first 10 min of injection. 
d: Changes in the systemic arterial pressure (SAP) on particle injection.  e: Changes in 
levels of thromboxane B2 (TxB2) on particle injection. The results from pig 
experiments are expressed as mean ± s.e.m. of injections (n=3). 
 
 
  
 
Pag
e 22 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Circulation profile of spheres, rods and disks following intravenous injection 
into pigs. Spheres are cleared faster compared to rods and disks. The inset is a magnified 
representation of early time points. The results are expressed as mean ± s.e.m (n=3).  
 
 
  
 
Pag
e 23 
 
  
 
Figure 4. Dampening of particle-mediated haemodynamic changes in pigs following 
pulmonary intravascular macrophage (PIM) depletion. a: number of positive PIM cells 
per high-powered field in lung samples untreated and clodronate-liposome-treated pigs 
(the results represents 15 random biopsy lung specimens per animal ± s.e.m.; n=2 pigs 
per group). b: Time-dependent changes in pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP) in 
control 
and 
clodronate-liposome-treated 
pigs. 
Animals 
were 
injected 
intravenously with spherical carboxylated polystyrene particles of 500 nm (1.5 x 
1011 particle/20 kg body weight) at zero time. c: Comparison of maximum PAP in 
control and clodronate-liposome-treated pigs on intravenous injection of 500 nm 
  
 
Pag
e 24 
 
carboxylated polystyrene particles (C-500nm), 750 nm sulfated polystyrene 
particles (S-750nm) and 200 nm PEGylated liposomes (Lip 200nm). Polystyrene 
particles were injected at a dose of 1.5 x 1011 particle/20 kg body weight and 
liposomes at a dose of 10 mg total lipid/20 kg body weight. d:  Changes in levels of 
thromboxane B2 (TxB2) on particle injection in control and clodronate-liposome-
treated pigs. The results in b, c & d are mean ± s.e.m. (n=2 pigs per group). Open 
circles and columns represent animals pre-treated with control liposomes and black 
squares and columns represent pigs pre-treated with clodronate-encapsulated 
liposomes, respectively. *p<0.05. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Pag
e 25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Overcoming adverse reactions to spheres through erythrocyte ‘hitch-hiking’. 
a: DIC/fluorescence images of adhered 750 nm carboxylated polystyrene particles to 
human and pig (inset) erythrocytes. Scale bars: 10 µm. b: SEM image of a human 
erythrocyte with adhered polystyrene particles. Scale bar: 1 µm. c&d: Quantitative 
assessment of the particle-cell interaction by FACS, showing the fraction of bound 
particles and cells for human and pig (c) and how particles are distributed on cells (d). 
Values are expressed as mean ± s.e.m. of four human donors, each in biological 
duplicates, and one pig donor in biological triplicates. e: Complement responses (sC5b-
9 measurements) to erythrocyte-bound and unbound particles in human and pig whole 
blood. In c, d & e the ratio of human and pig erythrocytes to particles was 2:1 
corresponding to 1.13 x 109 and 1.69 x 109 spheres/incubation, respectively. Values are 
expressed as mean ± s.d. (see methods for statistical details). f: Haemodynamic changes 
in pigs measured by changes in pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP). Total number of 
particles injected in both cases was 8.6 x 109/20 kg body weight. Inset: Area under the 
curve (AUC) for particles that are bound (B) to erythrocytes or unbound (U). Values 
are expressed as mean ± s.e.m. for two pigs.  
 
 
