 REVIEW ARTICLE
Administration of Caffeine in Alternate Forms
Kate A. Wickham1 • Lawrence L. Spriet1
Published online: 24 January 2018
� The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
Abstract There has been recent interest in the ergogenic
effects of caffeine delivered in low doses (* 200 mg or
* 3 mg/kg body mass) and administered in forms other
than capsules, coffee and sports drinks, including chewing
gum, bars, gels, mouth rinses, energy drinks and aerosols.
Caffeinated chewing gum is absorbed quicker through the
buccal mucosa compared with capsule delivery and
absorption in the gut, although total caffeine absorption
over time is not different. Rapid absorption may be
important in many sporting situations. Caffeinated chewing
gum improved endurance cycling performance, and there is
limited evidence that repeated sprint cycling and power
production may also be improved. Mouth rinsing with
caffeine may stimulate nerves with direct links to the brain,
in addition to caffeine absorption in the mouth. However,
caffeine mouth rinsing has not been shown to have signif-
icant effects on cognitive performance. Delivering caffeine
with mouth rinsing improved short-duration, high-intensity,
repeated sprinting in normal and depleted glycogen states,
while the majority of the literature indicates no ergogenic
effect on aerobic exercise performance, and resistance
exercise has not been adequately studied. Studies with
caffeinated energy drinks have generally not examined the
individual effects of caffeine on performance, making
conclusions about this form of caffeine delivery impossible.
Caffeinated aerosol mouth and nasal sprays may stimulate
nerves with direct brain connections and enter the blood via
mucosal and pulmonary absorption, although little support
exists for caffeine delivered in this manner. Overall, more
research is needed examining alternate forms of caffeine
delivery including direct measures of brain activation and
entry of caffeine into the blood, as well as more studies
examining trained athletes and female subjects.
1 Introduction
Caffeine is a socially acceptable drug that has been used as
an ergogenic aid or performance enhancer in athletic cir-
cles for many years. It is a currently legal method of
enhancing performance in training sessions and athletic
competitions as it does not appear on the World Anti-
Doping Agency’s banned or restricted substances list. Over
the last 10 years, numerous reviews have examined dif-
ferent aspects of the efficacy of caffeine as an ergogenic aid
[1–6] and a book was published to ‘‘describe a framework
that might help the world of sport to develop a sensible and
unified view of caffeine use by athletes’’ [7]. The con-
temporary approach is to use low doses of caffeine which
exert ergogenic effects through interactions with the central
nervous system (CNS) and have minimal effects on the
physiological responses to exercise and caffeine-related
side effects [6].
The traditional form of caffeine administration in
research
and
athletic
settings
has
been
to
ingest
tablets/capsules along with water or to drink coffee. The
caffeine is quickly swallowed and the majority absorbed
into the blood from the intestine, with the possibility that a
small amount is absorbed in the buccal mucosa. Caf-
feinated sports drinks have also been studied for many
years, with most reports demonstrating that caffeine added
to a sports drink has a further performance enhancing effect
above that of a carbohydrate (CHO)-electrolyte solution
alone, as reviewed by Kovacs et al. [8], Cureton et al. [9],
and Spriet [6]. These findings will not be reviewed here,
& Lawrence L. Spriet
lspriet@uoguelph.ca
1
Human Health and Nutritional Sciences, University of
Guelph, Guelph, ON N1G 2W1, Canada
123
Sports Med (2018) 48 (Suppl 1):S79–S91
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40279-017-0848-2
 but include studies that examined the effects of caffeinated
sports drinks on cycling [10–12], running [13], golf [14]
and soccer [15, 16] performance.
Caffeine is now also available in gels, bars, gums,
lozenges and energy drinks, which may affect how quickly
the caffeine is absorbed into the blood from the buccal
mucosa and intestines. There is also recent evidence that
mouth rinsing with caffeine may activate sensors in the oral
cavity with direct connections to the brain that could ulti-
mately affect athletic performance. Lastly, manufacturers
are also suggesting that the delivery of caffeine in mouth
and nasal aerosol sprays may activate sensors with neural
links in the nose and provide a direct route for absorption in
the lungs, although no research has examined this possi-
bility. Given the interest in these so-called ‘‘alternate forms
of delivery,’’ this paper aims to examine (1) how they
affect the rate of caffeine entry into the blood versus tra-
ditional tablet or coffee administration, (2) if they stimulate
direct connections between caffeine sensors in the oral and
nasal cavities and the brain, and (3) if they are ergogenic in
training and competition situations.
2 Caffeinated Bars and Gels
Over the last decade, few studies have explored the
potential ergogenic effects of caffeinated bars and gels. To
date, only Hogervorst et al. [17] have tested the effects of
repeated dosing with caffeinated energy bars on cycling
performance and a battery of cognitive tests in 24 trained
men. The subjects completed 150 min of submaximal
cycling at 60% maximal oxygen consumption (VO2max)
followed by a 5-min rest, and a time to exhaustion protocol
at 75% VO2max. Additionally, the subjects underwent a
cognitive battery at baseline, at 70 and 140 min into the
submaximal cycle, and again at exhaustion. The conditions
were a caffeinated bar with 100 mg caffeine and 45 g
CHO, a non-caffeinated bar with 45 g CHO, or 300 mL of
a non-caloric placebo beverage, administered immediately
before and at 55 and 115 min into the submaximal cycling
protocol. The cognitive battery assessed complex cognitive
function through a Stroop test, a rapid visual information
processing (RVIP) task and a visual search test, and simple
cognitive function through an immediate recall task. Saliva
samples were collected at baseline and immediately fol-
lowing exhaustion for determination of caffeine concen-
trations. Supplementation with a caffeinated bar increased
salivary caffeine (5.93 lg/mL) compared to baseline
(0.25 lg/mL) (ratio of salivary to plasma concentra-
tions = 0.74 ± 0.08
[18]).
Supplementation
with
caf-
feinated bars improved reaction time on the Stroop test and
RVIP test during steady-state exercise and following
exhaustion and improved speed and accuracy on a visual
search test at the end of exhaustive exercise compared to
the other two conditions. The caffeinated bars also
improved time to exhaustion (1600 s) versus the non-caf-
feinated CHO bars (1150 s) and the placebo beverage
(850 s) [17].
Surprisingly, only two studies have explored the effects
of caffeinated gels on athletic performance. Cooper et al.
[19] investigated the effects of repeated dosing with caf-
feinated gels on performance of four blocks of an inter-
mittent sprint test (IST) in 12 recreationally active males.
The participants consumed either a CHO (25 g), CHO
(25 g) and caffeine (100 mg), or placebo gel 1 h prior to
the first IST block, immediately prior to the first IST block
and at the end of the second IST block. The authors
reported no significant difference between the conditions
for best sprint time, but there was a trend for faster sprint
performance in the CHO and caffeine group when com-
pared with the CHO-only and placebo gel groups. Addi-
tionally, following the third block of sprints, the CHO and
caffeine group demonstrated a significantly decreased
fatigue index and a lower rating of perceived exertion
compared to the CHO-only and placebo gel groups. In a
second study, Scott et al. [20] demonstrated that ingestion
of a CHO (21.6 g) and caffeine gel (100 mg), 10 min
before a 2000-m rowing task, significantly improved per-
formance compared to a CHO-only gel in 13 male colle-
giate athletes (CHO 471 s vs. CHO/caffeine 466 s).
Taken together, these studies suggest that bars and gels
with 100 mg caffeine improved cognitive function, time to
exhaustion, and time trial (TT) performance. Lacking from
these studies were plasma caffeine measurements, although
it could be assumed that increases would mimic the find-
ings from caffeine tablet and coffee consumption. More
research in this area is needed as caffeinated bars and gels
are key caffeine sources for athletes during training and
competition, and there is presently no work examining
female subjects.
3 Caffeinated Chewing Gum
Much of the important early work with the delivery of
caffeine in chewing gum was conducted with a military
purpose. Studies had demonstrated the ability of caffeine
delivered in capsules to reverse the prolonged wakefulness-
induced decrements in alertness, mood and performance
[21–23]. However, there is a time delay of 20–30 min
before significant amounts of caffeine leave the gut, reach
the blood and affect the CNS. Therefore, in military set-
tings where it is important to restore alertness and perfor-
mance as quickly as possible, it was hypothesized that
delivering caffeine in a chewing gum may speed the rate of
caffeine delivery to the blood by absorption through the
S80
K. A. Wickham, L. L. Spriet
123
 buccal mucosa as well as the gut [24]. Absorption of drugs
other than caffeine in a gum form had been demonstrated to
be more rapid through the buccal cavity, in part because of
the extensive vascularization in this region [24, 25]. In
addition, absorption through the buccal mucosa/cavity
avoids the first-pass metabolism which may occur in the
intestines or liver when absorbed through the gut. There-
fore, any increase in the rate of caffeine absorption with
gum could lead to a faster biological effect in the body.
To test this hypothesis, a landmark study by Kamimori
et al. [24] examined the rate of caffeine absorption by
measuring plasma caffeine concentrations at several time
points following the ingestion of capsules or chewing gum
containing either 50, 100 or 200 mg of caffeine. Each
condition had a separate group of 12 healthy male subjects
who consumed less than 300 mg caffeine/day and had
abstained from caffeine intake for 20 h and fasted for 3 h.
Blood samples were taken at 5, 15, 25, 35, 45, 55, 65 and
90 min and 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, 16 and 29 h post ingestion/
chewing. The time to reach the maximal caffeine concen-
tration was faster in the gum trials (44.2–80.4 min) versus
the capsule trials (84–120 min). However, the maximal
caffeine concentrations between capsule and gum condi-
tions and the area under the entire concentration–time
curves were not different at each of the three doses (Fig. 1).
The markedly faster rate of absorption with the gum is seen
when examining the 200-mg dose, as a large increase in
plasma caffeine concentration occurred between 5 and
15 min and to a lesser extent from 15 to 25 min (Fig. 2).
The largest increases in caffeine concentration with the
capsules were delayed until 25–35 and 35–45 min. This
study demonstrated the efficacy of delivering caffeine more
quickly with gum versus capsules, in part by uptake in the
buccal cavity along with absorption from swallowing while
chewing gum. A second study from the same group
demonstrated that plasma caffeine levels were maintained
and increased in a dose-dependent manner with three
repeated caffeine doses, each 2 h apart, when delivered in
gum form with either 50, 100 and 200 mg of caffeine [26].
These pharmacokinetic findings are useful in military and
sport situations where rapid caffeine effects are required
and need to be maintained over a known time span. It is
also possible that chewing gum may have an additional
advantage over capsule delivery during intense exercise
where splanchnic blood flow may be reduced and slow the
absorption of caffeine in the gut, but this has not been
studied to date.
3.1 Caffeinated Gum and Athletic Performance
3.1.1 Aerobic Endurance Cycling
Several studies have now examined the potential ergogenic
effect of caffeinated gum administration on aerobic-based
cycling. Ryan et al. [27] administered two sticks of caf-
feinated chewing gum (200 mg total) to college-age,
physically active males at either 35 or 5 min before exer-
cise, or 15 min into cycling at 85% VO2max to exhaustion
(*30–35 min). A placebo was given at the other two time
points and all three points during the control trial. The
caffeinated gum did not improve endurance performance at
any of the administration times [27]. In a follow-up study,
Fig. 1 Mean caffeine plasma
concentration profiles following
a 50-, 100- or 200-mg dose of
caffeine, delivered as either a
capsule or gum formulation to
healthy male volunteers (12
subjects in each of the seven
treatment groups) Reproduced
from Kamimori et al. [24], with
permission
Caffeine in Alternate Forms
S81
123
 Ryan et al. [28] gave caffeinated gum (300 mg) or non-
caffeinated gum to well-trained male cyclists at either 120,
60 or 5 min before cycling at 75% VO2max for 15 min,
followed by a TT where 7 kJ/kg body mass (BM) of work
was completed as fast as possible. Caffeine improved
cycling TT performance only in the trial where the caffeine
was administered 5 min before exercise [28]. Lane et al.
[29] examined the effects of 3 mg/kg BM of caffeine
delivered in chewing gum to 12 well-trained males and 12
well-trained females during a TT that simulated the cycling
course at the 2012 London Olympic Games (females
29.35 km, males 43.83 km), lasting 50–60 min. The ath-
letes chewed caffeinated gum with 2 mg/kg BM for
10 min, starting at 40 min before the TT, and another
1 mg/kg BM in the 10 min before the TT. In the placebo
trial, subjects chewed non-caffeinated gum. The subjects
also underwent two additional trials, one with beetroot
juice (BRJ) and one with BRJ and caffeine. The results
were similar for females and males, and caffeine ingestion
in the caffeine trial alone and in the caffeine ? BRJ trial
significantly improved TT performance by 3–4% versus
placebo (Fig. 3). BRJ did not affect performance.
Oberlin-Brown et al. [30] had 11 well-trained male cy-
clists ride for 90 min at 63% VO2max, followed by a 20-km
TT on four occasions—to test placebo, caffeine, CHO, and
caffeine with CHO. The caffeine was administered in
50-mg sticks of gum at the start of the TT and at the
completion of 5, 10 and 15 km for a total dose of 200 mg
(2.7 mg/kg BM). There were no significant differences in
TT
performance
between
conditions,
with
all
times
between 32:20 and 32:27 min:s. It is possible that the use
of small 50-mg caffeine doses administered only at the start
of the TT and every * 8 min thereafter limited the ergo-
genic effect of caffeine in this study. Paton et al. [31]
studied
the
effects
of
administering
caffeinated
(200–300 mg) or non-caffeinated gum at the 10-km mark
of a 30-km TT in ten well-trained female and ten well-
trained male cyclists. There also was a 0.2-km sprint
(* 15 s) at the end of each 10-km section. There were no
Fig. 2 Mean caffeine plasma
concentration profiles following
a 200-mg dose of caffeine as a
capsule or gum formulation to
healthy male volunteers (12
subjects in each of the two
treatment group). Inset shows
plasma concentration profiles of
the 200-mg dose delivered in
capsule or gum formulation up
to 90 min after caffeine
administration Reproduced
from Kamimori et al. [24], with
permission
Fig. 3 Mean power output combined for males and females during
cycling time trial. Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation.
BJ beetroot juice, CAFF caffeine, CAFF ? BJ caffeine with beetroot
juice, CONT placebo. *Different from CONT and BJ (p\0.01)
Reproduced from Lane et al. [29], with permission
S82
K. A. Wickham, L. L. Spriet
123
 differences in performance during the initial 20 km of the
TT, but caffeine improved mean power by 3.8 ± 2.3% and
increased speed by 1.9% in the final 10 km and improved
sprint power by 4.0 ± 3.6% during the final sprint. Females
and males increased mean power over the final 10 km by
4.3 ± 3.4 and 3.2 ± 3.0% and increased sprint time by
1.9 ± 5.0 and 6.2 ± 5.2%, respectively.
These studies suggest that caffeine delivered in chewing
gum in a dose of * 200–300 mg is ergogenic in well-
trained females and male cyclists when delivered prior to
or during an endurance event. However, it should be noted
that no study has compared the effects of chewing gum
versus the traditional caffeine capsule ingestion on aerobic
performance in the same group of subjects.
3.1.2 Sprint Cycling and Power Events
Paton et al. [32] gave caffeinated chewing gum to nine
competitive male cyclists who completed four sets of 30-s
maximal sprints (with 30 s of active recovery at 100 W),
with five sprints/set. Subjects cycled for 5 min at 100 W
following sets 1 and 3. Following set 2, subjects cycled for
10 min at 100 W and caffeinated (240 mg/3 mg/kg BM) or
placebo gum was administered. The rate of power output
decline in sets 3 and 4 (ten sprints) was significantly
reduced by the caffeinated gum versus placebo. A second
study reported that standing shot-put performance was
improved following the administration of 100 mg caffeine
in chewing gum in nine collegiate shot-put athletes [33].
The
subjects
chewed
the
gum
immediately
before
attempting six throws (with 1 min between throws), and
the performance of the first throw and the overall perfor-
mance of all six shot-put throws was improved with caf-
feine. Although this study utilized a small sample size, the
results suggested that caffeinated gum improved perfor-
mance in sprint and power events.
There was also one study that assessed the ergogenic
effects of a caffeinated lozenge, and while this is not gum,
the lozenge is held in the mouth for several minutes [34].
The lozenge contained 420 mg of nitric oxide (NO) and
70 mg of caffeine compared to a non-caloric placebo
lozenge. The treatment was administered to 15 moderately
trained cyclists (eight males, seven females) 10 min prior
to the beginning of a cycling protocol where subjects
cycled for 8 min at 50%, 6 min at 65% and 6 min at 75%
VO2max, and then rested for 5 min before completing a
21.15-km TT. TT performance was significantly faster
(2.1%) with the caffeinated lozenge (2424 s) compared to
placebo (2477 s). In this study, the authors could not dis-
tinguish between the effects of NO and caffeine, and
therefore could not be certain that caffeine was the only
active ingredient [34].
4 Caffeine Mouth Rinsing
Caffeine mouth rinsing is a relatively new form of caffeine
supplementation. This modality gained traction alongside
the emerging interest associated with the potential ergo-
genic effects of CHO mouth rinsing [35, 36]. It was orig-
inally proposed that caffeine mouth rinsing for 5–20 s
elicited its ergogenic effects by allowing caffeine mole-
cules to competitively inhibit adenosine through binding to
adenosine receptors located in the mouth [37, 38]. This
interaction was thought to increase permeability of the
buccal mucosa therefore triggering caffeine absorption into
the blood stream [39]. However, the time for this to occur
would be short and the only study examining caffeine
mouth rinsing that measured blood caffeine concentrations
reported no increase in blood caffeine concentrations [40].
Evidently, a more feasible mechanism of action has been
proposed to explain the performance benefits associated
with caffeine mouth rinsing. The oral cavity is decorated
with bitter taste receptor cells specifically located in the
oropharyngeal epithelia [41], and these have been shown to
be activated when exposed to caffeine [42]. It has been
proposed that activation of these bitter taste receptors can
activate gustatory neural pathways [41] and ultimately
stimulate regions of the brain associated with information
processing and reward [43, 44]. These same regions are
shown to be activated when participants are administered a
CHO mouth rinse [36, 43].
4.1 Cognitive Performance
Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), De
Pauw and colleagues [45] identified in ten healthy males
that caffeine mouth rinsing increased activity in the dor-
solateral prefrontal cortex and the orbitofrontal cortex,
which are brain regions associated with problem solving
and reward, respectively. Furthermore, this group demon-
strated that caffeine (1.2%) mouth rinsing, when adminis-
tered as a 25-mL solution for 20 s, improved reaction time
on an incongruent Stroop task (where the color of the word
and the meaning do not match) compared to a CHO (6.4%)
mouth rinse, and a placebo rinse. There was no significant
difference
on
incongruent
Stroop
task
performance
between the CHO and placebo conditions [45]. Pomportes
et al. [46] tested the effects of caffeine (67 mg), CHO
(7%), and guarana (0.4 g) mouth rinses on cognitive
function during 40 min of submaximal cycling versus a
placebo rinse in 24 physically active participants (16
males, six females). The subjects were instructed to mouth
rinse with 25 mL of the treatment for 20 s immediately
before cycling. After 1 min of cycling, the subjects com-
pleted
a
duration-production
task
(to
assess
time
Caffeine in Alternate Forms
S83
123
 perception) lasting 3 min, continued to cycle for 7 min,
then completed the Simon task (to assess cognitive control
and information processing) lasting another 3 min. This
cognitive battery was repeated two more times with a 20-s
mouth rinse occurring between batteries. The results
showed that mouth rinsing with caffeine, CHO, or guarana
resulted in more consistent responses during the duration-
production task compared to placebo and shorter produc-
tion durations, meaning that participants underestimated
the duration of the task compared to placebo. There were
also no differences between the caffeine, CHO or guarana
treatments for variability or production durations. These
authors suggest that mouth rinsing with caffeine, CHO, or
guarana may increase brain activation and arousal com-
pared to placebo. Interestingly, the authors also noted a
smaller difference between mean incongruent reaction time
and mean congruent reaction time during the Simon task in
the caffeine condition (24 ms) compared to placebo
(30 ms), CHO (29 ms) and guarana (29 ms) conditions,
indicating improved cognitive control. There were no dif-
ferences in errors between conditions.
Although there is minimal evidence to support the
effects of caffeine mouth rinsing on cognitive performance,
the evidence presented here suggests there may be a ben-
eficial effect on reaction time and cognitive control.
However, additional work is required with direct measures
of brain activation and plasma caffeine concentrations.
4.2 High-Intensity Repeated Cycle Sprinting
Beaven et al. [37] investigated the effects of caffeine
mouth rinsing on repeated sprint cycling performance in 12
recreationally active males. The first experiment compared
the effects of a 6% CHO mouth rinse solution, a 1.2%
caffeine rinse solution, and a placebo rinse. The subjects
completed a 5-min warm up before swirling 25 mL of the
rinse solution around their mouths for 5 s and then expel-
ling the solution. Immediately following the mouth rinse,
subjects completed a 6-s all out sprint against a resistance
equal to 10% of their BM. The subjects then received a
24-s rest period in which they were instructed to mouth
rinse again for 5 s. The 6-s sprint and subsequent rest
period with mouth rinsing was repeated a total of five
times. The authors found that caffeine and CHO mouth
rinses improved mean power in the first sprint compared to
placebo. Furthermore, 50% of the participants elicited their
greatest maximal power during the first two sprints in the
caffeine mouth rinse condition when compared to the CHO
and placebo rinses [37]. In the second experiment, the
authors investigated the effects of a combined caffeine and
CHO mouth rinse versus a CHO-only mouth rinse using the
same exercise protocol as the first experiment. The com-
bined caffeine and CHO mouth rinse elicited an increase in
peak power during the first sprint and increased mean
power during the last sprint compared to the CHO only
rinse.
Kizzi et al. [47] employed the same exercise protocol as
Beaven et al. [37], but induced a state of glycogen deple-
tion (estimated at 30% of resting glycogen levels) prior to
the repeated sprint protocol. This group explored the
effects of mouth rinsing with 25 mL of a 2% caffeine
solution versus a placebo rinse in a glycogen-depleted state
in eight recreationally active males. The mouth rinse was
performed for 10 s before the first sprint and in the rest
periods between each subsequent sprint. The protocol was
also repeated in a no-rinse, glycogen-rich state to provide a
control group. As expected, the authors found that mean
and peak power were highest in the control group for the
first three sprints (Fig. 4). Furthermore, in the third sprint,
mean and peak power were higher in the caffeine rinse
group compared to placebo. Interestingly, there was no
significant difference between the control group and the
caffeine mouth rinse group for mean and peak power
during sprints 4 and 5, and mean and peak power were
significantly lower in the placebo group. Similarly, sub-
jects’ perceived pain was lower for the first three sprints in
the control condition, and perceived pain was lower in the
caffeine condition compared to placebo during the third
sprint [47]. There was no difference in perceived pain
during sprints 4 and 5 when comparing the control condi-
tion to caffeine mouth rinse (Fig. 4). However, perceived
pain was significantly higher in the placebo versus control
and caffeine rinsing during sprints 4 and 5. It should be
noted that no measures of muscle glycogen or plasma
caffeine levels were made in this study.
It appears that short-duration, high-intensity, repeated-
bout sprinting is improved with caffeine mouth rinsing in
normal and glycogen-depleted states.
4.3 Aerobic Exercise
The evidence surrounding the ergogenic effects of caffeine
mouth rinsing and aerobic exercise performance is equiv-
ocal. Sinclair and Bottoms [48] investigated the effects of a
tasteless 6.4% CHO mouth rinse, a tasteless 0.032% caf-
feine rinse, and a water rinse during a 30-min arm crank TT
in 12 healthy males. The subjects rinsed with a 25-mL
solution for 5 s immediately before starting the TT, and
repeated the mouth rinse procedure every 6 min throughout
the TT. The results indicated a greater distance covered
during a 30-min arm crank TT when utilizing caffeine or
CHO mouth rinses (* 15 km) compared to a water rinse
(* 13 km). This greater distance was achieved by higher
power outputs and revolutions per min in the caffeine and
CHO rinse conditions.
S84
K. A. Wickham, L. L. Spriet
123
 Conversely, Doering et al. [40] found no effect of a
caffeine mouth rinse in ten well-trained male cyclists
performing a TT in which they had to complete the work
equivalent to 75% of peak power output for 1 h (lasted
* 65 min). These subjects were administered a 25-mL
solution containing 35 mg of caffeine or a placebo rinse
immediately before the TT and at 25, 50, 75 and 90%
completion of the TT, and were instructed to rinse the
solution around their mouths for 10 s before expelling the
solution.
Pataky et al. [49] investigated the effects of caffeine
capsule
ingestion,
caffeine
mouth
rinsing,
and
the
Fig. 4 Peak and average power
profiles and ratings of perceived
pain for five, 6-s sprints
separated by 24 s active rest in
control (CON), glycogen
depletion and placebo (PLA),
and glycogen depletion and
caffeine (CAF) conditions.
a Peak power; b mean power;
and c perceived pain. Data are
presented as mean ± standard
deviation. §CON significantly
greater than PLA (p\0.05); #
CON significantly greater than
CAF (p\0.05); #CAF
significantly greater than PLA
(p\0.05); ¥CON significantly
less than PLA (p\0.05); &CAF
significantly less than PLA
(p\0.05) Reproduced from
Kizzi et al. [47], with
permission
Caffeine in Alternate Forms
S85
123
 combination on 3-km cycling TT performance in 38
recreationally trained cyclists (25 males, 13 females). This
group also explored the effects of caffeine mouth rinsing
on TT performance with respect to caffeine metabolizer
genotype and time of day. It is important to note that the
subjects were divided into two genotypes: AA homozygous
(n = 21), who typically experience greater ergogenic
effects with caffeine due to a quicker accumulation of
caffeine metabolites, and AC heterozygotes (n = 17) [50].
To assess the effect of time of day on caffeine mouth
rinsing and 3-km TT performance, 15 participants com-
pleted all of their trials before 10 a.m. and 23 subjects
completed all of their trials after 10 p.m. The treatment
conditions included a placebo capsule with a placebo
25-mL mouth rinse, a 6-mg/kg caffeine capsule with a
25-mL placebo rinse, a placebo capsule with a 25-mL
caffeine rinse containing 300 mg of caffeine, and a 6-mg/
kg caffeine capsule with a 25-mL caffeine mouth rinse
containing 300 mg of caffeine. The capsule was ingested
1 h before the exercise protocol, and the mouth rinse was
administered immediately before a 5-min warm up and
again at the end of the warm up just before the TT.
These authors found a 3% improvement in 3-km cycling
TT performance with caffeine capsule ingestion and in the
caffeine capsule with mouth rinsing condition when com-
pared to placebo and the caffeine rinse condition [49].
Since there was no benefit of caffeine mouth rinsing alone,
it is suggested that the ergogenic effects were solely
attributed to caffeine capsule ingestion. Interestingly, these
researchers found a positive effect of caffeine mouth
rinsing only when the exercise protocol was performed in
the morning compared to the evening, suggesting a diurnal
effect. Lastly, these authors found that caffeine capsule
ingestion was ergogenic for AC heterozygous caffeine
metabolizers, and caffeine rinse and capsule ingestion was
likely ergogenic for both AA homozygous and AC
heterozygous caffeine metabolizers. However, it was also
found that caffeine mouth rinsing was possibly detrimental
to performance in AA homozygous caffeine metabolizers.
More work will be needed to confirm these findings. It is
important to consider the possibility that caffeine admin-
istered in forms that avoid absorption in the gut and first
pass metabolism, such as caffeinated gum, mouth rinsing,
or aerosol sprays, may lead to more consistent responses
across subjects as genetic variability in caffeine metabo-
lism can account for some of the individual responses
demonstrated in many caffeine studies.
Lesniak et al. [51] investigated the effects of a CHO
mouth rinse, a caffeine rinse, and a combined CHO and
caffeine rinse on TT performance in seven recreationally
active females. Subjects completed the work equivalent to
60% of their maximum work rate for 1 h as fast as possible
(TT lasted * 61 min). These authors found no differences
between the conditions. However, there was no placebo
group to determine if caffeine mouth rinsing improved
performance over baseline. Dolan et al. [52] studied the
effects of caffeine mouth rinsing on intermittent exercise
performance in ten competitive college lacrosse players.
These researchers utilized the Yo–Yo Intermittent Recov-
ery Test to mimic stop-and-go sports performance. The
participants were instructed to rinse their mouth with
25 mL of either a 6% CHO solution, a 1.2% caffeine
solution, a combined CHO and caffeine solution, or a water
rinse. There was also a no rinse condition. There were no
significant differences in intermittent sport performance
between any of the conditions [52].
Currently, most of the literature indicates no ergogenic
effect of caffeine mouth rinsing for 5–20 s on aerobic
exercise performance [40, 49, 51, 52]. The study by Sin-
clair and Bottoms [48] is the only study supporting a
beneficial effect of caffeine mouth rinsing on aerobic
exercise performance.
4.4 Resistance Exercise
Clarke et al. [38] explored the effects of a caffeine mouth
rinse (1.2%), a CHO rinse (6%), a combined caffeine and
CHO mouth rinse, a placebo rinse, and a water rinse on
resistance exercise performance in 15 recreationally resis-
tance-trained males. The subjects were instructed to rinse
25 mL of the treatment solution around their mouth for
10 s immediately prior to performing a bench press at 60%
of their 1 repetition maximum (RM) until failure. There
were no significant differences in the total weight lifted
between CHO mouth rinsing (* 1100 kg), caffeine rinsing
(* 1100 kg),
combined
CHO
and
caffeine
rinsing
(* 1050 kg), water rinsing (* 1050 kg), or control con-
ditions (* 1050 kg). As this is the only study assessing the
effects of caffeine mouth rinsing on resistance exercise
performance, more research is needed.
4.5 Mouth Rinse Summary
The only exercise situation where it has been shown that
caffeine mouth rinsing is ergogenic is with short-duration,
high-intensity, repeated-bout cycling protocols. Similarly,
it seems that caffeine mouth rinsing may prove beneficial
in states of glycogen depletion, and earlier in the day
compared to later in the afternoon. Future research should
examine if rinsing for a longer duration promotes absorp-
tion of caffeine through the buccal mucosa and measure the
pharmacokinetics of plasma caffeine concentrations in
these situations. More research is needed to examine the
effects of caffeine mouth rinsing in females, as only one
study investigated caffeine mouth rinsing in women [51],
S86
K. A. Wickham, L. L. Spriet
123
 and also in trained subjects, as only two studies examined
trained populations [40, 52].
5 Caffeinated Energy Drinks
While energy drinks are not generally designed for use
during sporting activities, they are used before, during and
after physical activity [53]. The active ingredients in
energy drinks are high levels of CHO (* 10–12%) and
moderate levels of caffeine (* 80 mg caffeine/250 mL).
There are also suggestions that taurine (1000 mg/250 mL)
is an active ingredient, although little research support
exists [54]. Energy drinks also contain many other ingre-
dients. Over the past 2 decades numerous studies have
examined the potential ergogenic effects of caffeinated
energy drinks on athletic performance [55]. However, most
of these studies did not assess the ergogenic effects of the
individual ingredients in caffeinated energy drinks. This
makes it impossible to assess the relative importance of
each potential active ingredient to any ergogenic effects
seen.
This review will discuss the three studies that attempted
to examine the potential ergogenic effects of individual
ingredients [56–58]. Geiss et al. [56] investigated the
effects of 500 mL of Red Bull (160 mg caffeine, 2000 mg
taurine, 10.5 g glucose) versus Red Bull with just the
caffeine and glucose versus Red Bull with just glucose on
cycling
performance in ten endurance-trained males.
However, there were no trials with just caffeine or just
taurine. The exercise protocol consisted of 60 min at 70%
VO2max immediately followed by 50 W increases every
3 min until volitional exhaustion. The Red Bull beverage
was administered halfway through the submaximal exer-
cise. In addition, 24 h later, subjects returned to complete a
cycling protocol starting at 50 W and increasing by 50 W
every 3 min until volitional exhaustion. The subjects had a
prolonged time to exhaustion in the taurine and caffeine
condition (857.8 ± 236.4 s) compared to the caffeine and
glucose condition (689 ± 92.35 s) and the glucose only
condition (791.8 ± 188.52 s). Time to exhaustion in the
exercise bout 24 h later was also significantly longer only
with the drink that contained taurine. These authors sug-
gested that taurine was the main ergogenic ingredient in
Red Bull and that caffeine and glucose had no effect, as
times to exhaustion were prolonged in the taurine condition
compared to the taurine-free conditions. However, this
study did not test the individual effects of caffeine or
taurine. The results imply some synergistic effect of having
taurine, glucose and caffeine in the same drink, as studies
examining the effects of taurine alone on TT performance
and incorporation into skeletal muscle have seen no effect
[54, 59].
Kammerer et al. [58] improved on the previous work
and recruited 14 male soldiers to test the effects of 250 mL
of a placebo beverage, a caffeinated beverage (80 mg
caffeine), a taurine beverage (1000 mg taurine), a caffeine
and taurine beverage, and a commercially available energy
drink (Red Bull: 27 g CHO, 80 mg caffeine, 1000 mg
taurine) administered 45 min before three physical tests
and two cognitive tests. The physical tests consisted of a
VO2max test where time to exhaustion was recorded, a
maximum handgrip strength test using both right and left
hands, and three vertical jumps. The participants completed
a focused attention task in which they were required to
point out the numbers 1–38 randomly allocated on a grid
with different sized digits, and a digit span test to assess
attention and immediate auditory memory. This test
required participants to repeat strings of nine numbers in
forward order and strings of eight numbers in reverse order.
The
results
demonstrated
no
significant
differences
between conditions on any of the physical or cognitive
tests, suggesting no ergogenic effect of caffeine, taurine, or
the combination with glucose on aerobic capacity, handgrip
strength, jump performance or cognitive performance.
A study by Eckerson et al. [60] assessed the effects of
500 mL of sugar-free Red Bull (160 mg caffeine, 2000 mg
taurine), a sugar-free drink containing only caffeine
(160 mg caffeine), and a placebo beverage on bench press
strength and endurance in 17 physically active men. Sub-
jects performed repetitions to failure at a weight equivalent
to 70% of their 1 RM. The results indicated that sugar-free
Red Bull (114.9 ± 16.2 kg) and the caffeinated sugar-free
drink (115.1 ± 16.2 kg) had no significant effect on 1 RM
compared to placebo (114.1 ± 5.5 kg) and no effect on
muscular endurance during this test (sugar-free Red Bull
1164.1 ± 147.0 kg;
caffeinated
sugar-free
drink
1173 ± 170.6 kg; placebo 1141.5 ± 193.4 kg). This study
suggested there was no benefit of sugar-free Red Bull
(caffeine and taurine) or a caffeinated sugar-free drink on
resistance exercise performance.
The current literature does not support the ergogenic
effects of caffeine supplementation administered in the
form of energy drinks. However, there is a need for addi-
tional studies examining the effectiveness of the individual
components of caffeinated energy drinks on performance.
6 Caffeinated Nasal and Mouth Aerosol Sprays
Caffeine nasal and mouth sprays are the latest alternative
method of caffeine supplementation. It has been reported
that nasal administration of drugs may affect the brain
through several mechanisms. First, it is possible that some
of the drug enters the systemic circulation, ultimately
reaching the brain and crossing the blood–brain barrier.
Caffeine in Alternate Forms
S87
123
 The nasal epithelium is an extremely permeable membrane
that allows molecules with a mass cut off lower than
1000 Da to rapidly access the brain via the blood stream
[61]. Caffeine molecules could easily cross the nasal
epithelium and ultimately affect the CNS through nasal
spray delivery since they have a low molecular weight of
194 Da [62]. However, it could be argued that the time for
this to occur is too short to have a meaningful impact.
Secondly, the drug can be transported directly from the
nasal cavity to the cerebrospinal fluid and brain tissue via
intracellular axonal transport through the olfactory and
trigeminal neural pathways [61, 63]. This method of
delivery requires small molecules to travel along axons
spanning from the nasal epithelium to the brain [63], but
there is no information on the time course of this phe-
nomenon. Thirdly, it has been shown that there are bitter
taste receptors in the nasal cavity, akin to those found in the
mouth [64]. It is possible that caffeine nasal sprays can
activate bitter taste receptors located in the nasal cavity,
which form connections with the trigeminal nerve and
ultimately stimulate regions of the brain associated with
reward and information processing [64]. Lastly, aerosols
could deliver caffeine directly to the lungs where absorp-
tion into the blood would be expected, thereby delivering
caffeine directly to the heart. However, the exact mecha-
nism(s) are not presently established.
The first study in this field examined the efficacy of
caffeine and glucose nasal sprays in affecting brain activity
and cognitive performance in ten healthy males [62]. Par-
ticipants completed a Stroop task immediately before and
after administering a nasal spray containing 15 mg/mL
caffeine, a spray containing 80 mg/mL glucose, or a dis-
tilled water placebo spray. The nasal spray was dispensed
twice in each nostril to optimally disperse the treatment,
and was administered for a total duration of 20 s. These
authors measured brain activity through electroencephalo-
gram and event-related potential (P300). Interestingly,
treatment with both the caffeine and glucose nasal sprays
increased activation of the primary somatosensory cortex
(receives and interprets touch), motor cortices (planning,
execution and control of motor movements), dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (information processing and working
memory), orbitofrontal cortex (information processing and
decision making), posterior cingulate cortex (learning and
motivation), insular cortex (emotional awareness), and
supramarginal gyrus (language perception and processing)
compared to the placebo nasal spray [62]. It is also
important to note that treatment with a caffeine nasal spray
also resulted in a significantly greater activation of the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and orbitofrontal cortex than
the glucose spray. The Stroop task is designed to test a
subject’s information processing, decision making, and
attention [65]. However, it is surprising that despite
increasing the activation of these brain regions, there was
no effect of caffeine nasal spray on cognitive efficiency as
measured by P300 amplitude and latency during a Stroop
task [62].
De Pauw et al. [66] performed a follow-up study on 11
moderately trained males, assessing the effects of a caf-
feine nasal spray, a glucose spray, or a placebo spray on
Stroop task performance, Wingate sprint cycling perfor-
mance, and a 30-min cycling TT. The Stroop task was
performed before and after both exercise components and a
15-min rest occurred between exercises. Before each
exercise test and at 25, 50 and 75% completion of the
cycling TT, the subjects were administered a nasal spray
containing either 15 mg/mL caffeine, 80 mg/mL glucose,
or a placebo distilled water spray. The nasal spray was
dispensed twice in each nostril for 20 s. Furthermore, these
authors performed an additional trial to collect venous
blood samples at baseline and 20 s after administering the
caffeine nasal spray to measure plasma caffeine concen-
trations. There was no significant increase in blood caffeine
concentrations 20 s after administration of the nasal caf-
feine spray, and it is not clear why serial samples were not
taken. There was no effect of caffeine or glucose nasal
sprays on mean or peak power output during the Wingate
test (peak power 1069 W with placebo, 1046 W with
glucose, 1082 W with caffeine). The caffeine nasal spray
also had no effect on the 30-min cycling TT (caffeine
206 W, placebo 207 W). Lastly, caffeine and glucose nasal
sprays had no impact on reaction time during the Stroop
task compared to placebo at any time point throughout the
protocol. These authors argued that the effects of a caffeine
nasal spray on the brain may be too small to significantly
improve exercise performance and/or the dose of caffeine
may be too small to elicit an ergogenic effect.
There are few investigations of the efficacy of caffeine
nasal sprays, and more work needs to be done to expand the
literature in this area. More detailed measurements of
plasma caffeine levels following repeated nasal spray doses
could establish the efficacy of this procedure. If positive
results were found, it is conceivable that caffeine nasal
sprays could be applied to many exercise situations, most
notably those that incorporate a large information-handling
and cognitive component, such as stop-and-go team sports.
It is also important to mention the prevalence of caf-
feinated aerosols administered directly in the mouth and/or
under the tongue. These products are readily on the market
and are flaunted for their ability to ‘‘boost energy levels
throughout the day’’. Some of the most common products
on the market include AeroShot Pure Energy, which claims
to deliver 100 mg caffeine/spray [67], Instavit Instant
Energy, which claims to deliver 30 mg caffeine/four sprays
[68], or Primer Caffeinated Breath Spray, which claims to
deliver 33 mg caffeine/spray [69]. However, there is no
S88
K. A. Wickham, L. L. Spriet
123
 current research examining these claims. Additionally,
similar to caffeine nasal sprays, there is some concern
about the safety of these products. If caffeine is adminis-
tered as an aerosol in much larger doses than recom-
mended, it could be quickly absorbed into the circulation in
high amounts allowing rapid delivery to the heart and the
potential for an overdose, similar to what can happen with
overdosing with oral caffeine.
Furthermore, Revvies manufactures a caffeinated
mouth strip claimed to deliver 40 mg caffeine/strip.
Revvies advertises rapid caffeine delivery, as the strip
dissolves on the tongue in just 30 s [70]. Lastly, Spray-
able Energy claims to deliver 12.5 mg of caffeine/four
sprays, and touts the benefit of sustained, slow release
energy due to the prolonged absorption of caffeine
through the skin [71]. However, there is no research to
support these claims.
7 Conclusions
Caffeine in chewing gum can be effectively administered at
doses up to 200 mg, and higher with repeated dosing.
Caffeine delivered via chewing gum is absorbed quicker
through the buccal mucosa compared with capsule delivery
and absorption in the gut, although total caffeine absorption
over time is not different. Delivering caffeine in chewing
gum improved endurance cycling performance, and there is
limited evidence that repeated sprint cycling and power
production are improved. Mouth rinsing with caffeine may
stimulate nerves with direct links to the brain, in addition to
any caffeine absorption that occurs in the mouth. However,
caffeine mouth rinsing has not been shown to improve
cognitive performance, although there is limited support
for improvements in reaction time and cognitive control. It
appears
that
delivering
caffeine
with
mouth
rinsing
improved short-duration, high-intensity, repeated sprinting
in normal and depleted glycogen states, while the majority
of the literature indicated no ergogenic effect on aerobic
exercise performance, and any effects on resistance exer-
cise have not been adequately examined. Studies with
caffeinated energy drinks have generally not examined the
individual effects of caffeine on performance, as other
documented (CHO) and potential (taurine) active ingredi-
ents are present. Caffeinated aerosol mouth and nasal
sprays are gaining popularity as caffeine may stimulate
nerves with direct brain connections and enter the blood via
mucosal and pulmonary absorption. However, there is little
support for any ergogenic effects as the delivery and/or
effectiveness of caffeine delivered in this manner may be
too small. Overall, direct measures of brain activation and
entry of caffeine into the blood are generally limited or
lacking when examining alternate forms of caffeine
delivery in doses that are B 200 mg. There is also a lack of
research examining trained athletes and female subjects
receiving alternate forms of caffeine delivery. Future
research should also consider assessing the caffeine content
of commercially available products prior to experimenta-
tion, as there may be a large variation in caffeine content
within and between products.
Acknowledgements This article was published in a supplement
supported by the Gatorade Sports Science Institute (GSSI). The
supplement was guest edited by Lawrence L. Spriet, who attended a
meeting of the GSSI expert panel in October 2016 and received
honoraria from the GSSI for his participation in the meeting and the
writing of a manuscript. He received no honoraria for guest editing
the supplement. Dr. Spriet selected peer reviewers for each paper and
managed the process, except for his own paper, which was managed
by Dr. Roger Olney, an editor for Sports Medicine. The views
expressed in this manuscript are those of the author and do not nec-
essarily reflect the position or policy of PepsiCo, Inc.
Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were
made.
References
1. Burke LM. Caffeine and sports performance. Appl Physiol Nutr
Metab. 2008;33:1319–34.
2. Ganio MS, Klau JF, Casa DJ, et al. Effect of caffeine on sport
specific endurance performance: a systematic review. J Strength
Cond Res. 2009;23:315–24.
3. Davis JK, Green JM. Caffeine and anaerobic performance:
ergogenic
value
and
mechanisms
of
action.
Sports
Med.
2009;39:813–32.
4. Astorino TA, Robertson DW. Efficacy of acute caffeine ingestion
for short-term high intensity exercise performance: a systematic
review. J Strength Cond Res. 2010;24:257–65.
5. Spriet LL. Caffeine. In: Maughan RJ, editor. The encyclopaedia
of sports medicine: an IOC medical commission publication.
Sports Nutrition. 19th ed. Oxford: Wiley; 2013. p. 313–23.
6. Spriet LL. Exercise and sports performance with low caffeine
doses of caffeine. Sports Med. 2014;44:S175–84.
7. Burke L, Desbrow B, Spriet LL. Caffeine for sports performance.
Champaign: Human Kinetics; 2013.
8. Kovacs EMR, Stegen JHCH, Brouns F, et al. Effect of caffeinated
drinks on substrate metabolism, caffeine excretion, and perfor-
mance. J Appl Physiol. 1998;85:709–15.
9. Cureton KJ, Warren GL, Millard-Stafford ML, et al. Caffeinated
sports drink: ergogenic effects and possible mechanisms. Int J
Sport Nutr Exerc Metab. 2007;17:35–55.
10. Van Nieuwenhoven MA, Brummer RJM, Brouns F, et al. Gas-
trointestinal function during exercise; comparison of water, sports
drink,
and
sports
drink
with
caffeine.
J
Appl
Physiol.
2000;89:1079–85.
11. Cox GR, Desbrow B, Montgomery PG, et al. Effect of different
protocols of caffeine intake on metabolism and performance.
J Appl Physiol. 2002;93:990–9.
Caffeine in Alternate Forms
S89
123
 12. Talanian JL, Spriet LL. Low and moderate doses of caffeine late
in exercise improve performance in trained cyclists. Appl Physiol
Nutr Metab. 2016;41:850–5.
13. Van Nieuwenhoven MA, Brouns F, Kivacs EM, et al. The effect
of two sports drinks and water on GI complaints and performance
during an 18-km run. Int J Sports Med. 2005;26:281–5.
14. Stevenson EJ, Hayes PR, Allison SJ, et al. The effect of a car-
bohydrate-caffeine sports drink on simulated golf performance.
Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2009;34:681–8.
15. Gant N, Ali A, Foskett A. The influence of caffeine and carbo-
hydrate coingestion on simulated soccer performance. Int J Sports
Nutr Exerc Metab. 2010;20:191–7.
16. Guttierres APM, Alfenas RC, Lima JRP, et al. Metabolic effects
of a caffeinated sports drink consumed during a soccer match.
Motriz Rio Claro. 2013;19:688–95.
17. Hogervorst E, Bandelow S, Schmitt J, et al. Caffeine improves
physical and cognitive performance during exhaustive exercise.
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2008;40:1841–51.
18. Newton R, Broughton L, Lind M, et al. Plasma and salivary
pharmacokinetics of caffeine in man. Eur J Clin Pharmacol.
1981;21:45–52.
19. Cooper R, Naclerio F, Allgrove J, et al. Effects of a carbohydrate
and caffeine gel on intermittent sprint performance in recre-
ationally trained males. Eur J Sport Sci. 2014;14:353–61.
20. Scott AT, O’Leary T, Walker S, et al. Improvement of 2000-m
rowing performance with caffeinated carbohydrate-gel ingestion.
Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2015;10:464–8.
21. Kamimori GH, Penetar DM, Headley DB, et al. Effect of three
caffeine doses on plasma catecholamines and alertness during
prolonged wakefulness. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2000;56:537–44.
22. Kaplan GB, Greenblatt DJ, Ehrenberg BL, et al. Dose dependent
pharmacokinetics and psychomotor effects of caffeine in humans.
J Clin Pharmacol. 1997;37:693–703.
23. Penetar D, McCann U, Thorne D, et al. Caffeine reversal of sleep
deprivation effects on alertness and mood. Psychopharmacology.
1993;112:359–65.
24. Kamimori GH, Karyekar CS, Otterstetter R, et al. The rate of
absorption and relative bioavailability of caffeine administered in
chewing gum versus capsules to normal healthy volunteers. Int J
Pharm. 2002;234:159–67.
25. Shargel L, Yu ABC. Applied biopharmaceutics and pharma-
cokinetics. 4th ed. Stamford: Appleton and Lange; 1999.
26. Syed SA, Kamimori GH, Kelly W, et al. Multiple dose phar-
macokinetics of caffeine administered in chewing gum to normal
healthy volunteers. Biopharm Drug Dispos. 2005;26:403–9.
27. Ryan EJ, Kim CH, Muller MD, et al. Low-dose caffeine
administered in chewing gum does not enhance cycling to
exhaustion. J Strength Cond Res. 2012;26:844–50.
28. Ryan EJ, Kim CH, Fickes EJ, et al. Caffeine gum and cycling
performance:
a
timing
study.
J
Strength
Cond
Res.
2013;27:259–64.
29. Lane SC, Hawley JA, Desbrow B, et al. Single and combined
effects of beetroot juice and caffeine supplementation on cycling
time
trial
performance.
Appl
Physiol
Nutr
Metab.
2014;39:1050–7.
30. Oberlin-Brown KT, Siegel R, Kilding AE, et al. Oral presence of
carbohydrate and caffeine in chewing gum: independent and
combined effects on endurance cycling performance. Int J Sports
Physiol Perfom. 2016;11:164–71.
31. Paton C, Costa V, Guglielmo L. Effects of caffeine chewing gum
on race performance and physiology in male and female cyclists.
J Sports Sci. 2015;33:1076–83.
32. Paton CD, Lowe T, Irvine A. Caffeinated chewing gum increases
repeated sprint performance and augments increases in testos-
terone
in
competitive
cyclists.
Eur
J
Appl
Physiol.
2010;110:1243–50.
33. Bellar D, Kamimori G, Judge L. Effects of low-dose caffeine
supplementation on early morning performance in the standing
shot put throw. Eur J Sports Sci. 2012;12:57–61.
34. Lee J, Kim HT, Solares GJ, et al. Caffeinated nitric oxide-re-
leasing lozenge improves cycling time trial performance. Int J
Sports Med. 2015;36:107–12.
35. Carter JM, Jeukendrup AE, Jones DA. The effect of carbohydrate
mouth rinse on 1-h cycle time trial performance. Med Sci Sports
Exerc. 2004;36:2107–11.
36. Chambers ES, Bridge MW, Jones DA. Carbohydrate sensing in
the human mouth: effects on exercise performance and brain
activity. J Physiol. 2009;587:1779–94.
37. Beaven CM, Maulder P, Pooley A, et al. Effects of caffeine and
carbohydrate mouth rinses on repeated sprint performance. Appl
Physiol Nutr Metab. 2013;38:633–7.
38. Clarke ND, Kornilios E, Richardson DL. Carbohydrate and caf-
feine mouth rinses do not affect maximum strength and muscular
endurance performance. J Strength Cond Res. 2015;29:2926–31.
39. Rubinstein I, Chandilawa R, Dagar S, et al. Adensoine A1
receptors mediate plasma exudation from the oral mucosa. J Appl
Physiol. 2001;91:552–60.
40. Doering TM, Fell JW, Leveritt MD, et al. The effect of a caf-
feinated mouth-rinse on endurance cycling time-trial perfor-
mance. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab. 2014;24:90–7.
41. Matsumoto I. Gustatory neural pathways revealed by genetic
tracing from taste receptor cells. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem.
2013;77:1359–62.
42. Meyerhof W, Batram C, Kuhn C, et al. The molecular receptive
ranges of human tas2r bitter taste receptors. Chem Senses.
2010;35:157–70.
43. Zald DH, Hagen MC, Pardo JV. Neural correlates of tasting
concentrated quinine and sugar solutions. J Neurophysiol.
2002;87:1068–75.
44. Gam S, Guelfi KJ, Fournier PA. Mouth rinsing and ingesting a
bitter solution improves sprint cycling performance. Med Sci
Sports Exerc. 2014;46:1648–57.
45. De Pauw K, Roelands B, Knaepen K, et al. Effects of caffeine
and maltodextrin mouth rinsing on P300, brain imaging, and
cognitive performance. J Appl Physiol. 2015;118:776–82.
46. Pomportes L, Brisswalter J, Casini L, et al. Cognitive perfor-
mance enhancement induced by caffeine, carbohydrate and
guarana mouth rinsing during submaximal exercise. Nutrients.
2017;9:589.
47. Kizzi J, Sum A, Houston FE, et al. Influence of a caffeine mouth
rinse on sprint cycling following glycogen depletion. Eur J Sport
Sci. 2016;16:1087–94.
48. Sinclair J, Bottoms L. The effects of carbohydrate and caffeine
mouth rinsing on arm crank time-trial performance. J Sports Res.
2014;1:34–44.
49. Pataky MW, Womack CJ, Saunders MJ, et al. Caffeine and 3-km
cycling performance: effects of mouth rinsing, genotype, and
time of day. Scand J Med Sci Sports. 2016;26:613–9.
50. Womack CJ, Saunders MJ, Bechtel MK, et al. The influence of a
CYP1A2 polymorphism on the ergogenic effects of caffeine. J Int
Soc Sports Nutr. 2012;9:7.
51. Lesniak AY, Davis SE, Moir GL, et al. The effects of carbohy-
drate, caffeine and combined rinses on cycling performance.
J Sport Human Perform. 2016;4:1–10.
52. Dolan P, Witherbee K, Peterson K, et al. The effect of carbo-
hydrate, caffeine and carbohydrate ? caffeine mouth rinsing on
intermittent running performance in collegiate male lacrosse
athletes. J Strength Cond Res. 2017;31:2473–9.
53. Ballard SL, Wellborn-Kim JJ, Clausen KA. Effects of commer-
cial energy drink consumption on athletic performance and body
composition. Phys Sportsmed. 2010;38:107–17.
S90
K. A. Wickham, L. L. Spriet
123
 54. Spriet LL, Whitfield J. Taurine and skeletal muscle function. Curr
Opin Clin Metab Care. 2015;18:96–101.
55. Souza DB, Del Coso J, Casonatto J, et al. Acute effects of caf-
feine-containing energy drinks on physical performance: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Nutr. 2017;56:13–27.
56. Geiss KR, Jester I, Falke W, et al. The effect of a taurine-con-
taining drink on performance in 10 endurance athletes. Amino
Acids. 1994;7:45–56.
57. Rutherford JA, Spriet LL, Stellingwerff T. The effect of acute
taurine ingestion on endurance performance and metabolism in
trained cyclists. Int J Sports Nutr Exerc Metab. 2010;20:322–9.
58. Kammerer M, Jaramillo JA, Garcia A, et al. Effects of energy
drink major bioactive compounds on the performance of young
adults in fitness and cognitive tests: a randomized controlled trial.
J Int Soc Sports Nutr. 2014;11:44–50.
59. Galloway SDR, Talanian JL, Shoveler AK, et al. Seven days of
oral taurine supplementation does not increase muscle taurine
content or alter substrate metabolism during prolonged exercise
in humans. J Appl Physiol. 2008;105:643–51.
60. Eckerson JM, Bull AJ, Baechle TR, et al. Acute ingestion of
sugar-free Red Bull energy drink has no effect on upper body
strength and muscular endurance in resistance trained men.
J Strength Cond Res. 2013;27:2248–54.
61. Jogani V, Jinturkar K, Vyas T, et al. Recent patents review on
intranasal administration for CNS drug delivery. Recent Pat Drug
Deliv Formul. 2008;2:25–40.
62. De Pauw K, Roelands B, Van Cutsem J, et al. Electro-physio-
logical changes in the brain induced by caffeine or glucose nasal
spray. Psychopharmacology. 2017;234:53–62.
63. Pardeshi CV, Belgamwar VS. Direct nose to brain drug delivery
via integrated nerve pathways bypassing the blood-brain barrier:
an excellent platform for brain targeting. Expert Opin Drug
Deliv. 2013;10:957–72.
64. Finger TE, Bo
¨ttger B, Hansen A, et al. Solitary chemoreceptor
cells in the nasal cavity serve as sentinels of respiration. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA. 2003;100:8981–6.
65. Stroop JR. Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions. J Exp
Psychol. 1935;18:643–62.
66. De Pauw K, Roelands B, Van Cutsem J, et al. Do glucose and
caffeine nasal sprays influence exercise and/or cognitive perfor-
mance? Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2017;12:1186–91.
67. Aeroshot, http://www.blessthisstuff.com/stuff/living/misc-living/
aeroshot-pure-energy/. Accessed 26 Nov 2017.
68. Instavit, https://instavit.com/product/instant-energy/. Accessed 26
Nov 2017.
69. Primer, http://www.itsgotime.com/. Accessed 26 Nov 2017.
70. Revvies, http://www.revviesenergy.com/our-products/. Accessed
26 Nov 2017.
71. Sprayable Energy, https://sprayable.wpengine.com/media/. Acces-
sed 26 Nov 2017.
Caffeine in Alternate Forms
S91
123
