 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 0 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 10   October 2017
Introduction
In response to microbial infection, CD8+ T lymphocytes undergo 
rapid clonal proliferation associated with differentiation into ter-
minal effector and memory cell subsets. Terminally differentiated, 
short-lived effector cells produce inflammatory cytokines, such 
as IFN-γ and TNF-α, and release cytolytic granules to kill infected 
 
cells. Memory CD8+ T cells are capable of stem cell–like self- 
renewal, and certain subsets of memory cells, such as central 
 
memory T cells (TCM cells), can proliferate rapidly in response to 
recurrent infections. Specification of these CD8+ T cell subsets is 
driven by diverse factors, including TCR signal strength, costim-
ulatory molecules, cytokine signals, transcription factors, and the 
microenvironment (1–4).
Prior studies have shown that a single naive CD8+ T cell can 
give rise to both terminal effector and memory lymphocytes (5–7). 
One mechanism by which terminal effector and memory cells can 
be derived from a single naive cell is asymmetric cell division, an 
evolutionarily conserved process in which cellular components 
are unequally localized to opposing poles of a mitotic cell, thereby 
 
resulting in daughter cells with tendencies toward distinct fates 
from their inception (8, 9). T-bet, a transcription factor critical in 
terminal effector CD8+ T lymphocyte differentiation (10), has been 
demonstrated to undergo asymmetric localization during the first 
cell division (11). T-bet asymmetry during mitosis has been shown 
to be mediated by localized degradation due to asymmetric segre-
gation of the proteasome machinery in dividing CD8+ T cells (11). 
This observation raised the possibility that the degree of protea-
some activity experienced by daughter CD8+ T cells emerging from 
the first division in vivo in response to microbial infection may play 
a role in regulating the eventual fate of these cells.
The 26S proteasome is a multi-subunit protein complex that 
performs the majority of cellular protein degradation in a highly 
regulated manner. It comprises a 20S core particle that contains 
catalytic subunits and 19S regulatory particles, which attach 
directly to the outer rings of the core particle to regulate substrate 
unfolding and entry. Lymphocytes can also express specialized 
inducible immunoproteasome subunits, which have been shown 
to play a role in antigen processing and the generation of a diverse 
T cell repertoire (12, 13). Proteins are marked for degradation 
by the post-translational process of ubiquitination, which is also 
reversible (14–17). Thus, ubiquitination and deubiquitination of 
proteins, as well as the level of proteasome activity itself, can con-
trol the rate of protein degradation.
Regulation of endogenous proteasome activity has been pre-
viously shown to control cell fate decisions of human embryonic 
stem cells (18, 19) and cancer stem cells (20, 21). Moreover, recent 
studies in lymphocytes have shown that proteasome activity can 
also influence their differentiation and function (22–26). These 
findings, along with the observation of asymmetric proteasome 
During an immune response, CD8+ T lymphocytes can undergo asymmetric division, giving rise to daughter cells that exhibit 
distinct tendencies to adopt terminal effector and memory cell fates. Here we show that “pre-effector” and “pre-memory” 
cells resulting from the first CD8+ T cell division in vivo exhibited low and high rates of endogenous proteasome activity, 
respectively. Pharmacologic reduction of proteasome activity in CD8+ T cells early during differentiation resulted in acquisition 
of terminal effector cell characteristics, whereas enhancement of proteasome activity conferred attributes of memory 
lymphocytes. Transcriptomic and proteomic analyses revealed that modulating proteasome activity in CD8+ T cells affected 
cellular metabolism. These metabolic changes were mediated, in part, through differential expression of Myc, a transcription 
factor that controls glycolysis and metabolic reprogramming. Taken together, these results demonstrate that proteasome 
activity is an important regulator of CD8+ T cell fate and raise the possibility that increasing proteasome activity may be a 
useful therapeutic strategy to enhance the generation of memory lymphocytes.
Proteasome activity regulates CD8+ T lymphocyte 
metabolism and fate specification
Christella E. Widjaja,1 Jocelyn G. Olvera,1 Patrick J. Metz,1 Anthony T. Phan,2 Jeffrey N. Savas,3 Gerjan de Bruin,4  
Yves Leestemaker,5,6 Celia R. Berkers,7 Annemieke de Jong,5 Bogdan I. Florea,4 Kathleen Fisch,8 Justine Lopez,1  
Stephanie H. Kim,1 Daniel A. Garcia,1 Stephen Searles,9 Jack D. Bui,9 Aaron N. Chang,8 John R. Yates III,3 Ananda W. Goldrath,2 
Hermen S. Overkleeft,4 Huib Ovaa,5,6 and John T. Chang1
1Department of Medicine and 2Division of Biological Sciences, UCSD, La Jolla, California, USA. 3Department of Chemical Physiology, The Scripps Research Institute,  
La Jolla, California, USA. 4Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands. 5Division of Cell Biology II, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 6Department of 
Chemical Immunology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. 7Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands. 8Center for Computational 
Biology and Bioinformatics, Department of Medicine, and 9Department of Pathology, UCSD, La Jolla, California, USA.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: September 26, 2016; Accepted: July 14, 2017.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2017;127(10):3609–3623. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI90895.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 1 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 10   October 2017
(CD44hiCD62Llo) and central memory lymphocytes (CD44hi 
CD62Lhi), assessed at 60 days after infection, exhibited lower 
proteasome activity compared with naive cells (Figure 1D). Taken 
together, these findings suggest the possibility that the eventual 
fates of CD8+ T lymphocytes that have undergone their first asym-
metric division in vivo in response to microbial infection might be 
influenced by their levels of proteasome activity.
Proteasome activity in activated CD8+ T cells influences their fate 
and function. We next sought to determine whether the predispo-
sition of first-division pre-effector and pre-memory CD8+ T cells 
toward different fates might be mechanistically related to their 
distinct levels of proteasome activity. We reasoned that treating 
cells with a pharmacologic inhibitor or activator would enable 
us to recapitulate the low and high levels of intrinsic proteasome 
activity exhibited in vivo after the first cell division (Figure 1A). 
We first established that proteasome activity could be modu-
lated in CD8+ T cells with the pan-subunit proteasome inhibitor 
epoxomicin (Figure 2A). We then screened a panel of proteasome 
activators that has been shown to increase proteasome activity 
in immortalized cell lines (30). Several of these compounds also 
increased proteasome activity in CD8+ T cells (Figure 2A).
Next, we evaluated whether modulation of proteasome activ-
ity could influence effector and memory lymphocyte differenti-
ation using a previously described in vitro differentiation system 
(31). CD8+ T cells were stimulated with their cognate peptide for 
48 hours, followed by culture with either IL-2 or IL-15 along with 
proteasome inhibitor, proteasome activator, or vehicle control. In 
response to IL-2, vehicle-treated cells were able to differentiate 
into “effector-like” lymphocytes characterized by high expression 
of IL-2Rα. Relative to vehicle-treated cells, reducing proteasome 
activity in IL-2 culture conditions increased the proportion of 
IL-2Rαhi effector-like lymphocytes, whereas increasing protea-
some activity reduced the proportion of these cells (Figure 2B, top 
row). In response to IL-15, vehicle-treated cells differentiated into 
“memory-like” lymphocytes characterized by high expression of 
CD62L. Reducing proteasome activity in IL-15 culture conditions 
reduced the proportion of CD62Lhi memory-phenotype cells, 
whereas increasing proteasome activity with certain proteasome 
activators (activators 1, 4, 5, and 9) increased the proportion of 
these cells (Figure 2B, bottom row).
We sought to determine whether modulation of proteasome 
activity might alter production of inflammatory cytokines, a mea-
sure of effector CD8+ T cell function. We purified CD8+ T cells and 
transiently treated them with proteasome inhibitor, proteasome 
activators, or vehicle control, followed by drug washout. Cells 
were then activated in vitro with plate-bound anti-CD3 and anti-
CD28 antibodies; 48 hours later, we assessed the capacity of the 
cells to produce IFN-γ and TNF-α. We observed that cells treated 
with proteasome inhibitor exhibited an enhanced capacity to pro-
duce IFN-γ relative to control-treated cells (Figure 2C), while one 
of the proteasome activators we tested (activator 9) reduced cyto-
kine production by CD8+ T cells; we selected this proteasome acti-
vator, revealed to be cyclosporine, for subsequent experiments. 
The activators we tested were identified in a high-throughput 
screen solely based on their ability to increase proteasome activity 
(30); thus, they may act through different mechanisms and have 
unique functional properties.
segregation within mitotic CD8+ T cells (11), led us to hypothesize 
that proteasome activity may be an important regulator of CD8+ T 
lymphocyte fate specification.
Here we show that “pre-effector” and “pre-memory” daughter 
 
cells emerging from the first CD8+ T cell division in vivo exhibited 
low and high rates of proteasome activity, respectively. Pharmaco-
logic alteration of proteasome activity resulted in changes to CD8+ 
T cell effector and memory differentiation. Proteasome-mediated 
effects on CD8+ T cell differentiation were due, in part, to effects 
on Myc, a transcription factor that controls glycolysis and meta-
bolic reprogramming. Together, these results suggest that prote-
asome activity regulates CD8+ T lymphocyte metabolism and fate 
specification and suggest the possibility that increasing protea-
some activity may be a useful therapeutic strategy to enhance the 
generation of memory lymphocytes.
Results
CD8+ T cells with unique fate tendencies exhibit distinct levels of 
proteasome activity. It has been previously shown that CD8+ T 
lymphocytes can asymmetrically segregate certain cellular com-
ponents, including the proteasome machinery, during their first 
division in response to microbial infection (11). We therefore 
asked whether asymmetric localization of the proteasome during 
mitosis might lead to distinct proteasome activity levels in the 
nascent daughter cells following division. Using a model system 
that we have previously employed to examine T cells undergoing 
their first division in vivo in response to microbial infection (9), 
we assessed the total activity of the proteasome catalytic sub-
units using irreversible, covalent activity–based probes that have 
been previously described (Supplemental Figure 1; supplemental 
material available online with this article; https:/
/doi.org/10.1172/
JCI90895DS1) (21, 27, 28).
OT-I CD8+ T cells, which have transgenic expression of the T 
cell antigen receptor that recognizes a specific OVA epitope, were 
labeled with a fluorescent dye (CFSE) that enables tracking of 
cell division. Cells were then adoptively transferred into recipient 
mice that were infected 24 hours later with Listeria monocytogenes– 
expressing OVA (Lm-OVA). At 45 hours after infection, mice were 
sacrificed and splenocytes analyzed by flow cytometry. Asymmet-
ric CD8+ T cell division has been shown to yield one daughter cell 
(phenotypically CD8hiIL-2RαhiCD62Llo) exhibiting a predisposi-
tion toward the terminal effector fate (“pre-effector”) and another 
daughter cell (phenotypically CD8loIL-2RαloCD62Lhi) exhibiting a 
predisposition toward the long-lived memory fate (“pre-memory”) 
 
(29). We observed that pre-effector first-division cells exhibit-
ed lower proteasome activity, compared with pre-memory first- 
division cells (Figure 1A). Moreover, CD8+ T cells exhibiting low 
proteasome activity expressed higher levels of effector lymphocyte– 
associated molecules (granzyme B [Gzmb], T-bet [Tbx21]) and 
lower levels of memory lymphocyte–associated molecules (Bcl-2, 
 
IL-7Rα, Tcf7) compared with their counterparts exhibiting low 
proteasome activity (Figure 1, B and C). Notably, these patterns 
of proteasome activity observed in early differentiating cells that 
had undergone their first division were distinct from those of 
mature, fully differentiated T lymphocytes. KLRG1hiIL-7Rαlo ter-
minal effector cells exhibited proteasome activity similar to that 
of naive (CD62LhiCD44lo) CD8+ T cells, whereas effector memory 
 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 1 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 10   October 2017
mentally distinguish between NFAT- and proteasome-dependent 
effects, we asked whether transient pretreatment of CD8+ T cells 
with cyclosporine followed by drug washout prior to activation, 
the experimental methodology we used in Figure 2C, could pre-
vent nuclear translocation of NFAT. In contrast to continuous 
treatment with cyclosporine, we observed that transient pretreat-
ment of cells followed by drug washout prior to activation did 
not prevent NFAT nuclear translocation (Supplemental Figure 2, 
A and B). In support of these results, we also evaluated a second 
calcineurin inhibitor, tacrolimus, for effects on proteasome activ-
Cyclosporine is an immunosuppressive drug (32) that is com-
monly used to treat transplant rejection; however, it was not pre-
viously known to have effects on proteasome activity. We there-
fore sought to distinguish the proteasome-modulating effects of 
cyclosporine on CD8+ T cell differentiation from its other known 
effects on the immune system. A major mechanism of action 
by which cyclosporine acts is binding to its cognate intracellu-
lar receptor, cyclophilin; inhibiting the calcium/calmodulin- 
regulated phosphatase calcineurin; and preventing nuclear trans-
location of the transcription factor NFAT (33, 34). Thus, to experi-
Figure 1. Differentially fated CD8+ T cells exhibit distinct rates of endogenous proteasome activity. (A) Proteasome activity, assessed by flow cytometry, of 
gated first division (second CFSE peak) of putative pre-effector IL-2RαhiCD62Llo and pre-memory IL-2RαloCD62Lhi OT-I CFSE-labeled CD8+ T cells adoptively  
transferred into recipient mice subsequently infected with Lm-OVA and analyzed 45 hours after infection. (B) Expression of Tbx21, Gzmb, Il7r, and Tcf1 
mRNA in FACS-sorted first-division proteasome activityloIL-2RαhiCD62Llo (red bars) and proteasome activityhiIL-2RαloCD62Lhi (blue bars) cells. Expression is 
normalized to the average of Rpl13 and Rn18s mRNA. (C) Flow cytometry analysis (left) and mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of T-bet, granzyme B, and  
Bcl-2 in first-division proteasome activityloIL-2RαhiCD62Llo (red) and proteasome activityhiIL-2RαloCD62Lhi (blue) cells. Gray histograms represent isotype 
control–stained first-division cells. (D) Proteasome activity, assessed by flow cytometry, of gated naive (CD8+CD45.1+CD62LhiCD44lo cells; uninfected mice), 
terminal effector (CD8+CD45.1+CD44hiKLRG1hiIL-7Rlo cells; 7 days after infection), effector memory (CD8+CD45.1+CD44hiCD62Llo; 60 days after infection), and 
central memory (CD8+CD45.1+CD44hiCD62Lhi; 60 days after infection) adoptively transferred into CD45.2 recipient mice followed by Lm-OVA infection and 
analyzed 7 or 60 days after infection. Data are representative of at least 3 independent experiments (A, C, and D) or 3 biological replicates from 3 indepen-
dent experiments (B) with n ≥ 4 mice per group. Error bars represent SEM of 3 replicates. N.S., not significant (P > 0.05), **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 (A–C, 
Student’s 2-tailed t test; D, 1-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post-test).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 1 2
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 10   October 2017
effects of cyclosporine, which we will refer to as “proteasome acti-
vator,” in subsequent experiments.
Using an in-gel proteasome activity assay and a luminescent 
substrate assay, we confirmed our flow cytometry finding that pro-
teasome activity could be reliably modulated in CD8+ T cells with 
proteasome inhibitor and activator (Figure 3, A–C). We also ana-
lyzed CD8+ T cells treated with proteasome inhibitor or activator 
and found that neither drug affected the expression of structural 
ity and CD8+ T cell differentiation. In contrast to cyclosporine, 
addition of tacrolimus did not increase proteasome activity in 
CD8+ T cells or promote the differentiation of memory-like cells in 
IL-15 conditions in vitro (Supplemental Figure 3, A and B). Taken 
together, these results provide evidence that the observed effects 
of cyclosporine on CD8+ T cell differentiation may be mediated by 
increasing proteasome activity, at least when administered tran-
siently. We therefore proceeded to test the proteasome-mediated 
Figure 2. Level of proteasome activity influences CD8+ T cell differentiation in vitro. (A) Proteasome activity, assessed by flow cytometry, of naive CD8+ 
T cells following 4-hour culture with vehicle, proteasome inhibitor, or proteasome activators. The same vehicle control was used to compare against all 
experimental groups and is displayed in all histograms. (B) Flow cytometry analysis of in vitro IL-2RαhiCD62Llo effector-like and IL-2RαloCD62Lhi memory-like 
P14 CD8+ T cells. Cells were activated for 2 days with gp33–41 peptide and T cell–depleted splenocytes, then cultured in IL-2 (top row) or IL-15 (bottom row) 
conditions in the presence of vehicle, proteasome inhibitor, or indicated proteasome activators for an additional 3 days. (C) Flow cytometry analysis of 
intracellular IFN-γ at 72 hours after activation in CD8+ T cells transiently treated for 4 hours with vehicle, proteasome inhibitor, or proteasome activators 
followed by drug washout prior to activation with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies. Data are representative of at least 2 independent experiments (A–C).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 1 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 10   October 2017
tiation and function (10, 35). Finally, 
proteasome 
inhibitor–treated 
CD8+ 
T cells also exhibited increased cyto-
toxicity when incubated with peptide- 
pulsed target cells compared with vehi-
cle-treated cells, whereas CD8+ T cells 
with 
increased 
proteasome 
activity 
exhibited decreased levels of cytotoxic 
 
activity (Figure 3E). Together these 
observations suggested that levels of 
proteasome activity might influence 
CD8+ T lymphocyte fate specification, 
at least in vitro.
We next sought to examine whether 
levels of proteasome activity could affect 
this process in vivo and utilized an exper-
imental approach that would enable us to 
selectively modulate proteasome activity 
within early differentiating CD8+ T lym-
phocytes without affecting the cells and 
tissues of recipient mice. We pretreated 
OT-I cells with proteasome inhibitor or 
vehicle control followed by drug washout, 
adoptively transferred the cells into con-
genically marked recipients, then infect-
ed the recipients with Lm-OVA; donor- 
derived CD8+ T cells were then analyzed 
at days 7 and 50 after infection (Figure 
4A). Cells that had been treated with pro-
teasome inhibitor or vehicle control gave 
rise to comparable numbers of effector 
cells on day 7 after infection (Figure 4B). 
However, compared with control-treated 
 
cells, proteasome inhibitor–treated cells 
exhibited a significant reduction in the 
proportion of KLRG1loIL-7Rhi memory 
precursor cells (Figure 4C) (10) and 
expressed higher levels of transcription 
factors T-bet, Eomes, and IRF4 (Figure 
4D). On day 50 after infection, compared 
with control-treated cells, proteasome 
inhibitor–treated cells gave rise to mark-
edly fewer memory CD8+ T cells (Figure 
4E); these cells expressed higher levels of 
KLRG1; lower levels of IL-7R, CD122, and 
CD27, molecules associated with memory 
 
cell survival (36, 37); and reduced levels of 
the antiapoptotic molecule Bcl-2 (Figure 
4, F and G) (36, 37). Upon re-challenge, 
mice that had received proteasome inhibitor–treated cells exhib-
ited significantly reduced secondary re-expansion (Figure 4H) 
compared with control-treated cells, supporting the hypothesis that 
inhibiting proteasome activity in CD8+ T cells results in reduced 
memory differentiation.
To determine whether increasing proteasome activity in CD8+ 
T cells might enhance their capacity to differentiate into memory 
 
lymphocytes, we transiently pretreated OT-I CD8+ T cells with 
and catalytic subunits of the 20S proteasome compared with cells 
treated with vehicle control (Supplemental Figure 4, A and B). We 
then tested whether modulation of proteasome activity might alter 
other attributes of effector CD8+ T cell differentiation and func-
tion in addition to cytokine production. Indeed, compared with 
control-treated cells, proteasome inhibitor–treated cells exhibit-
ed higher levels of T-bet and IRF4 (Figure 3D), key transcription 
factors that have been linked with terminal effector cell differen-
Figure 3. Modulation of proteasome activity influences CD8+ T cell function in vitro. (A) Proteasome 
activity, assessed by in-gel assay, of naive CD8+ T cells following 4 hours of culture with vehicle, protea-
some inhibitor, or proteasome activator. Immunoblotting was performed with anti–β-actin antibodies to 
confirm equal loading of samples. (B) Proteasome activity, assessed by flow cytometry, of cells cultured 
with vehicle (black line), proteasome inhibitor (red line), or proteasome activator (blue line). (C) Prote-
asome activity, assessed by bioluminescent chymotrypsin-like proteolytic assay, of cells cultured with 
proteasome inhibitor (red bar) or proteasome activator (blue bar) and normalized to vehicle control (black 
bar). (D) Flow cytometry analysis (left) and MFI (right) of T-bet and IRF4 at 72 hours after activation in 
CD8+ T cells transiently treated for 4 hours with vehicle, proteasome inhibitor, or proteasome activator 
prior to activation with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies. (E) Percent specific cytotoxicity of OT-I CD8+ T 
cells treated transiently with vehicle (black line), proteasome inhibitor (red line), or proteasome activator 
(blue line) prior to culture with T cell–depleted splenocytes and OVA peptide. CD8+ T cells were incubated  
with an equal ratio of peptide-pulsed and unpulsed splenocytes in varying effector cell to target cell 
ratios. Cytotoxicity was calculated as the difference in the percentage of live events between pulsed and 
unpulsed target cells, normalized to the live percentage of unpulsed target cells. Data are representative 
of at least 2 independent experiments (A–C) or least 3 biologic replicates from 3 independent experiments 
(D and E). Error bars represent SEM of 3 replicates. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 (C and D, 1-way 
ANOVA with Dunnett’s post-test; E, repeated measures 1-way ANOVA).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 1 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 10   October 2017
proteasome activator or vehicle control followed by drug washout, 
adoptively transferred the cells into recipient mice, then infected the 
recipients with Lm-OVA. We observed that proteasome activator–
treated cells expanded to the same degree as vehicle-treated cells 
by day 7 after infection (Figure 5A). Compared with control-treated 
cells, proteasome activator–treated cells tended to have a KLRG1lo 
IL-7Rhi phenotype (Figure 5B), although their expression of T-bet 
and Eomes was comparable (Figure 5C). Although proteasome 
activator–treated cells gave rise to similar numbers of total memory 
cells on day 50 after infection compared with control cells (Figure 
5D), they had decreased expression of KLRG1 and increased IL-7R, 
and they exhibited higher expression of Bcl-2, CD122, CD27, and 
CD62L, indicating that these memory cells were more likely to be 
TCM cells (10) (Figure 5, E and F). Proteasome activator–treated cells 
exhibited significantly higher secondary re-expansion in response to 
rechallenge (Figure 5G). Taken together, these results suggest that 
the level of proteasome activity in CD8+ T cells early during their 
 
differentiation may play a critical role in regulating memory lympho-
cyte fate specification and function.
Last, we sought to determine whether manipulation of pro-
teasome activity during late phases of differentiation would still 
affect the differentiation of effector and memory cells. CD8+ T 
cells were activated in vitro for 2 days, then cultured with IL-2 to 
induce effector-like differentiation or IL-15 to induce memory- 
like differentiation. Proteasome inhibitor or activator was added 
 
at the same time as cytokines (“early condition”) or 2 days later 
 
(“late condition”). Treatment with proteasome inhibitor increased 
the percentage of effector-like IL-2RαhiCD62Llo cells and reduced 
Figure 4. Proteasome inhibition reduces CD8+ T cell memory formation in vivo. (A) Experimental design. CD45.1+ OT-I CD8+ T cells were transiently treated 
with vehicle control, proteasome inhibitor, or proteasome activator, then adoptively transferred into CD45.2 recipients that were subsequently infected with 
103 CFU Lm-OVA; mice were analyzed on days 7 and 50 after infection (p.i.). (B) Percentages of CD45.1+ vehicle- and proteasome inhibitor–treated CD8+ T 
cells, analyzed by flow cytometry on day 7 after infection. (C) Percentages of KLRG1hiIL-7Rlo and KLRG1loIL-7Rhi cells, gated on CD45.1+CD8+ cells, as in B. (D) 
T-bet, Eomes, and IRF4 expression (MFI) within gated CD45.1+CD8+ cells, as in B. (E) Percentages of CD45.1+ vehicle- and proteasome inhibitor–treated CD8+ 
T cells on day 50 after infection. (F) Percentages of KLRG1hiIL-7Rlo and KLRG1loIL-7Rhi cells, gated on CD45.1+CD8+ cells, as in E. (G) T-bet, Eomes, and Bcl-2 
expression (MFI) and percentages of cells expressing CD122, CD27, or CD62L; cells were gated on CD45.1+CD8+ T cells, as in E. (H) Proliferative response of 
CD45.1+CD8+ T cells in response to re-infection with 105 CFU Lm-OVA in immune mice that had received cells treated with vehicle or proteasome inhibitor 50 
days prior. (B–H) Data are representative of at least two independent experiments with n ≥ 4 mice per group; error bars represent SEM of 3 replicates. N.S.,  
P > 0.05; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 (Student’s t test).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 1 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 10   October 2017
differentiation of memory-like IL-2RαloCD62Lhi cells regardless 
of when the drug was added (Supplemental Figure 5). However, 
 
treatment with proteasome activator only increased differen-
tiation into memory-like cells or reduced differentiation into 
effector-like cells when added at an early stage of differentiation 
(Supplemental Figure 5). These results suggest that proteasome 
inhibitors, but not proteasome activators, may be capable of alter-
ing CD8+ T cell fate specification even after cells have begun the 
process of differentiation.
Proteasome activity influences transcriptomic and proteomic pro-
files of activated CD8+ T cells. To begin to investigate the molecu-
lar mechanisms underlying proteasome-mediated regulation of 
terminal effector and memory lymphocyte differentiation, we 
performed microarray analysis of CD8+ T cells treated with prote-
asome inhibitor, proteasome activator, or vehicle control activated 
for 24 hours in vitro. 470 and 1,461 genes were significantly differ-
entially expressed in inhibitor-treated and activator-treated CD8+ 
T cells, respectively, compared with control-treated cells (Fig-
ure 6, A and B). Proteasome activator–treated cells differentially 
expressed several transcripts that have been previously reported 
to be associated with T cell function, survival, and memory (Fig-
ure 6, B and C), including Ifng, Il2, Tbx21, Eomes, Bcl2, Klf2, and 
Il7r. By contrast, many of these genes did not differ significantly 
between groups receiving control treatment and those receiving 
proteasome inhibitor treatment (Supplemental Figure 6).
Differentially expressed genes were subjected to pathway analy-
sis to determine relevant Gene Ontology biological processes. These 
analyses identified metabolic processes among the most significantly 
affected pathways; these processes included apoptosis, lipid metab-
olism, cellular protein metabolism, and cell proliferation (Figure 6, 
D and E). Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) revealed that tran-
scripts expressed in proteasome inhibitor–treated cells were signifi-
cantly enriched within the set of genes associated with effector CD8+ 
T cells obtained from the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB; 
http:/
/software.broadinstitute.org/gsea/msigdb; Supplemental Table 
1 and Figure 6F). Conversely, transcripts upregulated in proteasome 
activator–treated cells were significantly enriched within the set of 
genes associated with naive and memory CD8+ T cells (Figure 6F). 
Taken together, these data suggest that the low and high proteasome 
activity levels induced by proteasome inhibitor and activator resulted 
in differential regulation of cellular metabolic processes, which may 
lead to gene expression patterns resembling those found in effector 
and memory CD8+ T cells, respectively.
We next sought to identify categories of proteins that might be 
differentially affected by distinct levels of proteasome activity. We 
performed a quantitative shotgun proteomic screen using stable 
isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), a meth-
od in which newly synthesized proteins are differentially labeled 
with different isotopes. CD8+ T cells were treated with proteasome 
inhibitor, proteasome activator, or vehicle control and activated in 
Figure 5. Proteasome activation enhances generation of central memory CD8+ T cells in vivo. (A) Percentages of CD45.1+ vehicle- and proteasome activator– 
treated CD8+ T cells, analyzed by flow cytometry on day 7 after infection. (B) Percentage of KLRG1hiIL-7Rlo and KLRG1loIL-7Rhi cells, gated on CD45.1+ CD8+ cells. 
(C) T-bet and Eomes expression within gated CD45.1+CD8+ cells, as in I. (D) Percentages of CD45.1+ vehicle- and proteasome activator–treated CD8+ T cells, 
analyzed by flow cytometry on day 50 after infection. (E) Percentage of KLRG1hiIL-7Rlo and KLRG1loIL-7Rhi cells, gated on CD45.1+ CD8+ cells. (F) T-bet, Eomes, or 
Bcl-2 expression (MFI) and percentages of cells expressing CD122, CD27, or CD62L; cells were gated on CD45.1+CD8+ T cells as in L. (G) Proliferative response of 
CD45.1+ CD8+ T cells in response to re-infection with 105 CFU Lm-OVA in immune mice that had received cells treated with vehicle or proteasome activator 50 
days prior. (A–G) Data are representative of at least 2 independent experiments with n ≥ 4 mice per group; error bars represent SEM of 3 replicates. N.S.,  
P > 0.05; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 (Student’s t test).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 1 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 10   October 2017
experimental groups. Relative to control-treated cells, 337 proteins 
were found at higher levels in proteasome inhibitor–treated cells, 
whereas 341 proteins were found at lower levels in proteasome 
activator–treated cells (Figure 7, A and B). Pathway analyses of dif-
ferentially abundant proteins suggested that proteasome inhibition 
significantly affected several metabolic processes, including ribo-
vitro for 52 hours (at least 6 cell divisions) in media that contained 
either “light” or “heavy” isotopes of l-lysine and l-arginine to 
allow metabolic incorporation of these amino acids into proteins. 
After cell lysis, peptides were analyzed by multidimensional liquid 
 
chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS proteomics), 
and differentially expressed proteins were compared between 
Figure 6. Modulating proteasome activity in activated CD8+ T cells alters their gene expression. (A and B) Volcano plots depicting differentially expressed 
genes derived from microarray gene expression analysis in CD8+ T cells treated with (A) proteasome inhibitor or (B) proteasome activator prior to activation 
with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies for 24 hours, compared with gene expression of vehicle-treated cells. The x axis represents normalized log2 expres-
sion, and the y axis represents significance as –log10 (t test P value). Each dot represents an individual gene; red or blue represents significantly differentially 
upregulated or downregulated genes, respectively. (C) mRNA expression of selected cytokines, transcription factors, and memory-associated genes in prote-
asome activator–treated CD8+ T cells 24 hours following activation with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies. Expression is shown relative to vehicle-treated 
cells and normalized to the average of Rpl13 and Rn18s RNA. (D and E) Gene Ontology Biological Processes of differentially expressed gene sets are shown in 
order of significance as –log10 (corrected P value). (F) GSEA of functional enrichment of differentially expressed genes in proteasome inhibitor–treated versus 
proteasome activator–treated cells; naive, effector, and memory enrichment datasets were obtained from MSigDB. Enrichment score is visualized in green; 
NES, normalized enrichment score. Microarray data are derived from 2 biological replicates. mRNA expression data are representative of 3 biologic replicates 
from 3 independent experiments. Error bars represent SEM of 3 replicates. N.S., P > 0.05; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 (Student’s 2-tailed t test).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 1 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 10   October 2017
pared with control-treated cells, while proteasome activator–treated 
cells exhibited decreases in these processes (Figure 8, A and B). Con-
versely, proteasome inhibitor–treated cells exhibited a decreased 
maximal respiratory capacity, while proteasome activator–treated 
cells exhibited an increase (Figure 8C). In support of the hypothe-
sis that low levels of proteasome activity may promote glycolysis, we 
observed that inhibitor-treated cells exhibited increased expression 
of genes associated with glycolysis and glutaminolysis, such as Glut1, 
Hk2, Eno1, Ldha, and Pfkp (Figure 8D); by contrast, these genes did 
not differ in expression between control-treated and activator- 
treated cells (Supplemental Figure 7). Taken together, these results 
suggest that low levels of proteasome activity may promote meta-
bolic reprograming by enhancing the expression of key metabolic 
genes involved in the glycolytic program.
We next sought to determine the mechanism by which prote-
asome activity influences the glycolytic transcriptional program. 
Several key transcription factors, including Myc, estrogen-related 
receptor α (ERRα), and hypoxia-inducible factor 1-α (HIF1α), have 
been shown to facilitate metabolic reprogramming by upregulat-
ing genes associated with the glycolytic pathway (1, 40–42). Con-
versely, Bcl-6 directly represses genes encoding the glycolytic 
pathway, while Foxo1 positively regulates genes involved in mito-
chondrial function and fatty acid metabolism (43, 44). Relative to 
control-treated cells, proteasome inhibitor–treated cells exhibited 
nucleoprotein complex biogenesis, generation of precursor metab-
olites, and electron transport chain activity. Proteasome activation 
had the most pronounced effects on pathways involving lympho-
cyte activation and differentiation (Figure 7, C and D). The tran-
scriptomic analysis suggests that proteasome modulation results 
in differential expression of genes controlling cellular metabolism, 
and the findings from the proteomic screen confirm that these met-
abolic changes persist even after cell divisions have taken place. 
Taken together, these data suggest that early changes in proteasome 
activity can result in sustained changes in cellular metabolism that 
may play a role in regulating lymphocyte fate specification.
Modulating proteasome activity in CD8+ T cells affects metabolic 
reprogramming in a Myc-dependent manner. It has been previously 
shown that effector T cells increase aerobic glycolysis, the process 
by which glucose is converted to lactate in the presence of oxygen, 
whereas memory T cells preferentially use oxidative phosphoryla-
tion to meet metabolic demands (38, 39). To test the possibility that 
differential levels of proteasome activity might exert distinct effects 
on metabolic reprogramming, we examined the levels of glycolysis 
and oxidative phosphorylation in CD8+ T cells transiently treated 
with proteasome inhibitor, proteasome activator, or vehicle prior 
 
to activation in vitro for 72 hours. Proteasome inhibitor–treated 
cells exhibited an increased extracellular acidification rate (ECAR), 
which represents glycolytic activity, as well as glucose uptake com-
Figure 7. Modulating proteasome activity affects pathways involved in cellular metabolism. (A and B) Volcano plots depicting differentially expressed 
proteins derived from quantitative analysis in CD8+ T cells treated with (A) proteasome inhibitor (B) or proteasome activator prior to activation with 
anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies for 72 hours, compared with vehicle-treated cells. Numbers in the top left and top right corners represent the number 
of proteins whose abundance was decreased or increased, respectively, in the proteasome-inhibited (A) or proteasome-activated (B) conditions, relative 
to vehicle treatment, respectively. Black horizontal line represents the threshold of significance (P < 0.05). (C and D) Gene Ontology Biological Processes 
categories enriched in proteins that were differentially expressed by proteasome inhibitor–treated (C) or proteasome activator–treated (D) cells are shown 
in order of significance as –log10(t test P value). Data are representative of 3 biologic replicates.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 1 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 10   October 2017
Figure 8. Proteasome activity levels in CD8+ T cells alters cellular metabolism in a Myc-dependent manner. (A) ECAR, glycolysis, or maximal glycolytic 
capacity of CD8+ T cells transiently treated with vehicle (black), proteasome inhibitor (red), or proteasome activator (blue) prior to activation for 72 hours. 
Compounds were added at specified time points. (B) Glucose uptake, as measured by 2-NBDG, in CD8+ T cells treated as in A. (C) OCR and maximal respira-
tory capacity in CD8+ T cells transiently treated as in A. Compounds were added at specified time points. (D) mRNA expression of genes involved in glycoly-
sis and glutaminolysis in vehicle- or proteasome inhibitor–treated CD8+ T cells. Expression was normalized to Actb. (E) Immunoblot analysis of Myc, HIF1α, 
Bcl-6, ERRα, and Foxo1 in vehicle-, proteasome inhibitor–, and proteasome activator–treated CD8+ T cells. The same samples were used to probe for both 
ERRα and Foxo1. Molecular weights in kDa are listed. (F) FACS analysis of IFN-γ production in CD8+ T cells transiently treated with proteasome inhibitor, 
expressed as fold change over vehicle, followed by addition of DMSO or Myc inhibitor at 24 hours after activation. (G–I) FACS analysis of IFN-γ production, 
expressed as fold change over WT, in (G) HIF1α-deficient, (H) Bcl-6–deficient, or (I) Foxo1-deficient CD8+ T cells transiently treated with proteasome inhibi-
tor. (J) Myc expression (MFI) in first-division proteasome activityloCD8hi (red) and proteasome activityhiCD8lo (blue) cells. (K) Myc expression (MFI) in recently 
divided (second CFSE peak) cells arising from sorted undivided (first CFSE peak) CD8+ T cells treated with proteasome inhibitor or activator, relative to 
control-treated cells. Data are representative of 2 (E–I) or 3 independent experiments (A–D, J, and K), n ≥ 3 replicates per group. Error bars represent SEM 
of 3 replicates. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 (A and C, 1-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post-test; B, D, and F–K, Student’s 2-tailed t test).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 1 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 10   October 2017
protein or mRNA was then quantitated. We added proteasome- 
modulating drugs to cells that had been activated for 24 hours in 
order to more closely model functional effects of altered protea-
some activity specifically at the time of the first division, which 
occurs at 24 hours after activation (11). We observed that cells 
treated with proteasome inhibitor expressed higher levels of Myc 
protein, but not Myc mRNA (Supplemental Figure 11, B and C), 
suggesting that the proteasome may act predominantly by influ-
encing the levels of Myc protein through its degradative activity. 
Notably, these findings do not exclude the possibility that the 
proteasome may also regulate Myc at the level of transcription, 
especially in light of a recent report (48) demonstrating differ-
ential expression of Myc mRNA by putative pre-effector and pre- 
memory first-division cells, which as we show (Figure 1A) exhib-
ited distinct levels of proteasome activity.
Because antagonizing Myc has been previously shown to 
reduce mTORC1 signaling, we analyzed the phosphorylation 
state of downstream mTORC1 targets (49). mTORC1 is known 
to regulate cell growth, proliferation, and biosynthesis through 
phosphorylation of several targets, including S6 kinase and 4EBP1 
(50). mTORC2 is less characterized than mTORC1 but is also 
known to regulate similar processes through phosphorylation 
of Akt and NDRG1, an upstream regulator of SGK1 (51, 52). We 
observed that mTORC1 targets exhibited increased phosphor-
ylation in cells treated with proteasome inhibitor (Supplemental 
Figure 12A), whereas mTORC2 targets were not affected (Supple-
mental Figure 12B). Taken together, these findings suggest that 
proteasome-mediated effects on metabolism and T cell differen-
tiation may involve the mTORC1 pathway, although it remains to 
be determined whether these effects are mediated through Myc.
The observation of distinct proteasome activity levels with-
in daughter cells emerging from the first T cell division in vivo 
(Figure 1A), together with the finding that proteasome activity– 
mediated effects on effector differentiation were predominantly 
Myc-dependent (Figure 8, E and F), prompted us to hypothesize 
that Myc might also be unequally expressed in the first daughter 
cells by virtue of differential degradation. OT-I CD8+ T cells were 
labeled with CFSE and adoptively transferred into recipient mice 
that were infected 24 hours later with Lm-OVA; splenocytes were 
harvested and analyzed 48 hours after infection. We observed 
that among cells that had undergone their first division (second 
CFSE peak), pre-effector cells exhibiting low proteasome activity 
expressed higher levels of Myc on a per-cell basis compared with 
pre-memory cells exhibiting high proteasome activity (Figure 8J).
We sought to link the differential levels of Myc observed in 
first-division pre-effector and pre-memory daughter cells with 
the disparate levels of proteasome activity exhibited by these 
cells. To experimentally model the distinct levels of proteasome 
activity in first-division daughter cells, we activated CFSE-labeled 
CD8+ T cells for 24 hours in vitro and sorted the undivided paren-
tal cells (first CFSE peak) using flow cytometry. Sorted cells were 
then re-cultured for an additional 4 hours along with proteasome 
inhibitor or activator to model the low and high proteasome activ-
ity experienced by pre-effector and pre-memory daughter cells. 
Myc protein levels were then analyzed by flow cytometry in cells 
that had subsequently undergone their first division. We observed 
that nascent daughter cells pharmacologically induced to exhibit 
increased expression of Myc and HIF1α; however, no significant 
changes in the levels of ERRα, Bcl-6, or Foxo1 were observed in the 
setting of proteasome inhibition (Figure 8E). To confirm that prote-
asome activity–induced effects were not mediated through Foxo1, 
we also assessed nuclear translocation of Foxo1 following treat-
ment with proteasome-modulating drugs. Although we observed a 
modest increase in Foxo1 nuclear translocation in cells treated with 
proteasome inhibitor relative to vehicle-treated cells (Supplemen-
tal Figure 8, A and B), this increase did not appear to be functionally 
significant, as the expression of known Foxo1 downstream targets, 
including TCF1 and Eomes (44, 45), was not altered.
Because we observed increased expression of Myc and HIF1α 
in CD8+ T cells exhibiting low proteasome activity, we investigated 
whether these transcription factors were functionally required for 
the proteasome inhibitor–mediated effects on effector CD8+ T cell 
differentiation. We assessed IFN-γ as a proxy of effector cell differ-
entiation because its expression is dependent on the induction of 
glycolysis (46). We activated wild-type (WT) CD8+ T cells treated 
 
with proteasome inhibitor or vehicle control and added a Myc 
inhibitor (47) at 24 hours following activation to avoid potential 
confounding effects on cell activation and proliferation (40). Strik-
ingly, addition of Myc inhibitor prevented the increase in IFN-γ 
production induced by proteasome inhibition, suggesting that the 
 
proteasome-mediated effect on effector differentiation was depen-
dent on Myc (Figure 8F and Supplemental Figure 9). By contrast, 
analogous experiments performed with HIF1α-deficient CD8+ T 
cells suggested that HIF1α might be dispensable for the proteasome- 
mediated effects on early T cell effector differentiation (Figure 8G 
and Supplemental Figure 10).
Although we did not observe changes in the expression level of 
Bcl-6 and Foxo1 in CD8+ T cells treated with proteasome inhibitor 
or activator, it remained possible that these molecules could none-
theless play a functional role in mediating decreased effector CD8+ 
T cell differentiation induced by the proteasome activator. We acti-
vated Bcl-6–deficient, Foxo1-deficient, or WT CD8+ T cells treated 
with proteasome activator or vehicle control. Bcl-6–deficient and 
Foxo1-deficient CD8+ T cells exhibited a proteasome activator– 
mediated reduction in IFN-γ production comparable to that 
observed with control cells, suggesting that both Bcl-6 and Foxo1 
may be dispensable for proteasome-mediated effects on effector 
differentiation (Figure 8, H and I, and Supplemental Figure 10). 
Taken together, these results suggest that proteasome-mediated 
effects on metabolic reprogramming and effector differentiation 
may be predominantly dependent on Myc.
Next, we sought to determine whether the Myc-dependent 
effects we observed were mediated through changes in mRNA, 
protein, or both. CD8+ T cells were treated with vehicle, protea-
some inhibitor, or proteasome activator; activated with anti-CD3 
and anti-CD28 antibodies; then assessed at 24, 48, or 72 hours 
for Myc mRNA expression. Proteasome inhibitor–treated cells 
exhibited an increase in Myc mRNA expression compared with 
vehicle-treated cells, but only at 72 hours after activation (Sup-
plemental Figure 11A). These findings suggested that changes in 
Myc at the mRNA level may be an indirect consequence of altered 
proteasome activity. As a complementary approach, CD8+ T cells 
activated for 24 hours with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies 
were treated with vehicle, inhibitor, or activator for 4 hours; Myc 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 2 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 10   October 2017
of these transcripts were shared between these gene sets, suggest-
ing that the majority of these differentially expressed genes may 
uniquely influence either early specification or maintenance of 
lymphocyte fate, but not both processes.
In addition to proteasome activity, other components of the 
ubiquitin-proteasome system have been previously shown to influ-
ence lymphocyte differentiation and function. Stability of the 
transcription factor Foxp3 has been shown to undergo ubiquitin- 
proteasome system–mediated (UPS-mediated) regulation (53, 54). 
Moreover, proteasome inhibition through genetic or pharmacologic 
approaches can attenuate experimental models of autoimmune dis-
ease by virtue of effects on antigen processing and presentation or 
direct effects on T lymphocytes (22–24). In another study, treatment 
of virally infected mice with the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib 
resulted in an impaired CD8+ T cell response, but these effects were 
attributed to effects on antigen presentation due to systemic admin-
istration of the drug (55). By contrast, our data suggest that modula-
tion of T cell–intrinsic proteasome activity can alter differentiation 
 
in response to microbial infection, with decreased proteasome activ-
ity promoting the terminal effector cell fate and increased protea-
some activity promoting the central memory cell fate.
Another factor that has recently been shown to influence the 
differentiation of CD8+ and CD4+ T cells responding to microbial 
infection is metabolic reprogramming (38, 39). Within the first 24 
hours following T cell activation, a rapid increase in glycolysis and 
glutamine oxidation driven by Myc-dependent metabolic repro-
gramming occurs, driven by the upregulation of numerous genes 
encoding molecules necessary for these processes (40). At later 
time points, additional factors, such as HIF1α, may play an import-
ant role in sustaining the glycolytic program (56). Engagement of 
glycolysis by activated CD8+ T cells is essential for de-repression of 
IFN-γ mRNA, a hallmark of effector differentiation (46). Our data 
suggest that a key consequence of differential proteasome activity 
 
within CD8+ T cells that have undergone their first division in vivo 
is an alteration in their expression of Myc. These findings are con-
sistent with recent reports demonstrating asymmetric PI3K signal-
ing, Myc expression, and mTORC1 kinase activity following CD8+ 
T cell division (49, 57, 58). In the current study, we provide evidence 
supporting a role for Myc in influencing proteasome activity– 
mediated effects on CD8+ T cell differentiation. However, Myc 
is unlikely to be the only mediator, as the proteasome can target 
many ubiquitinated proteins, including T-bet (11), that play criti-
cal roles in T cell differentiation. In support of this possibility, we 
provide evidence that proteasome modulation may also influence 
the mTORC1 pathway, consistent with recent publications demon-
strating a role for mTORC1 in CD8+ T cell differentiation (58, 59).
Immunologic memory is an important goal of vaccination 
strategies. Recent evidence has suggested the intriguing pos-
sibility that targeting cellular metabolism may be a strategy 
for increasing the generation and function of memory CD8+ T 
cells. Inhibition of the mTORC1 pathway of metabolic regula-
tion and nutrient sensing enhanced the development of central 
memory CD8+ T lymphocytes (60). Treatment of mice with 
the drug metformin promoted fatty acid oxidation and oxida-
tive phosphorylation through an AMPK-dependent mecha-
nism, resulting in an enhanced memory CD8+ T cell response 
(38). Conversely, inhibition of glycolysis in CD8+ T cells using 
low proteasome activity expressed higher levels of Myc, whereas 
 
daughter cells induced to exhibit high proteasome activity 
expressed lower levels of Myc (Figure 8K). Taken together, these 
data suggest that the low proteasome activity observed in first- 
division pre-effector daughter cells may result in reduced degra-
dation and consequently increased abundance of Myc, leading to 
increased glycolytic activity and effector differentiation.
Discussion
While both T cell–intrinsic and –extrinsic factors have been shown 
to contribute to specification of CD8+ T lymphocytes into terminal 
effector and memory cells following microbial infection (1–4), the 
underlying mechanisms remain incompletely understood. It has 
been previously demonstrated that asymmetric proteasome seg-
regation during the first CD8+ T lymphocyte division in response to 
microbial infection mediates unequal T-bet inheritance by the result-
ing daughter cells through differential degradation of T-bet protein 
degradation (11). However, the prior study did not directly investigate 
the functional consequences of asymmetric proteasome segregation 
on CD8+ T differentiation following division. Here we show that the 
level of proteasome activity within a differentiating lymphocyte can 
play a critical role in influencing CD8+ T cell fate decisions. Strikingly, 
differentially fated daughter cells emerging from the first division in 
response to microbial infection exhibit distinct levels of proteasome 
activity. We show that proteasome activity can be exploited phar-
macologically to alter the differentiation of CD8+ T cells toward the 
terminal effector or memory fate. Importantly, our study is the first 
to our knowledge to suggest that increasing proteasome activity may 
enhance the generation of central memory T cells. These functional 
consequences appear to be mediated, in part, through alterations in 
Myc expression that lead to metabolic reprogramming.
Regulation of endogenous proteasome activity has been pre-
viously demonstrated to play an important role in controlling 
cell fate decisions in multiple biologic contexts. Pluripotent stem 
cells exhibit higher levels of proteasome activity compared with 
their differentiated progeny (18, 19). Moreover, regulation of pro-
teasome activity has been shown to influence the specification 
and function of cancer stem cells, a subset of cancer cells that are 
characterized by self-renewal capacity and the ability to initiate 
tumors (20, 21). Our data provide evidence supporting a role for 
proteasome activity in another important biologic context — CD8+ 
T lymphocyte fate specification in response to microbial infection. 
We show that cells with lower proteasome activity tend to differ-
entiate into terminal effector cells, whereas cells with high pro-
teasome activity tend to acquire a memory cell fate. Notably, the 
differences in proteasome activity observed at the first division 
do not appear to persist as the cells continue to differentiate. This 
finding suggests that proteasome activity may be important in 
 
early CD8+ T cell fate specification, but may no longer play the same 
role in “fully differentiated” terminal effector or memory cells. In 
support of this possibility, we recently showed that early specifi-
cation versus maintenance of CD8+ T cell fates may be regulated 
by distinct transcriptional programs (48). Using a single-cell RNA- 
sequencing approach, we observed that 930 genes were differen-
tially expressed between putative pre-memory and pre-effector 
cells at the first division, whereas 834 genes were differentially 
expressed between terminal effector and memory cells. Only 115 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 2 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 10   October 2017
(IM7), anti–IFN-γ (XMG1.2), anti–TNF-α (MP6-XT22), anti-KLRG1 (2F1), 
anti–IL-7R (A7R34), anti-CD27 (LG.7F9), anti–T-bet (4B10), anti–Bcl-2 
(BCL/10C4; all from BioLegend), and anti-Gzmb (GB11, Life Technol-
ogies). Intracellular antigens were stained with a Transcription Factor 
Staining Buffer Set (eBioscience) according to the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. For intracellular cytokine staining, cells were stimulated for 4 hours 
at 37°C with 0.5 μg/ml phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate, 5 μg/ml ionomycin 
(Sigma-Aldrich) in the presence of 10 μg/ml brefeldin A (Sigma-Aldrich). 
Cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (Electron Microscopy Services) 
and permeabilized with PBS (Mediatech) containing 1% FBS (Life Tech-
nologies), 1% saponin (Sigma-Aldrich), and 0.1% sodium azide (Sigma- 
Aldrich), followed by staining with antibodies. Analysis was performed 
with FlowJo software (Tree Star).
Immunoblotting and antibodies. Cells were lysed with RIPA lysis 
buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% 
sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) in the presence of Protease Inhibi-
tor Cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich). Protein concentration was quantitated 
using a DC protein assay (Bio-Rad). 20 μg of protein was resolved on 
4-20% Tris-Glycine gels (Life Technologies) and transferred onto 
nitrocellulose membranes. Membranes were probed with the fol-
lowing antibodies: anti-Myc (D84C12), anti–Bcl-6 (polyclonal), anti- 
ERRα (E1G1J), Foxo1 (C29H4; all from Cell Signaling Technology), 
anti-HIF1α (polyclonal, Novus Biologicals), and anti–β-actin (AC-74, 
Sigma-Aldrich). Fluorochrome-conjugated secondary antibodies 
used were anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 680 (Life Technologies) and anti-
mouse IRDye 800 (Rockland). Fluorescent signals were detected 
using an Odyssey imaging system (LI-COR Biosciences).
Cytotoxicity assay. OT-I CD8+ T cells were pretreated with DMSO, 
0.5 μM epoxomicin, or 1 μM proteasome activator for 4 hours, washed, 
and then cultured with OVA peptide for 3 days. Mouse splenocytes 
were harvested and labeled with 5 μM and 0.5 μM eFluor 670 (eBiosci-
ence) for use as target cells. One group of labeled cells was pulsed with 
1 nM peptide for 1 hour, while the other group served as an unpulsed 
control. CD8+ T cells were cocultured in various ratios with unpulsed 
and pulsed target cells for 4 hours. Specific killing was shown as the 
difference in live percentage between pulsed and unpulsed target 
cells, normalized to the live percentage of unpulsed target cells.
Adoptive transfer and infection. For analysis of first-division 
cells, OT-I CD8+ T cells were labeled with CFSE, and 3 × 106 cells 
were transferred intravenously into recipient mice. 24 hours later, 
mice were infected intravenously with 5 × 103 CFU of L. monocy-
togenes expressing full-length chicken OVA (Lm-OVA). 45 hours 
after infection, spleens were harvested and analyzed by flow 
cytometry. For analysis of cells 7 and 50 days after infection, 5 × 
103 congenically marked CD45.1+ OT-I CD8+ T cells transiently 
treated with proteasome inhibitor or activator were transferred 
into CD45.2+ recipient mice that were infected 24 hours later with 
Lm-OVA. Blood and splenocytes were analyzed on days 7 and 50 
after infection. Mice were re-challenged ≥50 days after infection 
with 5 × 105 CFU Lm-OVA.
Gene expression microarray. RNA was extracted using TRIzol with 
GlycoBlue, then processed using an RNA Clean & Concentrator Kit 
(Zymo Research). RNA quality was assessed using the Agilent 2100 
Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies). Microarray analysis was per-
formed using the Illumina Mouse WG-6 v2.0 Expression BeadChip 
(Illumina) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Data analysis is 
detailed in Supplemental Methods.
2-deoxyglucose resulted in increased formation of CD8+ central 
memory T cells (61). Taken together, these studies suggested 
 
that increasing fatty acid oxidation and oxidative phosphoryla-
tion at the expense of glycolysis has the potential to enhance 
the generation of immunologic memory. Our findings here sug-
gest that increasing proteasome activity in CD8+ T cells results 
in key changes in cellular metabolism and raise the possibility 
that such an approach may be a useful strategy in enhancing the 
generation of central memory T cells.
Methods
Mice. All mice were housed in specific pathogen–free conditions 
before use. WT C57BL/6, OT-I, and P14 mice were purchased from 
the Jackson Laboratory. Cd4CreHif1αfl/fl mice have been previously 
described (42). Cd4CreBcl6fl/fl mice were provided by Shane Crotty (La 
Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, California, USA) 
and dLckCreFoxo1fl/fl mice were provided by Stephen Hedrick (UCSD).
Cell culture. Single-cell suspensions were prepared from spleens 
and peripheral lymph nodes of C57BL/6, OT-I, or P14 mice. For in 
vitro memory differentiation, TCR transgenic CD8+ T cells were iso-
lated using a CD8+ T Cell Isolation Kit II (Miltenyi Biotec) and then 
cultured for 2 days with their cognate peptide and WT T cell–depleted 
splenocytes. Cells were then washed and resuspended in media con-
taining IL-2 or IL-15 (PeproTech), along with DMSO (Sigma-Aldrich), 
100 nM epoxomicin (Enzo), 1 μM proteasome activator, or 1 μM tac-
rolimus (Sigma-Aldrich); cells were analyzed 3 or 5 days later. In pre-
treatment experiments, CD8+ T cells were isolated with a CD8+ T Cell 
Isolation Kit II; treated with DMSO, 0.5 μM epoxomicin, or 1 μM prote-
asome activator for 4 hours; washed with culture media; then cultured 
with immobilized anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 (Bio X Cell) antibodies 
and IL-2 for 3 days. In some experiments, Myc inhibitor was added 24 
hours after activation at a dose of 10 μM (47).
Proteasome activity assays. Cells were incubated with 5 μM activity- 
based proteasome probe (21, 28) for 2 hours at 37°C, then washed and 
analyzed with flow cytometry. To analyze probed cells using SDS-PAGE, 
cells were lysed with cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, 150 mM 
NaCl, 1% Triton X-100) for 30 minutes at 4°C with vortexing. 50 μg of 
protein was incubated with 0.5 μM of activity-based probe for 1 hour at 
37°C, then resolved on a 4-20% Tris-Glycine gel (Life Technologies). 
Fluorescence was detected directly from the gel using a FluorChem 
Q (Cell Biosciences). Proteasome activity was also measured using a 
 
Proteasome-Glo Cell-Based Assay (Promega) according to the manu-
facturer’s instructions.
Analysis of gene expression. RNA was extracted using TRIzol (Life 
Technologies) with GlycoBlue coprecipitant (Ambion). RNA quality 
and concentration were measured using a NanoDrop spectrometer 
(Thermo Scientific). cDNA was synthesized using a High-Capacity 
cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems). Primers were 
designed using Primer-BLAST (62). Quantitative PCR was performed 
using SsoAdvanced SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad) on a CFX96 
qPCR machine (Bio-Rad). Relative mRNA was quantitated using the 
ΔΔCt method. Primers are listed in Supplemental Table 2.
Flow cytometry, cell sorting, and antibodies. Cells were stained with flu-
orochrome-conjugated antibodies and analyzed on an Accuri C6 or FACS-
Canto II (BD Biosciences). Cell sorting was done on a FACSAria II (BD Bio-
sciences). The following antibodies were used: anti-CD8α (clone 53-6.7), 
anti-CD45.1 (A20), anti-CD25 (PC61), anti-CD62L (MEL-14), anti-CD44 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 2 2
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 10   October 2017
Author contributions
CEW, JGO, PJM, DAG, ATP, AWG, JDB, and JTC designed exper-
iments. CEW, PJM, JL, SHK, and SS performed experiments and 
data analysis. GdB, YL, CRB, AdJ, BIF, HSO, and HO provided 
critical reagents and advice. JNS and JRY performed quantitative 
proteomics analysis. KF and ANC performed microarray analysis. 
CEW and JTC wrote the manuscript, and all authors contributed to 
manuscript editing.
Acknowledgments
We thank members of the Chang laboratory for helpful discussions 
and critical reading of the manuscript. This work was supported by the 
NIH (DK080949, OD008469, and AI095277 to JTC; P41GM103533 
to JRY; AI072117 to AWG) and UCSD Digestive Diseases Research 
Development Center Grant DK80506; JTC is a Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute Physician-Scientist Early Career Awardee. CEW 
and PJM were supported by NIH grant T32DK007202. JNS was sup-
ported by an NIH Ruth L. Kirschstein Postdoctoral National Research 
Service Award (F32AG039127). DAG is a Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute Gilliam Fellow.
Address correspondence to: John T. Chang, 9500 Gilman Drive, Mail 
Code 0063, La Jolla, California 92093, USA. Phone: 858.822. 5795; 
Email: changj@ucsd.edu
JNS’s present address is: Department of Neurology, Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA
SILAC metabolic labeling and mass spectrometry. Preparation 
and processing of isotope-labeled CD8+ T cells that had been 
 
treated with proteasome inhibitor or activator are detailed in 
 
Supplemental Methods. Proteomic analysis of purified CD8+ T 
cell lysate proteins was carried out using Multidimensional Pro-
tein Identification Technology (MudPIT) (63). Protein identifi-
cation and quantitation analysis was performed as detailed in 
 
Supplemental Methods.
Cellular metabolism analysis. CD8+ T cells were treated with 
vehicle, proteasome inhibitor, or proteasome activator for 4 hours, 
washed, then cultured with immobilized anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 
antibodies and IL-2 for 2 days. 2 × 105 CD8+CD44+ cells were plated in 
triplicate and analyzed for ECAR and oxygen consumption rate (OCR) 
on a Seahorse XF96 (Seahorse Bioscience) according to the manu-
facturer’s instructions. Glycolytic and mitochondrial stress tests were 
performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Statistics. An unpaired (2-tailed) Student’s t test was used for 
comparisons between 2 groups. One-way ANOVA was used to mea-
sure multiple treatments compared with a control group. Repeated 
measures 1-way ANOVA was used for comparisons among 3 or more 
groups over several time points (GraphPad Prism). P values less than 
0.05 were considered significant.
Study approval. All animal work was approved by the Institutional 
Animal Care and Use Committee of UCSD.
Accession codes. Gene expression array data: NCBI Gene Expression 
Omnibus (GEO) GSE78750. Proteomic data: MassIVE MSV000079611 
(https:/
/massive.ucsd.edu/ProteoSAFe/static/massive.jsp).
 1. Chang JT, Wherry EJ, Goldrath AW. Molecular 
regulation of effector and memory T cell differ-
entiation. Nat Immunol. 2014;15(12):1104–1115.
 2. Kaech SM, Cui W. Transcriptional control of 
effector and memory CD8+ T cell differentia-
tion. Nat Rev Immunol. 2012;12(11):749–761.
 3. Kaech SM, Wherry EJ. Heterogeneity and cell-
fate decisions in effector and memory CD8+ T 
cell differentiation during viral infection. Immu-
nity. 2007;27(3):393–405.
 4. Williams MA, Bevan MJ. Effector and mem-
ory CTL differentiation. Annu Rev Immunol. 
2007;25:171–192.
 5. Stemberger C, et al. A single naive CD8+ T cell 
precursor can develop into diverse effector and 
memory subsets. Immunity. 2007;27(6):985–997.
 6. Gerlach C, et al. One naive T cell, multiple 
fates in CD8+ T cell differentiation. J Exp Med. 
2010;207(6):1235–1246.
 
7. Plumlee CR, Sheridan BS, Cicek BB, Lefrançois 
L. Environmental cues dictate the fate of individ-
ual CD8+ T cells responding to infection. Immu-
nity. 2013;39(2):347–356.
 8. Betschinger J, Knoblich JA. Dare to be dif-
ferent: asymmetric cell division in Drosoph-
ila, C. elegans and vertebrates. Curr Biol. 
2004;14(16):R674–R685.
 9. Chang JT, et al. Asymmetric T lymphocyte 
division in the initiation of adaptive immune 
responses. Science. 2007;315(5819):1687–1691.
 10. Joshi NS, et al. Inflammation directs memory 
precursor and short-lived effector CD8(+) T cell 
fates via the graded expression of T-bet transcrip-
tion factor. Immunity. 2007;27(2):281–295.
 11. Chang JT, et al. Asymmetric proteasome segrega-
tion as a mechanism for unequal partitioning of 
the transcription factor T-bet during T lympho-
cyte division. Immunity. 2011;34(4):492–504.
 12. Kincaid EZ, et al. Mice completely lacking immu-
noproteasomes show major changes in antigen 
presentation. Nat Immunol. 2011;13(2):129–135.
 13. Zanker D, Waithman J, Yewdell JW, Chen W. 
Mixed proteasomes function to increase viral 
peptide diversity and broaden antiviral CD8+ T 
cell responses. J Immunol. 2013;191(1):52–59.
 14. Glickman MH, Ciechanover A. The ubiquitin- 
proteasome proteolytic pathway: destruction  
for the sake of construction. Physiol Rev. 
2002;82(2):373–428.
 15. Kisselev AF, Goldberg AL. Monitoring activity 
and inhibition of 26S proteasomes with flu-
orogenic peptide substrates. Meth Enzymol. 
2005;398:364–378.
 16. Peth A, Besche HC, Goldberg AL. Ubiquitinated 
proteins activate the proteasome by binding to 
Usp14/Ubp6, which causes 20S gate opening. 
Mol Cell. 2009;36(5):794–804.
 17. Finley D. Recognition and processing of ubiquitin- 
protein conjugates by the proteasome. Annu Rev 
Biochem. 2009;78:477–513.
 18. Vilchez D, et al. Increased proteasome activity 
in human embryonic stem cells is regulated by 
PSMD11. Nature. 2012;489(7415):304–308.
 19. Jang J, Wang Y, Kim HS, Lalli MA, Kosik KS. Nrf2, 
a regulator of the proteasome, controls self- 
renewal and pluripotency in human embryonic 
stem cells. Stem Cells. 2014;32(10):2616–2625.
 20. Pan J, Zhang Q, Wang Y, You M. 26S protea-
some activity is down-regulated in lung cancer 
stem-like cells propagated in vitro. PLoS One. 
2010;5(10):e13298.
 21. Banno A, et al. Downregulation of 26S protea-
some catalytic activity promotes epithelial- 
mesenchymal transition. Oncotarget. 
2016;7(16):21527–21541.
 22. Muchamuel T, et al. A selective inhibitor of the 
immunoproteasome subunit LMP7 blocks cytokine 
production and attenuates progression of experi-
mental arthritis. Nat Med. 2009;15(7):781–787.
 23. Kalim KW, Basler M, Kirk CJ, Groettrup M. 
Immunoproteasome subunit LMP7 deficiency 
and inhibition suppresses Th1 and Th17 but 
enhances regulatory T cell differentiation.  
J Immunol. 2012;189(8):4182–4193.
 24. Basler M, Dajee M, Moll C, Groettrup M, Kirk CJ. 
Prevention of experimental colitis by a selective 
inhibitor of the immunoproteasome. J Immunol. 
2010;185(1):634–641.
 25. Yanaba K, et al. The proteasome inhibitor borte-
zomib inhibits T cell-dependent inflammatory 
responses. J Leukoc Biol. 2010;88(1):117–122.
 26. Rasid O, Meulenbroeks C, Gröne A, Zaiss D, 
Sijts A. Enhanced inflammatory potential of 
CD4+ T-cells that lack proteasome immuno-
subunit expression, in a T-cell transfer-based 
colitis model. PLoS One. 2014;9(4):e95378.
 27. Berkers CR, et al. Profiling proteasome activity 
in tissue with fluorescent probes. Mol Pharm. 
2007;4(5):739–748.
 28. Florea BI, et al. Activity-based profiling reveals 
reactivity of the murine thymoproteasome-specific 
subunit beta5t. Chem Biol. 2010;17(8):795–801.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 2 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 10   October 2017
 29. Arsenio J, Kakaradov B, Metz PJ, Kim SH, Yeo 
GW, Chang JT. Early specification of CD8+ T 
lymphocyte fates during adaptive immunity 
revealed by single-cell gene-expression analyses. 
Nat Immunol. 2014;15(4):365–372.
 30. Leestemaker Y, et al. Proteasome activa-
tion by small molecules. Cell Chem Biol. 
2017;24(6):725–736.e7.
 31. Manjunath N, et al. Effector differentiation 
is not prerequisite for generation of mem-
ory cytotoxic T lymphocytes. J Clin Invest. 
2001;108(6):871–878.
 32. Borel JF, Feurer C, Gubler HU, Stähelin H. Biolog-
ical effects of cyclosporin A: a new antilympho-
cytic agent. Agents Actions. 1976;6(4):468–475.
 33. Clipstone NA, Crabtree GR. Identification 
of calcineurin as a key signalling enzyme 
in T-lymphocyte activation. Nature. 
1992;357(6380):695–697.
 34. Liu J, Farmer JD, Lane WS, Friedman J, Weissman 
I, Schreiber SL. Calcineurin is a common target 
of cyclophilin-cyclosporin A and FKBP-FK506 
complexes. Cell. 1991;66(4):807–815.
 35. Huber M, Lohoff M. IRF4 at the crossroads of 
effector T-cell fate decision. Eur J Immunol. 
2014;44(7):1886–1895.
 36. Hendriks J, Gravestein LA, Tesselaar K, van Lier 
RA, Schumacher TN, Borst J. CD27 is required 
for generation and long-term maintenance of T 
cell immunity. Nat Immunol. 2000;1(5):433–440.
 37. Grayson JM, Zajac AJ, Altman JD, Ahmed R. 
Cutting edge: increased expression of Bcl-2 in 
antigen-specific memory CD8+ T cells. J Immunol. 
2000;164(8):3950–3954.
 38. Pearce EL, et al. Enhancing CD8 T-cell memory 
by modulating fatty acid metabolism. Nature. 
2009;460(7251):103–107.
 39. van der Windt GJ, Pearce EL. Metabolic switch-
ing and fuel choice during T-cell differentiation  
and memory development. Immunol Rev. 
2012;249(1):27–42.
 40. Wang R, et al. The transcription factor Myc con-
trols metabolic reprogramming upon T lympho-
cyte activation. Immunity. 2011;35(6):871–882.
 41. Michalek RD, et al. Estrogen-related receptor-α is 
a metabolic regulator of effector T-cell activation 
and differentiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2011;108(45):18348–18353.
 42. Doedens AL, et al. Hypoxia-inducible factors 
enhance the effector responses of CD8(+) 
T cells to persistent antigen. Nat Immunol. 
2013;14(11):1173–1182.
 43. Oestreich KJ, et al. Bcl-6 directly represses the 
gene program of the glycolysis pathway. Nat 
Immunol. 2014;15(10):957–964.
 44. Tejera MM, Kim EH, Sullivan JA, Plisch EH, 
Suresh M. FoxO1 controls effector-to-memory 
transition and maintenance of functional CD8 T 
cell memory. J Immunol. 2013;191(1):187–199.
 45. Hess Michelini R, Doedens AL, Goldrath 
AW, Hedrick SM. Differentiation of CD8 
memory T cells depends on Foxo1. J Exp Med. 
2013;210(6):1189–1200.
 46. Chang CH, et al. Posttranscriptional control of T 
cell effector function by aerobic glycolysis. Cell. 
2013;153(6):1239–1251.
 47. Kiessling A, Sperl B, Hollis A, Eick D, Berg T. 
Selective inhibition of c-Myc/Max dimerization 
and DNA binding by small molecules. Chem Biol. 
2006;13(7):745–751.
 48. Kakaradov B, et al. Early transcriptional and epi-
genetic regulation of CD8(+) T cell differentia-
tion revealed by single-cell RNA sequencing. Nat 
Immunol. 2017;18(4):422–432.
 49. Verbist KC, et al. Metabolic maintenance of cell 
asymmetry following division in activated T lym-
phocytes. Nature. 2016;532(7599):389–393.
 50. Laplante M, Sabatini DM. mTOR signaling  
in growth control and disease. Cell. 
2012;149(2):274–293.
 51. García-Martínez JM, Alessi DR. mTOR com-
plex 2 (mTORC2) controls hydrophobic motif 
phosphorylation and activation of serum- and 
glucocorticoid-induced protein kinase 1 (SGK1). 
Biochem J. 2008;416(3):375–385.
 52. Sarbassov DD, Guertin DA, Ali SM, Sabatini 
DM. Phosphorylation and regulation of Akt/
PKB by the rictor-mTOR complex. Science. 
2005;307(5712):1098–1101.
 53. van Loosdregt J, et al. Stabilization of the tran-
scription factor Foxp3 by the deubiquitinase 
USP7 increases Treg-cell-suppressive capacity. 
Immunity. 2013;39(2):259–271.
 54. Chen Z, et al. The ubiquitin ligase Stub1 negatively  
modulates regulatory T cell suppressive activity by 
promoting degradation of the transcription factor 
Foxp3. Immunity. 2013;39(2):272–285.
 55. Basler M, Lauer C, Beck U, Groettrup M. The 
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib enhances 
the susceptibility to viral infection. J Immunol. 
2009;183(10):6145–6150.
 56. Finlay DK, et al. PDK1 regulation of mTOR and 
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 integrate metabo-
lism and migration of CD8+ T cells. J Exp Med. 
2012;209(13):2441–2453.
 57. Lin WH, et al. Asymmetric PI3K signaling driving 
developmental and regenerative cell fate bifurca-
tion. Cell Rep. 2015;13(10):2203–2218.
 58. Pollizzi KN, et al. Asymmetric inheritance of 
mTORC1 kinase activity during division dictates 
CD8(+) T cell differentiation. Nat Immunol. 
2016;17(6):704–711.
 59. Pollizzi KN, et al. mTORC1 and mTORC2 selec-
tively regulate CD8+ T cell differentiation. J Clin 
Invest. 2015;125(5):2090–2108.
 60. Araki K, et al. mTOR regulates memory  
CD8 T-cell differentiation. Nature. 
2009;460(7251):108–112.
 61. Sukumar M, et al. Inhibiting glycolytic metabolism 
enhances CD8+ T cell memory and antitumor 
function. J Clin Invest. 2013;123(10):4479–4488.
 62. Ye J, Coulouris G, Zaretskaya I, Cutcutache I, 
Rozen S, Madden TL. Primer-BLAST: a tool to 
design target-specific primers for polymerase 
chain reaction. BMC Bioinformatics. 2012;13:134.
 63. Washburn MP, Wolters D, Yates JR. Large-scale 
analysis of the yeast proteome by multidimen-
sional protein identification technology. Nat 
Biotechnol. 2001;19(3):242–247.
