 WHO and UNICEF joint statement encouraging greater health commodity supply chain convergence for 
temperature-sensitive pharmaceuticals where appropriate.
overview
Many pharmaceuticals must be kept in controlled 
temperatures to maintain potency during transport and 
storage. Challenges in maintaining this cold chain can 
damage or diminish access to lifesaving drugs. To ensure 
high-quality care, health systems must find ways to ensure 
that heat-sensitive drugs are managed within a temperature-
controlled supply chain from manufacture, through 
procurement and internal logistic systems, to the point of use. 
In fragile health care systems, such as those in developing 
countries, vaccine immunization programs often have the 
best, or only available, refrigerated cold-chain systems. 
Integrating other heat-sensitive health products into these 
systems can improve transport and storage, increasing 
access and saving lives. WHO and UNICEF confirm that it is 
permissible to transport and store drugs in the vaccine 
cold chain, provided that best storage and labeling 
practices are adhered to at all times to clearly distinguish 
non-vaccine products from vaccines and diluents.  
background
When the global Expanded Programme on Immunization was 
launched 40 years ago, it focused on six childhood vaccines. 
Some of these vaccines had to be kept cold (2°C–8°C/35°C–46°F), 
making them one of only a handful of essential commodities 
that required a specific cold supply chain. Subsequently, the 
Universal Child Immunization initiative, launched by UNICEF 
in the 1980s, initiated a sharp increase in country-level cold 
chain systems, which quickly became the backbone of national 
immunization programs. During the same decade, WHO, 
recognizing the importance of EPI and cold-chain best practice, 
disseminated early guidelines on cold-chain logistics.1 Although 
not specifically focused on integration, these materials broadly 
supported the possibility that other temperature-sensitive health 
products might be stored in the vaccine cold chain. 
Best practices evolved over time suggesting that vaccine cold 
chains managed by the EPI should be used exclusively for 
vaccines. This is partly because until recently, vaccines were 
the main essential health product that required cold chain 
transport in most developing countries. In addition, the EPI 
continues to operate largely independently from other health 
commodity supply chains. Nevertheless, integration, 
if feasible and accomplished safely and efficiently, 
remains permissible.  
what the guidance says
As noted, WHO and UNICEF guidance materials have included 
broad language suggesting that, if key provisions are met, 
other products may be safely stored in the vaccine cold 
chain. These provisions include: (1) maintaining good storage 
practices and (2) clear labeling and separation of non-vaccine 
products from vaccines and diluents at all times. For instance, 
the WHO 2014 Immunization in Practice manual states that “[if 
who/unicef joint statement
Temperature-sensitive health products in the Expanded 
Programme on Immunization cold chain
The World Health Organization (WHO) and United 
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) reiterate the value 
of safe, feasible, and cost-effective integration of 
temperature-sensitive health products into Expanded 
Programme on Immunization (EPI) health supply chains. 
Past policies from both organizations have allowed the 
possibility of converging supply chains. This statement 
provides further clarity by explicitly allowing 
convergence if feasible, cost-effective, and safe. This 
joint statement also supports the United Nations (UN) 
Commission on Life-Saving Commodities for Women 
and Children. To that end, WHO and UNICEF:
1. Reiterate that safe, properly organized integration 
of temperature-sensitive pharmaceuticals is allowed 
when feasible and cost-effective.
2. Call on countries and partners to integrate 
temperature-sensitive pharmaceutical products into 
the vaccine cold chain where safe and feasible and 
to document integration experiences as evidence for 
future policies and guidance.
3. Recommend universal adoption of best storage and 
labeling practices as a precondition to integration 
to clearly distinguish non-vaccine products from 
vaccines and diluents.
 national immunization programmes: a call-to-action for national 
programmes and the global community by the WHO Immunization 
Practices Advisory Committee, Geneva, Switzerland, March 2014. 
WHO/IVB/14.05. Geneva: WHO; 2014.
5 WHO. Recommendations for the Prevention and Treatment of 
Postpartum Haemorrhage. Geneva: WHO; 2012.
6 Seligman B, Liu X. Economic Assessment of Interventions for Reducing 
Postpartum Haemorrhage in Developing Countries. Bethesda, MD: Abt 
Associates Inc.; 2006.
May 2015
World Health Organization
Expanded Programme on Immunization
20 Avenue Appia, 1121 Geneva 27  
Switzerland
vaccines@who.int
www.who.int
United Nations Children’s Fund
3 United Nations Plaza
New York, NY 10017  
USA
immunization@unicef.org
www.unicef.org
example: answering the oxytocin 
challenge 
Postpartum hemorrhage (PPH), or excessive bleeding 
after childbirth, is the leading cause of maternal mortality 
worldwide. WHO has recommended oxytocin, a 
temperature-sensitive medicine, as the first-line choice 
for prevention and treatment of PPH.5 Over the next 
ten years universal access to this and similar medicines 
could avert an estimated 41 million PPH cases and save 
1.4 million lives.6 For this reason, oxytocin is among 
13 health products prioritized by the UN Commission on 
Life-Saving Commodities for Women and Children. 
Because oxytocin degrades when exposed to prolonged 
heat, WHO and UNICEF have recommended that 
oxytocin-based products be kept refrigerated as much 
as possible. 
Keeping oxytocin cool is a challenge, particularly in 
countries where daytime temperatures often exceed 
30°C (86°F), electricity is unavailable or unreliable, and 
adequate cold-chain infrastructure is lacking. As a result, 
oxytocin is still often transported and stored outside 
of a temperature-controlled system, compromising its 
potency and shelf life. 
Given these challenges, the UN Commission on Life-
Saving Commodities for Women and Children has 
proposed transporting oxytocin within national EPI cold-
chain infrastructures. Several countries, including Benin, 
Niger, Senegal, South Sudan, and Togo, have adopted 
this integrated approach, along with good storage and 
labeling practices.
WHO and UNICEF endorse the integration of oxytocin 
into the EPI cold chain in order to improve the availability 
of oxytocin that is not heat-damaged. Lessons learned 
from this experience can support integration of other 
drugs and products in the future.
you are working] … in an area with only one refrigerator and 
you need to store other heat-sensitive supplies such as drugs, 
ointments, serum and samples, be sure to label them clearly 
and keep them separate from vaccines and diluents.”2
In addition, in April 2014 the Strategic Advisory Group 
of Experts on Immunization endorsed a “Call to 
Action” developed by WHO’s Immunization Practices 
Advisory Committee.3 This document provides specific 
recommendations urging countries and the global 
community to strengthen immunization supply chains.4 One 
recommendation specifically advises increased efforts toward 
the convergence and integration of health commodity supply 
chains, including cold chains.
who/unicef recommendations on safe 
integration 
WHO and UNICEF reiterate that it is permissible to 
use the EPI cold chain for the storage of appropriate 
temperature-sensitive pharmaceuticals. In particular, 
WHO and UNICEF recommend the following:
Integration and documentation. Countries and partners 
are urged to consider integrating temperature-sensitive health 
products, particularly oxytocin, into national EPI cold chains, 
where safe and feasible. They are also urged to document 
experiences as evidence for future policies and guidance.
Safe storage and labeling. To keep non-vaccine products 
and vaccines and diluents safely distinct, leaders and health 
care workers must adopt solutions to quickly and clearly 
distinguish vaccines from other products, such as placing clear 
and unambiguous visual cues on external packaging.
for further information
For further information, please contact:
Patrick Lydon, WHO, Geneva; lydonp@who.int
Benjamin Schreiber, UNICEF, New York; bschreiber@unicef.org
references
1 WHO. Logistics and Cold Chain for Primary Health Care. Modules 1 to 
25. WHO/EPI/LOG/84/modules 1 to 25. Geneva: WHO; 1984.
2 WHO. Immunization in Practice: A Practical Guide for Health Staff. WHO/
IVB/04/06. Geneva: WHO; 2004.
3 WHO. Meeting of the Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on 
immunization, April 2014 – conclusions and recommendations. 
Weekly Epidemiological Record. 2014;89(21):221–236. 
4 WHO Immunization Practices Advisory Committee. Immunization 
supply chain and logistics: a neglected but essential system for 
