 1
Scientific RepoRts | 6:34553 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34553
www.nature.com/scientificreports
A novel bio-mimicking, planar 
nano-edge microelectrode enables 
enhanced long-term neural recording
Pierre Wijdenes1, Hasan Ali2, Ryden Armstrong3, Wali Zaidi3, Colin Dalton1,2 & 
Naweed I. Syed3,4
Our inability to accurately monitor individual neurons and their synaptic activity precludes fundamental 
understanding of brain function under normal and various pathological conditions. However, recent 
breakthroughs in micro- and nano-scale fabrication processes have advanced the development of 
neuro-electronic hybrid technology. Among such devices are three-dimensional and planar electrodes, 
offering the advantages of either high fidelity or longer-term recordings respectively. Here, we present 
the next generation of planar microelectrode arrays with “nano-edges” that enable long-term (≥1 
month) and high fidelity recordings at a resolution 15 times higher than traditional planar electrodes. 
This novel technology enables better understanding of brain function and offers a tremendous 
opportunity towards the development of future bionic hybrids and drug discovery devices.
Various neuronal activity recording and stimulating devices enable cellular exploration1–3 using micro- and 
nano-devices4. A multitude of penetrating and non-penetrating nanopillar electrodes5–7, carbon nanotube elec-
trodes8, mushroom-shaped protruding microelectrodes9, planar microelectrode arrays (MEAs) etc. have been 
used to record neuronal activities. Among such devices are three-dimensional and planar microelectrodes, each 
with their respective advantages and disadvantages. Whereas, the three-dimensional electrodes tend to allow for 
high fidelity recordings they only do so over a short time period (hours to days). On the other hand, the planar 
microelectrodes permit longer-term recordings (weeks to months), albeit at the expense of low signal resolution. 
Ideally, combining both advantages would permit long-term and high-resolution recordings, which, in turn, 
could offer new opportunities to monitor and record subtle aspects of brain activity. Inspired by the structural 
attributes of a synaptic cleft, our team reports here on the next generation of planar microelectrode arrays with 
nano-edges offering high fidelity recordings over long time periods.
Design and analysis
Inspired by the morphology of a synaptic cleft, whereby both pre- and postsynaptic structures are juxtaposed and 
semi-encapsulated, we developed microelectrodes mimicking a synapse morphology as well as neuronal juxtapo-
sition with their adjacent cells. Specifically, microelectrodes that “bio-mimic” the postsynaptic cleft were designed 
to exhibit ‘nano-edges’ that provide a tighter physical and dielectrical seal between the device and the neuron. 
This structural geometry was also anticipated to prevent the leakage of current into the surrounding extracellular 
milieu, thus preserving and augmenting the functional integrity of chemical and electrical neuronal signal pro-
cessing (Fig. 1a,b). We named these types of microelectrodes as “nano-edge microelectrodes”
.
Gold planar microelectrodes were fabricated using a standard photolithography technique and lift-off process. 
Electrode sizes, and distances between them, were adjusted according to our experimental needs by modifying 
the photomask designs, allowing us to keep the design relatively simple, economical and scalable. Once the planar 
microelectrodes were fabricated, the nano-edge was added using a custom photolithography process. Following 
the fabrication, we characterized and validated the morphological attributes of the microelectrodes with atomic 
force microscopy (Fig. 1c) and were able to qualitatively confirm the presence of the nano-edges (Fig. 1d).
1Biomedical Engineering Graduate Program, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada. 2Department of Electrical 
and Computer Engineering, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada. 3Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of 
Calgary, Calgary, Canada. 4Alberta Children’s Hospital Research Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada. 
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to N.I.S. (email: nisyed@ucalgary.ca)
Received: 05 May 2016
Accepted: 15 September 2016
Published: 12 October 2016
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific RepoRts | 6:34553 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34553
Nano-edge microelectrode enables high resolution recordings
Using the nano-edge microelectrodes, we investigated the electrical activity of single neurons (Fig. 2a). Identified 
neurons isolated from the mollusk Lymnaea were interfaced with the electrode under sterile culture conditions 
and spontaneous action potentials were recorded. We recorded spikes with a maximum amplitude of up to 
Figure 1. Biomimetic nano-edge microelectrode mimicking the morphological structure of a synaptic 
cleft. (a) Schematic representation of two synaptically connected neurons (the box depicts a chemical synapse 
between the cells). The post-synaptic terminal is shown as engulfing the pre-synaptic terminal; thereby 
enhancing tight physical and dielectric coupling between the neurons. (b) Schematic layout developed further 
from Spira and Hai10, illustrating an electrode-neuron interface with its analogue passive electrical circuit. 
Only the junctional membrane (part of the membrane in contact with the microelectrode) of the cell body 
is represented here (blue) – depicted to be in close contact with the electrode (yellow) and its nano-edges 
(orange). The non-junctional membrane (not shown in this diagram) refers to the part of the membrane 
not juxtaposed against the electrode. The electrode was fabricated on a silicon dioxide substrate (green) and 
connected to a recording system (MEA1060; Multichannel Systems, Reutlingen, Germany). The junctional 
membrane resistance (Rj) and conductance (Cj) are represented in parallel, similar to the electrode resistance 
(Re) and impedance (Ce). The sealing resistance (Rseal) was enhanced due to the nano-edges implemented on 
the electrodes. (c) Characterization of the nano-edge microelectrodes using atomic force microscopy. A three-
dimensional representation of a 30 μ 
m microelectrode with a 40° tilt is depicted. The nano-edge is discernable 
around the microelectrode perimeter (blue arrow), and can be seen continuing along the connecting electrode 
wire (bottom right). Having the nano-edge along the wire and not limited to the circular area has the advantage 
that it increases the sealing resistance even when a neuron is not placed exactly on top of the microelectrode. 
This configuration also increased the surface area of the microelectrode that was in contact with the neuronal 
cell membrane (when bigger than 30 μ 
m in diameter). (d) Cross-section of the microelectrode height showing 
the shape of the nano-edge. The microelectrodes are 30 ± 1 μ 
m in diameter, 200 ± 15 nm in height, and the 
nano-edges varied between 5 and 15 nm in height and 2 to 3 μ 
m in width. Letters ‘
A’ and ‘B’ refer to the location 
of the cross-section taken from (c).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific RepoRts | 6:34553 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34553
Figure 2. Nano-edge microelectrodes permit unprecedented resolution and long-term neural recording 
at the single neuron level. (a) Neurons were cultured on a custom designed MEA with multiple nano-
edge microelectrodes grouped into clusters of 4 or 6 microelectrodes per set. The number of electrodes 
per set could be increased depending on the fabrication design and experimental needs. We continuously 
monitored neuronal activity - even if the cells had moved away from their initial culture site as described 
previously23. This setup also allows us to characterize and differentiate activity patterns from various cell types 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific RepoRts | 6:34553 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34553
10.6 mV peak-to-peak (n = 
 13; Average peak-to-peak amplitude = 
 4.44 mV; Min and Max range peak-to-peak 
amplitude = 
 330 μ 
V-10.6 mV, Standard deviation = 
 4.08 μ 
V) (Fig. 2b,c), which were significantly higher than 
those recorded through commercially available planar electrodes (typically ≤ 
1 mV1). For this analysis, only 
those cells that completely covered at least one electrode (100%) were considered. As demonstrated by the stand-
ard deviation, the observed variability is due to numerous application specific factors. Chief among these are 
cell-specific variables such as the size of the neurons and the exact interfacing between their membrane and the 
electrode which enables the nano-edge to fully increase the sealing resistance.
We found the neuronal coupling coefficient to be 0.15, which is 15 times higher than what has been reported 
for traditional planar and resistor electrodes10 (0.001–0.011). Thus, our novel nano-edge microelectrode recorded 
neural activity at a significantly higher resolution than any other traditional planar electrodes, and often better 
than most three-dimensional electrodes (ranging from 0.1 to 0.3) (Fig. 3e).
Moreover, three-dimensional electrodes generally monitor activity over a limited period of time (maximum 2 
days using mushroom-shape electrodes10) due to the intrusive nature of these three-dimensional structures that 
compromise neuronal cell membrane and network integrity, thereby disrupting their connectivity and cellular 
viability. Indeed, neuronal adhesion and firm contact with the recording site are prerequisites for longer-term 
sustainable recordings. Neurons grown in culture tend to pull away from the recording sites due to physical 
tension applied by either their elongating growth cones or neurites. This, in turn, results in the neurons los-
ing contact with the recording site, reducing the efficacy of the signal and damaging the neuronal membrane. 
Several approaches have been used to restrain neurons to their recording sites, albeit with limited success11. When 
three-dimensional features restrain this natural movement (e.g. spike and mushroom electrodes), neurons may 
eventually experience membrane rupture, cytosol leakage and cell death within a short period of time10.
In contrast, our planar nano-edge microelectrodes did not limit a neurons’ movement to such an extent and 
subtly maintained the interface with the contact site, thus enabling stable neuronal recordings for at least two 
weeks (recordings were conducted for a minimum of two weeks in this case and then stopped intentionally as per 
the experimental paradigm) but with the full potential for continued recording for another two weeks) (Fig. 3f) 
- like any other traditional planar electrodes12. Indeed, because of the presence of a nano-edge of 5 to 15 nm in 
height the neuronal membrane integrity was not compromised nor did the cell migrate away from the electrode. 
This allowed for neurons to develop networks whose activity was then continuously monitored for at least two 
weeks. In instances where neurons did migrate away from their initial site of electrode contact, we continued 
to acquire high fidelity recordings due to the following reasons: First, the adjacent nano-edge microelectrodes 
(grouped in multi-electrodes units of either four or six, in our case) maintained the dielectric contact with the cell. 
Specifically, we could use the adjacent nano-edge microelectrodes as our new monitoring site and then merge the 
acquired data at the end of the experiments. Secondly, to enable stable and high-resolution recordings over and 
above the background noise, a neuron must fully cover a typical planar electrode at all times. Any movement away 
from the recording site may thus render the signal undetectable. Since the signals recorded by our nano-edge 
microelectrodes were significantly larger, the amplitude of the action potential remained easily discernable from 
the noise level throughout the course of an experiment, even if the cell was not fully covering the microelectrode 
surface.
Taken together, we have demonstrated that our novel nano-edge design offers tremendous potential to study 
neural activity at the resolution of single neurons. Moreover, these electrodes also allowed us to monitor changes 
in the patterned neural activity (Fig. 2d), as the neuronal membrane and network properties mature over time, 
thus allowing us to investigate network connectivity and plasticity at a resolution never achieved before.
Nano-edge microelectrodes functional validation using computational simulation
To validate the functional efficacy of our nano-edge microelectrodes, we ran a computational simulation. The 
simulation test confirmed that our observed signal enhancement could be attributed to two main factors: either 
an increased sealing resistance or a decreased electrode impedance. In our case, as the materials and dimensions 
of the microelectrode did not vary significantly from conventional planar gold electrodes13, a decreased imped-
ance was an unlikely reason. Thus a change in the sealing resistance was likely the determining factor underlying 
higher amplitude signals. To investigate this variable, we modeled a neuron-electrode interface using the built in 
over time. An example is provided in (d). (b) Recording of action potentials from a single neuron showing 
distinguishable patterned activity from selected Lymnaea neurons21. (c) Single action potential with clearly 
defined depolarization followed by rebound hyperpolarization. Average of the recorded action potentials 
amplitude was 4.44 mV peak-to-peak (n = 13) with a maximum measured value of 10.6 mV. (d) Examples of 
distinctive spontaneous activity patterns associated to two different neurons (LPeD1 and RPeD1) resected from 
the mollusk Lymnaea. These specific activity changes recorded within identified neurons can now be studied 
over months and advanced drug-screening can be performed to better understand the effect of the extracellular 
milieu on the cells activity. (e) Comparison of maximum-recorded peak-to-peak action potential between the 
nano-edge microelectrodes compared with other types of extra-cellular electrode, showing that the nano-edge 
microelectrodes record higher action potentials than all other planar microelectrodes10,29, including some 
three-dimensional ones (e.g. vertical nanowire7,8, Mushroom shape electrode (gMμ 
E)5,9. (f) Comparison of the 
most commonly used micro-/nano-electrodes used to record neural activity in-vitro. The maximum coupling 
coefficient and the longest reported recording time were used to evaluate electrodes capabilities. Our nano-edge 
microelectrodes (green circle) permit monitoring of action potentials with a coupling coefficient comparable 
to that of 3D electrodes (red square), and for a period of time equivalent to traditional planar microelectrodes 
(blue triangles).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific RepoRts | 6:34553 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34553
Figure 3. Schematic representation of the simulated elements using COMSOL Multiphysics and their 
physical characteristics. (a) Both glass substrate and extracellular fluid were modeled as infinite boundaries. The 
microelectrode height was set at 200 nm and its width to 30 μ 
m as per our experimental needs. The neuron was 
positioned 50 nm above the microelectrodes to mimic the gap found at the neuron-electrode interfaces10,16,17, 
and was modeled with diameters in the range of 5 to 80 μ 
m, which is representative of most vertebrate and 
invertebrate cell diameters. Finally, the nano-edge was modeled at various heights from 0 (no nano-edge, similar 
to traditional planar electrodes) to 50 nm (same height as the cleft). (b) Table of physical values of electrical 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific RepoRts | 6:34553 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34553
Electric Currents module in COMSOL Multiphysics (COMSOL Inc., Burlington MA). The goal of this simulation 
exercise was to improve on previous COMSOL models of neuron simulation14,15, and also to determine the effect 
of the nano-edge on the sealing resistance, which is defined as the resistance that restricts current leakage through 
the gap between a neuron and the electrode.
As shown in Fig. 3a, the model consists of several domains. Firstly, a glass substrate, which acts as an insulat-
ing layer, was modeled to form the basis for the MEA. The glass substrate was modeled with an infinite bound-
ary for this simulation, meaning that the multi-physical properties were preserved along the entire surface of 
the glass substrate. The microelectrode was modeled above the glass using a gold cylinder with a diameter of 
30 μ 
m, which reflects the size of our microelectrodes. A thin layer of chrome was inserted in between the gold 
microelectrode layer and the glass, which acted as an adhesive substrate between the two layers in the fabricated 
devices. However, no differences in the simulation results were observed when the chrome layer was added or 
removed from the model. Located 50 nm above the electrode, to reflect the junctional gap in neuron-electrode 
interfaces10,16,17, the neuron was modeled using a semi-circle (ranging from 5 μ 
m in diameter to 80 μ 
m, to reflect 
the variability of cell diameters found in vertebrate as well as invertebrate models). The boundaries and volume 
of this semi-circle acted as the membrane and intracellular fluid, respectively. A 2 μ 
m wide nano-edge was added 
to the electrode via a ring of dielectric material around its upper edges. While the nano-edge height on our fab-
ricated microelectrode ranges between 5–15 nm, we simulated a nano-edge ranging from 0 nm (no nano-edge, 
similar to traditional planar electrodes) to 50 nm (height at which the nano-edge completely fills the gap between 
the electrode and the neuron15,16,18) to provide a better understanding of its effect. The remaining external space 
was filled with the extracellular fluid. Similar to the glass substrate, this domain of extracellular fluid was modeled 
as an infinite region. Figure 3b shows the values of electrical conductivity and relative permittivity used for the 
various materials.
Two specific meshes were used in the computational model to improve the outcomes and analysis. A standard 
free tetrahedral mesh was used for the neuron and the surrounding extracellular fluid. However, the free tetra-
hedral mesh was unable to mesh the smaller portions of the simulation due to computational limitations with 
regards to smaller elements, and therefore a free triangular swept mesh was implemented for these regions. This 
mesh was utilized for the glass substrate, gold electrode, and the thin layers in between the electrode and neuron. 
A swept mesh was found to be better for modeling thin layers and non-proportioned domain sizes by avoiding 
redundant mesh elements, which also decreased the computation time. The mesh contained between 253,178 and 
157,401 mesh elements. Increasing the mesh from 250,513 to 779,642 elements resulted in a very small change 
of 0.02 MΩ 
 to the sealing resistance, indicating that a larger mesh did not have an extensive impact on the results 
and a smaller mesh was therefore used to reduce computational time19. The sealing resistances calculated using 
this model for a nano-edge microelectrode of 30 μ 
m in diameter ranged from 0.66 MΩ 
 to 8.71 MΩ 
, depending on 
the height of the nano-edge and the size of the neuron simulated. When analyzing the sealing resistance values 
of planar microelectrodes with no nano-edge, our results were in the same range to that of Cohen et al.20 when 
using transistor planar electrodes, which validated the accuracy of our simulation and gave us confidence in our 
nano-edge simulation results.
Results of this simulation help draw two important conclusions: (1) The neuronal diameter is a determining 
factor underlying the sealing resistance value, which significantly increases as the diameter is equal to or larger 
than the circular microelectrode diameter (30 μ 
m in our case). When a cell’s diameter is smaller than the elec-
trode, the sealing resistance values tend to vary due to current leakage. (2) As soon as the nano-edge is present 
(nano-edge ≥ 
5 nm in height) and that the neuronal diameter is equal to or larger than the electrode, the sealing 
resistance remains approximately the same, with an average of 7.49 ± 
 0.34 MΩ 
 (standard deviation), no mat-
ter the height of the nano-edge. In the absence of the nano-edge, no significant difference in sealing resistance 
is observed (average of 1.03 ± 
 0.08 MΩ 
), no matter what the cell diameter is. These results are represented in 
Fig. 3c–e.
Discussion
We have demonstrated that designing neuro-electronic devices that are based on natural cellular architecture 
could pay large dividends in the design and implementation of future bionic hybrids and drug screening devices. 
Specifically, simple nano-scale structural modifications can significantly increase not only the cell-coupling coef-
ficient (by a factor of 15 in our case), but also facilitate long-term recordings at the resolution of single neurons. 
By exploiting parameters such as the size and spatial pattern of the microelectrodes, or the types and thickness 
of materials, we have optimized the recording potential of our custom designed MEAs while maintaining a rela-
tively simple, scalable fabrication process. In addition, our computational simulation model revealed the reasons 
conductivity and relative permittivity used to run the computational simulation (Refs 18, 25–27 are listed in 
brackets in the table). (c) Graphical representation of the sealing resistance disparity when computationally 
varying the nano-edge height and the cell’s diameter using a heat map, function of the cell’s diameter and the 
nano-edge height. Note the rapid increase in sealing resistance when the nano-edge is present and the cell’s 
diameter is equal or larger than the electrode (here 30 μ 
m in diameter). (d) Variation of the sealing resistance 
for each cell diameter when the nano-edge increases in height. When the cell’s diameter reaches a diameter 
equal to or larger than the microelectrode and that an edge is present, the sealing resistance reached a plateau 
of 7.49 ± 0.34 MΩ 
. (e) Variation of the sealing resistance for each nano-edge height when the cell diameters 
increases. A dip between 10 and 25 μ 
m can be attributed to current leakages happening when a cell’s diameter is 
smaller than the electrode. A similar plateau as for (d) can be seen.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific RepoRts | 6:34553 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34553
behind the nano-edge effect; an increase in the sealing resistance (Rseal) value is observed if the cell’s diameter is at 
least equal to the electrode’s diameter and only if there is a nano-edge of a particular height.
Advantages and applications. 
The nano-edge microelectrodes fill a large technological gap and provide 
a breakthrough in the field of neural recording by coupling the advantages of both planar and three-dimensional 
electrodes. It is now possible to monitor neuronal activity from single cells and large ensembles by maintaining 
stable recordings over extended time periods (weeks to months). Such attributes when combined together are 
necessary as they open up new opportunities to investigate advanced neural phenomena such as network forma-
tion, maturation, plasticity and dysfunction21. Such high fidelity recording capability may even allow us in the 
future to monitor sub-threshold synaptic events and distinguish between various spike patterns of bursting or 
tonically active neurons embedded in a complex network.
Limitations and future development. 
The nano-edge microelectrodes presented here were coupled with 
large invertebrate neurons, which can be manipulated with ease. Broadening the scope of this technology for 
mammalian neurons would require reconfiguration of the electrode design, which is relatively straightforward 
based on the fabrication process. Although giant invertebrate neurons (40 to 80 μ 
m diameter) generate large 
electrical events as compared with their vertebrate counterparts (6 to 15 μ 
m on average), we are confident that 
our ability to increase the sealing resistance and therefore the amplitude of the recorded neural signals will enable 
higher resolution signals for mammalian cells.
Several modifications could be made in the future to improve the recording resolution. For example, using 
conductive materials for the nano-edge; replacing the gold electrode with another metal or alloy coated with 
platinum black22 or increasing the general roughness of the electrode surface may all enhance the quality of the 
recordings further. Regardless of the modifications, we believe that the nano-edge will define the future of biocom-
patible microelectrode arrays permitting long-term recordings at a resolution close to intra-cellular recordings.
Methods
Device fabrication. 
Devices were fabricated using a two-mask photolithography process on 49 × 
 49 mm, 
1mm thick glass. The electrodes were sputter coated ~200 nm gold on top of a 10 nm chromium adhesion layer. 
Once the planar microelectrodes were fabricated, the nano-edge was added using a custom photolithography 
process. An epoxy based 5 μ 
m photoresist (SU8) was then added with photolithography to provide an insulation 
layer over the microelectrode traces. Openings in the SU8 layer left the main microelectrode arrays bare for stim-
ulation/recording. Sizes and intervals between microelectrodes can be adjusted according to experimental needs 
by modifying the photomask designs, resulting in the multi-electrodes units used in this paper shown in Fig. 2a. 
This represents a standard photolithography process that can be adapted to many needs.
Cell culture. 
Snail. We used the freshwater snail Lymnaea stagnalis to study neuronal properties and intrin-
sic patterned activity. This invertebrate model provides structurally and functionally well-characterized individual 
neurons, which are 50–80 μ 
m in diameter, and allow manipulation on MEAs with ease at the single cell level23. We 
used functionally well-defined and characterized neurons to study their electrophysiological activity over time.
Culture. Neurons were isolated and cultured as described in Syed, et al.24. Briefly, the dissected central ring gan-
glia from 1 to 2 month old animals were enzymatically digested with trypsin (2 mg/mL; T- 4665; Sigma-Aldrich, 
St Louis, MO, USA) in order to loosen the surrounding connective sheath. Trypsin inhibitor (2 mg/mL; T-9003; 
Sigma-Aldrich) was applied for 15 minutes to stop the enzymatic reaction. Identified pre- and post-synaptic neu-
rons, VD4, LPeD1 and RPeD1, were isolated respectively, by gentle suction applied through a fire- polished, 
Sigmacote® 
-treated glass pipette (SL2; Sigma- Aldrich). The cells were then plated on the multi-electrode units 
of a poly-L-lysine coated MEA and maintained in brain-conditioned media (CM) prepared as described previ-
ously21. The neurons were allowed to settle overnight and used for experiments 12–18 hours post-culture.
Biocompatibility study. 
To assess the biocompatibility of our MEAs, we considered three key aspects; 
whether the neurons (a) maintain their intrinsic membrane properties, (b) were capable of growth and (c) devel-
oped synaptic connections.
First, we tested whether neurons cultured on our MEAs maintained their intrinsic membrane properties and 
were able to maintain a voltage differential across their membrane and fire action potentials. All cells (100%, 
n = 20) were consistently able to do so at least 10 days post-culture.
Second, to determine whether neurons cultured on our MEAs exhibited growth, cells were plated on the MEA 
and allowed to extend neurites. We found that all cells (n = 
 9) exhibited extensive outgrowth for cultured neu-
rons to grow at a rate of up to 1 mm per 24 hours, indicating a high degree of biocompatibility with the substrate 
materials used. Neurons remained viable for at least a month, similar to what is seen on conventional coated glass 
coverslips, as long as the extracellular environment is regularly replaced with new solution.
Finally, we determined whether synapses could be formed on our MEA. When pre- and post-synaptic neurons 
(VD4 and LPeD1, respectively) were cultured together in a soma-soma configuration, action potentials could be 
triggered in VD4 using intracellular sharp electrodes which elicited 1:1 EPSPs of constant amplitude and latency, as 
seen when cultured on our SS-Chip (95% of paired cells formed a synapse within 24 hours on the SS-Chip, n = 
 20).
This high degree of biocompatibility was expected as we used materials that have been previously reported as 
safe in the literature23,28.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific RepoRts | 6:34553 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34553
References
1. Waser, R. Nanoelectronics and information technology: advanced electronic materials and novel devices, 3rd edition (ed. Waser, R.) 
1040 (Wiley, 2012).
2. Cogan, S. F. Neural stimulation and recording electrodes. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 10, 275–309 (2008).
3. Jones, I. L. et al. The potential of microelectrode arrays and microelectronics for biomedical research and diagnostics. Anal. Bioanal 
Chem. 399(7), 2313–2329 (2011).
4. Taketani, M. & Baudry, M. Advances in network electrophysiology. US: Springer (2006).
5. Xie, C. et al. Intracellular recording of action potentials by nanopillar electroporation. Nat. Nanotechnology 7(3), 185–190 (2012).
6. Bruggemann, D. et al. Nanostructured gold microelectrodes for extracellular recording from electrogenic cells. Nanotechnology 
22(26), 265104 (2011).
7. Robinson, J. T. et al. Vertical nanowire electrode arrays as a scalable platform for intracellular interfacing to neuronal circuits. Nat. 
nanotechnology 7(3), 180–184 (2012).
8. Suzuki, I. et al. Carbon nanotube multi-electrode array chips for noninvasive real-time measurement of dopamine, action potentials, 
and postsynaptic potentials. Biosens Bioelectron 49, 270–275 (2013).
9. Hai, A., Shappir, J. & Spira, M. E. In-cell recordings by extracellular microelectrodes. Nat. Methods 7(3), 200–202 (2010).
10. Spira, M. E. & Hai, A. Multi-electrode array technologies for neuroscience and cardiology. Nat. Nanotechnology 8(2), 83–94 (2013).
11. Zeck, G. & Fromherz, P. Noninvasive neuroelectronic interfacing with synaptically connected snail neurons immobilized on a 
semiconductor chip. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 10457–10462 (2001).
12. Potter, S. M. & DeMarse, T. B. A new approach to neural cell culture for long-term studies. J. Neurosci. Methods 110, 17–24 (2001).
13. Fromherz, P. Nanoelectronics and information technology (ed. Waser, R.) 781–810 (Wiley 2003).
14. Buitenweg, J. R., Rutten, W. L. & Marani, E. Finite element modeling of the neuron-electrode interface. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag. 
19, 46–52 (2000).
15. Ghazavi, A. et al. Effect of planar microelectrode geometry on neuron stimulation: finite element modeling and experimental 
validation of the efficient electrode shape. J. Neurosci Methods 248, 51–58 (2015).
16. Wrobel, G. et al. Transmission electron microscopy study of the cell-sensor interface. J. R. Soc. Interface 5(19), 213–222 (2008).
17. Gleixner, R. & Fromherz, P. The extracellular electrical resistivity in cell adhesion. Biophys J 90(7), 2600–2611 (2006).
18. Hai, A.  et al. Spine-shaped gold protrusions improve the adherence and electrical coupling of neurons with the surface of micro-
electronic devices. J. R. Soc. Interface 6(41), 1153–1165 (2009).
19. Lavacchi, A. et al. Cyclic voltammetry simulation at microelectrode arrays with COMSOL Multiphysics® 
. Journal of Applied 
Electrochemistry 39(11), 2159–2163 (2009).
20. Cohen, A. et al. Reversible transition of extracellular field potential recordings to intracellular recordings of action potentials 
generated by neurons grown on transistors. Biosens. Bioelectron 23(6), 811–819 (2008).
21. Luk, C. C. et al. Trophic Factor-Induced Activity ‘Signature’ Regulates the Functional Expression of Postsynaptic Excitatory 
Acetylcholine Receptors Required for Synaptogenesis. Scientific Reports 5, 9523 (2015).
22. Desai, S. A. et al. Improving impedance of implantable microwire multi-electrode arrays by ultrasonic electroplating of durable 
platinum black. Front. Neuroeng 3, 5 (2010).
23. Wijdenes, P. et al. Development of a planar microelectrode array offering long-term, high-resolution neuronal recordings. IFMBE 
Proceeding 51, 1173–1176 (2015).
24. Syed, N. I., Zaidi, H. & Lovell, P. In Vitro Reconstruction of Neuronal Circuits: A Simple Model System Approach in Modern 
Techniques in Neuroscience Research (eds. Windhorst, U. & Johansson, H.) 361–377 (Springer, 1999).
25. Martina, M. et al. Recordings of cultured neurons and synaptic activity using patch-clamp chips. J. N. Engineering 8(3), 34002 (2011),
26. Molleman, A. Patch clamping: an introductory guide to patch clamp electrophysiology (ed. Molleman, A.) (Wiley, 2003).
27. Elia, S. & Lamberti, P. The Reproduction of the Physiological Behaviour of the Axon of Nervous Cells by Means of Finite Element 
Models. Innovations in Intelligent Machines 3, 69–87 (2013).
28. Taghavi, M. & Bahrami, M. Design and simulation of a micro-channel for separating the particles with nearly constant 
dielectrophoretic force in channel space. Molecular Simulation 37, 865–874 (2011).
29. Fromherz, P. Three levels of neuroelectronic interfacing: silicon chips with ion channels, nerve cells, and brain tissue. Ann N Y Acad 
Sci. 1093, 143–160 (2006).
Acknowledgements
Devices were fabricated at the Advanced Micro/Nanosystems Integration Facility (AMIF) at the University 
of Calgary. We thank the following for supporting this work: Alberta Innovates Technology Futures (AITF); 
Canadian Institute of Health Research (CIHR) and Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of 
Canada (NSERC), and design software support from CMC microsystems. We also acknowledge the support 
of the Microscopy and Imaging Facility (MIF) at the University of Calgary for their help with investigating the 
electrode design. This work also wouldn’t be possible without the generous support of the Antje Graupe Pryor 
Foundation and its Werner Graupe International Fellowship in Engineering.
Author Contributions
P
.W
. and C.D. fabricated the devices and analyzed their morphological structures. P
.W
. and H.A. conducted the multi-
physic computational simulation. Cells were cultured by W
.Z. and biological experiments were conducted by P
.W
. and 
R.A. Figures and main manuscript text was written by P
.W
., C.D. and N.I.S. All authors have reviewed the manuscript.
Additional Information
Competing financial interests: This technology has been protected and a patent has been filed (application 
number: 32277803).
How to cite this article: Wijdenes, P. et al. A novel bio-mimicking, planar nano-edge microelectrode enables 
enhanced long-term neural recording. Sci. Rep. 6, 34553; doi: 10.1038/srep34553 (2016).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 
© The Author(s) 2016
