 Salt-responsive gut commensal modulates TH17 axis and 
disease
Nicola Wilck1,2,3,4,5, Mariana G. Matus6,7, Sean M. Kearney6, Scott W. Olesen6, Kristoffer 
Forslund8, Hendrik Bartolomaeus1,2,3,4, Stefanie Haase9, Anja Mähler1,5, András 
Balogh1,2,3,4,5, Lajos Markó1,2,3,4,5, Olga Vvedenskaya3,10,11, Friedrich H. Kleiner1, Dmitry 
Tsvetkov1,2, Lars Klug1,5, Paul I. Costea8, Shinichi Sunagawa8,12, Lisa Maier13, Natalia 
Rakova1,9, Valentin Schatz14, Patrick Neubert14, Christian Frätzer15, Alexander Krannich5, 
Maik Gollasch1,2,3, Diana A. Grohme16, Beatriz F. Côrte-Real22, Roman G. Gerlach17, 
Marijana Basic18, Athanasios Typas13, Chuan Wu19, Jens M. Titze20, Jonathan Jantsch14, 
Michael Boschmann1,5, Ralf Dechend1,2,5, Markus Kleinewietfeld16,21,22, Stefan 
Kempa3,5,10, Peer Bork3,8,23,24, Ralf A. Linker#9, Eric J. Alm#6, and Dominik N. Müller#1,2,3,4,5
1Experimental and Clinical Research Center, a joint cooperation of Max-Delbrück Center for 
Molecular Medicine and Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13125 Berlin, Germany 2Charité-
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Germany 3Max-Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine 
in the Helmholtz Association, 13125 Berlin, Germany 4DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular 
Research), partner site Berlin, Germany 5Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany 6Center 
for Microbiome Informatics and Therapeutics, and Department of Biological Engineering, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA 7Computational 
and Systems Biology Program, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts 02139, USA 8European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Structural and 
Computational Biology Unit, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany 9Department of Neurology, Friedrich-
Alexander-University Erlangen-Nuremberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany 10Integrative Proteomics 
and Metabolomics Platform, Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology BIMSB, 13125 Berlin, 
Germany 11Berlin School of Integrative Oncology, Charité University Medicine Berlin, Germany 
12Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zurich, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland 13European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory, Genome Biology Unit, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany 14Institute of Clinical Microbiology 
and Hygiene, University Hospital of Regensburg, University of Regensburg, 93053 Regensburg, 
Germany 15Lipidomix GmbH, 13125 Berlin, Germany 16Translational Immunology, Department of 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to dominik.mueller@mdc-berlin.de and ejalm@mit.edu. 
Author Contributions N.W. led and conceived the project, designed and performed most experiments, analyzed and interpreted the 
data. M.G.M., S.W.O., S.M.K. performed 16S sequencing and data analysis. S.H., D.T., M.Ba., C.W. performed animal experiments 
and analyzed data. H.B., S.H., A.B., D.A.G., B.F.C. performed and analyzed flow cytometry. Li.Ma., S.M.K., V.S., P.N., R.G.G. 
performed bacterial growth experiments. O.V., C.F. performed metabolite analysis with input by A.B. and M.G.M. La.M., F.H.K. and 
L.K. performed 16S qPCR. N.R. performed sodium analyses. K.F. performed metagenomic analyses with contributions by P.I.C. and 
S.S. M.Bo., R.D. and A.M. conducted the clinical study. A.K. performed statistical analyses. M.G., A.T., J.M.T, S.K., P.B., J.J. 
supervised the experiments and analyses. D.N.M., E.J.A., M.K. and R.A.L. conceived the project, supervised the experiments and 
interpreted the data. N.W. and D.N.M. wrote the manuscript with key editing by E.J.A., R.A.L., M.K., K.F. and further input from all 
authors.
Author Information The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2017 November 30; 551(7682): 585–589. doi:10.1038/nature24628.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Clinical Pathobiochemistry, Medical Faculty Carl Gustav Carus, TU Dresden, 01307 Dresden, 
Germany 17Project Group 5, Robert Koch Institute, 38855 Wernigerode, Germany 18Hannover 
Medical School, Institute for Laboratory Animal Science and Central Animal Facility, 30625 
Hannover, Germany 19Experimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, US National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA 20Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Vanderbilt 
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA 21Center for Regenerative Therapies 
Dresden (CRTD), 01307 Dresden, Germany 22VIB Laboratory of Translational 
Immunomodulation, VIB Center for Inflammation Research (IRC), UHasselt, Campus 
Diepenbeek, 3590 Diepenbeek, Belgium 23Molecular Medicine Partnership Unit, University of 
Heidelberg and European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany 
24Department of Bioinformatics, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, 97074 Würzburg, Germany
# These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
Western lifestyle with high salt consumption leads to hypertension and cardiovascular disease. 
High salt may additionally drive autoimmunity by inducing T helper (TH)17 cells, which may also 
contribute to hypertension. Induction of TH17 cells depends on the gut microbiota, yet the effect of 
salt on the gut microbiome is unknown. In mouse model systems, we show that high salt intake 
affects the gut microbiome, particularly by depleting Lactobacillus murinus. Consequently, L. 
murinus treatment prevents salt-induced aggravation of actively-induced experimental 
autoimmune encephalomyelitis and salt-sensitive hypertension, by modulating TH17 cells. In line 
with these findings, moderate high salt challenge in a pilot study in humans reduces intestinal 
survival of Lactobacillus spp. along with increased TH17 cells and blood pressure. Our results 
connect high salt intake to the gut-immune axis and highlight the gut microbiome as a potential 
therapeutic target to counteract salt-sensitive conditions.
High salt content in the Western diet is implicated in numerous disorders1, particularly 
cardiovascular disease2. Guidelines3,4 and public initiatives recommend reducing salt 
intake, yet an improved mechanistic understanding is warranted. The deleterious effect of a 
high salt diet (HSD) on cardiovascular health is driven by arterial hypertension and 
associated with increased morbidity and mortality2,5. Thus far, most studies have focused 
on the role of the kidneys, the sympathetic nervous system, and direct effects on the 
vasculature6. However, some investigations implicate the immune system in these 
processes7 linking pro-inflammatory T cells to the development of hypertension8. In 
particular, interleukin (IL)-17A producing CD4+ helper T cells (TH17) may promote 
hypertension9,10. TH17 cells play a deleterious role in autoimmune diseases. We and others 
recently demonstrated that the generation of pathogenic TH17 cells could be promoted by a 
high salt environment. Consequently, a HSD boosts TH17 generation and exacerbates 
actively-induced experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE)11,12, as a prototypic 
TH17-driven autoimmune disease13. Active MOG35-55-induced EAE is a disease model 
recapitulating many aspects of multiple sclerosis (MS), although differing from transgenic 
EAE models in several aspects of T cell function14. The intestine is exposed to varying salt 
loads of ingested foods, yet the interaction between HSD and the gut microbiome has not 
Wilck et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 been thoroughly investigated. Gut microbes are known to respond to fluctuations in dietary 
composition15, leading to transient or persistent alterations of the gut microbiome16. Diet-
induced shifts in microbiome composition may have profound effects on the host, especially 
on T cells17. TH17 cells are particularly affected by the abundance of specific commensal 
bacteria18. We sought to examine the influence of high salt challenges on the gut 
microbiome, the immune system, and implications for hypertension and autoimmunity.
High salt decreases Lactobacillus in mice
To determine the effect of a HSD on the gut microbiome composition, we analyzed fecal 
pellets from normal salt diet (NSD) or HSD-fed FVB/N mice by 16S ribosomal DNA 
(rDNA) gene sequencing. Both diets were equally well-tolerated, indicated by similar body 
weight and food intake (Extended Data Fig. 1a, b). HSD-fed mice had a significantly higher 
fluid and salt intake than NSD-fed mice (Extended Data Fig. 1c-f), but similar intestinal 
transit (Extended Data Fig. 1g). The overall microbial composition (based on Operational 
Taxonomic Units, OTUs, assigned using Ribosomal Database Project, RDP) showed no 
obvious pattern shifts between HSD and NSD mice (Extended Data Fig. 2a, b, 3a). Although 
Jensen-Shannon Divergence indicated differences between HSD and NSD bacterial 
communities, these differences were not confirmed by Bray-Curtis or UniFrac metrics (data 
not shown). Bacterial load was not significantly different between NSD and HSD (Extended 
Data Fig. 3b), but several OTUs were significantly decreased under HSD on day 14, 
including species with the genera Lactobacillus, Oscillibacter, Pseudoflavonifractor, 
Clostridium XIVa, Johnsonella and Rothia, while others increased under HSD, e.g. 
Parasutterella spp. (Extended Data Fig. 3c). Interestingly, analysis of fecal metabolites from 
central carbon and nitrogen metabolic pathways by gas-chromatography mass-spectrometry 
showed clear differences between the two groups (Extended Data Fig. 3d-g). The absence of 
large-scale taxonomic differences was unexpected, given the differences in metabolites, but 
consistent with the fact that the two diets are identical in energy content and only differ in 
salt content. To identify the specific bacterial OTUs that did change across diet, we 
employed a sensitive machine learning approach. An AdaBoost classifier trained to 
distinguish NSD from HSD samples on day 14 of the treatment identified 8 OTUs with 
nontrivial feature importance (Figure 1a, c) with 92% accuracy (Figure 1b). These OTUs 
varied in maximum relative abundance (from 0.04% to 19.5%) and responded differently to 
the HSD (Figure 1a, c). OTUs identified as most important were consistent across different 
cross-validation runs, and across different algorithms (Extended Data Fig. 4a). The most 
important OTU (25% feature importance) was a member of the genus Lactobacillus, and 
was depleted under HSD (Figure 1d). Other features included OTUs from Prevotellaceae, 
Pseudoflavonifractor, Clostridia, Parasutterella, Akkermansia, Bacteroidetes and Alistipes 
(Figure 1a, c, Extended Data Fig. 4b). Lactobacillus depletion showed a quick onset 
detectable 1 day after initiation of the HSD, remaining at low levels during the HSD with the 
lowest abundance on day 14. When the mice were returned to NSD, the Lactobacillus OTU 
abundance returned to baseline levels (Figure 1d).
Since the Lactobacillus OTU was the bacterial group most strongly associated with high salt, 
we aimed to isolate a Lactobacillus strain from the mouse feces. The 16S rDNA sequence of 
the isolate shared 100% identity with the V4-V5 16S region of the OTU described above, 
Wilck et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 and was identified as L. murinus. We confirmed the decrease of this strain under HSD using 
qPCR (Figure 1e, f). Genome sequencing of the isolate showed 93% similarity to two 
published L. murinus genomes19,20 (Extended Data Fig. 5a). Notably, there are no strains 
of L. murinus known to be native to the human microbiota, with the closest 16S sequence in 
the human gut microbiota matching at below 90% identity (Extended Data Fig. 5b). The 
prevalence of different Lactobacillus species varies in humans, each present in 0.5-22% of 
subjects in the MetaHIT21 Danish subcohort (Extended Data Fig. 5b).
Next, we cultured L. murinus, human-associated Lactobacilli and non-related control strains 
in vitro and tested their growth under increasing NaCl concentrations. Half maximal growth 
inhibition (IC50) of L. murinus occurred at comparable NaCl concentrations under aerobic 
and anaerobic culture conditions (Extended Data Fig. 5c, d). NaCl inhibited the growth of 
several human isolates at slightly lower concentrations, with the exception of L. salivarius 
(Extended Data Fig. 5e, f). However, not all strains tested were similarly salt-sensitive. For 
instance, Akkermansia muciniphila, identified by the classifier and increasing in fecal 
abundance upon HSD, and Escherichia coli had higher salt tolerances (Extended Data Fig. 
5d, g). Importantly, in vivo colonic fecal sodium concentrations in HSD-fed mice are 
comparable to growth inhibitory NaCl concentrations in vitro (0.252 for HSD vs. 0.133 M 
for NSD).
Since Lactobacilli are known to metabolize tryptophan to indole metabolites22, we 
speculated that HSD would also reduce fecal indoles. Indeed, HSD significantly reduced 
fecal levels of indole-3-lactic acid (ILA, Figure 1g) and indole-3-acetic acid (IAA, Extended 
Data Fig. 6a), while indole-3-carboxaldehyde was unchanged (IAld, Extended Data Fig. 6b). 
Notably, mice monocolonized with the L. murinus isolate exhibited fecal ILA, IAA and IAld 
as compared to germ-free (GF) controls, indicating L. murinus capability of producing these 
indoles (Figure 1h, Extended Data Fig. 6c-d).
L. murinus ameliorates active EAE
In MS23 and EAE24, the importance of the gut microbiome has recently been recognized. 
The suppression of L. murinus by HSD prompted us to investigate whether oral 
administration of L. murinus ameliorates HSD-induced exacerbation of actively-induced 
MOG35-55 EAE.
We relied on a daily gavage protocol to maintain L. murinus abundance and fecal indole 
metabolites during HSD. Body weight and disease incidence were similar in all groups. 
Mice on a HSD displayed an exacerbated disease course (Figure 2a; Extended Data Fig. 7a). 
L. murinus supplementation during HSD and NSD feeding ameliorated the disease (Figure 
2a and Extended Data Fig. 7a, b). Similar results were observed when HSD-fed mice were 
treated with L. reuteri (Extended Data Fig. 7c). We analyzed small intestinal lamina propria 
(siLPL) CD4+ lymphocytes producing IL-17A by flow cytometry at the maximum of 
intestinal TH17 expansion on day 3 post MOG immunization (p.i.)25. HSD mice displayed a 
significantly higher frequency of TH17 cells compared to NSD mice, which was reduced in 
HSD-fed mice concomitantly receiving L. murinus (Figure 2b). Flow cytometry analysis of 
splenocytes and spinal cord infiltrating lymphocytes on day 17 p.i. revealed a significant 
Wilck et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 reduction in TH17 cells by L. murinus (Figure 2c, d) and by L. reuteri treatment (Extended 
Data Fig. 7d, e) compared to HSD feeding alone. mRNA expression of Il17a and Rorc in 
spinal cord tissue was decreased after L. murinus treatment with a tendency towards lower 
Csf2 levels (Extended Data Figure 7f-h). The effect of HSD and L. murinus was largely 
TH17 specific as interferon (IFN)-γ producing CD4+ lymphocytes were not affected in 
siLPL, spleen or spinal cord (Extended Data Fig. 7i). Since we focused on actively-induced 
MOG35-55-EAE further studies are needed to extend the concept for HSD and Lactobacillus 
treatment to spontaneous EAE.
To elaborate on putative mechanisms for the modulation of TH17 cells, we focused on fecal 
indole metabolites, which are known to improve actively-induced EAE26. HSD significantly 
reduced fecal ILA, while concomitant L. murinus supplementation prevented this effect 
(Figure 3a, b). A similar pattern was observed for fecal IAA and IAld (Extended Data Fig. 
7j-m). Next, we investigated the effect of ILA on the differentiation of murine TH17 cells in 
vitro. ILA significantly reduced TH17 polarization in a dose-dependent manner (Figure 3c).
However, in MOG35-55 immunized GF mice, HSD did not change TH17 frequencies 
compared to NSD (Extended Data Fig. 8a, b), indicating a crucial role for intestinal bacteria 
in mediating the HSD effect on TH17 cells. To corroborate the modulatory effects of L. 
murinus, we used segmented filamentous bacteria (SFB) as known inducers of intestinal 
TH17 cells18 and compared MOG35-55 immunization in gnotobiotic mice harboring either 
solely SFB (GF+SFB) or SFB and L. murinus (GF+SFB+L. murinus). As predicted, the 
presence or absence of L. murinus determined TH17 frequencies in siLPL and cLPL 
(Extended Data Fig. 8c, d).
L. murinus reduces salt-sensitive hypertension
Accumulating evidence suggests that TH17 cells play a role in the genesis of hypertension7. 
Moreover, a recent meta-analysis provided preliminary support that Lactobacillus-rich 
probiotics might affect blood pressure in hypertensive subjects27. Thus, we tested whether 
L. murinus treatment would decrease experimental salt-sensitive hypertension.
Blood pressure increased over 3 weeks of HSD (Figure 4a, b, Extended Data Figure 9a). 
Concomitant daily treatment with L. murinus led to a significant reduction of systolic and 
normalization of diastolic blood pressure (Figure 4a, b, Extended Data Fig. 9b, c). L. reuteri 
was similarly effective, while non-Lactobacillus strain E. coli Nissle 1917 was ineffective 
(Extended Data Fig. 9d-g).
We next asked if L. murinus treatment affects TH17 cells in experimental salt-sensitive 
hypertension and analyzed intestinal and splenic lymphocytes by flow cytometry. Compared 
to NSD, HSD led to a significant increase in CD4+RORγt+ TH17 cell frequencies in siLPL, 
which was significantly reduced by L. murinus treatment (Figure 4c). In addition, flow 
cytometry analysis of siLPL, cLPL and splenic lymphocytes revealed a significant reduction 
of TH17 cell frequencies by L. murinus treatment compared to HSD feeding alone (Figure 
4d-f). The effect of HSD and concomitant L. murinus treatment on effector T cells was again 
largely specific to TH17, as a similar pattern was not observed for TH1 markers. Except for 
Wilck et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 the siLPL, HSD and L. murinus treatment did not alter the expression of TH1 cytokine IFN-
γ (Extended Data Figure 9 h-j). In addition, the frequencies of regulatory CD4+CD25+ 
Foxp3+ T cells (Treg) were neither significantly affected by the HSD, nor by concomitant L. 
murinus treatment in intestinal and splenic tissues (data not shown). Thus, L. murinus 
prevents HSD-induced generation of TH17 cells and consequently ameliorates salt-sensitive 
hypertension.
Salt challenge in healthy humans
To corroborate our findings in humans, we conducted an exploratory pilot study in healthy 
male volunteers, where participants were subjected to an increased salt intake for 14 days. 
Participants received 6 g sodium chloride per day (corresponding to 2.36 Na+ g/day) using 
slow-release NaCl tablets in addition to their accustomed diets. According to dietary records, 
salt intake from foods and drinks was similar between baseline and day 14 of high salt. 
During high salt challenge, the total salt intake was 13.8±2.6 g/day (Extended Data Figure 
10a). We monitored ambulatory blood pressure at baseline and after salt challenge in a 
subgroup of 8 participants. To standardize blood pressure measurements and exclude 
physical activity or stress-driven alterations during daytime28 unrelated to salt-sensitivity, 
we monitored nocturnal blood pressure during bed rest. Compared to baseline, high salt 
challenge significantly increased mean nocturnal systolic and diastolic blood pressure 
(Figure 5a). Since HSD increased TH17 cells in mice, we analyzed TH17 cells in human 
blood before and after high salt. Analysis of peripheral blood lymphocytes using flow 
cytometry revealed a significant increase in CD4+IL-17A+TNF-α+ TH17 cells (Figure 5b).
To investigate the effect of high salt challenge on the human gut microbiome, we analyzed 
the abundance of Lactobacilli in fecal samples before and after high salt challenge. To 
achieve more detailed taxonomic resolution, full shotgun metagenomic was performed (see 
Supplementary Information). Lactobacillus is not a dominant member of the human feces. In 
a control data set used here29,30 only 41.3% were positive for any Lactobacillus. In our 
present study, likewise 5 of 12 (41.7%) subjects were positive for at least one gut 
Lactobacillus species at baseline (Figure 5c). Overall, we detected 7 different gut 
Lactobacillus species at baseline (Figure 5c, species assignment using SpecI31). After high 
salt challenge, nine of ten initially present Lactobacillus populations could no longer be 
detected in the respective study subjects, suggesting a loss of Lactobacillus species 
(Supplementary Information and Extended Data Figure 10b, c, d for cross-validation). To 
test whether this is expected for the human gut over time, we reanalyzed 121 published 
Illumina-sequenced healthy gut metagenomes29,30 with time course information. A Kaplan-
Meier survival analysis on all Lactobacillus populations revealed a significantly decreased 
survival (defined here as continued detectability) rate of Lactobacillus gut populations under 
HSD (Figure 5d). Compared to non-Lactobacillus species, Lactobacilli were lost 
significantly faster under HSD, reflecting high salt impact on an intrinsically low-resilience 
taxon (Supplementary Information and Extended Data Figure 10e, f). Furthermore, we 
observed that several study subjects had gained at least one novel Lactobacillus species by 
day 14, which was not detected at baseline (Extended Data Fig. 10g-i). We speculate that 
this is the consequence of ingested Lactobacillus-containing foods, since study participants 
were not subjected to dietary restrictions. Thus, high salt challenge induces an increase in 
Wilck et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 blood pressure and TH17 cells in healthy subjects, alongside reducing survival of intestinal 
Lactobacillus species in subjects harboring Lactobacillus at baseline.
Discussion
Our data document the impact of an increased salt consumption on intestinal bacteria in 
mice and men and broaden existing knowledge on the effects of this nutrient. Several 
intestinal bacteria were affected by high salt; particularly Lactobacillus spp. were 
suppressed. In addition, fecal metabolites levels, particularly bacterial tryptophan 
metabolites, responded to HSD in mice. Such effects may contribute to salt-induced TH17 
responses and salt-sensitive conditions. Since L. murinus produces ILA, we speculate that its 
salt-induced decrease with reduced ILA generation could be responsible for an enhanced 
TH17 response. Importantly, the experimental approaches in mice demonstrate that L. 
murinus supplementation blunts HSD-induced TH17 activation and ameliorates salt-sensitive 
hypertension and actively-induced EAE in vivo. Yet, actively-induced EAE differs from 
spontaneous disease models14. It is thus currently unclear whether high salt effects can be 
generalized beyond the actively-induced model and to MS. These limitations may also 
extend to the recent controversy on more general effects of a HSD in 
neuroinflammation32,33. However, in the actively-induced EAE and hypertension models 
used here and in humans, high salt enhanced TH17 cells.
Lactobacillus metabolites are known to affect host physiology22,34 and ameliorate actively-
induced EAE26. Other tryptophan metabolites have been shown to reduce blood pressure35. 
Our data in mice suggest that L. murinus may substantially influence the abundance of fecal 
tryptophan metabolites, not excluding the possibility that other strains (e.g. Bifidobacterium 
spp.) may be producers of similar importance. Additionally, we demonstrated that ILA 
inhibited murine TH17 polarization in vitro, a finding that needs to be addressed in more 
detail in vivo. These results highlight the microbiome as a salt-sensitive compartment but do 
not speak against a more direct effect of high salt on host cells. Earlier investigations showed 
that the ionic microenvironment directly affects various immune cells36–39. Salt intake also 
has profound actions on hormonal systems such as the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis.
Our exploratory pilot study in humans is limited in power and needs to be validated in larger 
studies. Considering this limitation, it suggests that even a moderate salt challenge may 
affect the persistence of intestinal Lactobacilli and other bacteria, along with an increase in 
pro-inflammatory TH17 cells and salt-sensitive blood pressure changes. Interestingly, 
newborn infants have the greatest Lactobacillus abundance that decreases over time40,41. 
Compared to microbiomes from indigenous populations, Lactobacillus abundance in 
'Western' gut microbiomes is low42. Salt ingestion already starting at young age may 
partially have contributed to the relative loss of Lactobacilli from Western microbiomes and 
thereby may play role in the development of hypertension and autoimmunity.
Finally, the development of microbiota-targeted therapies is an intriguing new avenue for 
many diseases. Nevertheless, changes in microbiome composition or function must first be 
carefully shown to contribute to any disease. Our experimental data in mice suggest that the 
gut microbiota might serve as a potential target to counteract salt-sensitive conditions. The 
Wilck et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 identification of Lactobacillus as a ‘natural inhibitor’ of high salt-induced TH17 cells in mice 
could serve as a basis for the development of novel prevention and treatment strategies. It is 
up to randomized controlled trials in diseased humans to test this hypothesis. Moreover, any 
future dietary salt intervention trial should thus consider monitoring the microbiome to 
expand on our observations.
Methods
Animal ethics
All animal experiments were conducted in accordance with institutional, state and federal 
guidelines and with permission of the local animal ethics committees (Landesamt für 
Gesundheit und Soziales Berlin, Germany; Regierung Unterfranken, Würzburg, Germany; 
Ethical Committee for Animal Experiments, Hasselt University, Belgium). Male mice were 
maintained on a 12:12 hour day:night cycle with constant access to food and water.
Mouse high salt feeding and feces collection
All normal salt (NSD, E15430-047) and high salt (HSD, E15431-34) purified diets used for 
mouse experiments were purchased from Ssniff (Soest, Germany). Diets were gamma-
irradiated (25kGy) and identical in composition except for NaCl content (NSD: 0.5% NaCl, 
HSD: 4% NaCl). Drinking water for HSD animals was supplemented with 1% NaCl.
For fecal microbiome analyses, male FVB/N mice aged 12 weeks were purchased from 
Charles River and accustomed to NSD. Control animals remained on the NSD (n=8), others 
were switched to HSD (n=12) for 14 days. A subgroup was switched back to NSD for 
another 14 days (n=8). Body weight and food intake were monitored. To avoid cage effects, 
mice were housed individually. Fresh fecal pellets were collected directly from the anal 
orifices, immediately shock-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for later analyses.
DNA extraction from mouse feces and 16S sequencing
DNA was extracted from a single fecal pellet from each mouse using the Power Soil kit (MO 
BIO Laboratories, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The protocol was modified from the manufacturer's 
instructions to include proteinase K treatment to further lyse cells. After addition of 
proteinase K (final concentration 5 mg/ml) samples were incubated at 65 °C for 10 min and 
further 10 min at 95 °C. Plates were inverted to mix during both incubations. The V4 region 
of the 16S rRNA gene was amplified with 515F and 806R primers43 using a two-step PCR 
library preparation as previously described44. An Illumina MiSeq was run for 250 cycles to 
produce paired-end reads.
16S rDNA data processing
The raw sequences were de-multiplexed, allowing at most 2 mismatches in the barcode 
before discarding a sequence. Primers sequences were removed, allowing at most 2 
mismatches in the primer sequence before discarding a sequence. Forward and reverse reads 
were merged by comparing alignments with lengths of 253±5 nucleotides. The alignment 
with the fewest mismatches was used unless the number of mismatches was greater than 2, 
in which case the read pair was discarded. Merged reads were filtered for quality by 
Wilck et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 removing reads with more than 2.0 expected errors45. Each unique sequence was assigned a 
taxonomy using RDP46, truncating the taxonomy to the highest taxonomic level with at 
least 80% support. Sequences that were assigned the same taxonomy were then placed in the 
same operational taxonomic unit (OTU). De novo OTUs were also called using usearch47.
16S rDNA data analysis
For most analyses, three samples were excluded because their read counts were low (< 1000 
counts). The MDS ordination and PERMANOVA test were computed using R’s vegan 
package48. The phylogenetic tree was generated from a single medoid sequence from each 
OTU. Medoid sequences were selected by aligning all the sequences in each OTU with 
PyNAST49, computing a distance matrix with Clustal Omega50, and selecting the medoid 
sequence. Aligned sequences with at least 10 reads in their corresponding OTU were 
assembled into a tree with FastTree 2.051 and visualized with R’s ape package52. The 
AdaBoost classifier53 was run with 107 estimators using Python’s scikit-learn module54. 
The random forest classifier55 was run with 106 estimators also using Python’s scikit-learn 
module.
Fecal metabolite analysis
An extraction mixture of methanol-chloroform-water (MCW) (5:2:1/v:v:v) (Methanol LC-
MS-grade, Chloroform Reagent Plus ® 99,8% Sigma-Aldrich) with cinnamic acid (2 μg/ml, 
Sigma-Aldrich) as internal standard was added to the sample. Samples were dissolved in 
MCW (1 ml/ 60 mg of sample) using the tissue lyser (Precellys 24 lysis and 
homogenization, Bertin Technologies, France), samples were cooled on ice between the 
shaking cycles. Samples were shaken at 1,000 rpm and 4°C for 60 min. After addition of ice 
cold water (half of MCW volume) samples were shaken at 1,000 rpm and 4°C for 10 min. 
Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 14,000 rpm to separate the polar (top), lipid 
(bottom) and interface (tissue debris) layers. Polar phase containing metabolites was dried 
under vacuum for 12 h.
Samples were derivatized as follows: the dried extracts were dissolved in 20 μl of 
methoxyamine hydrochloride solution (Sigma, 40 mg/ml in pyridine (Roth)) and incubated 
for 90 min at 30°C shaken at 1,000 rpm followed by the addition of 40 μl of N-methyl-N-
[trimethylsilyl]trifluoroacetamide (MSTFA; Machery-Nagel, Dueren, Germany) and 
incubation at 37°C for 45 min agitated at 1,000 rpm. The extracts were centrifuged for 10 
min at 14,000 rpm, and aliquots of 30 μl were transferred into glass vials (Chromacol, UK) 
for gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) measurement. Metabolite analyses 
was performed with a Pegasus IV mass-spectrometer (LECO, St. Joseph, USA) as described 
previously56. The GC-MS chromatograms were pre-processed with the ChromaTOF 
software (LECO). Calculation of retention index, mass spectra identification and metabolite 
quantification were performed using the in house Maui-SILVIA Software tool57.
Measured values from 66 metabolites were obtained. Since a paired analysis (metabolites at 
NSD baseline vs. metabolites after HSD) was performed, absence of a given value made the 
exclusion of the corresponding second value necessary. This was in only 33 of 1056 cases 
(3.1%). A small pseudocount value (0.001) was added to all metabolite values and data was 
Wilck et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 log10 transformed. Data from each metabolite was normalized by subtracting the minimum 
and dividing by the maximum value across all eight mice. The PCA was performed using 
the Python scikit-learn package's PCA module. The heatmap was prepared with the Seaborn 
package's clustermap function.
Measurement of tryptophan metabolites
Fecal pellets derived from mice were processed as previously described22. Chemicals used 
were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and were liquid chromatography (LC)-MS grade. 
Pellets were diluted in 300 μl/10 mg feces 0.2 M acetate buffer (pH 4.2) and shaken with 1.5 
ml methyl tert-buthyl ether (MTBE) on a shaker at room temperature at 1,400 rpm for 10 
min in the presence of ceramic beads (2.8 mm Precellys Ceramic Beads, Peqlab). Samples 
were afterwards centrifuged at 4°C at 9000×g. From the organic phase 1 ml was transferred 
into a new Eppendorf vial and samples were concentrated using Eppendorf Concentrator 
5301. Concentrated samples were dissolved in 200 ml acetonitrile:H2O 1:4 v/v containing 
0.2% formic acid and stored at -20°C for further analysis.
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Agilent 1290 Infinity II UPLC system coupled 
to an Agilent 6495 Triple Quad mass spectrometer equipped with an iFunnel ESI ion source 
operated in the positive mode (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The UPLC 
column used was an Agilent Eclipse plus (100 mm × 2.1 mm, 1.8 μm). Chromatography was 
performed under gradient conditions using mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 
B (0.1% formic acid in methanol). Gradient was started at 5% methanol, increased to 95% 
after 10 min with a constant flow rate of 0.3 ml/min during a total run time of 17 min. The 
column temperature was set to 30°C. The injection volume was 1 μl. Drying gas was 
adjusted at 130°C/17 l/min, sheath gas at 400°C/11 l/min. Capillary and nozzle voltage were 
optimized at 3,500 V and 800 V, respectively. Analytes were monitored in the multiple 
reaction monitoring mode. The optimal transitions, collision energies and cell accelerator 
voltages for each compound were determined as in the following ILA m/z 206 -> 118 CE: 
24V CAV: 1V; ICA m/z 146 -> 118 CE: 13V CAV: 5V; IAA m/z 176 -> 130 CE: 17V CAV: 
1V. Calibration curves for the quantification of individual metabolites were established 
based on the changes in the relative peak area in response to different target compound 
concentration. Linearity was r2 > 0.99 over a range from 0.05 to 300 ng/ml for any 
compound.
Isolation of L. murinus
Fecal samples from healthy male NSD-fed FVB/N mice were dissolved and diluted at a 1:10 
dilution in anaerobic PBS (pH 7.6) containing L-cysteine HCl at 0.1% in a Coy Anaerobic 
Chamber (5% H2, 20% CO2, 75% N2). Samples were diluted 10-fold and each dilution 
spread on LAMVAB agar58. Plates were incubated at 37°C under anaerobic conditions and 
examined for growth at 24 hours. Individual colonies growing at the highest dilution were 
picked into LAMVAB medium and grown for an additional 16 hours. Liquid cultures were 
stored in 15% DMSO. For identification of isolates, DNA was extracted by adding 5 μl 
liquid culture to 20 μl sterile distilled water and storing at 4°C overnight; 2 μl of this extract 
was amplified with Phusion HF polymerase in a 20 μl reaction using universal 16S primers 
27F (5’-AGAGTTTGATCMTGGCTCAG-3’) and 1492R (5’-
Wilck et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 TACGGYTACCTTGTTACGACTT-3’). PCR products were purified using Agencourt 
AMPure XP and submitted with the 27F primer for Sanger sequencing. An isolate whose 
full-length 16S sequence shared 100% identity with the V4-V5 region of the Lactobacillus 
species identified in the 16S library was selected for further study. Frozen stocks of L. 
murinus (in PBS + 25% glycerol) were prepared, stored at -80°C and used for gavage of 
salt-sensitive and EAE mice.
Salt tolerance of L. murinus and selected gut commensals
Frozen stocks of L. murinus were streaked onto MRS agar and incubated at 37°C under 
aerobic conditions for 24 hours. Single colonies were picked into MRS medium and grown 
until mid-log phase (OD600 = 0.4-0.6), at which time liquid cultures were diluted 1:100 into 
MRS medium containing NaCl in the range of 0 to 2 OsM. In separate experiments, E. coli 
and L. murinus were picked into LB (E. coli) or MRS (L. murinus) medium, respectively. 
Na+ concentration of growth media was determined using atomic absorption spectrometry or 
calculated. OD600 of cultures was measured following 12-16 additional hours of growth. For 
comparison of the salt tolerance of phylogenetically distinct gut commensals, C. difficile 
ATCC 700057, A. muciniphila DSM 26127, and P. excrementihominis DSM 21040 were 
cultured under the same conditions. Frozen stocks of each strain, along with L. murinus, 
were streaked onto Brucella Blood Agar with vitamin K and hematin, and grown at 37°C in 
a Coy Anaerobic Chamber for 24 hours. Individual colonies were transferred into liquid 
Gifu anaerobic medium supplemented with 0.25% porcine gastric mucin (Sigma) and grown 
until mid-log phase, at which time they were diluted 1:100 into MGAM containing NaCl 
with concentrations of Na+ ranging from 0.08 to 1.8 M. OD600 of cultures was measured 
after 48 hours of growth (to compensate for the slow growth rates of some of the strains).
In vitro growth of human-associated Lactobacillus isolates
Human-associated Lactobacillus isolates were obtained from the German Culture Collection 
(DSMZ, Braunschweig, Germany): L. salivarius (DSM-No. 20555), L. ruminis (DSM-No. 
20403), L. delbrueckii subsp. Delbrueckii (DSM-No. 20074), L. fermentum (DSM-No. 
20052). L. acidophilus NCFM, L. paracasei (ATCC SD5275). Lactobacillus strains were 
grown anaerobically in a gas chamber (Coy Laboratory Products, USA; 12% CO2, 2,5-5 % 
H2, and 83-85,5% N2) in Gifu Anaerobic Medium Broth (MGAM) at 37°C. Overnight 
cultures were diluted to an initial OD of 0.01 and growth was assessed in the presence of 
increasing concentrations of NaCl by monitoring the absorbance at 578 nm using an Eon 
(Biotek) microplate spectrophotometer in 30-minute intervals after 30 s of shaking. AUCs 
were calculated using the trapezoidal rule and normalized to the AUC calculated for growth 
in MGAM without addition of NaCl.
Germ-free mice and L. murinus monocolonization
C57BL/6J male mice were bred under germ-free conditions and kept under a 12-hour light 
cycle and fed sterile NSD (E15430-047, Ssniff, Soest, Germany) ad libitum. For 
monocolonization, mice were gavaged with 200 μl of L. murinus stock solution (107 
CFU/ml, as described above) and further maintained under sterile conditions for two weeks. 
Fecal pellets were harvested under sterile conditions and immediately frozen in liquid 
nitrogen, or cultured in liquid thioglycolate medium (bioMerieux), incubated for 7 days, 
Wilck et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 streaked on sheep blood agar plates (oxoid, 24 hours) and further analyzed for species 
identification using MALDI-TOF (analyzed by GIMmbH, Michendorf, Germany) as 
described previously59.
Salt-sensitive hypertension in mice
To induce salt-sensitive hypertension, the L-NAME/salt mouse model was used as described 
previously60. This non-surgical intervention closely recapitulates salt-sensitive hypertension 
common in humans60. In brief, NSD-fed male FVB/N mice, aged 10-12 weeks, received 
pretreatment with (L-NAME, 0.5 mg/ml, Sigma-Aldrich) via drinking water for 3 weeks, 
followed by a 1-week washout period with NSD and normal drinking water. Then, mice 
were switched to either HSD with oral administration of L. murinus (daily gavage of 200 μl 
107 CFU/ml L. murinus suspension,), HSD with oral administration of control solution 
(daily gavage of 200 μl PBS/glycerol) or NSD for two weeks. For blood pressure 
measurements, mice were implanted with miniature subcutaneous radiotelemetry devices in 
anesthesia (Data Sciences International, New Brighton, MN, USA) prior to the L-NAME/
salt protocol. Thereby, systolic and diastolic blood pressures were recorded continuously at 
5 minute intervals in freely moving mice. Following hypertension induction with HSD for 3 
weeks, HSD was continued and mice were concomitantly gavaged with 200 μl 107 CFU/ml 
L. murinus in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) + glycerol daily. L. reuteri and E. coli Nissle 
1917 were used for separate experiments in a similar manner (107 CFU/ml in PBS + 
glycerol daily).
Mice were euthanized in anaesthesia, spleens and intestines were harvested. Single-cell 
suspensions of small intestinal (si) and colonic (c) lamina propria lymphoyctes (LPL) were 
obtained by enzymatic and mechanical dissociation using the Lamina Propria Dissociation 
Kit Mouse (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany) according to the manufacturers’ 
protocol. Cell debris was removed using Percoll (GE Healthcare) density gradient 
centrifugation as described previously61. Splenocyte single-cell suspensions were obtained 
using 70 μm strainers, followed by erythrocyte lysis and subsequent filtering using a 40 μm 
mesh. Cells were counted by trypan blue exclusion and labeled for flow cytometric analysis.
Isolated immune cells were either directly stained for surface markers using the respective 
fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies (30 min in PBS supplemented with EDTA and BSA) or 
restimulated with 50 ng/ml phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA, Sigma-Aldrich), 750 
ng/ml ionomycin (Sigma Aldrich) and 0.75μl/ml GolgiStop (BD Bioscience) for 4h at 37°C 
and 5% CO2 in RPMI 1640 medium (Sigma) supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% penicillin/
streptomycin. For all measurements, dead cell exclusion was performed using fixable 
viability dye for 405nm (Thermo Fisher). For intracellular staining, cells were permabilized 
and fixed using the FoxP3 Staining Buffer Kit (eBioscience) and labeled using the respective 
antibodies. Antibodies used are listed below. Cells were analyzed with the BD FACSCanto 
II flow cytometer and BD FACSDiva software (BD Bioscience). Data analysis was 
performed with FlowJo v10 (FlowJo LLC, Ashland, Oregon, USA).
Wilck et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE)
Male C57BL/6J mice (Charles River), aged 10-12 weeks, were either fed a NSD, a HSD 
(Ssniff, as described above) with oral administration of L. murinus or L. reuteri (daily 
gavage of 200 μl 107 CFU/ml suspension) or a HSD with oral administration of solvent 
(daily gavage of 200 μl PBS/glycerol). EAE was induced as described previously11. Briefly, 
mice were anaesthetized and subcutaneously injected with 200 μg MOG35-55 and 200 μg 
CFA. Pertussis toxin (200 ng/mouse) was applied intraperitoneally on days 0 and 2 post 
immunization (p.i.). Clinical symptoms were assessed daily according to a 5-point scale 
ranging from 0 (no symptoms) to 5 (moribund)11. For disease courses, only mice with 
clinical symptoms were included.
On day 17 p.i., mice were euthanized in anesthesia and CNS tissue was harvested, disrupted 
with a 5 ml glass homogenizer and strained through a 100 μm cell-strainer. CNS cell 
suspension was resuspended in 6 ml 30% isotonic Percoll (GE Healthcare) for a three-step 
density gradient. Lymphocytes were harvested from the interphases, washed and further 
analyzed by flow cytometry. Spleens were disrupted with a glass homogenizer, filtered 
through a 100-μm cell strainer and treated with 0.14 M ammonium chloride to lyse 
erythrocytes. To analyze the early inflammatory response in the small intestine, a subset of 
mice was euthanized on day 3 p.i. and the small intestine was harvested and processed as 
described above to obtain LPL.
In two additional experimental setups EAE was induced in male germ-free (GF) C57BL/6J 
mice fed gamma-sterilized (50 Gy) NSD or HSD diets. First, GF mice were either fed NSD 
or HSD (2 weeks prior to immunization and thereafter). Second, GF mice were fed NSD and 
either monocolonized with SFB (by introduction of feces from SFB monocolonized mice) or 
SFB and L. murinus. In both experimental subgroups intestines were harvested on day 3 p.i. 
for flow cytometry analyses.
Single-cell suspensions were analyzed by staining for extra- and intracellular markers. Dead 
cells were excluded by a fixable viability dye eFluor780 (eBioscience), Fc-block was 
performed using anti-CD16/32 antibody (eBioscience). For intracellular cytokine staining, 
cells were stimulated with ionomycin (1 μM) and PMA (50 ng/ml) in the presence of 
monensin (2 μM) for 4 hours. Cells were stained for surface markers with the respective 
fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies for 30 min and permeabilized using Fixation and 
Permeabilization Buffer (eBioscience) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. 
Intracellular cytokines were labeled with the respective fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies 
for 30-45 min. For antibodies used see below. Cells were analyzed with the BD FACSCanto 
II flow cytometer and BD FACSDiva software (BD Bioscience). Data analysis was 
performed with FlowJo (LLC).
For quantitative real-time PCR, tissue was homogenized in 500 μl peqGOLD TriFast with an 
Ultra-Turrax for 30 s followed by total RNA isolation with PerfectBind RNA Columns 
(peqGOLD HP Total RNA Kit, Peqlab). RNA yield was quantified by absorbance 
measurements at 260 nm and reversely transcribed into cDNA using QuantiTect 
transcriptase (Qiagen). PCR reactions were performed at a 5 μl scale on a qTower real-time 
PCR System (Analytic Jena, Germany) in triplicates using Taqman Assays (Thermo Fisher) 
Wilck et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 for Il17a (Mm00439618_m1), Rorc (Mm01261019_g1) and Csf2 (Mm01290062_m1). 
Relative quantification was performed by the ΔΔCT method, normalizing target gene 
expression on Actb/β-Actin (Mm00607939_s1) as housekeeping gene.
Antibodies used for flow cytometry of murine cells
Anti-CD3ε-FITC and anti-CD3ε-VioBlue (clone 17A2, Miltenyi), anti-CD4-APC-Vio770 
(clone GK1.5, Miltenyi), anti-CD4-Pacific Blue and anti-CD4-FITC (clone RM4-5, BD), 
anti-CD25-VioBlue and anti-CD25-FITC (clone 7D4, Miltenyi), anti-FoxP3-PerCP-Cy5.5 
(clone FJK-16s, eBioscience), anti-IFN-γ-PE-Cy7 and anti-IFN-γ-APC (clone XMG1.2, 
eBioscience), anti-IL-17A-PE (clone eBio17B7, eBioscience), anti-RORγt-APC (clone 
REA278, Miltenyi).
Electrolyte analysis of mouse feces
Fecal samples from NSD- and HSD-fed mice were collected and stored at -80°C until 
further analysis. n=7-9 feces samples were pooled, weighed and then processed as described 
previously62. In brief, samples were weighted, desiccated, ashed, dissolved and measured 
for Na+ concentration by atomic adsorption spectrometry (Model 3100, Perkin Elmer).
Measurement of intestinal transit
Male FVB/N mice were fed NSD or HSD for 14 days. Mice were administered activated 
charcoal (0.5 g/10 ml in 0.5% methylcellulose; 0.1 ml/10g body weight by oral gavage). 
Twenty min later mice were euthanized and the distance travelled by charcoal was measured.
High salt challenge study in healthy humans
We performed an open-label clinical pilot study to investigate the effect of an increased salt 
intake on cardiovascular and immunoregulatory functions in healthy men (ClinicalTrials.gov 
identifier: NCT02509962). The study was conducted at the Experimental and Clinical 
Research Center Berlin (ECRC), Germany, in accordance with the ethical standards of the 
institutional review board. The institutional review board of Charité University Medicine 
Berlin approved the study (EA1/138/15) and written informed consent was obtained from all 
participants prior to study entry. Key inclusion criteria were men, aged 18-50 years and a 
body mass index between 18.5 and 29.9 kg/m2. Key exclusion criteria were any 
cardiovascular, metabolic (diabetes), autoimmune, liver and kidney diseases, alcohol or drug 
abuse. To increase salt intake, subjects (n=12, included until March 2016, for baseline 
characteristics see Supplementary Information) received 10 coated tablets daily (three with 
breakfast, three with lunch and four with dinner) for two weeks, each tablet containing 600 
mg sodium chloride in a slow release formulation (Slow Sodium Tablets, HK Pharma Ltd., 
Bedford, UK), yielding an increase of habitual salt intake by 6 g/d. Subjects were asked not 
to change their dietary habits during the study. Sodium intake from ingested foods and 
drinks was calculated from dietary records of three consecutive days using OptiDiet Plus 
software 5.1.2 (GOE mbH, Linden, Germany), a professional analysis software that is based 
on nutritional content of food as provided by the German Nutrient Database63.
Stool samples were collected at baseline and on day 13 of the high salt challenge from all 12 
subjects. Briefly, subjects collected fresh fecal samples using disposable toilet seat covers 
Wilck et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 (Süsse Labortechnik, Gudensberg, Germany) and plastic vessels with spatula (Sarstedt AG, 
Nümbrecht, Germany). Closed vessels with fecal samples were immediately frozen in a 
domestic freezer at -20°C and subsequently transferred to the study center on dry ice, where 
samples were stored at -80°C until further use.
At baseline and on day 13 of the high salt challenge, 8 subjects received ambulatory blood 
pressure monitors (ABPM, Mobil-O-Graph, I.E.M. GmbH, Stolberg, Germany) for 
nocturnal blood pressure monitoring (measurements at bed rest every 30 min, subjects 
indicated bed rest by pressing the day/night button of the ABPM).
Venous blood was taken at baseline and on day 14 of the HSD for immediate isolation of 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC).
Metagenomic sequencing of human fecal samples
Samples were processed, extracted and sequenced as per the procedure in Voigt et al.30 with 
SpecI31 and mOTU64 taxonomic abundances estimated using MOCAT65. Since 
Lactobacillus is low-abundance in the human gut, to verify results are robust to changes in 
the bioinformatic protocol, samples were additionally processed using the complementary 
tool MetaPhlan66 which uses lineage-specific marker genes as opposed to the universal 
marker genes informing SpecI and mOTU species quantification, with MetaPhlan species 
detection results almost identical to mOTU species detection results (Extended Data Figure 
10a, b).
Previously published healthy human gut shotgun metagenomes where multiple samples from 
the same individual at different time points were available were taken from Voigt et al.30 
and from the Human Microbiome Project (2012, processed as described in Forslund et al.
29). Survival analysis was done using the R 'survival' package67 as outlined by Therneau & 
Grambsch68.
Human blood cell analysis
Peripheral venous blood was obtained from study participants. Peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were immediately isolated by density centrifugation using 
Biocoll (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). 106 CD4+ enriched cell fractions isolated by CD4+ T 
Cell Kit (Miltenyi) were plated onto U-bottom plates and were restimulated for 4 hours at 
37°C, 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator. Restimulation was conducted in a final volume of 
200 μl RPMI 1640 (Sigma) supplemented with 10% FBS (Merck), 100 U/ml penicillin 
(Sigma), 100 mg/ml streptomycin (Sigma), 50 ng/ml PMA (Sigma), 250 ng/ml ionomycin 
(Sigma) and 1.3 μl/ml Golgistop (BD). After restimulation cells were stained with Life/Dead 
Fixable Aqua Dead cell kit (Thermo Fisher) and monoclonal CD3-PerCP-Vio700 antibody 
(clone BW264/56, Miltenyi). Cells were fixed and permeabilized with Foxp3/Transcription 
Factor Staining Buffer kit (eBioscience) and labeled using anti-IL-17A-APC-Vio770 (clone 
CZ8-2361, Miltenyi) and anti-TNF-α-eFlour 450 (clone Mab11, eBioscience) monoclonal 
antibodies. Cells were analyzed using a FACSCanto II flow cytometer and FACSDiva 
software (BD). Data analysis was performed with FlowJo (LLC).
Wilck et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Murine TH17 cell polarization
Splenic T cells were isolated by magnetic activated cell sorting using the “Pan T cell 
isolation kit II” (Miltenyi Biotec) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Isolated T 
cells were collected and re-suspended in MACS buffer at 3·107 cells/ml. For APC free 
differentiation, cells were fluorescently stained for 30 min in an antibody cocktail containing 
anti-CD4-FITC (RM4-5, eBioscience), anti-CD44-PE (IM7, BioLegend), anti-CD62L-APC 
(MEL-14, eBioscience) and anti-CD25-PE-Cy5 (PC61.5, eBioscience) and subsequently 
purified by fluorescence activated cell sorting on MoFlo (Beckman-Coulter). Sorted naive T 
cells (CD4+CD62L+CD44lowCD25neg) were stimulated by plate-bound anti-CD3 (2 μg/ml, 
145-2C11, BD Pharmingen) and anti-CD28 (2 μg/ml, 37.51, BD Pharmingen) in the 
presence of IL-6 (40 ng/ml) and rhTGF-β1 (2 ng/ml). To determine the influence of indole-3 
lactic acid on TH17 cell differentiation, cells were cultured with vehicle (0.1% Ethanol) or 
10-500 μM indole-3-lactic acid (ILA) for 96h under isotonic or hypertonic (+40 mM NaCl) 
conditions.
DNA extraction from feces and qPCR of 16S rRNA genes
DNA from stool samples was isolated using QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen) 
according to the manufacturer's instructions. To optimize bacterial community structure 
representation, a mutanolysin (Sigma) digestion step was included (6 μl of 25kU/ml stock/
sample)69. qPCR on a 7500 Sequence Detector (Applied Biosystems, AB) was used to 
enumerate bacterial 16S rRNA gene copies in the genomic DNA extracted from stool 
samples. Samples were quantified in 10 μl reactions containing 1x SYBR Green Master Mix 
(AB), 300 nM of each primer and 4 ng of genomic DNA. Standard curves for quantification 
consisted in ten-fold serial dilutions in the range of 108 to 100 copies of E. coli (Invitrogen, 
C404010) or L. murinus isolate 16S rRNA gene amplified with primers 27F (5’-
GTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG-3’) and 1492R (5’-CGGCTA CCTTGTTACGAC-3’)70. The 
total amount of bacterial 16S in stool samples was quantified with the universal primers 
Univ 337F 5'-ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAGT-3' and Univ 518R 5'-
GTATTACCGCGGCTGCTGGCAC-3'71. The total amount of different Lactobacillus DNA 
in stool samples was quantified using the following primers: L. murinus/animalis72 LactoM-
F (5'-TCGAACGAAACTTCTTTATCACC-3'), LactoM-R (5'-
CGTTCGCCACTCAACTCTTT-3'); L. brevis73 LbrevF (5'-
TGCACTGATTTCAACAATGAAG-3'), LbrevR (5'-CCAGAAGTGATAGCCGAAGC-3'); 
L. casei/paracasei74 LcaseF (5'-GCACCGAGATTCAACATGG-3'), LcaseR (5'-
GGTTCTTGGATCTATGCGGTATTAG-3'); L. delbrueckii74 LdelbF (5'-
GGGTGATTTGTTGGACGCTAG-3'), LdelbR (5'-GCCGCCTTTCAAACTTGAATC-3'); L. 
fermentum75 LfermF (5'-GCACCTGATTGATTTTGGTCG-3'), LactoR (5'-
GTCCATTGTGGAAGATTCCC-3'); L. plantarum76 sg-Lpla-F (5'-
CTCTGGTATTGATTGGTGCTTGCAT-3'), sg-Lpla-R (5'-
GTTCGCCACTCACTCAAATGTAAA-3'); L. rhamnosus74 LrhamF (5'-
TGCTTGCATCTTGATTTAATTTTG-3'), LactoR (5'-GTCCATTGTGGAAGATTCCC-3'); 
L. salivarius75 LsalivF (5'-CGAAACTTTCTTACACCGAATGC-3'), LactoR (5'-
GTCCATTGTGGAAGATTCCC-3'). All measurements were performed in duplicates.
Wilck et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Code availability
Code used for the 16S rDNA data analysis has been uploaded to a github repository (https://
github.com/almlab/analysis-salt-responsive). Software was obtained from publicly available 
sources; papers describing the software are cited in the text.
Data availability
Raw files of the bacterial V4-V5 16S rRNA data and the L. murinus genome have been 
uploaded to the NCBI Sequence Read Archive as Bioproject PRJNA400793. Raw 
metagenomic data of the human study are available in the European Nucleotide Archive 
(ENA, accession number PRJEB22348). Reference datasets for the human metagenome 
analysis are accessible via ENA (accession number ERP009422) and via http://
hmpdacc.org/. Numerical source data for all figures are provided with the paper.
Statistics
Power calculation is a prerequisite for any animal experiment according to the local animal 
law and was performed using G*Power Software Version 3.1.9.2. Effect sizes were 
calculated from previously published experiments. Animals were randomly assigned to the 
respective body weight-matched groups, probiotic and control treatment were administered 
without knowledge of the treatment groups. The human pilot study was performed in an 
unblinded manner. Data analysis was performed by the investigators without knowledge of 
the treatment groups or treatment phase, respectively. All findings shown have been 
reproduced in at least two independent experiments. Data are presented depending on their 
scale and distribution with arithmetic mean and standard deviation (mean±s.e.m.) or median 
including 25-75% quartiles (25|75). Unless otherwise specified, boxplots show median and 
interquartile range (IQR) with whiskers showing minimum and maximum values, bar graphs 
show mean±s.e.m. Outliers identified by Grubbs’ test were excluded. Normality was 
assessed by Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. To compare independent measurements, we used a t-
test and Mann-Whitney U test, as appropriate. To compare dependent measurements, we 
used a paired t-test or Wilcoxon signed-rank test, as appropriate. To compare more than two 
groups, we used one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test or Kruskal-Wallis test 
followed by Dunn’s post hoc test, as appropriate. Statistical analysis was performed using 
GraphPad Prism 6. Lactobacillus survival times are visualized by Kaplan-Meier curves and 
statistically compared by Log-rank test.
To analyze mouse blood pressure telemetry data, we conducted repeated measurements 
analysis by using linear mixed models. We tested a random intercept versus a random 
intercept-slope model and selected the best-fit model. Data analysis was performed with R 
(Version 3.1.1 R Foundation, Vienna, Austria) using the packages "lme4" and "nlme". A P 
value <0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Wilck et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Body weight, food, fluid and sodium chloride (NaCl) intake, and 
intestinal transit in mice fed a NSD or HSD.
Body weight (a), food intake (b), fluid intake (c), NaCl intake from the chow (d), NaCl 
intake from the drinking water (e) and total NaCl intake (f; sum of NaCl intake from chow 
and drinking water) in mice fed normal salt diet (NSD, n=8) or high salt diet (HSD, n=8). 
(g) Measurement of intestinal transit. FVB/N mice were fed NSD (n=8) or HSD (n=9) for 14 
days and administered activated charcoal (0.5 g/10 ml in 0.5% methylcellulose; 0.1 ml/10 g 
Wilck et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 body weight by oral gavage). Twenty minutes later mice were euthanized and the distance 
travelled by charcoal was measured. Bars show mean±s.e.m., circles represent individual 
mice. **p<0.01, ****p<0.001 using paired two-tailed Student‘s t test for (a-c), one-tailed 
Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed rank test for (d-f) and unpaired two-tailed Student‘s t test 
for (g).
Extended Data Figure 2. Fecal microbiome profiles of mice kept on NSD or HSD over time.
Wilck et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Taxonomic bar charts showing relative abundance of RDP-based OTUs on indicated days. 
(a) Mice remaining on NSD for 14 days served as NSD controls. Baseline NSD day -1 and 
NSD day 14 are shown. (b) Separate mice were switched from NSD (days -2 and -1) to HSD 
for 14 days, and finally re-exposed to NSD for another 14 days (recovery). For time course 
analyses, fecal samples from baseline NSD days (-1 and -2), early (days 1-3) and late (day 
14) HSD days and NSD recovery days (days 15-17, 19, 22, 28) are shown. n=8 mice per 
group.
Wilck et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 3. HSD alters the fecal microbiome and the fecal metabolite profile.
(a) Mouse 16S rDNA fecal microbiome samples do not separate by diet in a MDS 
ordination (white, NSD samples; black, HSD samples; grey, recovery on NSD). (b) Real-
time PCR on DNA extracted from fecal samples of mice fed NSD or HSD using universal 
16S rDNA primers (n=8 fecal samples per group from independent mice, indicated by 
circles; two-tailed Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed rank test). (c) Phylogenetic tree showing 
changes in microbiome composition caused by HSD. OTUs present in samples from day 14 
are indicated by colored circles (red indicates reduction in HSD samples; blue indicates 
enrichment). The circles’ radii indicate median log fold difference in relative abundance 
between the two diets. Filled circles mark statistically significant differences (two-tailed 
Student‘s t-test, Benjamini-Hochberg correction, p<0.05). (d-g) High dietary salt strongly 
influences the fecal metabolite profile. Male FVB/N mice (n=8) were fed a NSD and then 
switched to HSD. Metabolites were extracted from fecal pellets taken under NSD (day -3) 
and HSD (day 13), and analyzed by gas-chromatography mass-spectrometry. (d) HSD 
samples are clearly distinguishable from NSD samples in a principal component analysis for 
fecal metabolites. (e) Fecal metabolites clearly cluster by treatment. The majority of fecal 
metabolites are reduced by HSD. Hierarchically clustered heatmap, metabolites shown in 
alphabetical order. Metabolites were normalized by subtracting the minimum and dividing 
by the maximum value across all mice. (f) Fecal levels of the nucleoside adenosine were 
similar in both diets, suggesting that the change in metabolites is not due to a decrease in 
overall bacterial biomass. (g) HSD leads to a reduction in total metabolite peak intensities in 
fecal samples. **p<0.01 two-tailed paired Student‘s t-test for (f, g).
Wilck et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 4. Accuracy of AdaBoost and Random Forest classifiers.
(a) AdaBoost and random forest classifiers (trained on samples from days -2, -1, and 14) 
were used to predict the classification of all samples from HSD mice. The fraction of 
samples from each time point that the classifiers predicted as belonging to animals currently 
on a HSD is shown. The two runs of the random forest produced the same fractions, so only 
one line is shown for the two random forest classifiers. (b) Time series for the other 
remaining 7 OTUs important to the classifier. NSD and HSD phases are indicated by white 
and grey backgrounds. Mice (n=12) were switched from NSD to HSD and back to NSD 
Wilck et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 (subgroup of n=8). Other control mice (n=8) remaining on NSD shown in white. Boxplots: 
median, IQR, whiskers 1.5*IQR, circles represent samples from independent mice.
Extended Data Figure 5. L. murinus genome and in vitro growth of Lactobacilli.
(a) Venn diagram of the coding sequences present in the L. murinus and two other isolates 
with available with full genome sequences. (b) Bootstrapped phylogenetic tree of full-length 
16S rDNA from a variety of Lactobacillus species resident to rodent or human guts. 
Prevalence of the respective species in the MetaHIT cohort is shown. L. murinus strains are 
Wilck et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 absent in the MetaHIT cohort. (c) Growth yield (OD600) of L. murinus measured at 
increasing concentrations of NaCl. Aerobic endpoint measurements of liquid L. murinus 
cultures in MRS medium and increasing NaCl concentrations relative to growth in MRS 
without the addition of NaCl. n=5 independent experiments. (d) Anaerobic growth yield of 
L. murinus, A. muciniphila, P. excrementihominis, and C. difficile grown at 37 °C for 48 
hours in MGAM liquid medium. Growth at each salt concentration is normalized to growth 
at 0.086 M Na+. The respective IC50 is indicated. n=3 technical replicates across 2 
experiments. (e) Anaerobic growth of selected human Lactobacilli in MGAM medium with 
increasing NaCl concentrations. Relative growth yield is calculated based on AUCs by 
comparing to growth in MGAM without the addition of NaCl. n=3 independent experiments 
with 3 technical replicates. (f) Heatmap showing data as in (e). The respective IC50 is shown 
in the bottom row. (g) Growth yield of E. coli and L. murinus, grown at 37 °C for 12-16 
hours on LB (E.coli) or MRS broth (L. murinus). n=4 technical replicates from two 
independent experiments. Mean±s.e.m.
Extended Data Figure 6. Indole metabolites in murine fecal samples.
(a) Effect of HSD on fecal indole-3 acetic acid (IAA) and (b) indole-3 carboxaldehyde 
(IAld) content in FVB/N mice fed a NSD or HSD (n=12 per group in b; n=13 per group in 
c). (c-d) Germ-free (GF) mice monocolonized with L. murinus showed increased fecal IAA 
Wilck et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 and IAld content (n=8 per group). *p<0.05 using one-tailed Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed 
rank test for (a-b), ****p<0.0001 using one-tailed Mann-Whitney U test for (c) and 
****p<0.0001 using unpaired one-tailed Student’s t-test for (d). n represents independent 
mice.
Extended Data Figure 7. The effect of Lactobacilli on actively-induced EAE.
(a) Median cumulative clinical EAE scores at day 15, 16 and 17 post immunization (p.i.) of 
NSD (n=9), HSD (n=11) and HSD mice treated with L. murinus (n=6) starting at the day of 
Wilck et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 immunization. Kruskal-Wallis followed by Dunn's multiple comparisons test *p<0.05, 
**p<0.01, ***p<0.001. n represents independent mice, indicated by circles. (b) Clinical 
course of MOG35-55 EAE in NSD mice (black circles, n=7) and NSD mice treated with L. 
murinus (green squares, n=4. Mean±s.e.m.). *p<0.05 using two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test. 
(c) Clinical course of MOG35-55 EAE in HSD mice (black circles) and HSD mice treated 
with L. reuteri (green squares, n=6 independent mice per group, mean±s.e.m.). *p<0.05 
using two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test. (d-e) Quantification for CD4+IL-17A+IFN-γ- cells 
on day 17 of EAE in the spleen (d) and spinal cord (e). n=4 independent mice per group. 
Mean±s.e.m. *p<0.05 one-tailed Mann-Whitney U test. (f-h) Spinal cords on day 17 of EAE 
were analyzed by real-time RT-PCR for relative expression of Il17a (f, n=7 for NSD, n=6 for 
HSD and n=5 for HSD+L. murinus), Rorc (g, n=5 for NSD, n=6 for HSD and n=5 for HSD
+L. murinus) and Csf2 (h, n=8 for NSD, n=6 for HSD and n=4 for HSD+L. murinus). Mean
±s.e.m. *p<0.05, **p<0.01 using one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test. (i) 
Quantification of IFN-γ-producing TH1 cells in siLPL on day 3 of EAE (n=4 per group) and 
quantification of IFN-γ producing TH1 cells in spleen (n=4 per group) and spinal cord on 
day 17 of EAE (n=5 for NSD, n=6 for HSD and n=5 for HSD+L. murinus). n indicates 
number of independent mice per group. Mean±s.e.m. ns=not significant by one-way 
ANOVA. (j-m) Fecal indole metabolites were determined in MOG35-55 EAE mice by LC-
MS/MS analysis. Effect of HSD on fecal IAA (j) and IAld (k) content on day 10 p.i. (n=5 
per group for j, n=4 for NSD and n=5 for HSD in k). Fecal IAA (l) and IAld (m) content in 
MOG35-55 EAE mice fed HSD with or without concomitant L. murinus treatment on day 10 
p.i. (n=7 per group for l, n=8 for HSD and n=7 for HSD+L. murinus for m). *p<0.05 using 
unpaired one-tailed Student’s t-test for (j and l-m) and one-tailed Wilcoxon matched-pairs 
signed rank test for (k). n indicates number of independent mice per group.
Wilck et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 8. Actively-induced EAE in gnotobiotic mice.
(a, b) HSD fails to induce intestinal TH17 cells in germ-free MOG35-55 EAE mice (n=5 for 
GF+NSD and n=6 for GF+HSD). (a) Analysis of IL-17A and IFN-γ in CD4+ siLPL isolated 
from NSD or HSD-fed MOG35-55 immunized germ-free mice (day 3 p.i.). Representative 
flow cytometry plots (left) show one mouse per group. Quantifications show frequencies of 
CD4+IL-17A+IFN-γ- (middle) and CD4+IL-17A+IFN-γ+ (right) cells and (b) CD4+ RORγt
+ frequencies in siLPL. (c-d) L. murinus reduces small intestinal (siLPL) and colonic (cLPL) 
lamina propria TH17 cells in EAE mice colonized with segmented filamentous bacteria 
(SFB). MOG35-55 EAE was induced in GF mice monocolonized with SFB (GF+SFB) and 
GF mice colonized with SFB and L. murinus (GF+SFB+L. murinus). LPL were isolated on 
day 3 p.i. (c) Left panel shows representative flow cytometry plots demonstrating IL-17A 
and IFN-γ expression in CD4+ siLPL (one mouse per group). Middle panel shows 
Wilck et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 quantification of CD4+IL-17A+IFN-γ- siLPL (n=9 for GF+SFB, n=8 for GF+SFB+L. 
murinus). Right panel shows quantification of CD4+RORγt+ siLPL (n=9 mice per group). 
(d) Left panel shows representative flow cytometry plots (one mouse per group) depicting 
IL-17A and IFN-γ expression in CD4+ cLPL. Middle and right panel show quantification of 
CD4+IL-17A+IFN-γ- (n=8 for GF+SFB, n=9 for GF+SFB+L. murinus) and CD4+ IL-17A
+IFN-γ+ cLPL (n=8 per group). All bar graphs show mean±s.e.m, circles represent 
independent mice. *p<0.05, ***p<0.001 unpaired one-tailed Student’s t-test for (a-d).
Wilck et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 9. Treatment with L. murinus or L. reuteri ameliorates salt-sensitive 
hypertension.
(a) Mean diastolic pressures over time in response to HSD and HSD with concomitant L. 
murinus treatment in n=7 FVB/N mice. Scale bar indicates 24 hours. Horizontal line 
indicates the mean across all values of the respective phase. (b, c) Mean systolic (b) and 
diastolic (c) blood pressures in these mice (n=7) fed a HSD (black curve) and HSD with 
concomitant L. murinus treatment at circadian scale. Arrows indicate the time of L. murinus 
gavage. (d, e) Boxplots (median, IQR, whiskers 1.5*IQR) show systolic (d) and diastolic (e) 
blood pressures recorded continuously in FVB/N mice fed a HSD and a HSD with 
concomitant L. reuteri treatment. These mice (n=9) were fed a HSD for 10 days prior to 
concomitant L. reuteri treatment for another 7 days. ***p<0.001 vs. HSD using linear mixed 
model. (f, g) Boxplots (median, IQR, whiskers 1.5*IQR) show systolic (f) and diastolic (g) 
blood pressures in mice (n=5) fed a HSD and a HSD with concomitant Escherichia coli 
Nissle 1917 (E. coli) treatment for 3 days, respectively. Statistics using linear mixed model. 
(h-j) Quantification of CD4+IL-17A-IFN-γ+ lymphocytes in siLPL (h, n=5 for NSD, n=7 
for HSD, n=6 for HSD+L. murinus) and cLPL and spleen, respectively (i-j, n=5 for NSD, 
n=6 for HSD, n=6 for HSD+L. murinus). All bars show mean±s.e.m, circles represent 
independent mice. *p<0.05 using Kruskal-Wallis and Dunn’s post-hoc test for (h), one-way 
ANOVA for (i-j).
Wilck et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 10. High salt challenge in healthy human subjects.
(a) Total salt intake according to dietary records (n=12, paired one-tailed t-test). (b, c) 
Metagenome analysis shows loss of Lactobacillus gut populations during human high salt 
challenge. Shown are all subjects (horizontal axis) for which gut Lactobacilli were detected 
at baseline and all species so detected (vertical axis) using the mOTU (b) or MetaPhlAn 
framework (c) for bacterial species identification. Heatmap cells show abundance for mOTU 
(insert counts as fraction of sample total) or average coverage (reads per position) for 
MetaPhlAn of these Lactobacilli at baseline (left part of cells, black border) and after high 
Wilck et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 salt challenge (right part of cells, grey border). Cross markers show complete loss 
(nondetection after high salt challenge) of each species. In all cases but one (shown), 
baseline Lactobacillus populations are no longer detected post high salt. (d) qPCR using 
Lactobacillus-specific 16S rDNA primers in human fecal samples positive for Lactobacillus 
at baseline show a loss of the respective species after 14 days of high salt. Lactobacillus 16S 
rDNA copy number in 4 ng fecal DNA is shown. Symbols indicate study subject, colors 
indicate respective Lactobacillus species. (e) Kaplan-Meier survival curves contrasting the 
fate of gut Lactobacillus populations (detected using the mOTU framework) following high 
salt challenge (bright red curve) and in healthy control individuals from reference cohorts 
(n=121, see methods) not undergoing any intervention (bright blue curve). This is compared 
with corresponding survival curves over time for the set of all other detected gut bacterial 
species following high salt challenge (high salt-others, dark red curve) and without such 
challenge in controls (NSD-others, dark blue curve). (f) For a clearer view of its time range 
only the salt intervention curves from (e) are shown. Two observations are clear. First, 
Lactobacillus on average persist for shorter times in the gut than the average over all other 
species. Second, a high salt challenge strongly increases gut loss of both Lactobacillus and 
non-Lactobacillus species. As such, in combination, Lactobacillus loss is highly pronounced 
under high salt intervention and significantly (p<1.62e-8) faster than the average over all 
species. (g-i) Metagenome analysis shows introduction of novel Lactobacillus gut 
populations during human high salt challenge. Shown are all subjects (horizontal axis) for 
which gut Lactobacilli were detected following high salt challenge, and all species so 
detected (vertical axis) using the SpecI (g), mOTU (h) or MetaPhlAn (i). Heatmap cells 
show abundance (insert counts as fraction of sample total for SpecI and mOTU) and average 
coverage (reads per position for MetaPhlAn) of these Lactobacilli at baseline (left part of 
cells, black border) and after high salt challenge (right part of cells, gray border). Cross 
markers show novel introduction (nondetection at baseline) of each species.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We thank Gabriele N’diaye, Ilona Kamer, Silvia Seubert, Petra Voss, Juliane Anders, Christiane Schmidt, Anneleen 
Geuzens, Rajna Hercog and Stefanie Kandels-Lewis for assistance. We thank John J. Mullins and Friedrich C. Luft 
for their support. This study was funded by grants from the German Centre for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK; 
BER 1.1 VD), the Center for Microbiome Informatics and Therapeutics, and the MetaCardis consortium. D.N.M., 
J.J. and M.G. were supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG). R.A.L. holds an endowed professorship 
supported by Novartis Pharma. M.K. was supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (640116), by a SALK-grant from the government of 
Flanders, Belgium and by an Odysseus-grant of the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO), Belgium. L. reuteri was 
kindly provided by L. Romani.
References
1. Manzel A, et al. Role of "Western diet" in inflammatory autoimmune diseases. Current allergy and 
asthma reports. 2014; 14:404.doi: 10.1007/s11882-013-0404-6 [PubMed: 24338487] 
2. O'Donnell M, et al. Urinary sodium and potassium excretion, mortality, and cardiovascular events. 
The New England journal of medicine. 2014; 371:612–623. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1311889 
[PubMed: 25119607] 
Wilck et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 3. Weber MA, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the management of hypertension in the community 
a statement by the American Society of Hypertension and the International Society of Hypertension. 
Journal of hypertension. 2014; 32:3–15. DOI: 10.1097/HJH.0000000000000065 [PubMed: 
24270181] 
4. Taylor J. 2013 ESH/ESC guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension. European heart 
journal. 2013; 34:2108–2109. [PubMed: 24040671] 
5. Mozaffarian D, et al. Global sodium consumption and death from cardiovascular causes. The New 
England journal of medicine. 2014; 371:624–634. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1304127 [PubMed: 
25119608] 
6. Coffman TM. Under pressure: the search for the essential mechanisms of hypertension. Nature 
medicine. 2011; 17:1402–1409. DOI: 10.1038/nm.2541
7. Wenzel U, et al. Immune Mechanisms in Arterial Hypertension. Journal of the American Society of 
Nephrology : JASN. 2016; 27:677–686. DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2015050562 [PubMed: 26319245] 
8. Guzik TJ, et al. Role of the T cell in the genesis of angiotensin II induced hypertension and vascular 
dysfunction. The Journal of experimental medicine. 2007; 204:2449–2460. DOI: 10.1084/jem.
20070657 [PubMed: 17875676] 
9. Madhur MS, et al. Interleukin 17 promotes angiotensin II-induced hypertension and vascular 
dysfunction. Hypertension. 2010; 55:500–507. DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.109.145094 
[PubMed: 20038749] 
10. Norlander AE, et al. Interleukin-17A Regulates Renal Sodium Transporters and Renal Injury in 
Angiotensin II-Induced Hypertension. Hypertension. 2016; 68:167–174. DOI: 10.1161/
HYPERTENSIONAHA.116.07493 [PubMed: 27141060] 
11. Kleinewietfeld M, et al. Sodium chloride drives autoimmune disease by the induction of 
pathogenic TH17 cells. Nature. 2013; 496:518–522. DOI: 10.1038/nature11868 [PubMed: 
23467095] 
12. Wu C, et al. Induction of pathogenic TH17 cells by inducible salt-sensing kinase SGK1. Nature. 
2013; 496:513–517. DOI: 10.1038/nature11984 [PubMed: 23467085] 
13. Miossec P, Korn T, Kuchroo VK. Interleukin-17 and type 17 helper T cells. The New England 
journal of medicine. 2009; 361:888–898. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMra0707449 [PubMed: 19710487] 
14. Bettelli E. Building different mouse models for human MS. Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences. 2007; 1103:11–18. DOI: 10.1196/annals.1394.021 [PubMed: 17376825] 
15. David LA, et al. Diet rapidly and reproducibly alters the human gut microbiome. Nature. 2014; 
505:559–563. DOI: 10.1038/nature12820 [PubMed: 24336217] 
16. Turnbaugh PJ, et al. An obesity-associated gut microbiome with increased capacity for energy 
harvest. Nature. 2006; 444:1027–1031. DOI: 10.1038/nature05414 [PubMed: 17183312] 
17. Honda K, Littman DR. The microbiota in adaptive immune homeostasis and disease. Nature. 2016; 
535:75–84. DOI: 10.1038/nature18848 [PubMed: 27383982] 
18. Ivanov II, et al. Induction of intestinal Th17 cells by segmented filamentous bacteria. Cell. 2009; 
139:485–498. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.09.033 [PubMed: 19836068] 
19. Sun Z, et al. Expanding the biotechnology potential of lactobacilli through comparative genomics 
of 213 strains and associated genera. Nature communications. 2015; 6:8322.doi: 10.1038/
ncomms9322
20. Wannemuehler MJ, Overstreet AM, Ward DV, Phillips GJ. Draft genome sequences of the altered 
schaedler flora, a defined bacterial community from gnotobiotic mice. Genome announcements. 
2014; 2doi: 10.1128/genomeA.00287-14
21. Li J, et al. An integrated catalog of reference genes in the human gut microbiome. Nature 
biotechnology. 2014; 32:834–841. DOI: 10.1038/nbt.2942
22. Zelante T, et al. Tryptophan catabolites from microbiota engage aryl hydrocarbon receptor and 
balance mucosal reactivity via interleukin-22. Immunity. 2013; 39:372–385. DOI: 10.1016/
j.immuni.2013.08.003 [PubMed: 23973224] 
23. Jangi S, et al. Alterations of the human gut microbiome in multiple sclerosis. Nature 
communications. 2016; 7 12015. doi: 10.1038/ncomms12015
24. Berer K, et al. Commensal microbiota and myelin autoantigen cooperate to trigger autoimmune 
demyelination. Nature. 2011; 479:538–541. DOI: 10.1038/nature10554 [PubMed: 22031325] 
Wilck et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 25. Haghikia A, et al. Dietary Fatty Acids Directly Impact Central Nervous System Autoimmunity via 
the Small Intestine. Immunity. 2015; 43:817–829. DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.09.007 [PubMed: 
26488817] 
26. Rothhammer V, et al. Type I interferons and microbial metabolites of tryptophan modulate 
astrocyte activity and central nervous system inflammation via the aryl hydrocarbon receptor. 
Nature medicine. 2016; 22:586–597. DOI: 10.1038/nm.4106
27. Khalesi S, Sun J, Buys N, Jayasinghe R. Effect of probiotics on blood pressure: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of randomized, controlled trials. Hypertension. 2014; 64:897–903. DOI: 
10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.114.03469 [PubMed: 25047574] 
28. Hansen TW, et al. Predictive role of the nighttime blood pressure. Hypertension. 2011; 57:3–10. 
DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.109.133900 [PubMed: 21079049] 
29. Forslund K, et al. Country-specific antibiotic use practices impact the human gut resistome. 
Genome research. 2013; 23:1163–1169. DOI: 10.1101/gr.155465.113 [PubMed: 23568836] 
30. Voigt AY, et al. Temporal and technical variability of human gut metagenomes. Genome biology. 
2015; 16:73.doi: 10.1186/s13059-015-0639-8 [PubMed: 25888008] 
31. Mende DR, Sunagawa S, Zeller G, Bork P. Accurate and universal delineation of prokaryotic 
species. Nature methods. 2013; 10:881–884. DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.2575 [PubMed: 23892899] 
32. Farez MF, Fiol MP, Gaitan MI, Quintana FJ, Correale J. Sodium intake is associated with increased 
disease activity in multiple sclerosis. Journal of neurology, neurosurgery, and psychiatry. 2015; 
86:26–31. DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2014-307928
33. Fitzgerald KC, et al. Sodium intake and multiple sclerosis activity and progression in BENEFIT. 
Annals of neurology. 2017; 82:20–29. DOI: 10.1002/ana.24965 [PubMed: 28556498] 
34. Lamas B, et al. CARD9 impacts colitis by altering gut microbiota metabolism of tryptophan into 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor ligands. Nature medicine. 2016; 22:598–605. DOI: 10.1038/nm.4102
35. Wang Y, et al. Kynurenine is an endothelium-derived relaxing factor produced during 
inflammation. Nature medicine. 2010; 16:279–285. DOI: 10.1038/nm.2092
36. Binger KJ, et al. High salt reduces the activation of IL-4- and IL-13-stimulated macrophages. The 
Journal of clinical investigation. 2015; 125:4223–4238. DOI: 10.1172/JCI80919 [PubMed: 
26485286] 
37. Eil R, et al. Ionic immune suppression within the tumour microenvironment limits T cell effector 
function. Nature. 2016; 537:539–543. DOI: 10.1038/nature19364 [PubMed: 27626381] 
38. Hernandez AL, et al. Sodium chloride inhibits the suppressive function of FOXP3+ regulatory T 
cells. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2015; 125:4212–4222. DOI: 10.1172/JCI81151 
[PubMed: 26524592] 
39. Jantsch J, et al. Cutaneous Na+ storage strengthens the antimicrobial barrier function of the skin 
and boosts macrophage-driven host defense. Cell metabolism. 2015; 21:493–501. DOI: 10.1016/
j.cmet.2015.02.003 [PubMed: 25738463] 
40. Cox LM, et al. Altering the intestinal microbiota during a critical developmental window has 
lasting metabolic consequences. Cell. 2014; 158:705–721. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.05.052 
[PubMed: 25126780] 
41. Tamburini S, Shen N, Wu HC, Clemente JC. The microbiome in early life: implications for health 
outcomes. Nature medicine. 2016; 22:713–722. DOI: 10.1038/nm.4142
42. Martinez I, et al. The gut microbiota of rural papua new guineans: composition, diversity patterns, 
and ecological processes. Cell reports. 2015; 11:527–538. DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.03.049 
[PubMed: 25892234] 
43. Caporaso JG, et al. Ultra-high-throughput microbial community analysis on the Illumina HiSeq 
and MiSeq platforms. The ISME journal. 2012; 6:1621–1624. DOI: 10.1038/ismej.2012.8 
[PubMed: 22402401] 
44. Preheim SP, Perrotta AR, Martin-Platero AM, Gupta A, Alm EJ. Distribution-based clustering: 
using ecology to refine the operational taxonomic unit. Applied and environmental microbiology. 
2013; 79:6593–6603. DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00342-13 [PubMed: 23974136] 
45. Edgar RC, Flyvbjerg H. Error filtering, pair assembly and error correction for next-generation 
sequencing reads. Bioinformatics. 2015; 31:3476–3482. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv401 
[PubMed: 26139637] 
Wilck et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 46. Wang Q, Garrity GM, Tiedje JM, Cole JR. Naive Bayesian classifier for rapid assignment of rRNA 
sequences into the new bacterial taxonomy. Applied and environmental microbiology. 2007; 
73:5261–5267. DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00062-07 [PubMed: 17586664] 
47. Edgar RC. Search and clustering orders of magnitude faster than BLAST. Bioinformatics. 2010; 
26:2460–2461. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq461 [PubMed: 20709691] 
48. Vegan: Community Ecology Package. R package version 2.3–02015
49. Caporaso JG, et al. PyNAST: a flexible tool for aligning sequences to a template alignment. 
Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:266–267. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp636 [PubMed: 19914921] 
50. Sievers F, et al. Fast, scalable generation of high-quality protein multiple sequence alignments 
using Clustal Omega. Molecular systems biology. 2011; 7:539.doi: 10.1038/msb.2011.75 
[PubMed: 21988835] 
51. Price MN, Dehal PS, Arkin AP. FastTree 2--approximately maximum-likelihood trees for large 
alignments. PloS one. 2010; 5:e9490.doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009490 [PubMed: 20224823] 
52. Paradis E, Claude J, Strimmer K. APE: Analyses of Phylogenetics and Evolution in R language. 
Bioinformatics. 2004; 20:289–290. [PubMed: 14734327] 
53. Freund Y, Schapire RE. A Decision-Theoretic Generalization of On-Line Learning and an 
Application to Boosting. Journal of Computer and System Sciences. 1997; 55:119–139. DOI: 
10.1006/jcss.1997.1504
54. Pedregosa F, et al. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning 
Research. 2011; 12:2825–2830.
55. Breiman L. Random Forests. Machine Learning. 2001; 45:5–32. DOI: 10.1023/A:1010933404324
56. Pietzke M, Zasada C, Mudrich S, Kempa S. Decoding the dynamics of cellular metabolism and the 
action of 3-bromopyruvate and 2-deoxyglucose using pulsed stable isotope-resolved 
metabolomics. Cancer & metabolism. 2014; 2:9.doi: 10.1186/2049-3002-2-9 [PubMed: 25035808] 
57. Kuich PH, Hoffmann N, Kempa S. Maui-VIA: A User-Friendly Software for Visual Identification, 
Alignment, Correction, and Quantification of Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry Data. 
Frontiers in bioengineering and biotechnology. 2014; 2:84.doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2014.00084 
[PubMed: 25654076] 
58. Hartemink R, Domenech VR, Rombouts FM. LAMVAB—A new selective medium for the 
isolation of lactobacilli from faeces. Journal of microbiological methods. 1997; 29:77–84. DOI: 
10.1016/S0167-7012(97)00025-0
59. Gomila M, et al. Genotypic and phenotypic applications for the differentiation and species-level 
identification of achromobacter for clinical diagnoses. PloS one. 2014; 9:e114356.doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0114356 [PubMed: 25474264] 
60. Itani HA, et al. CD70 Exacerbates Blood Pressure Elevation and Renal Damage in Response to 
Repeated Hypertensive Stimuli. Circulation research. 2016; 118:1233–1243. DOI: 10.1161/
CIRCRESAHA.115.308111 [PubMed: 26988069] 
61. Atarashi K, Honda K. Analysis of murine lamina propria TH17 cells. 2008
62. Wiig H, et al. Immune cells control skin lymphatic electrolyte homeostasis and blood pressure. The 
Journal of clinical investigation. 2013; 123:2803–2815. DOI: 10.1172/JCI60113 [PubMed: 
23722907] 
63. Mahler A, et al. Increased catabolic state in spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 patients. Cerebellum. 
2014; 13:440–446. DOI: 10.1007/s12311-014-0555-6 [PubMed: 24604678] 
64. Sunagawa S, et al. Metagenomic species profiling using universal phylogenetic marker genes. 
Nature methods. 2013; 10:1196–1199. DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.2693 [PubMed: 24141494] 
65. Kultima JR, et al. MOCAT2: a metagenomic assembly, annotation and profiling framework. 
Bioinformatics. 2016; doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btw183
66. Segata N, et al. Metagenomic microbial community profiling using unique clade-specific marker 
genes. Nature methods. 2012; 9:811–814. DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.2066 [PubMed: 22688413] 
67. TherneauTM. A Package for Survival Analysis in S. Version 2.382015
68. TherneauTM, , GrambschPM. Modeling Survival Data: Extending the Cox ModelSpringer-Verlag; 
New York: 2000
Wilck et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 69. Yuan S, Cohen DB, Ravel J, Abdo Z, Forney LJ. Evaluation of methods for the extraction and 
purification of DNA from the human microbiome. PloS one. 2012; 7:e33865.doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0033865 [PubMed: 22457796] 
70. Caesar R, Tremaroli V, Kovatcheva-Datchary P, Cani PD, Backhed F. Crosstalk between Gut 
Microbiota and Dietary Lipids Aggravates WAT Inflammation through TLR Signaling. Cell 
metabolism. 2015; 22:658–668. DOI: 10.1016/j.cmet.2015.07.026 [PubMed: 26321659] 
71. Bergstrom A, et al. Introducing GUt low-density array (GULDA): a validated approach for qPCR-
based intestinal microbial community analysis. FEMS microbiology letters. 2012; 337:38–47. 
DOI: 10.1111/1574-6968.12004 [PubMed: 22967145] 
72. Bindels LB, et al. Restoring specific lactobacilli levels decreases inflammation and muscle atrophy 
markers in an acute leukemia mouse model. PloS one. 2012; 7:e37971.doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0037971 [PubMed: 22761662] 
73. Duniere L, et al. Impact of adding Saccharomyces strains on fermentation, aerobic stability, 
nutritive value, and select lactobacilli populations in corn silage. Journal of animal science. 2015; 
93:2322–2335. DOI: 10.2527/jas.2014-8287 [PubMed: 26020328] 
74. Byun R, et al. Quantitative analysis of diverse Lactobacillus species present in advanced dental 
caries. Journal of clinical microbiology. 2004; 42:3128–3136. DOI: 10.1128/JCM.
42.7.3128-3136.2004 [PubMed: 15243071] 
75. Cui Y, et al. Different Effects of Three Selected Lactobacillus Strains in Dextran Sulfate Sodium-
Induced Colitis in BALB/c Mice. PloS one. 2016; 11:e0148241.doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0148241 [PubMed: 26840426] 
76. Matsuda K, et al. Establishment of an analytical system for the human fecal microbiota, based on 
reverse transcription-quantitative PCR targeting of multicopy rRNA molecules. Applied and 
environmental microbiology. 2009; 75:1961–1969. DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01843-08 [PubMed: 
19201979] 
Wilck et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. HSD alters the fecal microbiome and depletes Lactobacillus in mice.
(a) AdaBoost identified eight 16S rDNA OTUs distinguishing NSD from HSD samples. (b) 
Classifier accuracy per mouse and diet. (c) Relative OTU abundances on HSD day 14 (n=12 
mice, n=8 NSD control mice). (d) Lactobacillus abundance over time. Samples >1% not 
shown. Boxplots: IQR, whiskers 1.5*IQR. (e, f) L. murinus qPCR (n=8 mice). **p<0.01, 
***p<0.001 paired two-tailed t-test. (g) Fecal indole-3-lactic acid (ILA), n=12 mice per 
group. *p<0.05, Wilcoxon signed-rank test. (h) Fecal ILA in gnotobiotic mice (n=8 germ-
free, n=7 L. murinus-monocolonized mice). ****p<0.0001 unpaired two-tailed t-test.
Wilck et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. L. murinus prevents HSD-induced exacerbation of EAE and reduces TH17 cells.
(a) Mean disease scores±s.e.m. of MOG35-55-EAE mice fed NSD (n=9), HSD (n=11), or 
HSD with L. murinus (n=6). (b) siLPL (day 3 p.i.) analyzed for CD4+ IL-17A+ IFN-γ- cells 
(n=4). (c, d) Spleens (n=5) and spinal cords (NSD n=4; HSD n=6; HSD+L. murinus n=5, 
day 17 p.i.) were similarly analyzed. Representative plots, quantification to the right. Mean
±s.e.m., circles represent individual mice. *p<0.05, **p<0.01 by one-way ANOVA and post-
hoc Tukey’s for (c), Kruskal-Wallis and Dunn’s post-hoc test for (a, b, d). n equals mice per 
group.
Wilck et al.
Page 37
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. Putative role for ILA.
(a) HSD reduces fecal ILA in MOG35-55-EAE mice (n=5), day 10 p.i. (b) Fecal ILA in HSD
+L. murinus treated (n=6) vs. HSD-fed MOG35-55-EAE mice (n=8), day 10 p.i. Circles 
represent samples from individual mice. *p<0.05 using unpaired one-tailed t-test for (a); 
Mann-Whitney U test for (b). (c) Naïve murine CD4+ T cells cultured under TH17-
polarizing conditions in presence (+ILA) or absence (+vehicle) of ILA, analyzed for IL-17A 
(n=3 replicates per group, mean±s.e.m., one representative out of two independent 
experiments is shown). ***p<0.001 vs. vehicle using one-way ANOVA and Tukey's post-
hoc test.
Wilck et al.
Page 38
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 4. L. murinus ameliorates salt-sensitive hypertension and reduces TH17 cells.
Continuous blood pressure recordings in n=7 FVB/N mice. (a) Mean systolic pressures over 
time and (b) systolic and diastolic pressures as boxplots (IQR, whiskers 1.5*IQR). 
###p<0.001 vs. NSD, ***p<0.001 vs. HSD (linear mixed model). (c) CD4+RORγt+ siLPL 
in mice fed NSD (n=7), HSD (n=8) or HSD+L. murinus (n=9). (d-f) CD4+IL-17A+IFN-γ- 
siLPL, cLPL, splenocytes in mice fed NSD (n=5), HSD (n=6; siLPL n=7) and HSD+L. 
murinus (n=6; siLPL n=5). Representative plots per group, quantification showing mean
±s.e.m., circles represent individual mice. *p<0.05, **p<0.01, one-way ANOVA and post-
hoc Tukey’s (c, e, f), Kruskal-Wallis and post-hoc Dunn’s (d).
Wilck et al.
Page 39
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 5. High salt challenge affects blood pressure, TH17 cells and Lactobacilli in healthy 
humans.
(a) Mean nocturnal systolic and diastolic blood pressures and (b) IL-17A+TNF-α+ cells in 
CD4+ enriched PBMC (one representative subject is shown) in n=8 males at baseline and 
after challenge. *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ****p<0.0001, paired one-tailed t-test (a) and Wilcoxon 
signed-rank test (b). (c) Loss of Lactobacilli after high salt challenge. Subjects positive for 
Lactobacilli at baseline are shown. Split cells show abundance at baseline (left) and after 
high salt (right), crosses indicate nondetection. (d) Kaplan-Meier curves comparing the 
persistence of Lactobacilli to control cohorts (log-rank test).
Wilck et al.
Page 40
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
