  
 
 
 
 
Edinburgh Research Explorer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Type 2 diabetes and risk of hospital admission or death for
chronic liver diseases
Citation for published version:
Scottish and Southampton Diabetes and Liver Disease Group & Scottish Diabetes Research Network
Epidemiology Group 2016, 'Type 2 diabetes and risk of hospital admission or death for chronic liver
diseases' Journal of Hepatology. DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2016.01.014
Digital Object Identifier (DOI):
10.1016/j.jhep.2016.01.014
Link:
Link to publication record in Edinburgh Research Explorer
Document Version:
Peer reviewed version
Published In:
Journal of Hepatology
Publisher Rights Statement:
Author's final peer-reviewed manuscript as accepted for publication
General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via the Edinburgh Research Explorer is retained by the author(s)
and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and
abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
Take down policy
The University of Edinburgh has made every reasonable effort to ensure that Edinburgh Research Explorer
content complies with UK legislation. If you believe that the public display of this file breaches copyright please
contact openaccess@ed.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately and
investigate your claim.
Download date: 04. Jun. 2019
 1 
 
Type 2 diabetes and risk of hospital admission or death for chronic liver 
diseases.  
 
Sarah H Wild1, Joanne R Morling1, David A McAllister1, Jan Kerssens2, Colin 
Fischbacher2, Julie Parkes3, Paul J Roderick4, Naveed Sattar5, Christopher D Byrne 
6,7 on behalf of the Scottish and Southampton Diabetes and Liver Disease Group and 
the Scottish Diabetes Research Network Epidemiology Group 
1Centre for Population Health Sciences, Usher Institute of Population Health 
Sciences and Informatics, University of Edinburgh, UK  
2 Information Services Division, National Health Service National Services Scotland, 
Edinburgh, UK 
3 Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, UK 
4 Primary Care and Population Sciences, University of Southampton, UK 
5 British Heart Foundation Centre for Cardiovascular Science, University of Glasgow, 
UK 
6 Nutrition and Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, UK 
7NIHR Southampton Biomedical Research Centre, University Hospital Southampton, 
UK 
Further members of the Scottish and Southampton Diabetes and Liver Disease 
Group (John Dillon, Peter Hayes, David Macfarlane, John Petrie, Nick Sheron) and 
the Scottish Diabetes Research Network epidemiology group (Helen Colhoun, 
Robert Lindsay, Graham Leese, Helen Looker, John McKnight, Rory McCrimmon, 
Sam Philip)  
 
 
Corresponding author: 
Professor Sarah Wild, Centre for Population Health Sciences, Usher Institute of 
Population Health Sciences and Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Teviot Place, 
Edinburgh, EH8 9AG, UK. Tel: +44 131 651 1630 Fax: +44 131 650 6868. Email: 
sarah.wild@ed.ac.uk. 
 
 
Word count including abstract, references, tables and figure legends: 5642 
 
Number of figures and tables: 2 figures and 5 tables 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 
List of abbreviations in order of appearance: 
T2DM – type 2 diabetes 
CLD – chronic liver disease 
ALD – alcoholic liver disease 
NAFLD – non-alcoholic fatty liver disease 
SES – socio-economic status 
RR – rate ratio 
HCC – hepatocellular carcinoma 
NASH - non-alcoholic steatohepatitis  
SIMD –Scottish Index of Multiple Deprivation 
T1DM – type 1 diabetes 
BMI –body mass index 
SCI-DC – Scottish Care Information – Diabetes Collaboration 
 
Keywords: diabetes; liver disease; cohort 
 
Conflict of interest: none 
 
 
Financial support: this work was supported by funding from the Scottish 
Government through the Scottish Diabetes Group  
 
 
Author contributions: JRM and CDB performed the literature search, SHW, JRM, 
DAM, JK, CF, NS and CDB designed the study and the analysis plan, data were 
acquired as part of routine clinical care, JK prepared the data, SHW analysed the 
data and prepared the figures, SHW and CDB wrote the first draft of the manuscript 
and all authors contributed to data interpretation, critically reviewed the manuscript 
for important intellectual content and approved the final version.  The work was 
performed on behalf of the Scottish and Southampton Diabetes and Liver Disease 
Group and the Scottish Diabetes Research Network Epidemiology Group. 
 
 
 3 
 
Abstract  
 
Background & Aims: The impact of type 2 diabetes (T2DM) on hospital admissions 
and deaths due to common chronic liver diseases (CLDs) is uncertain. Our aim was 
to investigate associations between T2DM and CLDs in a national retrospective 
cohort study and to investigate the role of sex and socio-economic status (SES). 
Methods: We used International Classification of Disease codes to identify incident 
alcoholic liver disease (ALD), autoimmune liver disease, haemochromatosis, 
hepatocellular carcinoma, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and viral liver 
disease from linked diabetes, hospital, cancer and death records for people of 40-89 
years of age in Scotland 2004-2013. We used quasi Poisson regression to estimate 
rate ratios (RR). 
Results: There were 6667 and 33624 first mentions of CLD in hospital, cancer and 
death records over ~1.8 and 24 million person years in people with and without 
T2DM, respectively. The most common liver disease was ALD among people without 
diabetes and was NAFLD among people with T2DM. Age adjusted RR for T2DM 
compared to the non-diabetic population (95 % confidence intervals) varied between 
1.27 (1.04-1.55) for autoimmune liver disease and 5.36 (4.41-6.51) for NAFLD. RRs 
were lower for men than women and for more compared to less deprived populations 
for both ALD and NAFLD. 
Conclusions: T2DM is associated with increased risk of hospital admission or death 
for all common CLDs and the strength of the association varies by type of CLD, sex 
and SES. Increasing prevalence of T2DM is likely to result in increasing burden of all 
CLDs. 
Keywords: diabetes; liver disease; cohort 
 
 
 4 
 
Introduction 
Mortality from liver disease in the United Kingdom (UK) has increased by 400% 
since the 1970s, in contrast to reductions in mortality from cardiovascular disease 
and some cancers [1]. Similar increases in CLD mortality have also been observed 
in the United States (US)[2] although cirrhosis mortality has declined by 50-60% in 
France and Italy between 1980 and 2010[3].  Incidence and prevalence of common 
chronic liver diseases (CLDs) including alcohol-related liver disease (ALD) and 
obesity-related non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and their complications 
have increased in the UK and US [4, 5]. Age-standardised incidence and mortality 
from hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), a complication of many CLDs, have increased 
approximately two-fold in the UK in the last 40 years[4] and in other European 
countries (see http://globocan.iarc.fr/old/FactSheets/cancers/liver-new.asp). It is well 
known that type 2 diabetes (T2DM) is associated with increased risk of the whole 
spectrum of NAFLD and its complications including non-alcoholic steatohepatitis 
(NASH), cirrhosis and HCC[6-9], but the effect of T2DM on other common types of 
CLD is less clear. 
 
Estimating the burden of ill health attributable to CLDs is difficult due to the lack of 
accurate, non-invasive diagnostic tests that can be applied within population-based 
studies. The available tests have been predominantly validated in high prevalence 
(secondary care) populations and may be less accurate in the wider population. 
Routine healthcare data obtained from hospital admission, cancer registration and 
death records provides a source of readily available data that have been used 
previously to assess the burden of serious gastro-intestinal disease in the US[5]. 
Although hospital admission and cancer registration data are likely to underestimate 
 5 
 
prevalence of disease they provide valuable information for health care planning and 
an estimate of the burden of serious liver disease. 
 
Increasing global prevalence of T2DM and the inverse influence of socio-economic 
status (SES) on T2DM prevalence in high income countries are well established [10, 
11]. The inverse relationship between SES and ALD has also been described in 
several populations[12, 13] and the incidence of HCC in England between 1990 and 
2009 was higher among people living in materially deprived areas than among 
people living in less deprived areas[14]. However, it is not known whether SES 
influences the association between T2DM and CLDs, as it does for T2DM and 
cardiovascular disease [15]. The need for further research on the contribution of SES 
to disparities in incidence, treatment and outcomes of liver disease has previously 
been identified[16, 17]. 
 
The aim of this retrospective cohort study in a national population of approximately 
five million people was: a) to describe numbers and rates of first record of CLD 
hospital admission or death for people with and without T2DM and, b) to investigate 
associations between T2DM and CLD hospital admissions and deaths, establishing 
whether associations differed by sex or SES. 
 
Methods 
Datasets 
We used data from the population-based Scottish diabetes register linked to national 
hospital, cancer and death records in a retrospective cohort study design. The 
Scottish diabetes register is derived from primary and secondary care records for 
 6 
 
people with diabetes diagnosed in normal clinical practice using blood glucose 
measurements and/or HbA1c with coverage of >99% since 2004[18] the start of the 
study period. Validation of the diabetes register for clinical practice occurs through 
responses to annual invitations to diabetic retinopathy screening.  For example, in 2010 
191,571 individuals were invited for screening of whom 2% were suspended from the 
screening programme due to the person not having diabetes (see http://www.sci-
diabetes.scot.nhs.uk/project-overview/).  In addition, validation of the research extract, 
performed against hospital admissions mentioning diabetes[18]  or against sulphonylurea 
prescriptions (unpublished data) suggests that over 99% of people with diagnosed diabetes 
in Scotland are included in both clinical and research databases. 
 
Definition of CLD 
CLD was identified from the first mention in any position (primary/underlying or 
secondary diagnosis or cause of death) in national hospital in-patient, cancer and 
mortality records and grouped into categories using codes from the ninth (ICD-9) and 
tenth [ICD-10] International Classification of Diseases revisions as follows: 
- 
ALD: (571.0), (571.2), (571.3), [K70]; 
- 
autoimmune hepatitis and primary biliary cirrhosis: (571.4), (571.6), [K75.4, 
K74.3]; 
- 
hemochromatosis: (275.0) [E83.1]; 
- 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC):  (155.0); [C22.0]; 
- 
NAFLD: a category incorporating the following ICD-defined categories: other 
chronic non-alcoholic liver disease: (571.8), non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: 
[K76.0], non-alcoholic steatohepatitis: [K75.8], cirrhosis (571.5) [K74.6], 
hepatic fibrosis or sclerosis or fibrosis with sclerosis (571.9) [K74.0, K74.1, 
 7 
 
K74.2]  or portal hypertension: (572.3) [K76.6] that was not attributed to any of 
the other liver disease categories. 
- 
viral hepatitis: (D070.3), (D070.5), (D070.9); [B16, B17, B18]; 
 
The study size was determined by the number of incident CLDs occurring in the 
national population in the study time period which ended in December 2013, based 
on the most recent data available to the research team. 
 
An area-based measure of SES is assigned to residents of Scotland on the basis of 
where they live using the Scottish Index of Multiple Deprivation (SIMD) (for more 
information see http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Topics/Statistics/SIMD). SIMD 2009 
combines 31 indicators across seven domains: income/employment, health, 
education, housing, geographic access, and crime. The index is generated from a 
weighted sum of the seven domain scores for each area defined by postcodes which 
contains a median of 769 people. Quintiles of the index were used to define 
approximately equal fifths of the distribution at a national level, and Q1 and Q5 were 
used to identify the most and least deprived quintiles (or fifths) respectively.  
 
Study design and data analysis 
We used a dynamic population-based retrospective study design using aggregated 
data for the total population of Scotland and individual level data on people with 
diabetes. Inclusion criteria for estimation of the person-years denominator were 
being aged 40 to 89 years in Scotland between 2004 and 2013. The only exclusion 
criteria were the approximately 1% of hospital admissions or death records with 
missing SIMD data and the events and person-years for people with type 1 diabetes. 
 8 
 
For each CLD group, with the exception of NAFLD, the first recorded event was 
identified independently (so, for example, a record of hemochromatosis followed by a 
subsequent record of viral hepatitis contributes to event counts and person-years 
denominator for both disease groups).  Event counts and person-years at risk for 
NAFLD were identified by excluding records with any mention of ALD, viral disease, 
hemochromatosis or auto-immune liver disease. Records that mentioned HCC and 
NAFLD and no other specific CLD were counted in both HCC and NAFLD groups. 
 
Routine national healthcare data were used to identify CLD events occurring 
between January 1 2004 and December 31 2013 for adults aged 40-89 years. For 
each CLD, people with prevalent disease prior to January 2004 defined by the 
presence of a relevant disease code in hospital or cancer records in the previous 10 
years were excluded. Follow-up time was censored for each CLD at first event or 
death from any cause. We included deaths from CLDs and HCC where they 
represented the record of CLD or HCC and there was no previous hospital or cancer 
record of CLD or HCC. Numbers of CLD events, person-years at risk and rates were 
estimated by diabetes status, age, sex, and SIMD quintile. 
 
Mid-year population estimates for Scotland by age, sex, calendar year, and SIMD 
quintile for the relevant years were obtained from National Records of Scotland. Data 
for the non-diabetic population were identified by subtracting numbers of incident 
events and person-years at risk for the population of people with type 1 diabetes 
(T1DM) and T2DM from numbers of CLD events and person-years at risk calculated 
from mid-year populations for the whole of Scotland. Type of diabetes was based on 
clinical records and a validation algorithm that used information on age at diagnosis 
 9 
 
of diabetes with additional validation using dates and type of diabetes treatment, 
dates of first HbA1c>6.5% (48mmol/mol)  and invitation to diabetic retinopathy 
screening[19].  
 
Absolute incidence rates were used to describe patterns of different CLDs in the 
study population, with direct standardisation for age, stratification by sex and, where 
appropriate, for SIMD quintile, using the 2007 mid-year population of Scotland as the 
standard. Rate ratios (RR) for people with T2DM compared to people without 
diabetes were estimated using quasi Poisson regression modelling to control for 
potential confounding by age and  to allow for the over-dispersed nature of the 
distribution of the data. Likelihood ratio tests were used to test for interactions 
between T2DM and sex and T2DM and SES. Analyses were stratified by sex and 
also for SES where appropriate. Exploratory analyses were performed among 
people with type 1 diabetes. 
 
Sensitivity analyses were performed to identify whether the associations with T2DM 
altered if the following alternative outcome definitions were used 
1. primary diagnoses/ underlying cause of death of ALD and NAFLD 
(excluding mention of ALD or NAFLD in secondary positions in hospital 
and death records)  
2. hospital admission records mentioning ALD and NAFLD in any position 
(excluding deaths with no prior record of hospital admission) 
3. hospital and death records mentioning chronic non-alcoholic liver disease: 
(ICD-9 571.8), non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: [ICD-10 K76.0], and non-
alcoholic steatohepatitis: [ICD-10 K75.8]  in any position (excluding 
 10 
 
cirrhosis, hepatic fibrosis/sclerosis and portal hypertension of unspecified 
cause). 
 
Approval for the creation and analysis of the linked dataset containing no personal 
identifying information was obtained from the Scottish Care Information - Diabetes 
Collaboration (SCI-DC) steering committee, the Scottish multi-centre research ethics 
committee (reference number 11/AL/0225), the Privacy Advisory Committee of 
National Health Service National Services Scotland and Caldicott guardians. Stata 
version 13 (College Station, Texas) was used for the analyses. 
 
 
 
Results 
During approximately 26 million years of follow-up in total there were a total of 40291 
first records of CLD events identified from hospital or death records in people aged 
40 to 89 years in Scotland in the decade between 2004 and 2013. There were 6667 
events in people with T2DM during 1.8 million person-years of follow-up. 
Approximately 61% of CLD records were identified in men regardless of diabetes 
status whereas men represent 54% of the population of people with T2DM in 
Scotland over 40 years of age and 47% of the whole population in this age group in 
2008. The majority (97.4%) of people with a record of a specific incident CLD had 
only one of ALD, auto-immune liver disease, hemochromatosis, HCC, or viral liver 
disease mentioned in their records. 
 
 11 
 
Table 1 shows the numbers of first records of CLDs and age-standardised rates by 
diabetes status, sex and type of liver disease. The majority of outcomes were 
identified from hospital records or cancer registrations as shown in table 2. The 
highest CLD rates were for ALD for people without diabetes and for NAFLD for 
people with T2DM. The range of rates across SIMD quintiles is given for ALD and 
NAFLD because of the statistically significant variation in incidence by SES (see 
figures 1 and 2). People with T2DM were older than those without diabetes at the 
time of first CLD event and a large proportion of CLD events occurred among people 
of working age (data not shown but available from authors). 
 
Age-standardised rates by sex, diabetes status and SES for ALD and NAFLD are 
shown in figure 1 and figure 2 respectively and illustrate higher rates in more 
compared to less deprived populations and a more marked socio-economic gradient 
for ALD than NAFLD. Age-adjusted RRs for people with T2DM compared to people 
without diabetes for ALD and NAFLD varied with sex and SES (Table 3). We 
identified a statistically significant interaction between diabetes status and SES for 
ALD and NAFLD but there was no evidence of similar interaction for other CLDs. 
RRs for ALD and NAFLD were lower among more deprived than among less 
deprived populations. There was a statistically significant interaction between T2DM 
and sex for NAFLD as a consequence of markedly higher relative risk of NAFLD 
among women than men (p<0.0001), but no evidence for an interaction between 
T2DM and sex for ALD (p=0.870). 
 
 
Table 4 shows adjusted RRs for each CLD for people with T2DM compared to 
people without diabetes. Further adjustment for SES gave similar estimates of RRs 
 12 
 
to age-adjusted results suggesting minimal confounding by SES. T2DM was 
associated with statistically significantly higher risk of all types of CLD apart from for 
viral liver disease in men. The highest RRs associated with T2DM were for HCC and 
NAFLD. Summary estimates of RRs are shown for ALD and NAFLD to allow 
comparison with RRs for other liver diseases although the interaction illustrated in 
the figures and reported in table 3 should be noted. The sensitivity analyses for 
different outcome measures for ALD and NAFLD are reported in Table 5 and show 
similar RRs for the associations with T2DM as for those reported for the original 
analyses.  
 
 
 
Discussion 
This national retrospective cohort study of a contemporary Scottish population 
studied over a decade between 2004 and 2013. The absolute rates and relative risks 
associated with T2DM varied markedly by type of CLD. The strength of the 
associations between T2DM and CLD varied with sex for NAFLD and with SES for 
both ALD and NAFLD. In keeping with previous data, T2DM was associated with 
particularly high relative risks of HCC[20] and NAFLD[1], but we report for the first 
time that there is also increased risk associated with T2DM for all other types of CLD 
including ALD. There was only minimal confounding of the association between 
T2DM and CLD by SES but there was evidence of interaction between T2DM and 
SES for ALD and NAFLD. The absolute risk and the relative risk of NAFLD 
associated with T2DM were statistically significantly higher for women than men.  
 13 
 
Socio-economic deprivation was associated with higher incidence of ALD regardless 
of diabetes status.   
 
These findings have important implications for prevention and management of CLD 
and for the planning and the costs of health services, given the increasing 
prevalence of T2DM and the considerable cost of hospital admissions. Health care 
costs for patients with severe complications of CLDs are particularly high as 
illustrated by recent data for patients with various stages of liver disease related to 
hepatitis C from the US[21]. Costs per-patient-per-month over a mean of 634 days of 
follow-up between 2002 and 2010 amounted to $1,420, $1,870 and $4,931 for 
people with non-cirrhotic liver disease, compensated cirrhosis and end-stage liver 
disease respectively ($1 = 0.93 Euros November 2015). The annual costs to the 
National Health Service in England in 2007 for cirrhosis and liver cancer due to 
alcohol consumption alone was estimated to be £566 million[22] (£1 = 1.43 Euros 
November 2015). 
 
The associations between T2DM and CLDs by sex and SES are likely to reflect 
differences in distributions of risk factors for both CLDs and for T2DM including 
obesity, fat distribution and alcohol intake. For example, we have previously reported 
higher mean body mass index (BMI) among women than men for a given age at 
diagnosis of T2DM and higher prevalence of obesity (BMI>30kg/m2) in the most 
deprived compared to the least deprived fifths of the population around the time of 
diagnosis of diabetes (54% compared to 44%)[23] In the population based Scottish 
Health Survey 2003, obesity prevalence was 34% in the most deprived quintile and 
21% in the least deprived quintile[24]. Obesity and modest alcohol intake have 
 14 
 
previously been found to interact to further increase risk of cirrhosis in a Scottish 
population[25]. The higher prevalence of obesity in deprived populations is therefore 
likely to contribute to higher prevalence of cirrhosis regardless of diabetes status and 
underlying alcoholic or non-alcoholic CLD etiology.  
 
As both CLD and T2DM may have long asymptomatic phases prior to diagnosis, it is 
difficult to identify which disease develops first and to identify the true incidence of 
either disease and whether the association with CLDs and subsequent cirrhosis is bi-
directional. Detailed characterisation in cohort studies with repeated measurements 
is required to determine whether individual CLDs with or without cirrhosis are 
associated with increased risk of developing subsequent T2DM. For example, 
hepatic steatosis identified by ultrasound has been identified as a risk factor for 
subsequent incident diabetes compared to people without hepatic steatosis[6], and 
resolution of hepatic steatosis is associated with reduction of risk of incident diabetes 
compared to people with persistent hepatic steatosis[7]. Indeed, it is estimated up to 
70% of patients with T2DM have hepatic steatosis and increasing evidence indicates 
that increases in liver fat contributes to the pathogenesis of T2DM [26]. 
 
The strengths of our study include the very large population-based nature of the 
electronic record of diagnosed diabetes that captures data for >99% of the 
population of Scotland, validation of type of diabetes, and the availability of linkage to 
quality-assured hospital admission, cancer registration and mortality data for the 
whole population (for more information, see http://www.isdscotland.org/Products-
and-Services/Data-Quality/Assessments/). 
 
 15 
 
We identified first hospital admission and deaths in people in Scotland mentioning 
CLD whether or not this was recorded as the primary diagnosis in hospital or 
underlying cause of death in death records for our primary outcome measures. We 
believe that this is the most appropriate approach for identifying CLD from routine 
health care data at present because co-morbidities such as cardiovascular disease 
[27, 28] may be coded as the primary diagnosis in hospital records or underlying 
cause of death in people with CLDs. Accuracy and completeness of recording of 
secondary conditions on health records may differ by diabetes status which could 
introduce bias in either direction. People with diabetes may be more likely to have 
liver disease diagnosed as a consequence of larger numbers of health service 
contacts and are also be more likely to be admitted to hospital than people without 
diabetes but other co-morbidities may be recorded in preference to CLD among 
people with diabetes. Our sensitivity analyses identified that the associations with 
T2DM were similar when the outcomes were limited to primary diagnosis in hospital 
records or underlying cause of death suggesting that bias in recording did not 
influence our original findings. We are not able to describe the population-based 
incidence of each CLD in people with and without diabetes, because our measure of data 
capture only identifies non-fatal diagnoses of CLD recorded during a hospital admission. 
Consequently our data capture omits diagnoses established solely in primary or ambulatory 
care that are likely to represent less severe forms of each liver disease.  Our identification of 
the first CLD event and the interpretations of the associations with diabetes are based on the 
assumption that most of the previous events can be identified in Scottish records and that 
proportions of events occurring outside Scotland in people with and without diabetes are 
similar. 
 
 16 
 
Validation of coding of CLD and its complications is clearly required to facilitate 
population-based research. For example, the use of the narrow National Center for 
Health Statistics definition of CLD which excludes viral hepatitis and hepatobiliary 
cancer has been reported to systematically under-estimate liver-related mortality in 
the United States[30].  We found similar rate ratios associated with T2DM whether or 
not we included cirrhosis, hepatic fibrosis/ sclerosis and portal hypertension in the 
NAFLD outcome but it is not clear without validation whether it would be appropriate 
to include these outcomes in estimates of NAFLD resource use.  Validated coding of 
CLD would also improve future research including cohort studies of the association 
between different CLDs and HCC, cirrhosis, transplantation and mortality in people 
with and without diabetes and the investigation of effects of different treatments for 
diabetes on CLD outcomes. 
 
There is potential for mis-classification of ALD and NAFLD which will co-exist in a 
large proportion of people in populations where alcohol consumption and obesity are 
common. The approach we have taken means that records that include both 
diagnoses are identified as ALD, with consequent under-counting of records of 
NAFLD. It is likely therefore that we have under-estimated the strength of the 
association between T2DM and hospital admissions and deaths for people with a 
record of NAFLD. There is an argument for combining CLD into a single category but 
we elected not to do this because of the different patterns of association between 
T2DM and different CLDs.   
 
The use of an area-based measure of deprivation, rather than an individual-based 
measure of SES is a potential limitation of the study. However, the small average 
 17 
 
population size of each area used to create the SIMD (median <800 people) means 
that in general it performs well as a measure of material deprivation. The inclusion of 
the health domain in SIMD does not seem to have a major effect on the pattern of 
health inequalities by SIMD[29] The predominantly white ethnic distribution of the 
Scottish population means that it is not feasible to investigate ethnic differences in 
CLD incidence. We are not able to describe the population-based incidence of each 
CLD in people with and without diabetes because we were not able to identify 
diagnoses of CLD established in primary or ambulatory care.  
 
Key limitations of this analysis are that records of lifetime alcohol intake and 
measures of diet and physical activity are not available in this database and BMI is 
only available for people with diabetes. We were therefore not able to estimate what 
proportion of the apparent effect of T2DM could be explained by the association with 
obesity. The study had limited power to detect statistically significant interactions for 
less common liver diseases than ALD and NAFLD and to investigate the association 
between T1DM and CLD.  However, based on 115 ALD events among people with 
T1DM in our population, we found age, sex and SES adjusted RRs (95% confidence 
intervals) associated with type 1 diabetes of 1.09 (0.69-1.72). There was a 
statistically significant interaction between type 1 diabetes and sex for the 
association with NAFLD, with age and SES adjusted RR of 3.03 (2.68-3.43) for men 
and 5.36 (4.41-6.51) for women based on 75 events in men and 78 in women.  
 
 
Conclusions 
 18 
 
These findings show that people with T2DM in Scotland are at higher risk of first 
hospital admission, hepato-cellular cancer registration or death from all types of 
common chronic liver diseases, compared to people without diabetes. Adjustment for 
an area-based measure of SES only modestly attenuated the contribution of T2DM 
to hospital admission or death from CLD. SES modified the associations between 
T2DM and ALD and NAFLD and sex modified the association between T2DM and 
NAFLD. We suggest that there may be a role for targeted case finding of CLD and 
appropriate intervention in high risk populations including people with T2DM. The 
increasing global prevalence of T2DM can be expected to result in an increasing 
burden of all CLDs. 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by funding from the Scottish Government through the 
Scottish Diabetes Group.  Diabetes data for Scotland are available for analysis 
thanks to numerous healthcare staff who enter the data and people and 
organisations (people with diabetes, the Scottish Care Information – Diabetes 
Collaboration [SCI-DC] Steering Group, the Scottish Diabetes Group, the Scottish 
Diabetes Survey Group, the managed clinical network managers and staff in each 
Health Board) involved in providing data, setting up, maintaining and overseeing 
SCI-DC. CDB is supported in part by the Southampton National Institute for Health 
Research Biomedical Research Centre. 
 
 
 19 
 
Figure Legends 
Figure 1. Age-standardised incidence of hospital admissions and deaths for alcoholic 
liver disease per 100000 person years by sex, diabetes status (circles represent data 
for people without diabetes, squares for people with T2DM) and quintile of socio-
economic status (SES, where 1 indicates the most deprived quintile) 
 
Figure 2. Age-standardised incidence of hospital admissions and deaths for non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease per 100000 person years by sex, diabetes status (circles 
represent data for people without diabetes, squares for people with T2DM)  and 
quintile of socio-economic status (SES, where 1 indicates the most deprived quintile) 
 
 20 
 
Reference List 
 
[1] Williams R, Aspinall R, Bellis M, Camps-Walsh G, Cramp M, Dhawan A, et al. 
Addressing liver disease in the UK: a blueprint for attaining excellence in health care 
and reducing premature mortality from lifestyle issues of excess consumption of 
alcohol, obesity, and viral hepatitis. Lancet 2014 Nov 29;384(9958):1953-1997. 
[2] Kim Y, Ejaz A, Tayal A, Spolverato G, Bridges JF, Anders RA, et al. Temporal 
trends in population-based death rates associated with chronic liver disease and liver 
cancer in the United States over the last 30 years. Cancer 2014 Oct 1;120(19):3058-
3065. 
[3] Mokdad AA, Lopez AD, Shahraz S, Lozano R, Mokdad AH, Stanaway J, et al. 
Liver cirrhosis mortality in 187 countries between 1980 and 2010: a systematic 
analysis. BMC Med 2014;12:145. 
[4] Ladep NG, Khan SA, Crossey MM, Thillainayagam AV, Taylor-Robinson SD, 
Toledano MB. Incidence and mortality of primary liver cancer in England and Wales: 
changing patterns and ethnic variations. World J Gastroenterol 2014 Feb 
14;20(6):1544-1553. 
[5] Peery AF, Dellon ES, Lund J, Crockett SD, McGowan CE, Bulsiewicz WJ, et al. 
Burden of gastrointestinal disease in the United States: 2012 update. 
Gastroenterology 2012 Nov;143(5):1179-1187. 
[6] Sung KC, Jeong WS, Wild SH, Byrne CD. Combined influence of insulin 
resistance, overweight/obesity, and fatty liver as risk factors for type 2 diabetes. 
Diabetes Care 2012 Apr;35(4):717-722. 
[7] Sung KC, Wild SH, Byrne CD. Resolution of fatty liver and risk of incident 
diabetes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2013 Sep;98(9):3637-3643. 
[8] Wang C, Wang X, Gong G, Ben Q, Qiu W, Chen Y, et al. Increased risk of 
hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis of cohort studies. Int J Cancer 2012 Apr 1;130(7):1639-1648. 
[9] Walker JJ, Brewster DH, Colhoun HM, Fischbacher CM, Leese GP, Lindsay RS, 
et al. Type 2 diabetes, socioeconomic status and risk of cancer in Scotland 2001-
2007. Diabetologia 2013 Aug;56(8):1712-1715. 
[10] Guariguata L, Whiting DR, Hambleton I, Beagley J, Linnenkamp U, Shaw JE. 
Global estimates of diabetes prevalence for 2013 and projections for 2035. Diabetes 
Res Clin Pract 2014 Feb;103(2):137-149. 
[11] Walker JJ, Livingstone SJ, Colhoun HM, Lindsay RS, McKnight JA, Morris AD, 
et al. Effect of socioeconomic status on mortality among people with type 2 diabetes: 
a study from the Scottish Diabetes Research Network Epidemiology Group. Diabetes 
Care 2011 May;34(5):1127-1132. 
 21 
 
[12] Chartier K, Caetano R. Ethnicity and health disparities in alcohol research. 
Alcohol Res Health 2010;33(1-2):152-160. 
[13] Makela P. Alcohol-related mortality as a function of socio-economic status. 
Addiction 1999 Jun;94(6):867-886. 
[14] Konfortion J, Coupland VH, Kocher HM, Allum W, Grocock MJ, Jack RH. Time 
and deprivation trends in incidence of primary liver cancer subtypes in England. J 
Eval Clin Pract 2014 Jun 5. 
[15] Jackson CA, Jones NR, Walker JJ, Fischbacher CM, Colhoun HM, Leese GP, et 
al. Area-based socioeconomic status, type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular mortality in 
Scotland. Diabetologia 2012 Nov;55(11):2938-2945. 
[16] Guy J, Yee HF, Jr. Health disparities in liver disease: Time to take notice and 
take action. Hepatology 2009 Jul;50(1):309-313. 
[17] Nguyen GC, Thuluvath PJ. Racial disparity in liver disease: Biological, cultural, 
or socioeconomic factors. Hepatology 2008 Mar;47(3):1058-1066. 
[18] Anwar H, Fischbacher CM, Leese GP, Lindsay RS, McKnight JA, Wild SH. 
Assessment of the under-reporting of diabetes in hospital admission data: a study 
from the Scottish Diabetes Research Network Epidemiology Group. Diabet Med 
2011 Dec;28(12):1514-1519. 
[19] Livingstone SJ, Looker HC, Hothersall EJ, Wild SH, Lindsay RS, Chalmers J, et 
al. Risk of cardiovascular disease and total mortality in adults with type 1 diabetes: 
Scottish registry linkage study. PLoS Med 2012;9(10):e1001321. 
[20] Yang WS, Va P, Bray F, Gao S, Gao J, Li HL, et al. The role of pre-existing 
diabetes mellitus on hepatocellular carcinoma occurrence and prognosis: a meta-
analysis of prospective cohort studies. PLoS One 2011;6(12):e27326. 
[21] Gordon SC, Pockros PJ, Terrault NA, Hoop RS, Buikema A, Nerenz D, et al. 
Impact of disease severity on healthcare costs in patients with chronic hepatitis C 
(CHC) virus infection. Hepatology 2012 Nov;56(5):1651-1660. 
[22] Scarborough P, Bhatnagar P, Wickramasinghe KK, Allender S, Foster C, 
Rayner M. The economic burden of ill health due to diet, physical inactivity, smoking, 
alcohol and obesity in the UK: an update to 2006-07 NHS costs. J Public Health 
(Oxf) 2011 Dec;33(4):527-535. 
[23] Logue J, Walker JJ, Leese G, Lindsay R, McKnight J, Morris A, et al. 
Association between BMI measured within a year after diagnosis of type 2 diabetes 
and mortality. Diabetes Care 2013 Apr;36(4):887-893. 
[24] Lawder R, Harding O, Stockton D, Fischbacher C, Brewster DH, Chalmers J, et 
al. Is the Scottish population living dangerously? Prevalence of multiple risk factors: 
the Scottish Health Survey 2003. BMC Public Health 2010;10:330. 
 22 
 
[25] Hart CL, Morrison DS, Batty GD, Mitchell RJ, Davey Smith G. Effect of body 
mass index and alcohol consumption on liver disease: analysis of data from two 
prospective cohort studies. BMJ 2010 Mar 11;340:c1240. 
[26] Sattar N, Gill JM. Type 2 diabetes as a disease of ectopic fat? BMC Med 
2014;12:123. 
[27] Ekstedt M, Hagstrom H, Nasr P, Fredrikson M, Stal P, Kechagias S, et al. 
Fibrosis stage is the strongest predictor for disease-specific mortality in NAFLD after 
up to 33 years of follow-up. Hepatology 2014 Aug 14. 
[28] Byrne CD, Targher G. NAFLD: a multisystem disease. J Hepatol 2015 Apr;62(1 
Suppl):S47-S64. 
[29] Adams J, White M. Removing the health domain from the Index of Multiple 
Deprivation 2004-effect on measured inequalities in census measure of health. J 
Public Health (Oxf) 2006 Dec;28(4):379-383. 
[30] Asrani SK, Larson JJ, Yawn B, Therneau TM, Kim WR. Underestimation of liver-
related mortality in the United States. Gastroenterology 2013 Aug;145(2):375-382. 
 
 
