 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
110 
MMWR / February 12, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Occupational HIV Transmission Among Male Adult Film Performers — 
Multiple States, 2014
Jason A. Wilken, PhD1,2,; Christopher Ried, MD3; Pristeen Rickett3; Janet N. Arno, MD4; Yesenia Mendez5; Robert J. Harrison, MD1; Dan Wohlfeiler, MJ, 
MPH6; Heidi M. Bauer, MD6; M. Patricia Joyce, MD7; William M. Switzer, MPH7; Walid Heneine, PhD7; Anupama Shankar, MS7; Karen E. Mark, MD, PhD8
In 2014, the California Department of Public Health was 
notified by a local health department of a diagnosis of acute 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection* and rectal 
gonorrhea in a male adult film industry performer, aged 
25 years (patient A). Patient A had a 6-day history of rash, 
fever, and sore throat suggestive of acute retroviral syndrome 
at the time of examination. He was informed of his positive 
HIV and gonorrhea test results 6 days after his examination. 
Patient A had a negative HIV-1 RNA qualitative nucleic acid 
amplification test (NAAT)† 10 days before symptom onset. 
This investigation found that during the 22 days between the 
negative NAAT and being informed of his positive HIV test 
results, two different production companies directed patient A 
to have condomless sex with a total of 12 male performers. 
Patient A also provided contact information for five male 
non–work-related sexual partners during the month before 
and after his symptom onset. Patient A had additional partners 
during this time period for which no locating information 
was provided. Neither patient A nor any of his interviewed 
sexual partners reported taking HIV preexposure prophylaxis 
(PrEP). Contact tracing and phylogenetic analysis of HIV 
sequences amplified from pretreatment plasma revealed that 
a non–work-related partner likely infected patient A, and that 
patient A likely subsequently infected both a coworker during 
the second film production and a non–work-related partner 
during the interval between his negative test and receipt of his 
positive HIV results. Adult film performers and production 
companies, medical providers, and all persons at risk for HIV 
should be aware that testing alone is not sufficient to prevent 
HIV transmission. Condom use provides additional protec-
tion from HIV and sexually transmitted infections (STIs). 
Performers and all persons at risk for HIV infection in their 
professional and personal lives should discuss the use of PrEP 
with their medical providers.
During the first production (a 1-day film shoot on the 
day before his symptoms began and 9 days after his negative 
NAAT), Patient A had condomless insertive and receptive 
anal sex with two HIV-negative performers (contacts 1 and 2) 
(Table) and condomless receptive and insertive oral sex with 
four HIV-infected performers (contacts 3–6). Patient A 
reported that the production company informed him before 
the film shoot that contacts 3–6 were HIV-infected with 
undetectable viral loads. During the second production (a 
3-day film shoot that began the day after patient A’s symptom 
onset and 11 days after his negative NAAT), patient A had 
condomless receptive and insertive oral sex and condom-
less insertive anal sex with three HIV-negative performers 
(contacts 7–9), and condomless receptive and insertive oral 
sex with three HIV-negative performers (contacts 10–12).
After obtaining consent from patient A, local health depart-
ment staff contacted the two production companies and 
obtained contact information for each of his work-related 
sexual partners. The performers and patient A’s non–work-
related sexual contacts lived in seven U.S. states and four 
foreign countries. The production companies were based in 
two other states, and filming occurred in yet another state. 
The local or state health department of each performer con-
fidentially notified all eight performers previously known to 
be HIV-negative, two performers previously known to be 
HIV-infected, and all five named non–work-related sexual 
partners to inform them of their potential HIV and gonor-
rhea exposures. Two other performers previously known to 
be HIV-infected could not be located. All persons contacted 
were offered immediate and follow-up (30-day) HIV NAAT 
and STI testing. Pre-treatment plasma was collected from 
patient A and all his contacts with newly diagnosed HIV 
infections. Using established methods (1), HIV-1 polymerase 
(pol; 997-bp) and p17 gag (gag; 411-bp) sequences were 
independently polymerase chain reaction–amplified from 
plasma specimens.
Among patient A’s work-related sexual contacts from the first 
film production, contacts 1 and 2 had negative HIV NAATs 
62 and 53 days after filming, respectively, indicating that 
patient A did not infect any work-related sexual contacts from 
the first film production. Contact 4 received a diagnosis of early 
latent syphilis 13 days after filming, and contact 2 received a 
diagnosis of genital chlamydia infection 23 days after filming. 
No evidence of prefilming HIV testing was made available to 
investigators from this production company.
Among patient A’s work-related sexual contacts from the 
second film production, contact 7 (hereafter referred to as 
patient B) experienced fever and sore throat suggestive of 
* Positive HIV chemiluminescent antigen/antibody test, negative HIV-1/2 rapid 
immunoconcentrating assay, and quantitative HIV RNA viral load (viral load) 
>10 million/mL.
† NAAT is a highly sensitive test capable of detecting HIV 10–15 days after infection.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / February 12, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5 
111
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
acute retroviral syndrome 4 days after filming concluded, 
and received a diagnosis of acute HIV infection 18 days 
after filming.§ Contacts 8, 10, and 11 tested negative by 
HIV NAAT 36, 30, and 57 days, respectively, after filming. 
Contacts 9 and 12 tested negative by HIV NAAT 14 and 
16 days, respectively, after filming, but refused subsequent 
HIV NAAT testing. All six performers from the second 
production (patient B and contacts 8–12) had recent, 
documented HIV-negative testing before the second film 
production (contacts 8–12 had a documented negative 
HIV-1 NAAT 3–10 days before filming, and Patient B had 
a negative immunochemiluminometric HIV-1/2 antibody 
3 days before filming).
Patient A was the only performer common to both pro-
ductions. He reported no non–work-related sexual contact 
with performers from either production company. Patient B 
reported non–work-related sexual contact with one performer 
(contact 11) from the second film production company after 
filming was completed.
During the 1 month before as well as after symptom onset, 
patient A engaged in condomless insertive and receptive oral 
and insertive and receptive anal sex with five named male 
non–work-related partners (contacts 13–17). Based on dates of 
sexual contact, contacts 13–15 were considered at risk for infec-
tion (i.e., potential spread partners), and contacts 16 and 17 
were considered potential sources of patient A’s HIV infection. 
Among non–work-related potential spread partners, contact 13 
had multiple sexual contacts with patient A during the 8 days 
TABLE. Occupational and nonoccupational exposure to and transmission of HIV among contacts* of a male adult film performer (patient A) 
— multiple states, 2014
Contact no. 
(Patient ID)
Setting of sexual 
contact with 
patient A
HIV status at last sexual 
contact with patient A
Type of sexual contact 
with patient A
Day of last 
sexual contact 
with patient A†
Day of last 
negative 
HIV test
Day of 
symptom onset
Day of 
positive 
HIV test
STIs§
(A)*
—
—
—
—
6†
16¶
28¶
Rectal GC
1
Film production 1 Negative
Condomless anal I/R
15
62**
—
—
2
Film production 1 Negative
Condomless anal I/R
15
53**
—
—
Genital CT
3
Film production 1 Chronically infected, 
VL undetectable
Condomless oral I/R
15
—
—
—
4
Film production 1 Chronically infected, 
VL undetectable
Condomless oral I/R
15
—
—
—
Early latent 
syphilis
5
Film production 1 Chronically infected, 
VL undetectable
Condomless oral I/R
15
—
—
—
6
Film production 1 Chronically infected, 
VL undetectable
Condomless oral I/R
15
—
—
—
7 (B)*
Film production 2 Negative
Condomless oral I/R; 
Condomless anal R
17
—
4**
18**
8
Film production 2 Negative
Condomless oral I/R; 
Condomless anal R
17
36**
—
—
9
Film production 2 Negative
Condomless oral I/R; 
Condomless anal R
17
14**,††
—
—
10
Film production 2 Negative
Condomless oral I/R
17
30**
—
—
11
Film production 2 Negative
Condomless oral I/R
17
57**
—
—
12
Film production 2 Negative
Condomless oral I/R
17
16**,††
—
—
13 (C)*
Non-work
Negative
Condomless oral I/R; 
Condomless anal I/R
24
—
15**
16**
Rectal CT, 
latent syphilis
14
Non-work
Chronically infected, 
VL undetectable
Condomless oral I/R; 
Condomless anal I/R
22
—
—
—
15
Non-work
Negative
Condomless oral I/R; 
Condomless anal I/R
24
16**,††
—
—
Rectal CT
16 (D)*
Non-work
Chronically infected, 
VL = 127,000 copies/mL§§
Condomless oral I/R; 
Condomless anal I/R
0
—
unknown
47**
Pharyngeal CT
17
Non-work
Negative
Condomless oral I/R; 
Condomless anal I/R
~ -20
~38**
—
—
Rectal GC
Abbreviations: — = not applicable; CT = chlamydia; GC = gonorrhea; HIV = human immunodeficiency virus; I = insertive; R = receptive; STI = sexually transmitted 
infection; VL = viral load.
 * Letters in parentheses indicate patient A and his contacts who became patients during the investigation. 
 † Relative to patient A’s last sexual contact with patient D (source case).
 § At time of HIV test.
 ¶ Relative to last sexual contact with patient D.
 ** Relative to last sexual contact with patient A.
 †† Refused subsequent HIV testing.
 
§§ VL was measured 46 days after last sexual contact with patient A.
§ Negative HIV-1/2 immunochemiluminometric antibody, HIV viral load 
>10 million/mL.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
112 
MMWR / February 12, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
after patient A’s symptom onset. Contact 13 was HIV NAAT-
negative 5 days after his last sexual contact with patient A, 
but was found to have rectal chlamydia and latent syphilis. 
However, 15 days after his last sexual contact with patient A, 
contact 13 experienced onset of sore throat, fever, and body 
aches suggestive of acute retroviral syndrome. Contact 13, 
hereafter referred to as patient C, received a diagnosis of acute 
HIV infection 1 day after his symptom onset.¶ Contact 14 had 
sexual contact with patient A 6 days after patient A’s symptom 
onset and was previously known by his local health department 
(but not to patient A) to be HIV-infected, on treatment, and to 
have an undetectable viral load. Contact 15 had sexual contact 
with patient A 8 days after patient A’s symptom onset, had a 
negative HIV Ag/Ab chemiluminescent antigen/antibody test, 
and received a diagnosis of rectal chlamydia infection 16 days 
after their last sexual encounter; subsequent HIV test results 
for contact 15 are not available.
Patient A had non–work-related sexual contact with 
contact 16 six days before Patient’s A’s negative NAAT. 
Forty-seven days after his last sexual contact with patient A, 
contact 16 (hereafter referred to as patient D) received a 
diagnosis of pharyngeal chlamydia and previously unrecog-
nized chronic HIV infection through laboratory methods.** 
Patient D identified a potential spread partner, a man who 
also was subsequently determined to have previously unrec-
ognized chronic HIV infection; pretreatment plasma was not 
obtained from this patient for phylogenetic analysis of viral 
sequences. Patient A also had non–work-related sexual contact 
with another man (contact 17) approximately 1 month before 
symptom onset; Contact 17 had a negative NAAT but received 
a diagnosis of rectal gonorrhea >30 days after his last sexual 
contact with patient A.
Phylogenetic analysis of the pol and gag sequences revealed 
that patients A, B, C, and D all had subtype B sequences that 
clustered tightly together suggesting high genetic relatedness of 
their HIV sequences. Pairwise nucleotide identities (99.1% in 
gag and 99.6% in pol) were high. None of the pol sequences had 
any major drug resistance mutations. Patients A, B, C, and D 
were all linked to care within 18 days of receiving their diagnoses.
Discussion
Since the 1990s, many adult film production companies have 
required performers to participate in periodic HIV testing. In 
2004, work-related HIV transmission between heterosexual 
adult film performers (2) occurred despite the existence of one 
such testing program. Many adult film production companies 
continue to rely on HIV testing as the primary method to 
prevent HIV transmission. Performers obtain an HIV NAAT 
through a commercial laboratory, their test results are maintained 
in a database by a third party, and production companies check 
this database to ensure that performers have had a recent nega-
tive test before filming. To partially protect performer privacy, 
production companies are only informed of whether a performer 
is cleared to perform or not on the basis of test results. Some 
production companies have specialized in producing “bareback” 
films which involve condomless anal sex among male performers. 
Patient A had testing with NAAT <14 days before filming, as 
recommended by a leading industry trade group, with negative 
results. However, patient A’s acute retroviral syndrome onset 
occurred 10 days after his NAAT and he engaged in condomless 
insertive and receptive oral, and insertive anal sex with patient B 
as directed by the production company.
The Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
(OSHA) requires that all employers provide a place of employ-
ment free from recognized hazards that are causing, or are likely 
to cause, death or serious physical harm to employees.†† The 
California state standard, equivalent to the OSHA Bloodborne 
Pathogens standard, requires that employers must include 
consistent use of appropriate engineering, administrative, and 
work practice controls, and personal protective equipment to 
prevent contact with blood and other potentially infectious 
materials, including semen and vaginal secretions.§§ Adult 
film performers are at risk for these work-related exposures (3).
In 2012, voters in Los Angeles County passed a local law 
requiring that adult film performers wear condoms during 
vaginal and anal sex and requiring adult film production com-
panies to obtain a film permit from the Los Angeles County 
Department of Public Health. Permitting requirements include 
completion of a bloodborne pathogen training course by adult 
film directors, and submission of an exposure control plan by 
adult film producers.¶¶
 ¶ Positive HIV Ag/Ab chemiluminescent antigen/antibody test, negative 
HIV-1/2 immunoconcentrating assay, and viral load >10 million/mL.
 
** Positive HIV rapid immunoassay and HIV-1/2 enzyme immunoassay; CD4 
count = 384 cells/mm3, HIV viral load = 127,000 copies/mL.
 
†† 29 U.S.C. Section 651. Furthermore, in California, adult film performers may 
be considered employees under the law. See Deupree v Workers’ Comp. Appeals 
Bd., 2008 WL 4191236 (Cal. App. 2d Aug. 19, 2008); California Occupational 
Safety and Health Appeals Board, in the matter of the appeal of Cybernet 
Entertainment, LLC dba Kink.com, dockets 14-R6D1-0364 through 0367. 
April 10, 2015. http://www.dir.ca.gov/oshab/DECISIONS-ALJ/2015/
Cybernet_Entert_2014-6-1-0364.pdf; and California Occupational Safety and 
Health Appeals Board, in the matter of reconsideration of the appeal of Treasure 
Island Media, Inc., dockets 14-R6D1-1093 through 1095. August 13, 2015. 
http://www.dir.ca.gov/oshab/decisions/Treasure-Island-Media.(10-1093).pdf.
 
§§ 29 CFR, Section 1910.1030, Bloodborne Pathogens. https://www.osha.gov/
pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=STANDARDS&p_id=10051; 
and California Code of Regulations, Section 5193, Bloodborne Pathogens, 
http://www.dir.ca.gov/title8/5193.html.
 
¶¶ Los Angeles County Health and Safety Code, Title 11, Chapter 11.39, Safer 
Sex in the Adult Film Industry. https://www.municode.com/library/ca/los_
angeles_county/codes/code_of_ordinances.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / February 12, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5 
113
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
In May 2015, the California Occupational Safety and 
Health Standards Board held a public hearing on proposed 
new workplace standards to prevent STIs in the adult film 
industry, which included specific requirements for consistent 
and correct condom use (facilitated by the use of a compatible 
lubricant), and for confidential medical services provision at 
the employer’s expense, including HIV and STI testing, and 
hepatitis A and human papillomavirus vaccinations, in addi-
tion to existing requirements for hepatitis B vaccination (4). 
The specific testing and examinations performed and their 
results would only be available to the performer, the health 
care provider, and anyone designated by the performer.
The wide geographic distribution of adult performers, film-
ing locations, and production companies highlights the chal-
lenges of developing adult film worker protection regulations 
on a national and global scale, conducting contact investiga-
tions, and disseminating prevention information to employ-
ers and employees. Because the adult film industry recruits 
workers from numerous states and countries, documenting 
future disease transmission associated with filming sexual acts 
might, as this investigation did, require substantial resources 
and coordination between local, state, and federal agencies.
Because follow-up testing has not been reported for some 
sexual partners of patient A, and patient A did not reveal 
the names of all of his sexual contacts, this report might 
Summary
What is already known on this topic?
Work-related transmission of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
and other sexually transmitted infections has been documented 
among adult film performers. HIV tests, including nucleic acid 
amplification, do not detect HIV very early after infection.
What is added by this report?
This is the first well-documented work-related HIV transmission 
among male adult film performers. A performer was infected by 
a non–work-related partner who was not aware of his HIV 
infection. The performer, having tested negative by nucleic acid 
amplification test within the preceding 14 days, and unaware of 
his very recent HIV infection, infected another performer and a 
non–work-related partner. Viruses in all four HIV infections were 
highly genetically related, indicating a transmission cluster.
What are the implications for public health practice?
Federal and state Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration regulations delineate rights of employees and 
responsibilities of employers to ensure safe working conditions. 
The adult film industry is well suited for implementation of 
combination HIV prevention strategies including biomedical 
(HIV testing, treatment, and preexposure prophylaxis), behav-
ioral (consistent and correct use of condoms, facilitated by the 
use of a compatible lubricant), and regulatory interventions.
underestimate the extent of HIV transmission in this cluster. 
Among patient A’s 17 named sexual contacts, six were chroni-
cally HIV-infected, one had last sexual contact with patient A 
before patient A was infected, and 10 were at risk for infec-
tion by patient A. Seven of these 10 engaged in condomless 
receptive anal sex with patient A, and two became infected. 
This 29% attack rate is comparable to the 23% attack rate 
of work-related HIV transmission among heterosexual per-
formers in the 2004 report (2).
None of the interviewed persons in this sexual network 
used HIV PrEP
, despite being at high risk for HIV infec-
tion. Coformulated emtricitabine/tenofovir (Truvada) has 
federal Food and Drug Administration approval to be taken 
orally once daily by HIV-negative persons for PrEP
. Maximal 
intracellular concentrations of tenofovir are reached in rectal 
tissue at approximately 7 days, and in cervicovaginal tissues 
at approximately 20 days (5). Efficacy depends on adherence, 
but is >90% effective if taken daily. Unlike condoms, PrEP is 
not an HIV prevention modality with which employers can 
ensure compliance because of the requirement for daily use 
outside of the workplace, with no methods of tracking; PrEP 
also does not prevent other STIs. However, combined with 
condoms, PrEP remains an important approach for preventing 
HIV infection among persons at high risk for HIV infection, 
including adult film industry performers who might be at risk 
in both their professional and personal lives.
This investigation emphasizes the importance of public 
health prevention and regulatory strategies to prevent occu-
pational HIV and other STI transmission. Persons at high 
risk for HIV infection should receive periodic HIV and STI 
testing.*** However, as demonstrated here and previously 
among heterosexual adult film performers (2), testing alone is 
not sufficient to prevent occupational HIV transmission. HIV 
can be transmitted during the 14-day period after a negative 
NAAT test, before a positive test is obtained. PrEP significantly 
reduces the risk for HIV acquisition among HIV-negative 
persons at high risk; however, PrEP is not an intervention with 
which employers can ensure compliance, and should be used 
with condoms to protect against both HIV and other STIs. 
The high prevalence of STIs within this network of sexual 
partners, including performers, emphasizes the importance 
of consistent condom use. In addition to complying with 
regulatory requirements under OSHA standards, the adult film 
industry should consider the implementation of combination 
HIV prevention strategies, including biomedical (HIV testing, 
treatment, and PrEP) and behavioral (consistent and correct 
use of condoms) interventions.
 *** http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/prepguidelines2014.pdf; http://www.cdc.gov/
std/tg2015/screening-recommendations.htm.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
114 
MMWR / February 12, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Acknowledgments
Disease investigation staff members of the Colorado, Florida, 
Georgia, Indiana, Michigan, New York, New York City, Texas, San 
Diego, and Sonoma County, California health departments.
 1Occupational Health Branch, California Department of Public Health; 
2Division of State and Local Readiness, Office of Public Health Preparedness 
and Response, CDC; 3HIV/STD Program, Orange County Health Care 
Agency, Santa Ana, California; 4Indiana University School of Medicine; 
5Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment; 6STD Control 
Branch, California Department of Public Health; 7Division of HIV and AIDS 
Prevention, National Center for HIV, Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, 
CDC; 8Office of AIDS, California Department of Public Health.
Corresponding authors: Jason A. Wilken, jwilken@cdc.gov, 510-620-3622; 
Christopher Ried, cried@ochca.com, 714-834-8598.
References
1. Ivanov IA, Beshkov D, Shankar A, et al. Detailed molecular epidemiologic 
characterization of HIV-1 infection in Bulgaria reveals broad diversity 
and evolving phylodynamics. PLoS One 2013;8:e59666. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0059666.
2. Taylor MM, Rotblatt H, Brooks JT, et al. Epidemiologic investigation of 
a cluster of workplace HIV infections in the adult film industry: Los 
Angeles, California, 2004. Clin Infect Dis 2007;44:301–5. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1086/510487.
3. Gold D. An industrial hygienist looks at porn. J Occup Environ Hyg 
2015;12:D184–90. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15459624.2015.1053895.
4. California Department of Industrial Relations. Sexually transmitted infections. 
https://www.dir.ca.gov/oshsb/Sexually_transmitted_infections.html.
5. Anderson PL, Kiser JJ, Gardner EM, Rower JE, Meditz A, Grant RM. 
Pharmacological considerations for tenofovir and emtricitabine to prevent 
HIV infection. J Antimicrob Chemother 2011;66:240–50. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/jac/dkq447.
