 C A N C E R
Copyright © 2018
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim to
originalU.S.Government
Works. Distributed
under a Creative
Commons Attribution
NonCommercial
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Noninvasive ovarian cancer biomarker detection via an
optical nanosensor implant
Ryan M. Williams,1 Christopher Lee,1 Thomas V. Galassi,1,2 Jackson D. Harvey,1,2 Rachel Leicher,3,4
Maria Sirenko,1 Madeline A. Dorso,1,2 Janki Shah,1 Narciso Olvera,5 Fanny Dao,5
Douglas A. Levine,5 Daniel A. Heller1,2*
Patients with high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSC) exhibit poor 5-year survival rates, which may be
significantly improved by early-stage detection. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration–approved biomarkers
for HGSC—CA-125 (cancer antigen 125) and HE4 (human epididymis protein 4)—do not generally appear at
detectable levels in the serum until advanced stages of the disease. An implantable device placed proximal to
disease sites, such as in or near the fallopian tube, ovary, uterine cavity, or peritoneal cavity, may constitute a
feasible strategy to improve detection of HGSC. We engineered a prototype optical sensor composed of an
antibody-functionalized carbon nanotube complex, which responds quantitatively to HE4 via modulation of
the nanotube optical bandgap. The complexes measured HE4 with nanomolar sensitivity to differentiate dis-
ease from benign patient biofluids. The sensors were implanted into four models of ovarian cancer, within a
semipermeable membrane, enabling the optical detection of HE4 within the live animals. We present the first in
vivo optical nanosensor capable of noninvasive cancer biomarker detection in orthotopic models of disease.
INTRODUCTION
Worldwide, more than 238,000 patients are diagnosed with ovarian
cancer, a disease that is responsible for more than 151,000 deaths each
year (1, 2). Ovarian cancer is the fifth leading cause of cancer-related
deaths among females in the United States and first among gyneco-
logic malignancies (3). These grim statistics are due in part to the
advanced stage at which most cases are detected—at stage III or later
in more than 60% of diagnoses—higher than any other form of cancer
(3–5). Among all populations, the 5-year survival rate is just 46% (5).
In cases where diagnosis occurs at stage I, however, the 5-year survival
rate is 92% (6). Current screening methods involve cancer antigen
125 [CA-125 or mucin 16 (MUC16)] serum testing and transvaginal
ultrasonography. However, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force re-
commends against these methods because of high false-positive rates
and poor sensitivity for detecting small lesions (7). These methods nei-
ther alter patient outcome nor reduce mortality (8). Consequently, new
methods are needed to detect early-stage disease to reduce the burden
of ovarian cancer (9).
Human epididymis protein 4 (HE4) is one of two U.S. Food and
Drug Administration–approved serum biomarkers for ovarian cancer,
along with CA-125, and is involved in ovarian tumorigenesis (10). This
protein is overexpressed by malignant epithelial cells (11) and is found
in increased levels in patient serum (12, 13), ascites (14), and uterine
fluid (15, 16). Serum-based HE4 provides similar sensitivity and speci-
ficity for ovarian cancer diagnosis as CA-125, although it may be more
useful in differentiating benign from malignant disease (12). Like CA-
125, data do not show that serum-based screening for HE4 improves
overall patient survival. However, uterine cavity concentrations of these
markers are greater (23-fold greater median values for HE4) than serum
concentrations and may therefore present a route for more sensitive
ovarian cancer detection than serum-based measurements (15, 16).
Implantable sensors are of increasing interest for the detection of
disease biomarkers. Distinct from imaging agents used to visualize dis-
ease sites or delineate disease versus normal tissue for surgery (17), im-
plantable sensors aim to quantify biomarkers via devices that normally
remain stationary in the body. Progress in electronic implants includes
the development of increasingly flexible and thin electronic materials
(18).Opticalimplantablesensorsincludequantumdot-basedion-selective
sensors (19) and pH sensors (20).
Single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) have electronic and
optical properties that are well suited for in vivo signal transduction.
Semiconducting carbon nanotubes emit near-infrared (NIR) bandgap
photoluminescence (PL) between 800 and 1600 nm (21), which can pen-
etrate living tissues to a distance in the centimeter range (22). Carbon
nanotubes have been investigated for use in vivo to image vasculature
and as intraoperative probes (17). Carbon nanotube fluorescence ex-
hibits unique photostability (23), allowing for repeated, long-term mea-
surements. Nanotubes also exhibit exquisite sensitivity to their local
environment via optical bandgap modulation (24). Previous works have
demonstrated the optical detection of small molecules (25) and proteins
(26) in or on live cells (24). Nanotubes have been used in vivo to detect
nitric oxide in the liver of live murine models of inflammation (27) and
exogenous microRNA (28).
Here, we developed a carbon nanotube–based sensor to optically de-
tect the ovarian cancer biomarker HE4 in vivo. The sensor was devel-
oped by derivatizing NIR-emitting carbon nanotubes to transduce the
binding of HE4 to an immobilized antibody. The antibody-nanotube
complex responded specifically to HE4 via modulation of the nanotube
emission wavelength. Responses from single nanotubes differentiated
high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSC) from control patient
serum and ascites samples. We then engineered an implantable device
incorporating the antibody-nanotube complex and surgically im-
planted it into mice. The implant could be probed noninvasively via
NIR optical excitation and collection. The device successfully quantified
exogenously derived HE4 and detected endogenous HE4 in orthotopic
1Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. 2Weill Cornell
Medicine, Cornell University, New York, NY 10065, USA. 3Tri-Institutional Program in
Chemical Biology, New York, NY 10065, USA. 4The Rockefeller University, 1230 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA. 5Laura and Isaac Perlmutter Cancer Center, NYU
Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: hellerd@mskcc.org
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Williams et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaaq1090
18 April 2018
1 of 11
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 murine models of ovarian cancer to differentiate HE4-producing models
from HE4-deficient models (11).
RESULTS
We developed a carbon nanotube–based sensor for HE4 by synthe-
sizing a stable anti-HE4 antibody-nanotube complex without chem-
ical perturbation of the graphitic carbon of the nanotube (Fig. 1A).
SWCNTs [Unidym high pressure carbon monoxide (HiPCO) prepa-
ration] were suspended with the single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) oligo-
nucleotide (TAT)6 modified at the 3′ end with a primary amine
functional group, via ultrasonication. The nanotube suspensions were
purified by ultracentrifugation to remove bundles, and excess DNA
was removed by centrifugal filtration. The DNA-SWCNT complexes
were then conjugated via carbodiimide cross-linker chemistry to a
goat polyclonal anti-HE4 immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody (C-12,
Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and subsequently dialyzed against water
for 48 hours to remove unreacted reagents. Dynamic light scattering
of the dialyzed suspensions indicated a larger size after conjugation
with the antibody, confirming that the antibody successfully bound to
the DNA-SWCNT complexes (Fig. 1B). Electrophoretic light scattering
further suggested successful attachment by an increase in z-potential
of the DNA-SWCNT complexes after conjugation to the antibody
(Fig. 1C), as expected from analogous works (29). The stability of
the complexes and preservation of nanotube optical properties were
confirmed by absorbance and PL excitation/emission spectroscopy
(Fig. 1D). All nanotube species (chiralities) exhibited a red shift in
emission wavelength (red shift) after antibody conjugation (table
S1), suggesting an increase in the local electrostatic charge or increased
polarity/dielectric constant of the environment in the immediate vicin-
ity of the nanotube (26, 30).
We assessed the sensitivity and kinetics of the optical response of the
Ab-DNA-SWCNT complexes to HE4. The complexes were passivated
by incubating with bovine serum albumin (BSA) (31) and subjected to
testing with recombinant HE4 antigen in 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS),
a complex protein environment. The complexes were excited at 730 nm,
andtheemissionwascollectedacrossthe NIR range of 900 to 1400 nm
to simultaneously assess several nanotube chiralities (see Materials
and Methods) (32). The nanotube emission responded to increasing
concentrations of HE4 via monotonic blue shifting of the (9,4) nano-
tube chirality, with a detection limit of 10 nM and sensitivity of up to
500 nM (Fig. 1E and fig. S1A), as well as the other two chiralities we
investigated (fig. S1, B and C). This detection limit is within the range
found in ovarian cancer patient serum and ascites (14, 33) of approxi-
mately 10 nM and in uterine washings, where median values are 23-fold
higher than serum values (~230 nM) (15, 16).
We investigated the specificity of the response of the Ab-DNA-
SWCNT complex to HE4 (Fig. 1F). The complex was interrogated with
500 nM HE4 or 500 nM each of nontarget proteins, including uro-
kinase plasminogen activator (uPA), the ovarian cancer biomarker
CA-125, and BSA, in addition to 93% FBS. High concentrations, much
greater than those found under normal physiological conditions for in-
dividual proteins, were chosen to assess for nonspecific interactions. We
found either no change or a moderate red shift in the sensor response to
each interferent protein condition compared to the control (no protein).
The responses were measured transiently, and no further changes were
found for 120 min (fig. S1D). When ssDNA-suspended nanotubes in
the absence of a conjugated antibody were challenged with HE4, no
wavelength shifting response was observed, indicating that the ssDNA-
suspended nanotubes did not exhibit an intrinsic response to HE4
(fig. S1E).
We assessed the kinetics of the response of the Ab-DNA-SWCNT
complexes to HE4. The complexes exhibited an immediate change in
wavelength after introducing HE4, which was detectable after 1 min
(Fig. 1G). The signal stabilized by approximately 60 min after HE4
addition. To investigate long-term sensor functionality under simu-
lated in vivo conditions, we incubated Ab-DNA-SWCNT complexes
in FBS at 37°C for up to 7 days. When interrogated with HE4, we ob-
served the usual blue-shifting response for 3 days, although at 7 days,
the sensor response was significantly changed, wherein a larger response
and greater variability were observed (fig. S1F).
The sensor blue shift is likely caused by the removal of water from
the surface of the nanotube following the high affinity–specific interac-
tion of HE4 with the antibody. When this binding occurs, we hypoth-
esize that the HE4 protein is brought near to the nanotube surface,
displacing water from the surface of the nanotube and thereby reducing
the local dielectric constant, causing a blue shift (28, 30). The red shift in
response to certain nontarget proteins is likely due to electrostatic inter-
actions of the proteins with the surface of the nanotube that are not
strong enough to displace water, causing an increase in the local electro-
static charge environment of the nanotube (26, 30).
We developed a surface-based hyperspectral imaging assay to assess
the response of single nanosensor complexes to HE4 in the presence of a
minimal amount of patient sample. Ab-DNA-SWCNT complexes were
adsorbed to a glass surface and imaged using a near infrared (NIR) hy-
perspectral microscope to rapidly acquire the spatially resolved spectra
from hundreds of individual complexes (Fig. 2, A and B) (34–36).
Baseline hyperspectral cubes were obtained from single nanotubes
immersed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), resulting in spectra for
each complex. Spectra were then acquired from the same imaging field
10 min after spiking a final concentration of 10 nM HE4 into the buffer.
The mean blue shift was 1.2 nm [P = 0.04, measured for the (8,6)
species; Fig. 2C and fig. S2, A and B]. Further, we observed a blue
shift of 0.8 nm after spiking in a final concentration of 2.5 nM HE4,
but no change after the addition of 1 nM (fig. S2B), denoting a detection
limit in this range. In response to 10% FBS, the mean sensor red shift
was 2.3 nm (P = 0.03; Fig. 2C).
We investigated the individual nanosensor response upon expo-
sure to biofluid samples collected from ovarian cancer patients. The
hyperspectral imaging assay allowed measurements of patient samples
in volumes as little as 10 ml. Upon exposing the sensor to serum col-
lected from patients diagnosed in the clinic with HGSC or noncan-
cerous, benign conditions, we observed a distinct separation in signal
response (Fig. 2D). The HGSC patient serum caused a blue shift of
approximately 0.36 nm [SD = 0.16 nm, measured for the (8,6) nano-
tube species], whereas serum from patients with benign conditions
red-shifted the sensors by approximately 1.4 nm (SD = 0.72 nm), re-
sulting in a significant difference between the two cohorts (P = 0.015).
Using an enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay (ELISA), we measured
HE4 concentrations within 0.44 to 0.58 nM in patients with benign
conditions and 2.2 to 2.6 nM for HGSC patients. The nanosensor also
differentiated between HGSC patient ascites and benign patient perito-
neal fluid collected from patients without cancer (Fig. 2E). Peritoneal
fluid from benign controls elicited an average red shift of 0.96 nm
(SD = 0.64 nm), whereas ascites from HGSC patients caused an av-
erage blue shift of 0.27 nm (SD = 0.08 nm), resulting in a significant
difference between the two populations (P = 0.030). The HE4 concen-
trations measured by ELISA were 0.86 to 1.1 nM for peritoneal fluid
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Williams et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaaq1090
18 April 2018
2 of 11
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 1. Design and in vitro characterization of optical nanosensor for HE4. (A) Scheme of Ab-DNA-SWCNT complex synthesis and proposed nanosensor function.
a.u., arbitrary units. (B) Correlograms from a dynamic light scattering instrument showing correlation coefficient of pre-Ab– and post-Ab–conjugated ssDNA-SWCNT
samples. n = 3 for each complex. (C) Electrophoretic light scattering of ssDNA-SWCNT before and after anti-HE4 antibody conjugation. n = 3, mean ± SD; **P < 0.01, t test.
(D) Representative absorbance spectra of the hybridized ssDNA-SWCNT before and after conjugation of the anti-HE4 antibody. Inset: Representative PL excitation/emission
plot of the Ab-DNA-SWCNT sensor. (E) Dose-response curve of the Ab-DNA-SWCNT sensor emission [of the (9,4) nanotube species] as a function of HE4 concentration in
10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). Each point is the mean of three experiments ± SD. (F) Response of the Ab-DNA-SWCNT complex to interferent proteins. n = 3, mean ± SD;
control and HE4, P = 1.0 × 10−4; control and bovine serum albumin (BSA), P = 0.998; control and CA-125, P = 0.163; control and urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA),
P = 1.0 × 10−3; control and FBS, P = 0.64 [two-sided one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Dunnett’s post hoc analysis]. NS, not significant. (G) Representative
kinetic response of nanotube emission upon introducing recombinant HE4.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Williams et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaaq1090
18 April 2018
3 of 11
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 from patients with benign conditions and 2.2 to 2.8 nM for HGSC
patient ascites. The HE4 concentrations in noncancerous serum and
peritoneal fluid samples are consistent with the upper range of various
benign conditions, with HE4 levels greater than that of normal indi-
viduals, whereas the HGSC serum and ascites samples are consistent
with the upper range of HGSC patient samples (37, 38). Because all
benign serum and peritoneal fluid samples contained less than 1.1 nM
HE4 and all HGSC patient fluids contained 2.2 to 2.8 nM HE4, these
results confirm the detection limit of between 1 and 2.5 nM HE4 using
the surface-based nanosensor assay and the ability to differentiate
HGSC patient from benign fluids ex vivo.
To assess the function of the nanosensor in vivo, we developed a
membrane-based device to implant the Ab-DNA-SWCNT complexes
into live mice. The complexes, passivated with BSA, were loaded into a
semipermeable polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane capillary
with a molecular weight cutoff (MWCO) of 500 kDa. We chose this
MWCO to be larger than the HE4 antigen (approximately 25 kDa)
but smaller than the sensor complex. We estimated the mass of the
complex, assuming that an average diameter nanotube is 1.0 nm,
the experimentally determined average length is 166 nm (26), and
the derived ssDNA-to-nanotube weight ratio from simulations is 1:1
(39), to be 1446 kDa (see the Supplementary Text). The material
allowed excitation/emission of nanotubes through the membrane
(Fig. 3A). We first tested the response of the implantable sensor device
immersed in 10% FBS, resulting in a 1-nm blue shift upon exposure to
100 nM recombinant HE4 after 60 min, as compared to controls (P =
7.2 × 10−6; Fig. 3B).
We developed a minor surgical method to investigate the function-
ality of the implantable sensor in vivo. The membrane-encapsulated
sensors were surgically implanted into healthy, 4- to 8-week-old fe-
male athymic nude mice (Envigo Hsd:Athymic Nude-Foxn1nu) under
anesthesia (fig. S3; see Materials and Methods). The implants were su-
tured within the peritoneal cavity to the interior of the parietal perito-
neum medially above the intestines, and the overlying skin was clipped
closed. Placement of the implantable device and nanosensor emission
from within the peritoneal cavity were confirmed by whole-animal NIR
imaging (Fig. 3C). Typical results revealed bright emission medially to
the abdomen and no nanotube leakage from the membrane. Following
implantation, mice were allowed to become alert and ambulatory, ex-
hibiting no adverse effects or signs of distress from surgery or the im-
planted device.
We developed instrumentation to noninvasively acquire spectra
from the sensor and assess its response in vivo. A fiber optic probe–
based system was used to excite an area of approximately 0.8 cm2 with
a 730-nm laser (see Materials and Methods). Emission from the sensor
was collected through the same fiber bundle, which was coupled to a
spectrometer/NIR array detector. Spectra were obtained from mice re-
anesthetized after sensor implantation. Spectra were acquired with a 3 s
integration time by placing the probe approximately 1 to 2 cm above
the mouse skin. Three measurements were taken and averaged per
mouse (Fig. 3D). The distance through the skin and peritoneum was
Fig. 2. Single-sensor HE4 measurements in patient biofluids. (A) NIR image of
Ab-DNA-SWCNT complexes adsorbed to a glass surface. Scale bar, 5 mm. (B) Rep-
resentative spectra of a single complex, denoted by the green circle in (A), before
and 10 min after introducing recombinant HE4. RFU, relative fluorescence units.
(C) Shift in sensor emission wavelength 10 min after addition of recombinant HE4 or
10% FBS. Pre- to post-FBS, *P = 0.03; pre-HE4 to post-HE4, *P = 0.04 (two-sided t test).
n = 82 single nanotubes before and 98 after FBS, 100 before HE4, and 97 after
HE4. Data shown are means ± SEM. (D) Sensor response to serum. n = 3 HGSC
patients or patients with benign conditions. HE4 concentrations, measured in-
dependently via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), are specified for
each sample. *P = 0.015, two-sided t test. (E) Sensor response to HGSC patient
ascites or peritoneal fluid from patients with benign conditions. n = 3. HE4 con-
centrations, measured independently via ELISA, are specified for each sample, with
one exception due to sample volume limitation. *P = 0.03, two-sided t test.
Fig. 3. Implantable nanosensor device. (A) Semipermeable 500-kDa MWCO
membrane capillary incorporating Ab-DNA-SWCNT complexes. Spectrum of the
nanosensor acquired through the capillary wall. (B) Emission wavelength from
the sensor after introducing recombinant HE4. n = 3, mean ± SD; ***P = 7.2 ×
10−6, two-sided t test. (C) NIR image of nanosensor emission from the implanted
device, overlaid onto a reflected light image of the mouse. (D) Photograph of
typical data acquisition from the probe-based system used to excite/acquire
NIR emission from the implanted sensor in mice. (E) Representative NIR fluores-
cence spectra of sensors implanted into healthy mice and measured 1 hour and
38 days after implantation.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Williams et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaaq1090
18 April 2018
4 of 11
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 approximately 2 mm of tissue. To confirm the stability of the nanosen-
sor, the implantable device, and its long-term optical functionality in
vivo, a mouse was implanted with the sensor. Fluorescence was
measured 60 min and 38 days following injection (Fig. 3E). The results
suggest long-term stability of the emission of the sensor implant.
We investigated the response of the implanted sensor when chal-
lenged with exogenous recombinant HE4. Implanted mice were intra-
peritoneally injected with 10 pmol of HE4, an equal amount of BSA,
or left untreated (n = 3). Sensor fluorescence was obtained as above
with the fiber optic probe–based system. Three measurements were
taken per mouse per time point, baseline-subtracted (fig. S4), and fit
using a Lorentzian function to obtain the emission center wavelength.
The sensor implants were measured before implantation; in vivo
following implantation but before injection; 15 min and 1, 2, 4, and
24 hours after injection; and ex vivo after explantation (fig. S5, A to H).
The sensors exhibited a distinct blue-shifting response by 15 min after
HE4 injection, which stabilized by 60 min (Fig. 4A and fig. S5, I and J),
comparable to the in vitro kinetics data. Alternatively, mice injected
with BSA exhibited a slight red shift or no change in emission wave-
length throughout the experiment. At 60 min, the implanted sensor
in the HE4-injected mice exhibited a 0.7-nm blue shift, as compared to
controls (Fig. 4B)—almost identical to the magnitude observed in vitro
upon interrogating with the same quantity of HE4 (0.6-nm blue shift;
Fig. 1B). This change was significantly different when compared to the
change in center wavelength of the sensor in mice injected with BSA
(P = 0.016). Following sacrifice, the sensor device was removed and
was found to exhibit no compromise in structural integrity or function.
We next investigated the in vivo sensor response to tumor-derived
HE4 within orthotopic murine models of ovarian cancer. Four cohorts
of athymic nude mice were injected intraperitoneally with approxi-
mately 10 million cells of four different luciferase-expressing cell lines:
OVCAR-3, SK-OV-3, OVCAR-5, and OVCAR-8 (n = 4 of each). The
OVCAR-3 and OVCAR-5 cells express high levels of HE4, whereas
SK-OV-3 and OVCAR-8 cells express low to negligible levels of HE4
(11). These cell lines are thought to represent HGSC with the exception
of SK-OV-3, which is likely not of HGSC origin (40). We confirmed
HE4 expression in OVCAR-3 and OVCAR-5 and a lack thereof in
SK-OV-3 and OVCAR-8 cells via ELISA on conditioned cell culture
media (table S2). Tumors were allowed to grow for approximately
4 weeks, after which in vivo bioluminescence imaging showed signifi-
cant tumor burden in the mice (Fig. 4C). Mice exhibited distended, fluid-
filled abdomens typical of ovarian cancer–associated ascites and solid
tumornodulesintheperitonealcavity.ThepresenceofHE4inOVCAR-3
and OVCAR-5 ascites and negligible concentrations or absence of HE4
in SK-OV-3 and OVCAR-8 ascites were confirmed via ELISA on ascites
drawn or flushed from the peritoneal cavity (table S2). Tumor burden
was further confirmed via hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining on
resected tumor nodules (fig. S6).
To measure HE4 in ovarian cancer–bearing mice using the nano-
sensor, the devices were implanted into the peritoneal cavity following
initial spectral characterization (fig. S7A). Surgical implantation was per-
formed as described above on mice 4 weeks after tumor cell injection.
Nanosensor emission was measured in the tumor-bearing mice in vivo
using the optical probe system (Fig. 4D) for 24 hours. The sensors
were also interrogated after sacrifice and explantation at 24 hours
(fig. S7, B to G). Three measurements were taken per mouse per time
point and baseline-subtracted. The spectra were then fit with Lorentzian
functions to record the emission center wavelength. The implanted sen-
sors exhibited an immediate blue shift response in mice bearing HE4-
expressing tumors within 15 min that stabilized by 60 min (Fig. 4E and
fig. S7, H and I), similar to the in vitro results (Fig. 1G). Similar to the
exogenous protein injection experiments, the sensors in mice bearing
HE4 nonexpressing tumors exhibited no wavelength changes or slight
red shifting. At 60 min, in mice bearing OVCAR-3 or OVCAR-5 cells,
the sensor exhibited a 0.91- or 1.2-nm blue shift, respectively, as com-
pared to controls, while it exhibited a negligible change in SK-OV-3
and OVCAR-8 models (Fig. 4F). The mean emission wavelength of the
sensor from each HE4 (−) mouse was significantly different from that
of each HE4 (+) mouse. Emission was bright and stable across all mea-
surements (fig. S8A). Following mouse sacrifice and sensor explantation,
Fig. 4. In vivo measurement of HE4 in orthotopic ovarian cancer models.
(A) Change in emission center wavelength in mice following intraperitoneal injection
of 10 pmol of BSA or HE4, compared to emission in uninjected mice. Bold lines rep-
resent mean ± SD. n = 3. Lighter lines represent measurements from each mouse.
(B) Change in emission center wavelength at 60 min after injection of BSA or HE4
compared to uninjected mice. n = 3, mean ± SD; *P = 0.016, two-sided t test.
(C) Representative bioluminescence images denoting tumor burden in the peritoneal
cavity of nude mice inoculated with luciferase-expressing cell lines. (D) Schematic
method of HE4 measurement in live tumor-bearing mice. (E) Change in sensor emis-
sion center wavelength following implantation into mice bearing four different or-
thotopic intraperitoneal tumor models. Bold lines represent mean ± SD. n = 4. Lighter
lines represent traces from the emission within each mouse. (F) Sensor response from
all mice at 60 min after implantation. n = 4, mean ± SD. Sensor wavelength difference
between models and statistical analysis: SK-OV-3 and OVCAR-3 (0.79 nm; P = 4.4 ×
10−3), SK-OV-3 and OVCAR-5 (1.07 nm; P = 3.9 × 10−4), OVCAR-8 and OVCAR-3
(1.07 nm; P = 3.9 × 10−4), OVCAR-8 and OVCAR-5 (1.34 nm; P = 4.5 × 10−5), SK-OV-3
and OVCAR-8 (0.27 nm; P = 0.46), and OVCAR-3 and OVCAR-5 (0.27 nm; P = 0.48) by
two-sided one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc analysis.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Williams et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaaq1090
18 April 2018
5 of 11
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 we found that the blue shift remained consistent when the sensor
was interrogated using the optical probe (fig. S8B).
DISCUSSION
This work describes in vivo optical quantification of a soluble cancer
protein biomarker and direct correlation with disease state using an
implanted optical sensor with carbon nanotubes as the transduction
element. Many imaging modalities that visualize tumors by binding
protein targets exist (41). In addition, previous work using carbon
nanotube electrical (42) and optical properties has produced sensors
for the detection of proteins in vitro, including a chip-based optical
sensor to measure the cardiovascular disease biomarker cardiac tropo-
nin T (43) and an in vivo sensor for the small-molecule inflammatory
biomarker nitric oxide (27).
The current work described the construction and characterization of
a carbon nanotube–based optical sensor for the ovarian cancer protein
biomarker HE4. We found that the sensor can quantify HE4 in patient
serum and ascites samples at relevant biomarker concentrations, poten-
tiating future use as a rapid or point-of-care sensor. Finally, we devel-
oped, characterized, and used an implantable device in the peritoneal
cavity of four murine models of ovarian cancer to detect the HE4 bio-
marker and differentiate biomarker-producing murine ovarian cancer
models from non–biomarker-producing models.
The application of this sensor technology in the clinic will obviously
require multiple follow-up studies. Data presented herein show wave-
length shifting responses of up to 2 nm. Although consistent and repro-
ducible, there was some minor variation in values across experiments
and in initialemission wavelengths before detection. We note that this is
likely due to the different nanotube local environments across varying
platforms, including in solution, on a solid surface, and within a mem-
brane in live mice (34). Minor variability in initial center wavelength
measurements was addressed by performing spectral characterization
of each sensor before implantation. We also found slight differences
in the detection limit when used in solution versus on a glass surface.
However, future work will investigate several approaches to producing a
larger spectral change and thereby improve sensitivity of both ex vivo
measurements of patient biofluids and in vivo detection, including
separating nanotube chiralities to decrease spectral overlap and hetero-
geneity in emission center wavelengths (39, 44), performing site-directed
antibody conjugation chemistry to increase proper antibody orientation
(45), increasing the total number of antigen-binding events using multi-
valent polymers (32), and modifying polymers to exacerbate the magni-
tude of the shift (28). In addition, carbon nanotubeswithhigher quantum
yields would allow for greater tissue penetration of the optical signal.
The long-term function of the implant will be important for most
applications of this technology. Herein, we demonstrated stable sensor
function in vivo up to 24 hours and consistent emission intensity in vivo
over 38 days, although in vivo sensor functionality over extended pe-
riods requires further investigation. Should antibody stability be an
issue, more stable antibody constructs, such as single-chain variants
or nanobodies (46, 47) or other sensing elements such as aptamers,
(48, 49) may be investigated. Regarding the implant housing material, it
is known that PVDF in general and the specific implant used here is
highly biocompatible (50) and has been used in immunocompetent
mice and rats, finding no immune reactions caused by the membranes
(51). However, to modulate any potential biofouling or biocompatibility
issues, it is possible to coat the membrane with polyethylene glycol or
other antifouling materials (52). Alternatively, the nanosensors may be
embedded directly in a hydrogel matrix, as has been investigated with
carbon nanotubes in vivo, finding no local inflammation (27). Further,
although we expect no exposure of the nanosensor complex when im-
mobilized in the implant device, well-dispersed, purified SWCNTssuchas
those used here do not exhibit any immunogenic or toxic effects (36, 53).
Concerning the form factor and site of implantation of a clinical
device for detection of ovarian cancer biomarkers, several options may
be considered. Detection proximal to disease sites will increase the
likelihood that the sensor will be exposed to higher levels of HE4 in
the presence of cancer. It is unlikely that implantation of this sensor
into the peritoneal cavity would yield diagnostic value due to poor bio-
marker differentiation at that location (38). However, potential locations
include areas near the ovaries, fallopian tube, or within the uterine cav-
ity where HE4 is expressed up to 12-fold higher in patients with ovarian
cancer compared to benign conditions and up to 23-fold higher than in
the serum (15, 16). Devices such as T-shaped birth control intrauterine
devices (IUDs) are approximately 3 cm in each planar dimension (54).
Because our implantable device is roughly the same size, it may be in-
serted into the uterine cavity in a similar manner to existing IUDs or in
the fallopian tubes endoscopically, wherein nanotube fluorescence could
easily be probed endoscopically or through the body. Depending on the
patient, it may be possible to obtain measurements using a similar
probe-based device external to the patient; however, in certain circum-
stances, endoscopic probe-based measurements may be necessary. Al-
though there is potential invasiveness and associated risk with these
procedures, these would likely be acceptable in light of the potential
diagnostic benefits.
The stratification of patients to determine who may be good candi-
dates will be important for the successful translation of this technology.
Current evidence shows up to 23-fold greater uterine cavity concentra-
tions of HE4 compared to serum concentrations and that these levels
are associated with disease status (15, 16). Although this portends early-
stage disease screening, additional studies are warranted to modify and
assess the technology described here for use in a clinical context. Risk
factors that are indicative of an increased risk for ovarian cancer include
family history of ovarian or breast cancer, patients with BRCA1 or
BRCA2 mutations (55), and individuals experiencing early menarche,
late menopause, or endometriosis (56). These patients may be appropri-
ate for sensor implantation between the ages of 30 and 40 if longitudinal
monitoring (57) over a period of months to years can be achieved. In
addition, patients who have been diagnosed and treated for primary dis-
ease may be appropriate to monitor for recurrence. Most patients treated
for advanced ovarian cancer initially respond to first-line therapy and
then subsequently relapse (58). Thus, careful monitoring after the
completion of treatment may allow for a more rapid determination of
whether the disease is returning after initial therapy, alerting physicians
earlier to the need to initiate a new therapeutic approach or consider
additional surgical cytoreduction.
Regarding the choice of protein biomarker to measure using a clin-
ical device, several issues must be considered. We focused herein on
HE4, which, in the context of patient serum-based measurements for
ovarian cancer, has shown some utility for clinical diagnosis and, in
some circumstances, more so than the more commonly used CA-125
(12, 13), although not in all circumstances (59). Other proteins, including
YKL-40 and mesothelin, have additionally been found to exhibit elevated
levelsintheuterinecavitiesofpatientswithovariancancer(15,16).Itmay
be desirable to simultaneously measure multiple biomarkers to potential-
ly afford increased specificity for and sensitivity to disease. To develop a
single device for multiplexed detection (28), one may use either physical
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Williams et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaaq1090
18 April 2018
6 of 11
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 separation (60) of elements sensitive to different biomarkers on the same
device or chirality separation of carbon nanotubes (39, 44) to enable dif-
ferent nanotube species to be engineered to detect different biomarkers
and measured individually via spectral separation of emission bands.
CONCLUSION
We developed an implantable nanosensor to noninvasively detect an
ovarian cancer biomarker produced in a localized region within the
body and transmitted viaNIR emission to an external detector. The sen-
sor used SWCNTs to transduce the binding of HE4 to an immobilized
antibody via modulation of the intrinsic NIR emission of the nanotubes.
The nanotube-antibody complexes detected HE4 in serum and ascites
from ovarian cancer patients. The nanotube complexes were then
loaded into a semipermeable membrane to result in an implantable de-
vice that could be probed noninvasively in vivo. The sensors quantified
exogenously derived HE4 and detected endogenous HE4 in orthotopic
murine models of ovarian cancer to differentiate HE4-producing models
from biomarker-deficient models. The work portends clinical translation
of implantable devices for use in patients with risk factors for disease to
detect disease onset, recurrence, or to monitor treatment response.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Sensor synthesis
The HE4 sensor complex was synthesized by probe-tip ultrasonication
of as-prepared HiPCO SWCNTs (Unidym) with amino-modified
ssDNA oligonucleotide with the sequence 5′-TATTATTATTATTAT-
TAT/AmMO/-3′ (Integrated DNA Technologies), under previously
described conditions (34). Briefly, a 2:1 mass ratio of ssDNA to dried
nanotubes was added to 1 ml of 1X PBS and sonicated for 30 min at
40% of the maximum amplitude (~13 W; Sonics & Materials Inc.). The
suspensions were then ultracentrifuged (Sorvall Discovery 90SE) for
30 min at 280,000g. The top 75% of the solution was removed for
further processing, discarding the bottom 25% that contained unsus-
pended nanotubes and carbonaceous material. Amicon centrifugal
filters with a 100-kDa MWCO were used (Millipore) to remove free
ssDNA and to concentrate the samples, which were resuspended in
1X PBS. Absorbance spectra were obtained with a ultraviolet/visible/
near-infrared (UV/Vis/nIR) spectrophotometer (Jasco V-670) to de-
termine sample concentration using the extinction coefficient Abs630 =
0.036 liters mg−1 cm−1.
The resulting DNA-SWCNT complex was then chemically con-
jugated via carbodiimide chemistry to goat polyclonal anti-HE4
IgG antibody (C-12, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) to form the Ab-DNA-
SWCNT sensor construct. The carboxylic acids of the antibody were
first activated with 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylainopropyl)carbodiimide
and N-hydroxysuccinimide for 15 min. This reaction was quenched
with 1.4 ml of 2-mercaptoethanol. The activated antibody was added
in an equimolar ratio to the ssDNA. Following 2 hours of incubation on
ice, the conjugate was dialyzed against water with a 1-MDa MWCO filter
(Float-A-Lyzer G2; Spectrum Labs) at 4°C for 48 hours with two buffer
changes to remove unconjugated antibody and reaction reagents.
NIR spectroscopy and imaging experiments
NIR fluorescence emission spectra from antibody-conjugated and un-
conjugated nanotubes in solution were acquired using a home-built
optical setup (32). This apparatus consists of a SuperK EXTREME
supercontinuum tunable white light laser source (NKT Photonics) with
a VARIA tunable bandpass filter to modulate the output within the 500-
to 825-nm range. A bandwidth of 20 nm was used. Alternatively, a 1-W
continuous-wave 730-nm laser source (Frankfurt Laser Company) was
used. The light path was shaped and fed into the back of an inverted
IX-71 microscope (Olympus) and passed through a 20× NIR objec-
tive (Olympus) to illuminate a 100-ml sample in a UV half-area 96-well
plate (Corning). Emission was collected back through the 20× objective
and passed through an 875-nm dichroic mirror (Semrock). The light
was f/# matched to the spectrometer using glass lenses and injected into
an IsoPlane spectrograph (Princeton Instruments) with a 410-mm slit
width. The emission was dispersed using a 86 g/mm grating with blaze
wavelength of 950 nm. The spectral range was 930 to 1369 nm with a
resolution of ~0.7 nm. The light was collected by a PIoNIR InGaAs
640 × 512 pixel array (Princeton Instruments). Single spectra were
acquired using the 730-nm laser or the supercontinuum laser source
with the variable bandpass filter centered at 730 nm. Excitation/
emission plots, also dubbed PL plots, were compiled using the super-
continuum laser for excitation. Spectra were acquired between move-
ments of the VARIA bandpass filter in 3-nm steps from 500 to 827 nm.
An HL-3-CAL EXT halogen calibration light source (Ocean Optics)
was used to correct for wavelength-dependent features in the emission
intensity arising from the excitation power, spectrometer, detector, and
other optics, as previously described (26). A Hg/Ne pencil-style calibra-
tion lamp (Newport) was used to calibrate spectrometer wavelength.
Data were obtained from each well at multiple time points using custom
LabView (National Instruments) code.
NIR fluorescence images and spectra were obtained from a hy-
perspectral microscope, as previously described (Photon etc.) (34).
Briefly, the setup consists of an inverted IX-71 microscope (Olympus).
Experiments were performed with a continuous-wave 2-W 730-nm
laser (Frankfurt) fed through a 100× oil immersion lens (Olympus).
Nanotube samples immobilized on a glass surface were excited, and
emission was collected through the objective. To obtain spectra, light
was fed through a volume Bragg grating to obtain images in sequential
4-nm steps from 900 to 1400 nm (hyperspectral cubes). Light was col-
lected using a 256 × 320 pixel InGaAs array.
Individual NIR fluorescence spectra from implantable membranes
in vivo and ex vivo were obtained using a home-built preclinical fiber-
optic probe spectroscopy system. A continuous-wave 1-W730-nmlaser
(Frankfurt) was injected into a bifurcated fiber optic reflection probe
bundle. The bundle consisted of a 200-mm, 0.22 numerical aperture
(NA) fiber optic cable for sample excitation located in the center of
six 200-mm, 0.22 NA fibers for collection. Long-pass filters were used
to block emission below 1050 nm. The light was focused into a 303-
mm focal length Czerny-Turner spectrograph (Shamrock 303i, Andor)
with the slit width set at 410 mm. Light was dispersed by a 85 g/mm
grating with blaze wavelength of 1350 nm and collected with an iDus
InGaAs camera (Andor).
Live animal NIR images were obtained using a preclinical NIR im-
aging apparatus consisting of a two-dimensional InGaAs array and two
2-W 730-nm lasers (Photon etc.). The mouse was anesthetized with 1 to
3% isoflurane administered via nose cone during imaging. A 1100-nm
long-pass filter was placed into the emission path to reduce autofluor-
escence. The background-subtracted NIR fluorescence image was
overlaid on an image of the mouse taken under ambient visible light.
In vitro sensor characterization
Absorbance spectra of the Ab-DNA-SWCNT complex were obtained
with a UV/Vis/NIR spectrophotometer, as described above. PL plots
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Williams et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaaq1090
18 April 2018
7 of 11
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 and individualspectra were obtained from the antibody-conjugated and
unconjugated nanotubes using a home-built microscopy apparatus, as
described above. PL plots were obtained from the antibody-conjugated
sensor and unconjugated control to determine the effect on each nano-
tube chirality of antibody conjugation. Individual spectra were obtained
from samples using the 730-nm laser.
To test sensor response to HE4, the Ab-DNA-SWCNT complex was
first incubated on ice with a 50X BSA/SWCNT ratio to passivate the
nanotube surface (31). The passivated sensor complex was added to a
96-well plate at a nanotube concentration of 0.25 mg/liter in a 100-ml
total volume of PBS and 10% FBS (Gibco). Recombinant human HE4
(Glu31-Phe124, RayBiotech) was added to the sensor complex in sep-
arate wells at concentrations of 0 nM (baseline control), 1 pM, 10 pM,
100 pM, 1 nM, 10 nM, 50 nM, 100 nM, 250 nM, and 500 nM. Data were
taken for up to 2 hours in 5-min increments. Kinetic response
experiments were performed by introducing 500 nM HE4 to the sensor
and measuring the emission via NIR spectroscopy every 3 s up to 60 min.
To assess sensor response in simulated in vivo conditions, we incubated
the sensor in 95% FBS at 37°C for 7 days. Aliquots were removed and
interrogated with 50 nM HE4 at 1 hour, 1 day, 3 days, and 7 days via NIR
spectroscopy. All experiments were performed in triplicate.
To test sensor specificity, we first incubated the Ab-DNA-SWCNT
complex with BSA on ice as above. Passivated sensor complexes were
addedto a96-wellplate at ananotube concentration of 0.25 mg/liter in a
100-ml total volume of PBS and 10% FBS. In triplicate, the following
were added into wells: 500 nM recombinant human HE4, 500 nM re-
combinant human uPA [a metastatic cancer biomarker (RayBiotech)],
500 nM native human CA-125 of cellular origin (Cell Sciences), 500 nM
BSA (Sigma-Aldrich), or an additional 83% (for a total of 93%) FBS. To
ensure specificity of the sensor construct, 500 nM recombinant human
HE4 was added to DNA-SWCNT complexes without antibody, as de-
scribed above. Experiments were performed with the same time points
as above.
Ex vivo sensor characterization
The nonpassivated Ab-DNA-SWCNT sensor complex (10 ml) was
added to a collagen-coated MatTek (Ashland, MA) glass-bottom dish
for 30 s and removed, allowing the complexes to be deposited on the sur-
face. Then, 90 ml of 1X PBS was added to the dish. A single-broadband
NIRfluorescenceimagewasobtainedinthe 900-to-1400-nmrangeusing
the hyperspectral microscope described above (34) under a laser excita-
tion of 730 nm. A continuous stack of emission wavelength–defined
images (hyperspectral cube) was acquired with the volume Bragg grat-
ing in place, moving in 4-nm steps between 1150 and 1250 nm. Then,
10 ml (final concentration of 10 nM) of recombinant HE4 was added to
the PBS for 10 min before a second cube was acquired. Spectra from 50
to 100 individual nanotubes were processed as described above, and the
mean emission wavelength was calculated. A Student’s t test was used to
determine significance between the pre-HE4 and post-HE4 addition po-
pulations. A separate experiment was performed for an equal concentra-
tion of BSA to test specificity of the response of the sensor in this context.
The immobilized Ab-DNA-SWCNT complexes were interrogated
with 10 ml of patient samples. Fluids from three separate patients with
each condition were used: benign serum, HGSC serum, benign perito-
neal fluid, and HGSC ascites. Each sample was obtained as previously
described (15, 16) under the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
(MSKCC) Institutional Review Board–approved protocols, and in-
formed consent was obtained. A Student’s t test was performed to com-
pare sensor shift for benign samples and HGSC samples. All patient
samples (except one benign peritoneal fluid due to minimal volume ob-
tained) were analyzed by ELISA to quantify HE4 (R&D Systems).
Implantable device development
The Ab-DNA-SWCNT sensor complex was passivated by incubation
on ice with BSA in a 50X BSA/SWCNT ratio for 30 min. FBS was then
added to reach a 10% concentration. A semipermeable 500-kDa
MWCO PVDF KrosFlo dialysis membrane (Spectrum Labs) ~2 mm
in diameter was cut 2 to 3 cm long. A volume of 15 to 20 ml of SWCNTs
(4 mg/liter; or 60 to 80 ng of the complex) was injected into the capillary.
Both ends of the membrane were heat-sealed, leaving a ~2-mm flap on
each side.
In vitro characterization of implantable device
The optical response of the Ab-DNA-SWCNT complex within the
capillary device was tested by immersing the membrane in 1 ml of
1X PBS and adding 100 nM recombinant HE4 to the solution. NIR
emission of the nanotubes inside the membrane was obtained using
the home-built microscopy setup, as described above. Spectra were
obtained before HE4 addition and every 30 min thereafter. Background
subtractions were performed with a blank membrane containing no
nanotubes. Fluorescence measurements were taken in triplicate.
Exogenous HE4 detection in vivo
All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee at MSKCC. Animal numbers were chosen to en-
sure repeatability while minimizing animal use. To test in vivo sensor
functionality, nine healthy, 4- to 8-week-old female athymic nude mice
(Envigo Hsd:Athymic Nude-Foxn1nu) were used to implant the mem-
brane into the peritoneal cavity. Separately, one mouse was implanted
with the sensor to monitor its long-term stability and fluorescence.
Measurements from this mouse were performed at 60 min and 38 days
after implantation. Before implantation, NIR fluorescence spectra were
acquired from the implant using the fiber optic probe spectroscopy
apparatus described above. Surgical implantation and fluorescence
spectroscopy were performed under 1 to 3% isoflurane anesthesia, ad-
ministered via a nose cone. Two ~2-mm incisions were made in the skin
and below the parietal peritoneum: one ~5 mm distal to the xiphoid
process and one ~2 cm distally of the first incision (fig. S3). The mem-
brane was inserted through the proximal incision through to the distal
incision. The flaps at each end of the device were sutured to the parietal
peritoneum using 5-0 Monocryl (poliglecaprone 25) absorbable sutures
(Ethicon). The skin was clipped twice at each incision with 9-mm stain-
less steel AutoClips to close the incisions (Mikron Precision Inc.). Be-
tween time points, mice were alert and ambulatory, exhibiting no visible
signs of pain or distress. NIR fluorescence spectra from the sensor de-
vice were acquired using the probe-based system by pointing the fiber
probe at the abdomen of the anesthetized mouse from a distance of 1 to
2 cm. Mice were then injected with 10 pmol of HE4 or BSA in 100 ml of
PBS, orthey were left uninjected asa second control (n = 3). NIR spectra
were then acquired 15 and 60 min following injection. Spectra were also
collected at 2, 4, and 24 hours after injection. Following 24 hours, mice
weresacrificed, andthe implantable deviceswere removed. Spectrawere
again acquired from the device ex vivo. Spectra were processed as de-
scribed above. The change in emission center wavelength of the implant
within a mouse was obtained by subtracting the average center
wavelength of the control uninjected mice at the appropriate time point
(to control for variability in the sensor due to the in vivo environment)
and then the initial preimplant center wavelength for the given mouse
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Williams et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaaq1090
18 April 2018
8 of 11
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 (to control for variability in initial sensor emission) from the emission
center wavelength measured at each time point in vivo.
Murine models
Luciferized cell lines OVCAR-3 [cultured in RPMI-1640 + 20% FBS +
insulin(0.01mg/ml;HumulinR,Lilly)+Primocin(100mg/ml;InvivoGen)],
SK-OV-3 (cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium low glucose +
10% FBS + Primocin; American Type Culture Collection), OVCAR-5,
and OVCAR-8 (both cultured in RPMI-1640 + 1 mM sodium pyruvate +
10% FBS + Primocin) were grown at 37°C under humid conditions. All
culture reagents were from Gibco unless otherwise noted. Cells were
passaged at 80 to 90% confluency approximately once weekly, and
media was changed every 2 to 3 days. ELISA was performed to deter-
mine the presence of HE4 in conditioned culture media collected at
~90% confluency (R&D Systems). Upon reaching near confluency, cells
were trypsinized for 10 min at 37°C, complete media was added to de-
activate trypsin, cells were centrifuged at 150g for 7 min at 4°C, and pel-
lets were resuspended in cold 1X PBS. Cells were counted using a Tali
image-based cytometer (Invitrogen). Approximately 10 million cells in
a 100-ml volume were injected intraperitoneally into four to eight female
athymic nude mice (n = 4) (Envigo). Mice were housed under standard
conditions, and whole-animal bioluminescence imaging was performed
twice weekly to monitor cell proliferation using the IVIS Spectrum In
Vivo Imaging System (Perkin Elmer; Fig. 4C) using standard firefly lu-
ciferase bioluminescence settings. Approximately 4 to 5 weeks following
injection, maximalbioluminescence signalwasobtained,andmost mice
exhibited distended, fluid-filled abdomens typical of peritoneal ascites
with some solid tumor nodules.
In vivo studies with implantable sensor device
Before implantation, NIR spectra were acquired from the sensor de-
vices using the probe-based spectroscopy system. Sensor devices were
implanted into each mouse, as described above, with care taken to
minimize loss of ascitic fluid. Spectra were obtained at 15 min, 1 hour,
2 hours, 4 hours, and 24 hours following implantation. After 24 hours,
mice were sacrificed, the implant devices were removed, and spectra of
the devices were acquired. The change in emission center wavelength
of the implant within a mouse at a given time point was obtained by
subtracting the average center wavelength of control uninjected mice
at the appropriate time point (to control for variability in the sensor
due to the in vivo environment), and then, the initial preimplant center
wavelength for the given mouse (to control for variability in initial sensor
emission) from the emission center wavelength was measured at each
time point in vivo. Upon sacrificing the mice, ascitic fluid was removed
directly from the peritoneal cavity of the mice with a needle and syringe
or washed with up to 2 ml of 1X PBS and removed. Solid tumor nodules
were removed for histological analysis.
An ELISA was performed using an HE4 kit (R&D Systems) to quan-
tify HE4 mouse in ascites. Tumor tissues were fixed in 4% para-
formaldehyde (PFA), dehydrated, and paraffin-embedded before 5-
mm sections were placed on glass slides. The paraffin was removed
and slides were stained with H&E for basic histological analysis.
Statistical analysis and spectral fitting
Zeta potential, surface-based, in vitro confirmation of implantable
device sensitivity to HE4, and in vivo protein injection experiments
were analyzed by two-sided t tests. In vitro specificity experiments were
analyzed by a two-sided one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post hoc
analysis to compare to a single control. In vivo orthotopic cancer model
experimentswereanalyzedbytwo-sidedone-wayANOVAwithTukey’s
post hoc analysis to compare all groups. Reported P values were assigned
***P < 0.001, **P < 0.01, and *P < 0.05, and exact P values are re-
ported in captions.
Background subtraction of in vitro solution-based data was con-
ducted using a well in the same plate with identical buffer conditions
to the samples. Datawere processedwithcustomMATLAB code,which
applied spectral corrections as noted above for wavelength-dependent
features in emission intensity, background subtraction, and data fitting
of nanotube emission peaks with Lorentzian functions.
Background subtraction for surface-based hyperspectral microscopy
was performed by acquiring hyperspectral cubes from an identical glass
surface with identical buffer conditions to the samples. Data were pro-
cessed with custom MATLAB code, which applied spectral corrections
for nonuniformity in the camera’s light gathering efficiency, back-
ground subtraction, and data fitting of emission peaks of individual
nanotube species to Lorentzian functions. Binned center wavelengths of
all analyzed single nanotubes (n = 82 to 100 as noted in Results) were
graphed as histograms and fit with Lorentzian functions to obtain total
population center wavelengths.
In vivo spectral data were baseline-subtracted with a spline-
interpolation method via OriginPro 9 software (OriginLab) instead of
blank spectra due to nonuniformity in background spectra dependent
on location on the mouse and the distance from the probe (fig. S4).
Data were processed with custom MATLAB code, which applied
spectral corrections for nonlinearity of the InGaAs detector re-
sponse and data fitting to Lorentzian functions to obtain emission
center wavelengths.
In solution-based experiments, r2 fit values were not less than 0.98.
In surface-based experiments, r2 fit values were used only if greater
than 0.6.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/4/4/eaaq1090/DC1
Supplementary Text
fig. S1. Characterization of sensor function in vitro.
fig. S2. Single-sensor HE4 response characterization.
fig. S3. Images taken during the procedure to surgically implant the sensor devices.
fig. S4. Baseline subtraction procedure of a spectrum obtained from the implanted sensor
device in vivo (E3 = one thousand units).
fig. S5. Raw and fitted sensor data from all mice in the exogenous protein injection
experiment.
fig. S6. H&E stain of tumor nodules in tissue resected from each murine model of ovarian
cancer.
fig. S7. Sensor implant emission data from all murine orthotopic ovarian cancer models.
fig. S8. In vivo sensor stability.
table S1. Change in the nanotube emission wavelength of the DNA-SWCNT following
conjugation of the anti-HE4 antibody to the DNA.
table S2. Concentration of HE4 in conditioned cell culture media and ascites from
representative mouse ascites samples as determined by ELISA of SK-OV-3, OVCAR-8, OVCAR-3,
and OVCAR-5 models in vitro and in vivo.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. International Agency for Research on Cancer, Global Cancer Statistics; http://globocan.
iarc.fr/Pages/fact_sheets_population.aspx [accessed 2 July 2016].
2. G. C. Jayson, E. C. Kohn, H. C. Kitchener, J. A. Ledermann, Ovarian cancer. Lancet 384,
1376–1388 (2014).
3. R. L. Siegel, K. D. Miller, A. Jemal, Cancer statistics, 2016. CA Cancer J. Clin. 66, 7 (2016).
4. National Cancer Institute, Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program;
https://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/all.html [accessed 2 July 2016].
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Williams et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaaq1090
18 April 2018
9 of 11
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 5. S. Vaughan, J. I. Coward, R. C. Bast Jr., A. Berchuck, J. S. Berek, J. D. Brenton, G. Coukos,
C. C. Crum, R. Drapkin, D. Etemadmoghadam, M. Friedlander, H. Gabra, S. B. Kaye,
C. J. Lord, E. Lengyel, D. A. Levine, I. A. McNeish, U. Menon, G. B. Mills, K. P. Nephew,
A. M. Oza, A. K. Sood, E. A. Stronach, H. Walczak, D. D. Bowtell, F. R. Balkwill, Rethinking
ovarian cancer: Recommendations for improving outcomes. Nat. Rev. Cancer 11,
719–725 (2011).
6. C. Maringe, S. Walters, J. Butler, M. P. Coleman, N. Hacker, L. Hanna, B. J. Mosgaard,
A. Nordin, B. Rosen, G. Engholm, M. L. Gjerstorff, J. Hatcher, T. B. Johannesen,
C. E. McGahan, D. Meechan, R. Middleton, E. Tracey, D. Turner, M. A. Richards, B. Rachet
ICBP Module 1 Working Group, Stage at diagnosis and ovarian cancer survival:
Evidence from the International Cancer Benchmarking Partnership. Gynecol. Oncol.
127, 75–82 (2012).
7. V. A. Moyer; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, Screening for ovarian cancer: U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force reaffirmation recommendation statement. Ann. Intern. Med.
157, 900–904 (2012).
8.
S. S. Buys, E. Partridge, A. Black, C. C. Johnson, L. Lamerato, C. Isaacs, D. J. Reding,
R. T. Greenlee, L. A. Yokochi, B. Kessel, E. David Crawford, T. R. Church, G. L. Andriole,
J. L. Weissfeld, M. N. Fouad, D. Chia, B. O’Brien, L. R. Ragard, J. D. Clapp, J. M. Rathmell,
T. L. Riley, P. Hartge, P. F. Pinsky, C. S. Zhu, G. Izmirlian, B. S. Kramer, A. B. Miller, J.-L. Xu,
P. C. Prorok, J. K. Gohagan, C. D. Berg; PLCO Project Team, Effect of screening on
ovarian cancer mortality. JAMA 305, 2295–2303 (2011).
9. B. Zhang, F. F. Cai, X. Y. Zhong, An overview of biomarkers for the ovarian cancer
diagnosis. Eur. J. Obstet. Gynecol. Reprod. Biol. 158, 119–123 (2011).
10. R. G. Moore, E. K. Hill, T. Horan, N. Yano, K. K. Kim, S. MacLaughlan, G. Lambert-Messerlian,
Y. T. D. Tseng, J. F. Padbury, M. C. Miller, T. S. Lange, R. K. Singh, HE4 (WFDC2) gene
overexpression promotes ovarian tumor growth. Sci. Rep. 4, 3574 (2014).
11.
R. Drapkin, H. H. von Horsten, Y. Lin, S. C. Mok, C. P. Crum, W. R. Welch, J. L. Hecht, Human
epididymis protein 4 (HE4) is a secreted glycoprotein that is overexpressed by
serous and endometrioid ovarian carcinomas. Cancer Res. 65, 2162–2169 (2005).
12. I. Hellström, J. Raycraft, M. Hayden-Ledbetter, J. A. Ledbetter, M. Schummer, M. McIntosh,
C. Drescher, N. Urban, K. E. Hellström, The HE4 (WFDC2) protein is a biomarker for
ovarian carcinoma. Cancer Res. 63, 3695–3700 (2003).
13. M. A. Karlsen, N. Sandhu, C. Høgdall, I. J. Christensen, L. Nedergaard, L. Lundvall,
S. A. Engelholm, A. T. Pedersen, D. Hartwell, M. Lydolph, I. A. Laursen, E. V. S. Høgdall,
Evaluation of HE4, CA125, risk of ovarian malignancy algorithm (ROMA) and risk of
malignancy index (RMI) as diagnostic tools of epithelial ovarian cancer in patients with a
pelvic mass. Gynecol. Oncol. 127, 379–383 (2012).
14. V. O. Shender, M. S. Pavlyukov, R. H. Ziganshin, G. P. Arapidi, S. I. Kovalchuk,
N. A. Anikanov, I. A. Altukhov, D. G. Alexeev, I. O. Butenko, A. L. Shavarda,
E. B. Khomyakova, E. Evtushenko, L. A. Ashrafyan, I. B. Antonova, I. N. Kuznetcov,
A. Y. Gorbachev, M. I. Shakhparonov, V. M. Govorun, Proteome–metabolome profiling of
ovarian cancer ascites reveals novel components involved in intercellular
communication. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 13, 3558–3571 (2014).
15. D. A. Levine, U.S. Patent 20,130,078,319 (2013).
16.
C. S. Clair, J. Ducie, Q. Zhou, F. Dao, N. Kauff, D. Spriggs, M. Fleisher, A. Iasonos, D. Levine,
Uterine washing biomarkers as a novel screening tool for high-grade serous
carcinoma. Gynecol. Oncol. 130, e71 (2013).
17. D. Ghosh, A. F. Bagley, Y. J. Na, M. J. Birrer, S. N. Bhatiaand, A. M. Belcher, Deep,
noninvasive imaging and surgical guidance of submillimeter tumors using targeted
M13-stabilized single-walled carbon nanotubes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111,
13948–13953 (2014).
18. I. E. Araci, B. Su, S. R. Quake, Y. Mandel, An implantable microfluidic device for
self-monitoring of intraocular pressure. Nat. Med. 20, 1074–1078 (2014).
19. J. M. Dubach, D. I. Harjes, H. A. Clark, Ion-selective nano-optodes incorporating quantum
dots. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 129, 8418–8419 (2007).
20. X. Zheng, H. Mao, D. Huo, W. Wu, B. Liu, X. Jiang, Successively activatable ultrasensitive
probe for imaging tumour acidity and hypoxia. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 1, 0057 (2017).
21.
M. J. O’Connell, S. M. Bachilo, C. B. Huffman, V. C. Moore, M. S. Strano, E. H. Haroz,
K. L. Rialon, P. J. Boul, W. H. Noon, C. Kittrell, J. Ma, R. H. Hauge, R. Bruce Weisman,
R. E. Smalley, Band gap fluorescence from individual single-walled carbon nanotubes.
Science 297, 593–596 (2002).
22. K. Welsher, S. P. Sherlock, H. Dai, Deep-tissue anatomical imaging of mice using carbon
nanotube fluorophores in the second near-infrared window. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
108, 8943–8948 (2011).
23. D. A. Heller, S. Baik, T. E. Eurell, M. S. Strano, Single‐walled carbon nanotube spectroscopy
in live cells: towards long‐term labels and optical sensors. Adv. Mater. 17, 2793–2799
(2005).
24. D. A. Heller, H. Jin, B. M. Martinez, D. Patel, B. M. Miller, T. K. Yeung, P. V. Jena, C. Höbartner,
T. Ha, S. K. Silverman, M. S. Strano, Multimodal optical sensing and analyte specificity
using single-walled carbon nanotubes. Nat. Nanotechnol. 4, 114–120 (2008).
25. J. Zhang, M. P. Landry, P. W. Barone, J. H. Kim, S. Lin, Z. W. Ulissi, D. Lin, B. Mu,
A. A. Boghossian, A. J. Hilmer, A. Rwei, A. C. Hinckley, S. Kruss, M. A. Shandell, N. Nair,
S. Blake, F. Şen, S. Şen, R. G. Croy, D. Li, K. Yum, J. H. Ahn, H. Jin, D. A. Heller,
J. M. Essigmann, D. Blankschtein, M. S. Strano, Molecular recognition using corona
phase complexes made of synthetic polymers adsorbed on carbon nanotubes.
Nat. Nanotechnol. 8, 959–968 (2013).
26. D. Roxbury, P. V. Jena, Y. Shamay, C. P. Horoszko, D. A. Heller, Cell membrane proteins
modulate the carbon nanotube optical bandgap via surface charge accumulation.
ACS Nano 10, 499–506 (2016).
27. N. M. Iverson, P. W. Barone, M. Shandell, L. J. Trudel, S. Sen, F. Sen, V. Ivanov, E. Atolia,
E. Farias, T. P. McNicholas, N. Reuel, N. M. A. Parry, G. N. Wogan, M. S. Strano, In vivo
biosensing via tissue-localizable near-infrared-fluorescent single-walled carbon
nanotubes. Nat. Nanotechnol. 8, 873–880 (2013).
28. J. D. Harvey, P. V. Jena, H. A. Baker, G. H. Zerze, R. M. Williams, T. V. Galassi, D. Roxbury,
J. Mittal, D. A. Heller, A carbon nanotube reporter of microRNA hybridization events in
vivo. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 1, 0041 (2017).
29. S. Barua, J.-W. Yoo, P. Kolhar, A. Wakankar, Y. R. Gokarn, S. Mitragotri, Particle shape
enhances specificity of antibody-displaying nanoparticles. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110,
3270–3275 (2013).
30.
B. A. Larsen, P. Deria, J. M. Holt, I. N. Stanton, M. J. Heben, M. J. Therien, J. L. Blackburn,
Effect of solvent polarity and electrophilicity on quantum yields and solvatochromic
shifts of single-walled carbon nanotube photoluminescence. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134,
12485–12491 (2012).
31. B. Sweryda-Krawiec, H. Devaraj, G. Jacob, J. J. Hickman, A new interpretation of serum
albumin surface passivation. Langmuir 20, 2054–2056 (2004).
32. J. Budhathoki-Uprety, P. V. Jena, D. Roxbury, D. A. Heller, Helical polycarbodiimide
cloaking of carbon nanotubes enables inter-nanotube exciton energy transfer
modulation. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136, 15545–15550 (2014).
33. K. Huhtinen, P. Suvitie, J. Hiissa, J. Junnila, J. Huvila, H. Kujari, M. Setälä, P. Härkki,
J. Jalkanen, J. Fraser, J. Mäkinen, A. Auranen, M. Poutanen, A. Perheentupa, Serum HE4
concentration differentiates malignant ovarian tumours from ovarian endometriotic
cysts. Br. J. Cancer 100, 1315–1319 (2009).
34.
D. Roxbury, P. V. Jena, R. M. Williams, B. Enyedi, P. Niethammer, S. Marcet, M. Verhaegen,
S. Blais-Ouellette, D. A. Heller, Hyperspectral microscopy of near-infrared fluorescence
enables 17-chirality carbon nanotube imaging. Sci. Rep. 5, 14167 (2015).
35. T. V. Galassi, P. V. Jena, D. Roxbury, D. A. Heller, Single nanotube spectral imaging to
determine molar concentrations of isolated carbon nanotube species. Anal. Chem. 89,
1073–1077 (2017).
36. P. V. Jena, D. Roxbury, T. V. Galassi, L. Akkari, C. P. Horoszko, D. B. Iaea,
J. Budhathoki-Uprety, N. Pipalia, A. S. Haka, J. D. Harvey, J. Mittal, F. R. Maxfield, J. A. Joyce,
D. A. Heller, A carbon nanotube optical reporter maps endolysosomal lipid flux.
ACS Nano 11, 10689–10703 (2017).
37. H. Zheng, Y. Gao, Serum HE4 as a useful biomarker in discriminating ovarian cancer from
benign pelvic disease. Int. J. Gynecol. Cancer 22, 1000–1005 (2012).
38. A. Chudecka-Głaz, A. Cymbaluk-Płoska, J. Menkiszak, A. Sompolska-Rzechuła, E. Byra,
I. Rzepka-Górska, HE4 tumor marker concentration in neoplastic peritoneal effusion and
in peritoneal fluid associated with benign gynecological diseases. J. Ovarian Res. 7, 22
(2014).
39. M. Zheng, A. Jagota, E. D. Semke, B. A. Diner, R. S. Mclean, S. R. Lustig, R. E. Richardson,
N. G. Tassi, DNA-assisted dispersion and separation of carbon nanotubes.
Nat. Mater. 2, 338–342 (2003).
40. S. Domcke, R. Sinha, D. A. Levine, C. Sander, N. Schultz, Evaluating cell lines as tumour
models by comparison of genomic profiles. Nat. Commun. 4, 2126 (2013).
41. X. Michalet, F. F. Pinaud, L. A. Bentolila, J. M. Tsay, S. Doose, J. J. Li, G. Sundaresan,
A. M. Wu, S. S. Gambhir, S. Weiss, Quantum dots for live cells, in vivo imaging, and
diagnostics. Science 307, 538–544 (2005).
42. X. Yu, B. Munge, V. Patel, G. Jensen, A. Bhirde, J. D. Gong, S. N. Kim, J. Gillespie,
J. S. Gutkind, F. Papadimitrakopoulos, J. F. Rusling, Carbon nanotube amplification
strategies for highly sensitive immunodetection of cancer biomarkers. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
128, 11199–11205 (2006).
43. J. Zhang, S. Kruss, A. J. Hilmer, S. Shimizu, Z. Schmois, F. De La Cruz, P. W. Barone,
N. F. Reuel, D. A. Heller, M. S. Strano, A rapid, direct, quantitative, and label‐free detector
of cardiac biomarker troponin T using near‐infrared fluorescent single‐walled carbon
nanotube sensors. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 3, 412–423 (2014).
44. X. Tu, S. Manohar, A. Jagota, M. Zheng, DNA sequence motifs for structure-specific
recognition and separation of carbon nanotubes. Nature 460, 250–253 (2009).
45. C. R. Behrens, B. Liu, in Mabs (Landes Bioscience, 2013), vol. 6, pp. 46–53.
46. R. M. Williams, L. J. Sooter, In vitro selection of cancer cell-specific molecular recognition
elements from amino acid libraries. J. Immunol. Res. 2015, 186586 (2015).
47. R. M. Williams, C. J. Hajiran, S. Nayeem, L. J. Sooter, Identification of an antibody fragment
specific for androgen-dependent prostate cancer cells. BMC Biotechnol. 14, 81 (2014).
48. R. Yang, Z. Tang, J. Yan, H. Kang, Y. Kim, Z. Zhu, W. Tan, Noncovalent assembly of carbon
nanotubes and single-stranded DNA: an effective sensing platform for probing
biomolecular interactions. Anal. Chem. 80, 7408–7413 (2008).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Williams et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaaq1090
18 April 2018
10 of 11
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 49. R. M. Williams, S. Nayeem, B. D. Dolash, L. J. Sooter, The effect of DNA-dispersed
single-walled carbon nanotubes on the polymerase chain reaction. PLOS ONE 9, e94117
(2014).
50. J. J. Casciari, M. G. Hollingshead, M. C. Alley, J. G. Mayo, L. Malspeis, S. Miyauchi,
M. R. Grever, J. N. Weinstein, Growth and chemotherapeutic response of cells in a
hollow-fiber in vitro solid tumor model. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 86, 1846–1852 (1994).
51. M. Suggitt, D. J. Swaine, G. R. Pettit, M. C. Bibby, Characterization of the hollow fiber
assay for the determination of microtubule disruption in vivo. Clin. Cancer Res. 10,
6677–6685 (2004).
52. N. Wisniewski, M. Reichert, Methods for reducing biosensor membrane biofouling.
Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 18, 197–219 (2000).
53. S. Alidori, D. L. J. Thorek, B. J. Beattie, D. Ulmert, B. Aristega Almeida, S. Monette,
D. A. Scheinberg, M. R. McDevitt, Carbon nanotubes exhibit fibrillar pharmacology in
primates. PLOS ONE 12, e0183902 (2017).
54. N. Goldstuck, T. Hasskamp, S. Jandi, A. Pett, D. Wildemeersch, Geometric foundations
of intrauterine device complications and implications for IUD users–importance of
the iud size to maximize tolerability and prevent early discontinuation. J. Reprod.
Med. Endocrinol. 12, 255–259 (2016).
55. T. S. Frank, S. A. Manley, O. I. Olopade, S. Cummings, J. E. Garber, B. Bernhardt, K. Antman,
D. Russo, M. E. Wood, L. Mullineau, C. Isaacs, B. Peshkin, S. Buys, V. Venne, P. T. Rowley,
S. Loader, K. Offit, M. Robson, H. Hampel, D. Brener, E. P. Winer, S. Clark, B. Weber,
L. C. Strong, A. Thomas, Sequence analysis of BRCA1 and BRCA2: Correlation of mutations
with family history and ovarian cancer risk. J. Clin. Oncol. 16, 2417–2425 (1998).
56. T. Riman, I. Persson, S. Nilsson, Hormonal aspects of epithelial ovarian cancer: Review of
epidemiological evidence. Clin. Endocrinol. 49, 695–707 (1998).
57. R. Bell, M. Petticrew, T. Sheldon, The performance of screening tests for ovarian cancer:
Results of a systematic review. BJOG 105, 1136–1147 (1998).
58. D. K. Armstrong, Relapsed ovarian cancer: Challenges and management strategies for a
chronic disease. Oncologist 7, 20–28 (2002).
59. T. Van Gorp, I. Cadron, E. Despierre, A. Daemen, K. Leunen, F. Amant, D. Timmerman,
B. De Moor, I. Vergote, HE4 and CA125 as a diagnostic test in ovarian cancer:
prospective validation of the risk of ovarian malignancy algorithm. Br. J. Cancer 104,
863–870 (2011).
60. G. Zheng, F. Patolsky, Y. Cui, W. U. Wang, C. M. Lieber, Multiplexed electrical detection of
cancer markers with nanowire sensor arrays. Nat. Biotechnol. 23, 1294–1301 (2005).
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank D. Spriggs for cell lines; P. Jena and
D. Roxbury for instrument automation and MATLAB code and helpful discussions;
J. Budhathoki-Uprety, Y. Shamay, R. Frederiksen, J. Kubala, L. Forbes, D. Deep, and S. Albanese
for assistance with the preliminary sensor development and helpful discussions; and
R. Drapkin for helpful discussions. We would also like to acknowledge the Molecular Cytology
Core Facility and the Small Animal Imaging Core Facility at MSKCC. Funding: This work
was supported by the NIH New Innovator Award (DP2-HD075698), the NIH Cancer Center
Support Grant (P30 CA008748), the Honorable Tina Brozman Foundation for Ovarian
Cancer Research, the Louis V. Gerstner Jr. Young Investigator’s Fund, the Frank A. Howard
Scholars Program, the Alan and Sandra Gerry Metastasis Research Initiative, the Center for
Molecular Imaging and Nanotechnology at MSKCC, Cycle for Survival, the Anna Fuller
Fund, Mr. William H. Goodwin and Mrs. Alice Goodwin and the Commonwealth Foundation for
Cancer Research, the Imaging and Radiation Sciences Program, and the Experimental
Therapeutics Center at MSKCC. R.M.W. was supported by the Ovarian Cancer Research
Fund (Ann Schreiber Mentored Investigator Award 370463) and the American Heart
Association Postdoctoral Fellowship (17POST33650043). T.V.G. was supported by the Frank
Lappin Horsfall Jr. Fellowship. M.S. was supported by the Hunter R. Rawlings III Cornell
Presidential Research Scholars program and the Gerstner Sloan Kettering Summer
Undergraduate Research Program. D.A.L. is supported in part by grants from the
U.S. Department of Defense (W81XWH-11-2-0230 and W81XWH-15-1-0429). Author
contributions: R.M.W., D.A.L., and D.A.H. conceived and wrote the manuscript. R.M.W., C.L., T.V.
G., J.D.H., R.L., M.S., M.A.D., and J.S. performed the experiments and data analysis. N.O., F.D.,
and D.A.L. obtained and processed the patient samples. All authors provided input and
feedback for manuscript preparation. Competing interests: D.A.L. is an inventor on a
patent application related to this work (application no. PCT/US2012/056776, filed on
22 September 2012). D.A.H. and R.M.W. are inventors on another patent application
related to this work applied for by MSKCC (application no. PCT/US2017/026563, filed
on 7 April 2017). The other authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Data and materials availability: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper
are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. Additional data related to this
paper may be requested from the authors.
Submitted 2 October 2017
Accepted 6 March 2018
Published 18 April 2018
10.1126/sciadv.aaq1090
Citation: R. M. Williams, C. Lee, T. V. Galassi, J. D. Harvey, R. Leicher, M. Sirenko, M. A. Dorso,
J. Shah, N. Olvera, F. Dao, D. A. Levine, D. A. Heller, Noninvasive ovarian cancer biomarker
detection via an optical nanosensor implant. Sci. Adv. 4, eaaq1090 (2018).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Williams et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaaq1090
18 April 2018
11 of 11
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Noninvasive ovarian cancer biomarker detection via an optical nanosensor implant
Dorso, Janki Shah, Narciso Olvera, Fanny Dao, Douglas A. Levine and Daniel A. Heller
Ryan M. Williams, Christopher Lee, Thomas V. Galassi, Jackson D. Harvey, Rachel Leicher, Maria Sirenko, Madeline A.
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aaq1090
 (4), eaaq1090.
4
Sci Adv 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/4/4/eaaq1090
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2018/04/16/4.4.eaaq1090.DC1
REFERENCES
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/4/4/eaaq1090#BIBL
This article cites 56 articles, 12 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
registered trademark of AAAS.
is a
Science Advances 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
(ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New
Science Advances 
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
