 An Exploratory Human Laboratory Experiment Evaluating 
Vaporized Cannabis in the Treatment of Neuropathic Pain from 
Spinal Cord Injury and Disease
Barth Wilsey, MDa,b [Associate Physician], Thomas D. Marcotte, PhDc [Associate 
Professor], Reena Deutsch, PhDc [Statistician], Holly Zhao, MD, PhDa,b [Associate 
Professor], Hannah Prasada,b [Research Associate], and Amy Phana,b [Research 
Associate]
Barth Wilsey: blwilsey@ucdavis.edu; Thomas D. Marcotte: tmarcotte@ucsd.edu; Reena Deutsch: redeutsch@ucsd.edu; 
Holly Zhao: holly.zhao@ucdmc.ucdavis.edu; Hannah Prasad: hannahprasad89@gmail.com; Amy Phan: 
atphan07@gmail.com
aVA Northern California Health Care System Sacramento VA Medical Center, 10535 Hospital 
Way, Mather, CA 95655 USA, 916-843-7000 | 800-382-8387
bDepartment of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, University of California, Davis Medical 
Center, Lawrence J. Ellison Ambulatory Care Center, 4860 Y Street, Sacramento, CA 95817 USA
cDepartment of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, 220 Dickinson Street, Suite B, 
MC8231, San Diego, CA 92103-8231 USA
Abstract
Using eight hour human laboratory experiments, we evaluated the analgesic efficacy of vaporized 
cannabis in patients with neuropathic pain related to injury or disease of the spinal cord, the 
majority of whom were experiencing pain despite traditional treatment. After obtaining baseline 
data, 42 participants underwent a standardized procedure for inhaling 4 puffs of vaporized 
cannabis containing either placebo, 2.9%, or 6.7% delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on three separate 
occasions. A second dosing occurred 3 hours later; participants chose to inhale 4 to 8 puffs. This 
flexible dosing was utilized to attempt to reduce the placebo effect. Using an 11-point numerical 
pain intensity rating scale as the primary outcome, a mixed effects linear regression model 
demonstrated a significant analgesic response for vaporized cannabis. When subjective and 
psychoactive side effects (e.g., good drug effect, feeling high, etc.) were added as covariates to the 
model, the reduction in pain intensity remained significant above and beyond any effect of these 
Corresponding Author’s Current Address: Barth Wilsey MD, University of California Center for Medicinal Cannabis, Research, 
Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, 220 Dickinson Street, Suite B, San Diego, CA 92103-8231 USA, 
office (619) 543-5786, cell (916) 402-2270, bwilsey@ucsd.edu. 
Disclosures
No conflicts of interest declared. The research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institute of Drug Abuse 
(R01DA030424). The project described was also supported by the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National 
Institutes of Health, through grant number UL1 TR000002. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not 
necessarily represent the official views of the NIH, Department of Veterans Affairs or US Government. This material is the result of 
work supported with resources and the use of facilities at the Sacramento VA Medical Center.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Published in final edited form as:
J Pain. 2016 September ; 17(9): 982–1000. doi:10.1016/j.jpain.2016.05.010.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 measures (all p<0.0004). Psychoactive and subjective effects were dose dependent. Measurement 
of neuropsychological performance proved challenging because of various disabilities in the 
population studied. As the two active doses did not significantly differ from each other in terms of 
analgesic potency, the lower dose appears to offer the best risk-benefit ratio in patients with 
neuropathic pain associated with injury or disease of the spinal cord.
Keywords
neuropathic pain; analgesia; cannabis; clinical trial; neuropsychological testing
INTRODUCTION
The mechanisms involved in neuropathic pain arising from spinal cord pathology are 
numerous 37. Hypothetically, injury to spinal cord structures may alter sensory processing 
generating a central pain state. There may be decreased inhibition of neuronal activity 
through deafferentation of interneurons and/or sensitization such that sensory input is 
amplified and sustained via intact circuitry 89. Whatever the etiology, new approaches to 
treatment are constantly being sought. In 2012, pregabulin was approved by the Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of neuropathic pain related to spinal cord 
central pain. The number needed to treat (NNT) for 50% pain relief (7.1 (95% confidence 
interval 3.9–37)) was higher than in most peripheral neuropathic pain studies 38. Thus, 
although pregabulin has been approved by the FDA and should be considered a first-line 
therapy, there still exists an unmet need to improve pain relief in spinal cord central pain 37.
Neuropathic pain of spinal cord origin is a major cause of suffering adding to the physical, 
emotional, and societal impact of loss or impairment in motor movement, bowel and bladder 
function, digestion, and breathing. In one survey, respondents specified the extent of their 
dissatisfaction with analgesic medications 19. While opioids produced the greatest degree of 
pain relief, these medications were often discontinued because of side effects, primarily 
constipation. Although 44 of 117 (38%) respondents tried gabapentin, only 20 (17%) 
continued to use it, and their pain relief was only moderate. A majority of respondents 
eventually tried several alternative treatments. Interestingly, maximum relief was provided 
by massage or cannabis.
In general, current therapeutic strategies to treat neuropathic pain aim to reduce the 
excitability of neurons by increasing activity of ion channels (e.g., gabapentin, pregabalin, 
carbamazepine, lidocaine and capsaicin) or by modulating endogenous descending 
inhibitory tracts (e.g., tricyclic antidepressants, duloxetine and opioids) 92. In the last 
decade, another therapeutic option has been recognized involving non-neuronal cells (e.g., 
spinal microglia and astrocytes) 92. Inflammatory mediators released by activated glial cells 
include tumor necrosis factor-a and interleukin-1b; these cytokines are believed to trigger 
neuropathic pain by acting upon spinal cord dorsal horn neurons 98. Modulation of glial cell 
activation and blockade of signaling pathways between neuronal and non-neuronal cells 
offers new opportunities for more effective treatment of neuropathic pain.
Wilsey et al.
Page 2
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Given the need for therapeutic advancement, it is surprising that few clinical studies have 
examined drugs altering glial function 92. One such class of medications are the 
cannabinoids 97, 98, 110. Several clinical studies involving administration of cannabis have 
been indicative of an analgesic effect in neuropathic pain 2, 33, 104, 105, 107, 112, 113. A recent 
meta-analysis supported the use of cannabinoids for the treatment of chronic pain by 
demonstrating that the average number of patients who reported a reduction in pain of at 
least 30% was greater with cannabinoids than with placebo. (OR, 1.41 [95% CI, 0.99–
2.00]) 109. These findings are confirmatory of animal research that demonstrated a potent 
analgesic effect of cannabinoids 60, 91, 115.
The purpose of the present study was to compare the analgesic efficacy of different strengths 
of vaporized cannabis in participants with pathology of the spinal cord related to traumatic 
injury or disease. Secondary outcomes included neuropsychological and psychomimetic 
effects. It was hypothesized that pain relief could be achieved using whole plant cannabis 
while side-effects would prove to be tolerable.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Regulatory Approvals
The study was registered using Clinical Trials.gov identifier NCT01555983. The Human 
Subjects Institutional Review Boards at the UC Davis Medical Center and the Veterans 
Affairs of Northern California Health Care System approved the protocol. Mandated federal 
reviews for investigation of cannabis included submissions to the Drug Enforcement 
Administration, the Food and Drug Administration and the National Institute of Drug 
Abuse 1. The FDA approval process included an Investigational New Drug Application (IND 
number assigned: 102,847). The Research Advisory Panel of California also evaluated and 
approved the protocol.
Participants
Data in the present study was obtained from two populations; individuals with injury and 
disease of the spinal cord (see Table 1). Such a pooling of conditions has been done by other 
investigators looking at diverse neuropathic pain conditions 44, 90, 107, 112, 113. Studying 
closely related painful neuropathic conditions is valid because their clinical course are 
considered related and receive similar treatment recommendations 7, 83.
Participants were enrolled via recruitment from the UC Davis Medical Center Spinal Cord 
Injury Clinic, IRB-approved recruitment letters and newspaper advertisements. Screening 
for inclusion criteria (e.g., age > 18 and ≤ 70, pain intensity ≥ 4/10) was conducted via 
telephone. The 11-point pain intensity numerical rating scale, anchored at 0 equals no pain 
and 10 equals worst possible pain, was selected because of the ability to administer this 
instrument by telephone during the screening process 30. A level of ≥ 4/10 was chosen as 
this is a commonly utilized cut-off point in randomized clinical trials involving neuropathic 
pain 82. Qualified candidates were subsequently consented, interviewed and examined by the 
principal investigator who administered the Leeds Assessment of Neuropathic Symptoms 
and Signs (LANSS), a pain scale based on analysis of sensory description and bedside 
Wilsey et al.
Page 3
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 examination of sensory dysfunction 15, 65. A threshold of ≥12 on this instrument was utilized 
to substantiate neuropathic pain.
Because there is evidence that cannabis may exacerbate bipolar depression 73, 75 or increase 
suicide risk in patients with schizophrenia 50, candidates with these diagnoses were 
excluded. The Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9), a nine-item depression scale based 
directly on the diagnostic criteria for major depressive disorder in the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual Fourth Edition (DSM-IV) 72, was administered. As cannabis use may on 
occasion worsen depressive symptomatology 74, individuals with severe depression (PHQ-9 
≥ 15) were excluded and referred for psychiatric consultation, if not already in progress. 
Because exposure to cannabis may be associated with suicidal thoughts and attempts 87, the 
Center for Epidemiological Studies-Depression Scale (CES-D) was administered using the 
three item subscale measuring suicidal ideation proposed by Garrison et al. 42, 43 and 
others 22. If any of the items (“I felt life was not worth living”; “I felt like hurting myself”; 
“I felt like killing myself”) were answered affirmatively, the patient was excluded.
Comorbidities were also evaluated; potential participants were excluded if a medical 
condition was present that, in the opinion of the investigator, would potentially lead to a 
deleterious effect on the patient’s well-being (e.g., coronary artery disease, obstructive 
pulmonary disease, severe liver disease or impaired renal function). A history and physical, 
chest X-ray, electrocardiogram and laboratory analysis (e.g., hematology screen, blood 
chemistries, and urinalysis) were performed to screen for medical illnesses. The Substance 
Abuse Module of the Diagnostic Interview Schedule for DSM-IV 88 was administered to 
exclude individuals with a current substance use disorder. Urine drug immunoassay for 
opioids, benzolyecgonine (cocaine metabolite), cannabinoids, and amphetamines were also 
performed to confirm historical information obtained by interview. Participants without a 
medical indication for these substances were excluded.
All participants were required to refrain from smoking cannabis or taking oral synthetic 
delta 9-THC medications (i.e. Marinol®) for 7 days before study sessions to reduce residual 
effects. To further reduce unsystematic variation, participants were instructed to take all 
other concurrent medications as per their normal routine during the 3 to 4 week study 
period.
Design
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover design study employing three 
different strengths of cannabis (placebo, 2.9%, and 6.7% delta 9-THC) was performed. The 
cannabis was harvested at the University of Mississippi under the supervision of the 
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA). NIDA provides bulk cannabis for experimental 
use subject to existing concentrations of delta 9-THC in their marijuana plant material 
supply program. Placebo cannabis was derived from whole plant material with extraction of 
delta 9-THC. Following overnight delivery, the cannabis was stored in a freezer at the 
Sacramento VA Medical Center Research Pharmacy using precautionary measures (e.g., 
limited access to the pharmacy with an alarm system to protect against diversion).
Wilsey et al.
Page 4
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 A cumulative dosing scheme was employed to determine dosing relationships for analgesia, 
psychoactive and cognitive effects as recommended by previous investigators 23, 46. 
Participants inhaled four puffs after baseline data were obtained (Figure 1). They then 
inhaled four to eight puffs of cannabis (or placebo) during the second administration of 
study medication at 240 minutes. The second dosing was purposefully flexible as to the 
number of puffs permitted; experience has shown that clinical trials with adaptable dose 
designs are almost twice more likely to demonstrate significant differences between 
medications and placebo than fixed dose trials 6869. One explanation for this is that fixed 
dose trials probably involve an expectation of benefit. As a result, the placebo effect may 
increase thereby reducing the ability of a clinical trial to differentiate between an effective 
treatment (e.g., an active drug) and a less effective or ineffective treatment (e.g., placebo). 
The flexible dose design emulates clinical practice whereby the clinician, in cooperation 
with the patient, adjusts dosages to optimize efficacy and tolerability according to distinct 
patient conditions. Such a technique may also offer an advantage in the research setting by 
preventing withdrawal due to an adverse event when the therapeutic window is surpassed in 
some individuals, or withdrawals due to lack of efficacy in other participants in whom a 
fixed dose is insufficient 31. To enhance the sensitivity to differences among the treatment 
doses, participants served as their own controls.
Procedures
Participants were scheduled for three, 8-hour experimental sessions at the UC Davis Clinical 
Translational Science Center Clinical Research Center. The sessions were separated by at 
least 3 days to permit the metabolic breakdown of delta 9-THC metabolites 48. The median 
(interquartile range) interval between sessions was 7 (0.75) days. Participants received 
placebo, 2.9%, or 6.7% delta 9-THC in random order utilizing a web-based random number-
generating program, Randomization.com 〈http://www.randomization.com〉 to determine the 
sequence of administration. The allocation schedule was maintained by a research 
pharmacist and concealed from other study personnel.
Cannabis was stored in a freezer at −20°C until the day before use when it was thawed and 
humidified by placing the medication above a saturated NaCl solution in a closed humidifier 
at room temperature for twelve hours. The Volcano® vaporizer (Storz & Bickel America, 
Inc., Oakland, CA) was used to administer study medication to participants. Four hundred 
milligrams of NIDA cannabis with either placebo, 2.9%, or 6.7% delta 9-THC was loaded 
into the filling chamber, the temperature set at 185 degrees centigrade, and the machine was 
switched on. A balloon bag collected the vapor; this commercial device was fitted with a 
specially designed mouthpiece that allowed one to willfully interrupt inhalation repeatedly 
without loss of vapor to the atmosphere. To prevent contamination of the breathing space of 
observers, vaporization was conducted under a standard laboratory fume hood with constant 
ventilation. This was performed in a room with an ambient temperature of 22°C and a 
humidity of 40% to 60% that was outfitted with an exhaust system. This area was physically 
separate from the UC Davis Clinical Research Center and required that participants travel to 
an adjoining building. This necessitated a time delay of approximately 20 minutes at times 
60 and 240 min before the onset of study assessments. Because of the time involved in the 
dispensing of vaporized cannabis, we did not perform the neuropsychological examinations, 
Wilsey et al.
Page 5
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 subjective and psychoactive effects, or heat pain threshold at Times 60 and 240 min. These 
tests were delayed until the subsequent evaluation periods (Figure 2 provides details of 
assessment schedule).
A cued-puff procedure known as the “Foltin Puff Procedure” standardized the administration 
of the cannabis 23. Participants were verbally signaled to “hold the vaporizer bag with one 
hand and put the vaporizer bag mouthpiece in their mouth” (30 seconds), “get ready” (5 
seconds), “inhale” (5 seconds), “hold vapor in lungs” (10 seconds), “exhale and wait” before 
repeating puff cycle (40 seconds). Assessments were performed before the administration of 
vaporized cannabis or placebo and hourly thereafter for seven hours for outcome variables.
Vital signs (blood pressure, respiratory rate, and heart rate) were recorded at baseline and at 
every hour to ensure well-being of participants while under the influence of cannabis. 
Participants were allowed to engage in normal activities, such as reading, watching 
television, or listening to music, between puff cycles and assessment periods. After each 
session, participants were accompanied home by a responsible adult. Upon completion of 
study sessions, participants were compensated with a modest stipend for their participation 
(prorated at $25 per hour).
Outcome Measurements
Pain intensity, the primary outcome variable, was assessed by asking participants to indicate 
their current pain on an 11-point numerical rating scale anchored between 0 (no pain) and 10 
(worst possible pain) 30, 32. As a secondary measure of pain relief, the Patient Global 
Impression of Change was administered 30. This 7-point ordinal scale has the following 
range of values: very much worse, much worse, minimally worse, unchanged, minimally 
improved, much improved, very much improved. The Neuropathic Pain Scale 41, an 11-point 
ordinal scale, was another secondary outcome. It includes a series of items that assess two 
global pain domains (pain intensity and unpleasantness), six specific pain qualities (sharp, 
dull, sensitive, hot, cold, and itchy pain), and two spatial qualities (deep and surface pain) 65. 
Allodynia, pain due to a stimulus that does not normally provoke pain, was measured by 
tangentially stroking a painful area with a foam paint brush. The response was recorded 
using a 100-mm visual analogue scale (VAS) anchored between 0 (no pain) and 100 
(severely painful). Baseline levels were obtained from the same painful area of the body 
prior to administration of study medications. Heat-pain threshold was determined at baseline 
and again after vaporization sessions by applying mild-to-moderately painful heat stimuli to 
skin on the non-dominant C2–C3 level, where heat sensitivity could be assured to be 
present, using the commercially available Medoc TSA 2001 Peltier thermode 52. This device 
applied a constant 1-degree centigrade per second increasing thermal stimulus until the 
patient pressed the response button, indicating that the temperature change was considered 
painful. The heat pain threshold (mean of three attempts) was recorded in degrees 
centigrade.
Separate subjective intensities for “any drug effect,” “good drug effect,” and “bad drug 
effect,” were measured using a 100-mm VAS anchored by “not at all” at 0 and “extremely” 
at 100. In addition, psychoactive effects were measured by inquiring “Do you feel ______ 
right now?” and filling in the blank with “high”; “drunk”; “impaired”; “stoned”; “like the 
Wilsey et al.
Page 6
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 drug effect”; “sedated”; “confused”; “nauseated”; “desire more of the drug”; “hungry”; 
“changes perceiving time”; “changes perceiving space”; “difficulty paying attention”; and 
“difficulty remembering things”. Similar VAS questions have been shown to be sensitive and 
reliable subjective measures of cannabis intoxication 8, 56, 57, 67.
Spasticity assessments, manifested as spasms, pain, and muscle stiffness, were performed 
using the Numeric Rating Scale Measure of Spasticity (bordered by 0=no spasticity to 
10=worst possible spasticity) and the Patient’s Global Impression of Change, a 7-point 
ordinal scale with the following range of values: very much worse, much worse, minimally 
worse, unchanged, minimally improved, much improved, very much improved 34. The 
Modified Ashworth Scale was not used as it has been called into question by several 
observers for assessment of spasticity 39, 79, 114. One recognized problem is that this 
instrument has inadequate reliability for determining lower extremity spasticity between 
raters (inter-rater) or over time (inter-session) 25. Furthermore, while such clinician-rated 
measures of spasticity are purported to be objective, they do not measure the patient’s 
experience and may not be sensitive to changes that are meaningful to the patient 34.
Neurocognitive assessments focused on several domains: attention and concentration, fine 
motor speed, processing speed and learning and memory. Participants completed the 
Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale Digit Symbol Test (DST) 108, a test of concentration, 
psychomotor speed, and graphomotor abilities. This pen and paper test involved having 
participants substitute a series of symbols with numbers as quickly and accurately as 
possible during a 120-second period. The results were expressed as the number of correct 
substitutions.
The Trail Making Test (TMT), a test of processing speed, visual attention and task switching 
consists of two parts; Part A had consecutive numbers and Part B had a combination of 
numbers and letters of the alphabet 6, 7. Participants were instructed to connect a set of 25 
circles containing the numbers and letters with a pencil as fast as possible while maintaining 
accuracy. The scores are recorded as the time in seconds required to complete testing.
For the Grooved Pegboard Test (GPT) 70, a test of fine motor coordination and speed, 
participants were asked to place 25 small metal pegs into holes on a 3″ × 3″ metal board as 
quickly as possible. The score is the total time for each test (using the dominant and non-
dominant hand); a five-minute limit was employed for those unable to complete the task. 
Quadriplegic participants were instructed to use their best grip to hold pens (digit symbol 
and trail making test) or pins (grooved pegboard) where applicable. However, some 
participants were not able to complete testing because of the severity of their disability, a 
problem identified in the literature 59.
The Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test (PASAT) 47, a measure of auditory information 
processing speed and working memory, was also administered. A series of single digit 
numbers were presented via a digital recording where the two most recent digits had to be 
summed. The scores reported for the Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test were the number 
of correct responses for each trial 28, 29, 101.
Wilsey et al.
Page 7
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The Hopkins Verbal Learning Test Revised (HVLT) assessed learning and immediate recall 
of verbal information, as well as the ability to retain, reproduce, and recognize this 
information after a delay 13. Alternate forms (A through F) were used to minimize practice 
effects 12, 14. A list of 12 words was presented, using 4 words from each of three semantic 
categories. The participant was asked to recall as many words as possible in any order. This 
was repeated for three trials. After a 20-minute delay, the participant was asked to recall the 
original words once again (delayed recall). To test delayed recognition, the participant was 
asked to listen to 24 words (which included the original 12 words, and 12 distractors) and 
say whether the word was in the original list or not. The True Positive score reflects the 
number of words correctly identified as being in the original list, whereas the False Positive 
score indicates the number of words the participant incorrectly identified as being in the first 
list.
In order to estimate the level of functioning at baseline, the raw scores on each test were 
converted to demographically-corrected T-scores adjusting for age, gender, highest 
educational level achieved, and ethnicity 54, 55. Baseline neuropsychological test 
performance was summarized using the global deficit score (GDS), a validated approach for 
detecting neuropsychological impairments across multiple measures 20.
Statistical Methodology
For most outcomes, mixed effects models with random intercepts were generated for testing 
the main effects of time, dose, and time × dose interaction. Initial models also included the 
baseline value of the outcome if measurements were taken at time 0 at the study visit. 
Treatment sequence, the order in which the treatments were administered, was tested and 
retained in the model if significant. Then, potential confounding variables (i.e., pain 
condition coded as spinal cord injury vs. disease; level of injury coded as cervical vs. below 
cervical; and cannabis use coded as current [within 30 days prior to randomization] vs. not 
current), specified a priori, were added to the model and retained individually and, if 
applicable, in combination, if significant. For models that did not test for cannabis use, 
cannabis use was added to the main effects model to determine if main effects changed with 
the addition of that term. To account for the possibility that the level of spinal cord 
pathology (cervical vs. below cervical) might affect performance on tests in which upper 
extremity dexterity was required (i.e., Grooved Pegboard, Trail Making, and Digit Symbol 
Tests), a covariant term for the level of injury was evaluated in the same way. For the models 
described above, time was coded as a continuous variable and centered on its mean, and a 
Tukey’s honestly significant difference test which restricts the Type I error rate was 
performed to identify which doses differed from each other when a significant main dose 
effect was found. Dose effects at each individual timepoint were tested using contrasts for 
the main effect models generated above but with the time variable coded categorically. In 
some cases, only the largest p-value for comparing two doses may be indicated when 
reporting significant results for multiple pairwise comparisons in the text. Effect sizes for 
neuropsychological testing results were estimated using Glass’s delta (i.e., estimator of the 
effect size) 45 and classified as either positive or negative centered on the placebo mean. For 
all statistical testing, a 5% significance level was used, and unless indicated otherwise, no 
adjustments for multiple testing were applied. For each visit, participants who reported no 
Wilsey et al.
Page 8
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pain at baseline were omitted from analyses using pain intensity, pain relief and Neuropathic 
Pain Scale (NPS) intensity as outcomes. For other NPS outcomes (e.g., sharpness, burning, 
etc.), allodynia, and spasticity, participants who were not experiencing that particular 
outcome at the baseline for that visit were also excluded from analyses of that outcome. If 
excluded due to no baseline spasticity, then the Patient’s Global Impression of Change in 
spasticity was also not analyzed.
To determine whether or not a psychomimetic side effect had an influence on the primary 
outcome of pain intensity, an additional term measuring each side effect (e.g., feeling high, 
stoned, drunk) was separately forced into the final mixed effects model developed for the 
main effect of pain intensity as described above, and the impact of the psychoactive side 
effect on the treatment dose effect was tested. The proportion of participants with at least a 
30% pain reduction rate were estimated for each treatment dose with 95% score confidence 
intervals and compared among all three doses with a Cochran Armitage Trend Test 4, 24 and 
pairwise using a χ2 likelihood ratio test. The number of individuals needed to be treated 
during the 8-hour study visit for one additional person to achieve 30% pain reduction 
relative to a comparison treatment was calculated as 1÷(Absolute Risk reduction), rounded 
up to the nearest integer, and 95% confidence intervals were estimated according to Altman 
(1998) 3. The number of flexible dosing puffs, both within visit and combined for all visits, 
were compared among the three treatment levels using Kruskal-Wallis tests.
RESULTS
Recruitment and Withdrawals
Four hundred thirty four patients were evaluated for eligibility between July 2012 and May 
2014 (Figure 3 Consort Flow Chart). Following telephone vetting by a research associate, 
seventy patients were consented and then interviewed by the principal investigator. Sixteen 
participants were excluded following a medical evaluation and 12 other participants 
withdrew for various reasons (e.g., loss of interest, logistic difficulties, inability to curtail 
medicinal cannabis, etc.). The remaining 42 participants participated in 120 eight-hour 
human laboratory experimental sessions. No participant withdrew from the study due to an 
experimental intervention. One participant felt syncopal and was found to be slightly 
hypotensive; this responded promptly to his mechanical wheelchair being adjusted from the 
sitting to the reclining position. There were no study related serious adverse events. 
Consistent with the notion that cannabis is well tolerated, the majority of participants took 8 
puffs during flexible dosing sessions (23 of 41, 24 of 38, and 24 of 41 after receiving 
placebo, 2.9% and 6.7% delta 9-THC respectively) with no significant difference among the 
doses (p > 0.3).
The demographic make-up of participants is presented in Table 1. Of the 42 participants who 
completed at least one study visit, 17 (40%) were current cannabis users defined as reporting 
that they had used cannabis within 30 days prior to randomization. Twenty one (50%) were 
ex-users and 4 (10%) had never been exposed to cannabis previously.
Wilsey et al.
Page 9
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Primary Efficacy Measurement: Pain Intensity
The primary analysis compared patients’ mean numeric pain intensity scale before and after 
consuming vaporized marijuana or placebo (Figure 4). The mean (SD) pain intensities at 
baseline were 5.3 (1.8) prior to administration of placebo, and 5.0 (1.8) and 5.2 (2.1) for the 
lower (2.9%) and higher (6.7%) delta 9-THC doses of cannabis, respectively, on an 11-point 
numerical pain rating scale. These baseline values were not significantly different (p > 0.6). 
Overall, after controlling for baseline pain, a significant dose effect on pain intensity 
occurred (p<0.0001, see Table 2). According to the Tukey test, there was a significant 
stairstep effect where the most pain occurred with placebo, significantly less pain was 
measured at the 2.9% delta 9-THC dose, and at the highest delta 9-THC dose, significantly 
less pain was experienced compared to the lower dose and placebo. Recent cannabis use did 
not affect these results, and neither the sequence of treatment nor the presence of either 
spinal cord injury or disease had a significant effect on response to treatment. One hour after 
the first treatment dose (120 minutes), pain intensity was significantly lower for both doses 
of active treatment compared to placebo (p<0.05), but the effects of only the higher delta 9-
THC dose retained significance over the next two hours (p<0.01, see Table 2). One hour 
after the variable dose at 240 minutes, the dose-response effect was evident in separation 
between the two active doses in addition to their showing significantly better pain control 
over placebo (p<0.05), and both active doses continued to be associated with significantly 
less pain compared to placebo for the next two hours (p<0.05), although the impact on pain 
showed no distinction between the lower and higher doses of delta 9-THC (p>0.11).
When each of the seventeen subjective and psychoactive side effects (e.g., good drug effect, 
feeling high, etc.) were added as a covariate to the mixed effects model that included pain 
intensity in order to evaluate the mechanisms of the analgesic treatment effects, four side 
effects showed no significant effect on pain (“bad drug effect,” “nauseous,” “changes 
perceiving time,” and “difficulty remembering things”), but the others did (p ranged from 
<0.0001 to p=0.02). However, the main effect for delta 9-THC treatment remained 
significant (all p<0.0004) above and beyond any effect of the psychomimetic measures. 
Therefore, an independent effect of study medication was evident. In most cases, the 
stairstep direction of the effect was present. For a few of the side effects, the effects of both 
active treatments were indistinguishable from each other but evidenced less pain than with 
placebo.
The number of participants achieving a reduction of pain intensity of 30% or more, a level 
believed to be clinically important 35, was estimated for each treatment dose. Eighteen 
participants (45%, 95% confidence interval: 31–60%) reached that level when on placebo 
compared to 26 (70%, 95% CI: 54–83%) and 35 (88%, 95% CI: 74–95%) on the lower and 
higher active doses of cannabis, respectively. A significant dose-response effect was realized 
for these three treatment doses according to the Cochran-Armitage trend test (p<0.0001) 
and, pairwise, placebo differed from 2.9% (p=0.0242) and 6.7% (p<0.0001) but the two 
active doses did not significantly differ from each other on this measure (p=0.0606).
The number needed to treat (NNT) to achieve 30% pain reduction during the 8-hour period 
was 4 (95% CI: 2.1–25.3) for the lower dose vs. placebo, and 3 (95% CI: 1.6–4.2) for the 
higher dose versus placebo. For the higher dose compared to the lower dose, the NNT was 6, 
Wilsey et al.
Page 10
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 but because the 95% confidence interval for the absolute risk reduction ranged between a 
negative number (treatment may harm) and a positive number (treatment may benefit), 
division by zero would be required to report conventional confidence intervals. Instead, we 
report that with 95% confidence, when compared to the lower dose, either the higher dose is 
helpful and the number need to help is greater than 2.8 or the higher dose is harmful and the 
number needed to harm is greater than 140.33
Secondary Outcomes
Global Impression of Change—In addition to VAS ratings for pain intensity, the degree 
of relief was monitored by a seven-point ordinal scale of patient global impression of 
change. On average over the entire eight hour visit, there was significantly more pain relief 
with active cannabis compared to the placebo (p<0.0001, Table 2). This effect was observed 
immediately after the first vaporization (p<0.005) and one hour (p<0.04), but not two hours 
(p>0.2), later. Once the second vaporization took place, both delta 9-THC doses provided 
greater pain relief than placebo immediately (p<0.001) and one hour later (p<0.05). 
However, only one dose (2.9% at Time 360, p=0.03; 6.7% at Time 420, p=0.03) remained 
effective in reducing pain significantly compared to placebo. At no time was there a 
significant difference in pain relief between the two active doses.
Neuropathic Pain Scale—Measurements from the Neuropathic Pain Scale (NPS) over all 
timepoints indicate that vaporized cannabis positively and significantly affected all of the 
measured multidimensional pain descriptors associated with neuropathic pain, even after 
controlling for baseline levels (p<0.0001 for all except itching which had p=0.04, see Table 
3). At one hour after the first vaporization session and maintaining throughout the duration 
of the visit, modeling of intensity, cold and superficial pain revealed significantly reduced 
pain levels after both active treatments compared with placebo (p-values ranged from 
<0.0001 to 0.048). The sequence of treatments was significant for intensity and superficial 
pain, but even after controlling for sequence, the dose effects remained. NPS outcomes that 
showed a dose effect immediately after the first vaporization were burning, cold, itching, 
deep pain, and superficial pain (p<0.05). No results for any of the NPS measures were 
changed when the statistical models controlled for recent cannabis use.
Allodynia—There was no general effect of treatment on allodynia after adjusting for 
baseline levels, although immediately after the first vaporization, lower measurements were 
observed for the higher dose cannabis than for the placebo (p=0.01, see Table 2). Treatment 
sequence was not significant and recent cannabis use did not alter the results.
Heat Pain Threshold—Neither time (p>0.05) nor treatment condition (p>0.05) at any 
timepoint was associated with change in pain response to mild-to-moderately painful heat 
stimuli delivered to the non-dominant C2–C3 level (data not shown).
Subjective and Psychoactive Effects—Using several variables to explore side effects, 
the main effect of treatment (placebo vs. 2.9% delta 9-THC vs. 6.7% delta 9-THC) as well 
as treatment by time interaction effects were considered in the modeling. For each of the 17 
psychoactive side effects analyzed, a significant main treatment effect was detected (p-
Wilsey et al.
Page 11
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 values ranged from <0.0001 to 0.026, see Table 4). The lower dose produced effects lower 
than that for the higher dose, and placebo was lower than both active doses for “any drug 
effect,” “good drug effect,” “high,” “impaired,” “stoned,” “sedated,” and “changes 
perceiving space” (p<0.0001). For “bad drug effect,” “like the drug effect,” “nauseous,” and 
“changes perceiving time,” placebo levels were significantly lower than both 2.9% and 6.7% 
delta 9-THC doses overall, but there were no differences between the two active treatment 
doses (p<0.01). The higher delta 9-THC dose was associated with significantly higher levels 
of “desires more,” “hungry,” “difficulty remembering things,” (p<0.03) “drunk,” 
“confused,” and “difficulty paying attention” compared to placebo, but only the last three 
side effects showed significantly stronger effects on the higher dose compared to the lower 
THC dose overall (p<0.0001).
When testing contrasts at each timepoint, the previously described stairstep dose response 
occurred for “high” and “stoned” one hour after each vaporization (0% < 2.9% < 6.7%, 
p<0.05), and those effects plus “any drug effect” and “impaired” were significantly affected 
immediately after the flexible dose inhalation, too, and continued for at least one additional 
hour (p<0.05). The maximum mean effect for “any drug effect” and “good drug effect” for 
all three dose levels was attained immediately after the flexible dose at Time 240 (52 and 49 
out of 100 mm, respectively, for the 6.7% delta 9-THC dose). Starting with the second THC 
dose and continuing throughout the rest of the study visits for “any drug effect,” there was a 
clear stairstep dose response over all three treatments (p<0.05), with a stronger effect as the 
dose increased. For “bad drug effect,” the only times showing significant dose effects (both 
active doses resulted in stronger effects than placebo) occurred at one hour post-first and 
post-second vaporizations, respectively (p<0.05). However, the differences of the mean 
effects found to be present were less than 6 and 7 out of 100 mm, respectively, which are 
considered likely to be clinically unimportant. Similarly, the differences for all subjective 
and psychomimetic side effects were of small magnitude. Compared to placebo, the mean 
values were 6 mm and 9 mm on 100 mm visual analogue scales, respectively, for the 2.9% 
and 6.7% delta 9-THC. Significant dose effects (p<0.05) were detected one hour after both 
of the cannabis vaporizations for all psychomimetic side effects except “desires more” and 
“difficulty remembering things” and dose effects were also absent at one hour after just the 
first inhalation for “confused,” “changes perceiving time,” and “changes perceiving space,” 
and one hour after just the second dosing for “nauseous” and “difficulty paying attention.”
Spasticity—Spasticity showed an overall response to delta 9-THC (p=0.036), with less 
spasticity reported for the lower dose compared to placebo (Table 5). However, statistical 
significance was not reached until 3 hours after the second dosing with cannabis (Time 420, 
p=0.03). The categorical spasticity relief measure reflected more relief at that same 
timepoint, with the 2.9% dose providing more relief than either of the other two doses 
(p<0.05).
Vital Signs—There was an effect of treatment on heart rate immediately after both 
vaporization sessions (Table 6, p < 0.01). At Time 60 minutes, the average pulse was 70, 80, 
and 79 beats per minute for placebo, 2.9% and 6.7% delta 9-THC sessions, respectively. The 
corresponding values at Time 240 were 70, 77, and 80 beats per minute. There was no 
Wilsey et al.
Page 12
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 treatment effect on respiratory rate; there was a clinically insignificant difference of 1 breath 
per minute at baseline between the active medications. There were no treatment effects for 
systolic and diastolic blood pressure. At Time 300 both of these values were lower with the 
6.7% delta 9-THC than with placebo (p < 0.05). The differences were clinically 
insignificant. The average systolic difference was 6 mm Hg (placebo: 120 mmHg vs. 6.7% 
delta 9-THC: 114 mm Hg). The average diastolic difference was 1 mm Hg (placebo: 72 mm 
Hg vs. 6.7% delta 9-THC: 71 mm Hg). Current cannabis use did not have an effect on any of 
the measures.
Neuropsychological Testing—Based on neuropsychological test results at participants’ 
first visit before initial treatment, 73% of participants (N=30 of 41) evidenced global 
cognitive impairment prior to initiating the study, with the mean (standard deviation) GDS 
being 1.28 (0.96), indicative of an overall moderate-to-high level of cognitive impairment.
The main effects of dose and time model the cognitive effects over the course of the 
experimental sessions. To account for possible residual neuropsychological effects of 
cannabis in chronic users, the covariate of cannabis use (current vs. not current) was added 
to the main effects model for all of the neuropsychological tests to determine if there were 
any changes in the main results. Data from specific tests for five participants were removed 
from consideration due to the participant’s inability to validly perform the tests as a result of 
their disability (as determined by the research associate).
Overall, there were no significant differences between study medications on 
neuropsychological testing (Table 7). The results of the individual tests are described below:
Grooved Pegboard Test: After controlling for baseline values, no significant treatment 
effect was seen on the Grooved Pegboard dominant subtests, even after controlling for the 
level of spinal cord pathology. On the non-dominant subtests, at time 360, participants at 
2.9% delta-9 THC took less time to complete the task than when on placebo or at the high 
dose.
Digit Symbol Test: Dose effect differences were not significant throughout the 8 hour visit, 
although there was improvement across all visits for all conditions (i.e., placebo, 2.9% and 
6.7% delta 9-THC, time p-value<0.0001), consistent with practice effects.
Trail Making Test: There was an overall dose effect on Trailmaking Part A, although in the 
pairwise comparison participants only took longer to complete Part A at 420 when on 2.9, 
compared to 6.7 delta 9-THC. There were no significant dose effect differences on Part B.
Hopkins Verbal Learning Test: There were no significant dose effect differences for either 
immediate or delayed recall. True positive responses at 6.7% were less than 2.9% and 
placebo at 120 and 180 minutes (p<0.05); false positive results were higher at 6.7% 
compared to placebo at 300 minutes (p=0.023).
Wilsey et al.
Page 13
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test: This examination exhibited non-significant dose 
effect differences except at Time 420, where the number of correct responses at this time for 
the higher active dose was greater than for the lower active dose (p<0.05).
In summary, cannabis generally did not result in reduced cognitive performance, as indicated 
by the lack of dissimilarities in scores over time between treatment groups.
DISCUSSION
Analgesia
The primary outcome variable, numerical pain intensity, provides verification that vaporized 
cannabis can impart relief from neuropathic pain related to spinal cord injury or disease. 
Concordant with this proposition are the results of the Patient Global Impression of Change 
and Neuropathic Pain Scale. In addition, the NNT to achieve 30% pain reduction was 4 
(95% CI: 2.1–25.3) for the lower dose vs. placebo, and 3 (95% CI: 1.6–4.2) for the higher 
dose vs. placebo, These values are similar to those found in previous studies evaluating 
smoked cannabis 2, 33 and are in the range of two commonly deployed anticonvulsants used 
to treat neuropathic pain (pregabalin, NNT = 3.9; gabapentin, NNT = 3.8) 9, 78.
It is noteworthy that the two active doses did not significantly differ from each other 
(p=0.0606, χ2 likelihood ratio test). Likewise, the difference in the NNT of 6 between the 
two active doses does not indicate a definite dose difference as the confidence interval 
comparing the higher with the lower dose is wide and encompasses the possibility that 6.7% 
delta 9-THC is not more effective as an analgesic when compared to 2.9% delta 9-THC. 
Furthermore, there were no differences on the Patient Global Impression of Change between 
the two active doses.
Allodynia and Heat Pain Threshold
Abnormal thresholds to sensory stimuli are common in patients with neuropathic pain 
arising from lesions of the spinothalamic pathways 84. We therefore sought evidence for an 
effect of cannabis on allodynia as well as changes in thresholds for sensory perception using 
the heat pain threshold. However, substantiation of reversal of sensory sensitization or an 
increase in heat pain threshold by cannabis was not a consistent finding. Although lower 
measurements for allodynia were observed for the higher dose of delta 9-THC compared to 
placebo, this only occurred after the first vaporization session and not after the second 
session. The lack of an effect on the experimental heat pain threshold suggests that the 
analgesic effect of cannabis in treating acute pain would be less than ideal; this is consistent 
with the recommendation that cannabinoids are not suitable for postoperative pain 18.
Psychoactive and Subjective Side Effects
Many of the psychoactive side effects were delta 9-THC concentration-dependent with 
greater effects seen in the higher compared to the lower dose, with both active doses 
inducing a higher response than placebo. Similar assessments of “high,” “good drug effect,” 
and “stoned” have been described in the literature 62. The magnitude of the effects were 
modest, especially for the lower dose (Figures 5, 6 and 7). Given the aforementioned 
Wilsey et al.
Page 14
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 evidence that the two active doses did not significantly differ from each other in terms of 
analgesic potency, it appears appropriate for patients with spinal cord injury or disease who 
wish to avoid psychomimetic effects to consider the lower dose.
Spasticity
Relief from spasticity utilizing an 11-point numerical rating scale was not statistically 
significant until just prior to discharge at Time 420 minutes. Unexpectedly, the relief was 
greater with the 2.9% than after 6.7% delta-9-THC. In a recent meta-analysis, cannabinoids 
were associated with a greater improvement in spasticity (secondary to multiple sclerosis or 
paraplegia) compared to placebo when assessed using numerical rating scales (mean 
difference, −0.76 [95% CI, −1.38 to −0.14]) 109. Assessments in the studies in the meta-
analysis followed two weeks of treatment; therefore, a direct comparison with an 8 hour 
human laboratory experiment is not feasible.
Vital Signs
The approximate 10% increase in heart rate that was seen immediately after cannabis 
vaporization is a well-recognized side-effect. Cannabis can result in a rapid and substantial 
dose-dependent increase in heart rate by as much as 20–100%, as well as supine 
hypertension and orthostatic hypotension 5, 77. Although the hemodynamic effects of 
cannabis are generally not problematic for most young, healthy users, the orthostatic 
hypotension induced by cannabis can be symptomatic and incapacitating 66. As mentioned 
earlier, one participant with quadriplegia had near syncope associated with a low blood 
pressure. This was consistent with the autonomic instability with loss of descending 
autonomic control seen in patients with interruption of spinal tracts 71. For the most part, 
however, blood pressure was stable following administration of cannabis in the present 
study.
Neuropsychological Testing
The lack of treatment effects on cognition was surprising, given previous findings from our 
group 112, 113 and others 17, 26, 105. Although the reasons for this unanticipated finding are 
unclear, there are a few possible explanations. Administration of the cognitive measures 
instruments was delayed for 60 minutes after each dose (until 120 minutes and 300 minutes) 
(Figure 2). This was necessary because participants received treatments in a separate 
location. However, since peak levels of intoxication typically occur after approximately 30 
minutes and last several hours 48, reductions in cognitive performance would still have been 
expected to be present at subsequent evaluations.
Perhaps of more significance, numerous patients in this study had spinal cord involvement of 
their upper extremities. The challenge of assessing neuropsychological functioning using 
tests requiring the use of upper extremities in persons with paralyzed limbs has been 
reported in the literature 59. However, non-significant results were still seen when excluding 
patients with upper limb limitations. In addition, measures involving word recall (Hopkins 
Verbal Learning Test) and verbal calculations (Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test) also did 
not show performance decrements, which is inconsistent with previous reports of dose-
related neurocognitive effects of marijuana 26. Of note, many of the participants had spinal 
Wilsey et al.
Page 15
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cord injuries as a result of trauma (Table 1), including causes that may also have resulted in 
traumatic brain injury as well (i.e., motorized vehicle accidents). Indeed, a significant 
proportion were identified as having cognitive impairment (73%) at study initiation. 
Hypothetically, it is possible that the effects of delta 9-THC in the individuals who already 
have significant cognitive deficits are of insufficient magnitude to be detectable On the other 
hand, others have suggested that the use of cannabis in impaired individuals might 
significantly amplify such deficits 61, 86. The current study is not adequately powered to 
address which of these hypotheses is most plausible.
Daily smokers may develop tolerance and demonstrate smaller effect sizes on cognitive tests 
compared to less frequent users 53. Tolerance probably factored into a recent cohort study of 
chronic pain patients who used 12.5% delta-9 THC (median dose 2.5 grams/day) and found 
improvements in neurocognitive function over a one year period 106. Seventeen of the 42 
participants in the present study used cannabis regularly; we thus entered recent use as a 
covariate in modeling. But a majority of participants were ex-users or naïve to cannabis. 
Other potential confounding factors might include fatigability as well as depressed mood, as 
described in the multiple sclerosis literature 11, 36, 93. However, we excluded individuals with 
severe depression (PHQ-9 ≥ 15), as cannabis may worsen depressive symptomatology, so 
this may not have been that relevant to our study 74. And although the neuropsychological 
battery was relatively brief (taking approximately 20–30 minutes), it was administered 
repeatedly so physical and psychological/cognitive fatigability may have factored into the 
results of this study. Thus, factors in acute cognitive changes must be understood in the 
context of underlying chronic diseases, with attendant fatigue and its possible influence on 
neuropsychological testing.
Recommendations for Future Research
In the future, it will be important to explore the relative merits of different methods of 
delivery of cannabinoids and whether oral delta-9 THC or sublingual nabixamols would 
have comparable efficacy in the treatment of neuropathic pain as vaporized cannabis. 
Pharmacologic oral preparations avoid deleterious effects upon the respiratory system and 
have deservedly warranted attention from the scientific community for this 
reason27, 40, 49, 64, 80, 96, 99. However, some experts have opined that whole plant cannabis is 
superior to the FDA approved oral cannabinoid preparations, e.g., synthetic 
tetrahydrocannabinol (dronabinol, Marinol®) and/or the synthetic analog of Δ9-THC 
(nabilone, Cesamet®) 76. As testament to this belief, oral cannabinoids have been on the 
market in the United States for many years and are not widely used 76. In order to 
definitively describe the relative merits of cannabis and oral cannabinoids, it will be 
necessary to conduct randomized, controlled trials comparing the two methods of 
administration and interpret the results. The same might be said for the comparison of 
cannabis and nabixamols.
In addition, the optimization of dosing should be evaluated for all cannabinoid preparations 
when utilized for the treatment of neuropathic pain. It has been suggested that a patient-
specific, self-titrating model is a useful prescription paradigm for medicinal cannabis 21. The 
Wilsey et al.
Page 16
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 rationale for this arises from the considerable variability in response of different individuals 
when balancing efficacy with side-effects 21.
An additional issue is whether or not vaporization alters the risk of long-term negative 
pulmonary sequelae. While it is known that cannabis smoking increases cough, sputum 
production, hyperinflation, and upper lobe emphysematous changes 85, 100; the effect of 
vaporization on these pulmonary outcomes will require more investigative work. Also, many 
individuals are incidentally exposed to secondhand cannabis smoke, but little has been 
known about the effects of this exposure until recently. Under extreme, unventilated 
conditions, secondhand cannabis smoke exposure can produce detectable levels of delta-9 
THC in blood and urine, minor physiological and subjective drug effects, and minor 
impairment on a task requiring psychomotor ability and working memory 58. To our 
knowledge, exposure to secondhand vaporized cannabis has not been studied. An effort 
needs to be made to find out if this is a preventable problem perhaps by the use of an active 
exhaust or a hepa filter.
Another objective of future studies will be to evaluate all other short- and long-term side-
effects known to result from cannabis. When used by patients as part of a monitored 
treatment program in 7 pain clinics in Canada over 1 year, medicinal whole plant cannabis, 
appeared to have a reasonable safety profile 106. An average dose of 2.5 g cannabis per day 
resulted in a higher rate of adverse events (AE) among cannabis users compared with 
controls; there were no differences for serious adverse events (SAE). In contradistinction, a 
recent meta-analysis found that cannabinoids (e.g., cannabis, oral delta-9 THC and/or 
sublingual nabixamols) were associated with a greater risk of not only AE but also SAE in 
comparison with controls. Presumably, the difference between the two studies was related to 
the different study designs (i.e., types of study medications, blinding, use of controls, 
duration of studies, etc.) Common AE listed among both studies included headache, 
nasopharyngititis, dizziness, dry mouth, nausea, fatigue, somnolence, euphoria, vomiting, 
disorientation, drowsiness, confusion, loss of balance, and hallucination. Obviously, longer-
term monitoring for adverse outcomes is needed. The epidemiological literature concerning 
recreational cannabis reveals that cannabis use increases the risk of motor vehicle accidents 
and can produce dependence, and that there are consistent associations between regular 
cannabis use and poor psychosocial outcomes and mental health in adulthood 51. It remains 
to be seen whether these longer term consequences will be similar for medicinal cannabis.
Another existing knowledge gap that should be evaluated in the future is the potential of the 
non-psychoactive cannabinoid, cannabidiol (CBD). The synergistic contributions of CBD to 
the analgesia produced by Δ9-THC have been explored in studies involving Sativex®, an 
extract of Δ9-THC and CBD manufactured by GW Pharmaceuticals in Great Britain. 
Sativex® alleviates spasticity, overactive bladder, and neuropathic pain associated with 
multiple sclerosis 10, 16, 63, 94, 103. CBD can counteract some of the negative effects of Δ9-
THC (e.g., anti-psychotic effects 111, anti-anxiety effects 116), although such findings have 
not always been consistent 81.
The amount of CBD in the stock supplies provided by the National Institute of Drug Abuse 
(NIDA) at the time the present study was initiated were minimal. In the interim, the 
Wilsey et al.
Page 17
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 availability of research grade cannabis plant material available from NIDA has undergone 
substantial upgrading in terms of variability. CBD can each be provided in low (<1%), 
medium (1–5%), high (5–10%), and very high (>10%) concentrations 95. Nora Volkow 
M.D., Director of NIDA, has stated, “CBD appears to be a safe drug with no addictive 
effects, and the preliminary data suggest that it may have therapeutic value for a number of 
medical conditions. Addressing barriers that slow clinical research with CBD would 
accelerate progress. NIDA will do what we can to address such barriers and expedite the 
study of this potentially valuable compound, as well as other components of the marijuana 
plant” 102.
CONCLUSION
The present study complements previous investigative work that cannabis is a promising 
treatment in selected pain syndromes caused by injury or diseases of the nervous 
system 2, 33, 104, 105, 107, 112, 113. Due to the large number of statistical tests in the present 
study, a recognition of the potential of an elevated Type I error rate is warranted. However, at 
least for analgesic outcomes, the consistency of findings mitigates this concern. As this was 
an eight hour human laboratory experiment, additional studies are needed to examine this 
type of treatment over a more prolonged period (e.g., several weeks to months) to insure that 
an analgesic response will be sustained. In addition to measuring pain relief, such studies 
would also involve the impact of cannabis on daily functioning, cognition, and mood to 
adequately evaluate the real world impact of cannabis on spinal cord injury and disease. As 
this was a preliminary, phase I study, it does not justify the routine clinical use of medicinal 
cannabis until further research is conducted. Such research should include direct 
comparisons of cannabinoids both for efficacy and adverse effects over time.
References
1. Announcement of the Department Of Health And Human Services’ Guidance On Procedures for the 
Provision of Marijuana For Medical Research. National Institutes of Health Release Date; May 21. 
1998 https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/not99-091.html
2. Abrams DI, Jay CA, Shade SB, Vizoso H, Reda H, Press S, Kelly ME, Rowbotham MC, Petersen 
KL. Cannabis in painful HIV-associated sensory neuropathy: a randomized placebo-controlled trial. 
Neurology. 2007; 68:515–521. [PubMed: 17296917] 
3. Altman DG. Confidence intervals for the number needed to treat. BMJ (Clinical research ed. 1998; 
317:1309–1312.
4. Armitage P. Tests for Linear Trends in Proportions and Frequencies. Biometrics. 1955; 11:375–386.
5. Aryana A, Williams MA. Marijuana as a trigger of cardiovascular events: speculation or scientific 
certainty? International journal of cardiology. 2007; 118:141–144. [PubMed: 17005273] 
6. Ashendorf L, Jefferson AL, O’Connor MK, Chaisson C, Green RC, Stern RA. Trail Making Test 
errors in normal aging, mild cognitive impairment, and dementia. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2008; 
23:129–137. [PubMed: 18178372] 
7. Attal N, Cruccu G, Baron R, Haanpaa M, Hansson P, Jensen TS, Nurmikko T. EFNS guidelines on 
the pharmacological treatment of neuropathic pain: 2010 revision. Eur J Neurol. 2010; 17:1113–
e1188. [PubMed: 20402746] 
8. Azorlosa JL, Heishman SJ, Stitzer ML, Mahaffey JM. Marijuana smoking: effect of varying delta 9-
tetrahydrocannabinol content and number of puffs. The Journal of pharmacology and experimental 
therapeutics. 1992; 261:114–122. [PubMed: 1313866] 
Wilsey et al.
Page 18
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 9. Backonja MM. Use of anticonvulsants for treatment of neuropathic pain. Neurology. 2002; 59:S14–
17. [PubMed: 12221151] 
10. Barnes MP. Sativex: clinical efficacy and tolerability in the treatment of symptoms of multiple 
sclerosis and neuropathic pain. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2006; 7:607–615. [PubMed: 16553576] 
11. Beatty WW, Goodkin DE, Hertsgaard D, Monson N. Clinical and demographic predictors of 
cognitive performance in multiple sclerosis. Do diagnostic type, disease duration, and disability 
matter? Archives of neurology. 1990; 47:305–308. [PubMed: 2138014] 
12. Beglinger LJ, Gaydos B, Tangphao-Daniels O, Duff K, Kareken DA, Crawford J, Fastenau PS, 
Siemers ER. Practice effects and the use of alternate forms in serial neuropsychological testing. 
Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2005; 20:517–529. [PubMed: 15896564] 
13. Benedict R, Schretlen D, Groninger L, Brandt J. Hopkins Verbal Learning Test ? Revised: 
Normative Data and Analysis of Inter-Form and Test-Retest Reliability. The Clinical 
Neuropsychologist. 1998; 12(1):43–55.
14. Benedict RH, Zgaljardic DJ. Practice effects during repeated administrations of memory tests with 
and without alternate forms. Journal of clinical and experimental neuropsychology. 1998; 20:339–
352. [PubMed: 9845161] 
15. Bennett M. The LANSS Pain Scale: the Leeds assessment of neuropathic symptoms and signs. 
Pain. 2001; 92:147–157. [PubMed: 11323136] 
16. Berman JS, Symonds C, Birch R. Efficacy of two cannabis based medicinal extracts for relief of 
central neuropathic pain from brachial plexus avulsion: results of a randomised controlled trial. 
Pain. 2004; 112:299–306. [PubMed: 15561385] 
17. Bolla KI, Brown K, Eldreth D, Tate K, Cadet JL. Dose-related neurocognitive effects of marijuana 
use. Neurology. 2002; 59:1337–1343. [PubMed: 12427880] 
18. Campbell FA, Tramer MR, Carroll D, Reynolds DJ, Moore RA, McQuay HJ. Are cannabinoids an 
effective and safe treatment option in the management of pain? A qualitative systematic review. 
BMJ (Clinical research ed. 2001; 323:13–16.
19. Cardenas DD, Jensen MP. Treatments for chronic pain in persons with spinal cord injury: A survey 
study. J Spinal Cord Med. 2006; 29:109–117. [PubMed: 16739554] 
20. Carey CL, Woods SP, Gonzalez R, Conover E, Marcotte TD, Grant I, Heaton RK. Predictive 
validity of global deficit scores in detecting neuropsychological impairment in HIV infection. 
Journal of clinical and experimental neuropsychology. 2004; 26:307–319. [PubMed: 15512922] 
21. Carter GT, Weydt P, Kyashna-Tocha M, Abrams DI. Medicinal cannabis: rational guidelines for 
dosing. IDrugs. 2004; 7:464–470. [PubMed: 15154108] 
22. Chabrol H, Choquet M. Relationship between depressive symptoms, hopelessness and suicidal 
ideation among 1547 high school students. L’Encephale. 2009; 35:443–447.
23. Chait LD, Corwin RL, Johanson CE. A cumulative dosing procedure for administering marijuana 
smoke to humans. Pharmacology, biochemistry, and behavior. 1988; 29:553–557.
24. Cochran WG. Some methods for strengthening the common chi-squared tests. Biometrics. 
1954:417–451.
25. Craven BC, Morris AR. Modified Ashworth scale reliability for measurement of lower extremity 
spasticity among patients with SCI. Spinal cord. 2010; 48:207–213. [PubMed: 19786977] 
26. Crean RD, Crane NA, Mason BJ. An evidence based review of acute and long-term effects of 
cannabis use on executive cognitive functions. Journal of addiction medicine. 2011; 5:1–8. 
[PubMed: 21321675] 
27. de Vries M, van Rijckevorsel DC, Wilder-Smith OH, van Goor H. Dronabinol and chronic pain: 
importance of mechanistic considerations. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2014; 15:1525–1534. 
[PubMed: 24819592] 
28. Diehr MC, Cherner M, Wolfson TJ, Miller SW, Grant I, Heaton RK. The 50 and 100-item short 
forms of the Paced Auditory Serial Addition Task (PASAT): demographically corrected norms and 
comparisons with the full PASAT in normal and clinical samples. Journal of clinical and 
experimental neuropsychology. 2003; 25:571–585. [PubMed: 12911108] 
29. Diehr MC, Heaton RK, Miller W, Grant I. The Paced Auditory Serial Addition Task (PASAT): 
norms for age, education, and ethnicity. Assessment. 1998; 5:375–387. [PubMed: 9835661] 
Wilsey et al.
Page 19
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 30. Dworkin RH, Turk DC, Farrar JT, Haythornthwaite JA, Jensen MP, Katz NP, Kerns RD, Stucki G, 
Allen RR, Bellamy N, Carr DB, Chandler J, Cowan P, Dionne R, Galer BS, Hertz S, Jadad AR, 
Kramer LD, Manning DC, Martin S, McCormick CG, McDermott MP, McGrath P, Quessy S, 
Rappaport BA, Robbins W, Robinson JP, Rothman M, Royal MA, Simon L, Stauffer JW, Stein W, 
Tollett J, Wernicke J, Witter J. Core outcome measures for chronic pain clinical trials: IMMPACT 
recommendations. Pain. 2005; 113:9–19. [PubMed: 15621359] 
31. Dworkin RH, Turk DC, Peirce-Sandner S, Baron R, Bellamy N, Burke LB, Chappell A, Chartier 
K, Cleeland CS, Costello A, Cowan P, Dimitrova R, Ellenberg S, Farrar JT, French JA, Gilron I, 
Hertz S, Jadad AR, Jay GW, Kalliomaki J, Katz NP, Kerns RD, Manning DC, McDermott MP, 
McGrath PJ, Narayana A, Porter L, Quessy S, Rappaport BA, Rauschkolb C, Reeve BB, Rhodes T, 
Sampaio C, Simpson DM, Stauffer JW, Stucki G, Tobias J, White RE, Witter J. Research design 
considerations for confirmatory chronic pain clinical trials: IMMPACT recommendations. Pain. 
2010; 149:177–193. [PubMed: 20207481] 
32. Dworkin RH, Turk DC, Wyrwich KW, Beaton D, Cleeland CS, Farrar JT, Haythornthwaite JA, 
Jensen MP, Kerns RD, Ader DN, Brandenburg N, Burke LB, Cella D, Chandler J, Cowan P, 
Dimitrova R, Dionne R, Hertz S, Jadad AR, Katz NP, Kehlet H, Kramer LD, Manning DC, 
McCormick C, McDermott MP, McQuay HJ, Patel S, Porter L, Quessy S, Rappaport BA, 
Rauschkolb C, Revicki DA, Rothman M, Schmader KE, Stacey BR, Stauffer JW, von Stein T, 
White RE, Witter J, Zavisic S. Interpreting the clinical importance of treatment outcomes in 
chronic pain clinical trials: IMMPACT recommendations. J Pain. 2008; 9:105–121. [PubMed: 
18055266] 
33. Ellis RJ, Toperoff W, Vaida F, van den Brande G, Gonzales J, Gouaux B, Bentley H, Atkinson JH. 
Smoked medicinal cannabis for neuropathic pain in HIV: a randomized, crossover clinical trial. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2009; 34:672–680. [PubMed: 18688212] 
34. Farrar JT, Troxel AB, Stott C, Duncombe P, Jensen MP. Validity, reliability, and clinical importance 
of change in a 0–10 numeric rating scale measure of spasticity: a post hoc analysis of a 
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Clin Ther. 2008; 30:974–985. [PubMed: 
18555944] 
35. Farrar JT, Young JP Jr, LaMoreaux L, Werth JL, Poole RM. Clinical importance of changes in 
chronic pain intensity measured on an 11-point numerical pain rating scale. Pain. 2001; 94:149–
158. [PubMed: 11690728] 
36. Feinstein A, Magalhaes S, Richard JF, Audet B, Moore C. The link between multiple sclerosis and 
depression. Nature reviews. 2014; 10:507–517.
37. Finnerup NB. Pain in patients with spinal cord injury. Pain. 2013; 154(Suppl 1):S71–76. [PubMed: 
23375163] 
38. Finnerup NB, Jensen TS. Clinical use of pregabalin in the management of central neuropathic pain. 
Neuropsychiatric disease and treatment. 2007; 3:885–891. [PubMed: 19300623] 
39. Fleuren JF, Voerman GE, Erren-Wolters CV, Snoek GJ, Rietman JS, Hermens HJ, Nene AV. Stop 
using the Ashworth Scale for the assessment of spasticity. Journal of neurology, neurosurgery, and 
psychiatry. 2010; 81:46–52.
40. Frank B, Serpell MG, Hughes J, Matthews JN, Kapur D. Comparison of analgesic effects and 
patient tolerability of nabilone and dihydrocodeine for chronic neuropathic pain: randomised, 
crossover, double blind study. BMJ (Clinical research ed. 2008; 336:199–201.
41. Galer BS, Jensen MP. Development and preliminary validation of a pain measure specific to 
neuropathic pain: the Neuropathic Pain Scale. Neurology. 1997; 48:332–338. [PubMed: 9040716] 
42. Garrison CZ, Addy CL, Jackson KL, McKeown RE, Waller JL. A longitudinal study of suicidal 
ideation in young adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry. 1991; 30:597–603. [PubMed: 1890093] 
43. Garrison CZ, Jackson KL, Addy CL, McKeown RE, Waller JL. Suicidal behaviors in young 
adolescents. American journal of epidemiology. 1991; 133:1005–1014. [PubMed: 2035501] 
44. Gilron I, Bailey JM, Tu D, Holden RR, Weaver DF, Houlden RL. Morphine, gabapentin, or their 
combination for neuropathic pain. The New England journal of medicine. 2005; 352:1324–1334. 
[PubMed: 15800228] 
45. Glass, GV.; McGraw, B.; Smith, ML. Meta-analysis in social research. Sage; Beverly Hills, CA: 
1981. p. 120
Wilsey et al.
Page 20
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 46. Greenwald MK, Stitzer ML. Antinociceptive, subjective and behavioral effects of smoked 
marijuana in humans. Drug and alcohol dependence. 2000; 59:261–275. [PubMed: 10812286] 
47. Gronwall DM. Paced auditory serial-addition task: a measure of recovery from concussion. Percept 
Mot Skills. 1977; 44:367–373. [PubMed: 866038] 
48. Grotenhermen F. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of cannabinoids. Clinical 
pharmacokinetics. 2003; 42:327–360. [PubMed: 12648025] 
49. Grotenhermen F, Muller-Vahl K. The therapeutic potential of cannabis and cannabinoids. 
Deutsches Arzteblatt international. 2012; 109:495–501. [PubMed: 23008748] 
50. Gut-Fayand A, Dervaux A, Olie JP, Loo H, Poirier MF, Krebs MO. Substance abuse and suicidality 
in schizophrenia: a common risk factor linked to impulsivity. Psychiatry research. 2001; 102:65–
72. [PubMed: 11368841] 
51. Hall W. What has research over the past two decades revealed about the adverse health effects of 
recreational cannabis use? Addiction. 2015; 110:19–35. [PubMed: 25287883] 
52. Hansson P, Backonja M, Bouhassira D. Usefulness and limitations of quantitative sensory testing: 
clinical and research application in neuropathic pain states. Pain. 2007; 129:256–259. [PubMed: 
17451879] 
53. Hart CL, Ilan AB, Gevins A, Gunderson EW, Role K, Colley J, Foltin RW. Neurophysiological and 
cognitive effects of smoked marijuana in frequent users. Pharmacology, biochemistry, and 
behavior. 2010; 96:333–341.
54. Heaton, R.; Grant, I.; Matthews, C. Comprehensive Norms for an expanded Halstead-Reitan 
Battery: demographic corrections, research findings, and clinical applications. Psychological 
Assessment Resources; Odessa, FL: 1991. 
55. Heaton, RK.; Miller, SW.; Taylor, MJ.; Grant, I. Revised Comprehensive norms for an expanded 
Halstead-Reitan Battery: Demographically adjusted neuropsychological norms for African 
American and Caucasian adults. Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc; Lutz, FL: 2004. 
56. Heishman SJ, Arasteh K, Stitzer ML. Comparative effects of alcohol and marijuana on mood, 
memory, and performance. Pharmacology, biochemistry, and behavior. 1997; 58:93–101.
57. Heishman SJ, Stitzer ML, Bigelow GE. Alcohol and marijuana: comparative dose effect profiles in 
humans. Pharmacology, biochemistry, and behavior. 1988; 31:649–655.
58. Herrmann ES, Cone EJ, Mitchell JM, Bigelow GE, LoDico C, Flegel R, Vandrey R. Non-smoker 
exposure to secondhand cannabis smoke II: Effect of room ventilation on the physiological, 
subjective, and behavioral/cognitive effects. Drug and alcohol dependence. 151:194–202. 
[PubMed: 25957157] 
59. Hill-Briggs F, Dial JG, Morere DA, Joyce A. Neuropsychological assessment of persons with 
physical disability, visual impairment or blindness, and hearing impairment or deafness. Arch Clin 
Neuropsychol. 2007; 22:389–404. [PubMed: 17303374] 
60. Hohmann AG, Suplita RL 2nd. Endocannabinoid mechanisms of pain modulation. The AAPS 
journal. 2006; 8:E693–708. [PubMed: 17233533] 
61. Honarmand K, Tierney MC, O’Connor P, Feinstein A. Effects of cannabis on cognitive function in 
patients with multiple sclerosis. Neurology. 2011; 76:1153–1160. [PubMed: 21444900] 
62. Ilan AB, Gevins A, Coleman M, ElSohly MA, de Wit H. Neurophysiological and subjective profile 
of marijuana with varying concentrations of cannabinoids. Behavioural pharmacology. 2005; 
16:487–496. [PubMed: 16148455] 
63. Iskedjian M, Bereza B, Gordon A, Piwko C, Einarson TR. Meta-analysis of cannabis based 
treatments for neuropathic and multiple sclerosis-related pain. Current medical research and 
opinion. 2007; 23:17–24. [PubMed: 17257464] 
64. Issa MA, Narang S, Jamison RN, Michna E, Edwards RR, Penetar DM, Wasan AD. The subjective 
psychoactive effects of oral dronabinol studied in a randomized, controlled crossover clinical trial 
for pain. The Clinical journal of pain. 30:472–478. [PubMed: 24281276] 
65. Jensen MP. Review of measures of neuropathic pain. Current pain and headache reports. 2006; 
10:159–166. [PubMed: 18778569] 
66. Jones RT. Cardiovascular system effects of marijuana. Journal of clinical pharmacology. 2002; 
42:58S–63S. [PubMed: 12412837] 
Wilsey et al.
Page 21
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 67. Kelly TH, Foltin RW, Fischman MW. Effects of smoked marijuana on heart rate, drug ratings and 
task performance by humans. Behavioural pharmacology. 1993; 4:167–178. [PubMed: 11224183] 
68. Khan A, Kolts RL, Thase ME, Krishnan KR, Brown W. Research design features and patient 
characteristics associated with the outcome of antidepressant clinical trials. The American journal 
of psychiatry. 2004; 161:2045–2049. [PubMed: 15514405] 
69. Khan A, Schwartz K. Study designs and outcomes in antidepressant clinical trials. Essential 
psychopharmacology. 2005; 6:221–226. [PubMed: 16041918] 
70. Klove, H. Clinical neuropsychology. In: Forster, FE., editor. Medical Clinics of North America. 
New York, NY: Saunders; 1963. 
71. Krassioukov A. Which pathways must be spared in the injured human spinal cord to retain 
cardiovascular control? Progress in brain research. 2006; 152:39–47. [PubMed: 16198692] 
72. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The PHQ-9: validity of a brief depression severity measure. J 
Gen Intern Med. 2001; 16:606–613. [PubMed: 11556941] 
73. Lev-Ran S, Le Foll B, McKenzie K, George TP, Rehm J. Bipolar disorder and co-occurring 
cannabis use disorders: characteristics, co-morbidities and clinical correlates. Psychiatry research. 
2013; 209:459–465. [PubMed: 23312479] 
74. Lev-Ran S, Roerecke M, Le Foll B, George TP, McKenzie K, Rehm J. The association between 
cannabis use and depression: a systematic review and meta-analysis of longitudinal studies. 
Psychological medicine. 2014; 44:797–810. [PubMed: 23795762] 
75. Leweke FM, Koethe D. Cannabis and psychiatric disorders: it is not only addiction. Addiction 
biology. 2008; 13:264–275. [PubMed: 18482435] 
76. Mechoulam R, Parker L. Towards a better cannabis drug. British journal of pharmacology. 2013; 
170:1363–1364. [PubMed: 24024867] 
77. Mittleman MA, Lewis RA, Maclure M, Sherwood JB, Muller JE. Triggering myocardial infarction 
by marijuana. Circulation. 2001; 103:2805–2809. [PubMed: 11401936] 
78. Moore RA, Straube S, Wiffen PJ, Derry S, McQuay HJ. Pregabalin for acute and chronic pain in 
adults. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2009:CD007076. [PubMed: 19588419] 
79. Mutlu A, Livanelioglu A, Gunel MK. Reliability of Ashworth and Modified Ashworth scales in 
children with spastic cerebral palsy. BMC musculoskeletal disorders. 2008; 9:44. [PubMed: 
18402701] 
80. Narang S, Gibson D, Wasan AD, Ross EL, Michna E, Nedeljkovic SS, Jamison RN. Efficacy of 
dronabinol as an adjuvant treatment for chronic pain patients on opioid therapy. J Pain. 2008; 
9:254–264. [PubMed: 18088560] 
81. Niesink RJ, van Laar MW. Does Cannabidiol Protect Against Adverse Psychological Effects of 
THC? Frontiers in psychiatry. 2013; 4:130. [PubMed: 24137134] 
82. O’Connor, A.; Dworkin, R. Understanding and Interpreting Neuropathic Pain Clinical Trials. In: 
Simpson, D.; McArthur, J.; Dworkin, R., editors. Neuropathic Pain: Mechanisms, Diagnosis and 
Treatment. Oxford University Press; New York, NY: 2012. p. 136
83. O’Connor AB, Dworkin RH. Treatment of neuropathic pain: an overview of recent guidelines. The 
American journal of medicine. 2009; 122:S22–32. [PubMed: 19801049] 
84. Osterberg A, Boivie J. Central pain in multiple sclerosis - sensory abnormalities. European journal 
of pain (London, England). 2010; 14:104–110.
85. Owen KP, Sutter ME, Albertson TE. Marijuana: respiratory tract effects. Clinical reviews in allergy 
& immunology. 2014; 46:65–81. [PubMed: 23715638] 
86. Pavisian B, MacIntosh BJ, Szilagyi G, Staines RW, O’Connor P, Feinstein A. Effects of cannabis 
on cognition in patients with MS: a psychometric and MRI study. Neurology. 2014; 82:1879–
1887. [PubMed: 24789863] 
87. Pedersen W. Does cannabis use lead to depression and suicidal behaviours? A population-based 
longitudinal study. Acta psychiatrica Scandinavica. 2008; 118:395–403. [PubMed: 18798834] 
88. Robins LN, Helzer JE, Croughan J, Ratcliff KS. National Institute of Mental Health Diagnostic 
Interview Schedule. Its history, characteristics, and validity. Archives of general psychiatry. 1981; 
38:381–389. [PubMed: 6260053] 
Wilsey et al.
Page 22
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 89. Rowbotham MC. Mechanisms of neuropathic pain and their implications for the design of clinical 
trials. Neurology. 2005; 65:S66–73. [PubMed: 16385106] 
90. Rowbotham MC, Twilling L, Davies PS, Reisner L, Taylor K, Mohr D. Oral opioid therapy for 
chronic peripheral and central neuropathic pain. The New England journal of medicine. 2003; 
348:1223–1232. [PubMed: 12660386] 
91. Sagar DR, Jhaveri M, Chapman V. Targeting the cannabinoid system to produce analgesia. Curr 
Top Behav Neurosci. 2009; 1:275–287. [PubMed: 21104388] 
92. Scholz J, Woolf CJ. The neuropathic pain triad: neurons, immune cells and glia. Nature 
neuroscience. 2007; 10:1361–1368. [PubMed: 17965656] 
93. Schwid SR, Covington M, Segal BM, Goodman AD. Fatigue in multiple sclerosis: current 
understanding and future directions. Journal of rehabilitation research and development. 2002; 
39:211–224. [PubMed: 12051465] 
94. Selvarajah D, Gandhi R, Emery CJ, Tesfaye S. Randomized placebo-controlled double-blind 
clinical trial of cannabis-based medicinal product (Sativex) in painful diabetic neuropathy: 
depression is a major confounding factor. Diabetes care. 2010; 33:128–130. [PubMed: 19808912] 
95. Singh, H.; Gormley, K. NIDA Drug Supply Program. National Institute of Drug Abuse; Bethesda, 
MD: 2015. http://www.drugabuse.gov/researchers/research-resources/nida-drug-supply-program 
and http://www.drugabuse.gov/researchers/research-resources/nida-drug-supply-program-dsp/
marijuana-plant-material-available-nida-drug-supply-program
96. Skrabek RQ, Galimova L, Ethans K, Perry D. Nabilone for the treatment of pain in fibromyalgia. J 
Pain. 2008; 9:164–173. [PubMed: 17974490] 
97. Stella N. Cannabinoid signaling in glial cells. Glia. 2004; 48:267–277. [PubMed: 15390110] 
98. Suter MR, Wen YR, Decosterd I, Ji RR. Do glial cells control pain? Neuron glia biology. 2007; 
3:255–268. [PubMed: 18504511] 
99. Svendsen KB, Jensen TS, Bach FW. Does the cannabinoid dronabinol reduce central pain in 
multiple sclerosis? Randomised double blind placebo controlled crossover trial. BMJ (Clinical 
research ed. 2004; 329:253.
100. Tetrault JM, Crothers K, Moore BA, Mehra R, Concato J, Fiellin DA. Effects of marijuana 
smoking on pulmonary function and respiratory complications: a systematic review. Archives of 
internal medicine. 2007; 167:221–228. [PubMed: 17296876] 
101. Tombaugh TN. A comprehensive review of the Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test (PASAT). 
Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2006; 21:53–76. [PubMed: 16290063] 
102. Volkow, N. Researching Marijuana for Therapeutic Purposes: The Potential Promise of 
Cannabidiol (CBD). https://www.drugabuse.gov/about-nida/noras-blog/2015/07/researching-
marijuana-therapeutic-purposes-potential-promise-cannabidiol-cbd
103. Wade DT, Makela PM, House H, Bateman C, Robson P. Long-term use of a cannabis-based 
medicine in the treatment of spasticity and other symptoms in multiple sclerosis. Multiple 
sclerosis (Houndmills, Basingstoke, England). 2006; 12:639–645.
104. Wallace M, Schulteis G, Atkinson JH, Wolfson T, Lazzaretto D, Bentley H, Gouaux B, Abramson 
I. Dose-dependent effects of smoked cannabis on capsaicin-induced pain and hyperalgesia in 
healthy volunteers. Anesthesiology. 2007; 107:785–796. [PubMed: 18073554] 
105. Wallace MS, Marcotte TD, Umlauf A, Gouaux B, Atkinson JH. Efficacy of Inhaled Cannabis on 
Painful Diabetic Neuropathy. J Pain. 2015
106. Ware MA, Wang T, Shapiro S, Collet JP. Cannabis for the Management of Pain: Assessment of 
Safety Study (COMPASS). J Pain. 2015; 16:1233–1242. [PubMed: 26385201] 
107. Ware MA, Wang T, Shapiro S, Robinson A, Ducruet T, Huynh T, Gamsa A, Bennett GJ, Collet JP. 
Smoked cannabis for chronic neuropathic pain: a randomized controlled trial. Cmaj. 2010; 
182:E694–701. [PubMed: 20805210] 
108. Wechsler, D. Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale. 3. Administration and Scoring Manual; San 
Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation, Harcourt Brace & Co; 1997. 
109. Whiting PF, Wolff RF, Deshpande S, Di Nisio M, Duffy S, Hernandez AV, Keurentjes JC, Lang S, 
Misso K, Ryder S, Schmidlkofer S, Westwood M, Kleijnen J. Cannabinoids for Medical Use: A 
Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Jama. 2015; 313:2456–2473. [PubMed: 26103030] 
Wilsey et al.
Page 23
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 110. Wieseler-Frank J, Maier SF, Watkins LR. Glial activation and pathological pain. Neurochemistry 
international. 2004; 45:389–395. [PubMed: 15145553] 
111. Wilkinson ST, Radhakrishnan R, D’Souza DC. Impact of Cannabis Use on the Development of 
Psychotic Disorders. Current addiction reports. 2014; 1:115–128. [PubMed: 25767748] 
112. Wilsey B, Marcotte T, Deutsch R, Gouaux B, Sakai S, Donaghe H. Low-dose vaporized cannabis 
significantly improves neuropathic pain. J Pain. 2013; 14:136–148. [PubMed: 23237736] 
113. Wilsey B, Marcotte T, Tsodikov A, Millman J, Bentley H, Gouaux B, Fishman S. A randomized, 
placebo-controlled, crossover trial of cannabis cigarettes in neuropathic pain. J Pain. 2008; 
9:506–521. [PubMed: 18403272] 
114. Zajicek JP, Hobart JC, Slade A, Barnes D, Mattison PG. Multiple sclerosis and extract of 
cannabis: results of the MUSEC trial. Journal of neurology, neurosurgery, and psychiatry. 2012; 
83:1125–1132.
115. Zogopoulos P, Vasileiou I, Patsouris E, Theocharis SE. The role of endocannabinoids in pain 
modulation. Fundam Clin Pharmacol. 2013; 27:64–80. [PubMed: 23278562] 
116. Zuardi AW, Shirakawa I, Finkelfarb E, Karniol IG. Action of cannabidiol on the anxiety and other 
effects produced by delta 9-THC in normal subjects. Psychopharmacology. 1982; 76:245–250. 
[PubMed: 6285406] 
Wilsey et al.
Page 24
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 PERSPECTIVE
A cross-over, randomized, placebo-controlled human laboratory experiment involving 
administration of vaporized cannabis was performed in patients with neuropathic pain 
related to spinal cord injury and disease. This study supports consideration of future 
research that would include longer duration studies over weeks to months in order to 
evaluate the efficacy of medicinal cannabis in patients with central neuropathic pain.
Wilsey et al.
Page 25
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Highlights
•
Vaporized cannabis positively affected all of the neuropathic pain 
descriptors
•
There was significantly more pain relief with active cannabis compared 
to placebo
•
The two active doses did not significantly differ from each other in 
terms of analgesic potency
•
Many of the psychoactive side effects were delta 9-THC concentration-
dependent
Wilsey et al.
Page 26
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Experimental procedures and timing of cannabis vaporization sessions
Wilsey et al.
Page 27
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Schedule of Experimental Procedures
Wilsey et al.
Page 28
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Consort Flow Diagram
Wilsey et al.
Page 29
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
11-point numerical pain intensity rating scale anchored between 0 (no pain) and 10 (worst 
possible pain)
Wilsey et al.
Page 30
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
“Do you feel high right now?” a 100-mm VAS anchored by “not at all” at 0 and “extremely” 
at 100
Wilsey et al.
Page 31
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. 
“Do you feel a good drug effect right now?” a 100-mm VAS anchored by “not at all” at 0 
and “extremely” at 100
Wilsey et al.
Page 32
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. 
“Do you feel stoned right now?” a 100-mm VAS anchored by “not at all” at 0 and 
“extremely” at 100
Wilsey et al.
Page 33
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Wilsey et al.
Page 34
Table 1
Demographics and Characteristics of Patients (N=42)
Sex (no.)
 Male
29 (69%)
 Female
13 (31%)
Age, mean (SD)
46.4 (13.6)
Educational level
 Some high school
1 (2%)
 High school graduate
9 (22%)
 Some college
21 (51%)
 College graduate
10 (24%)
Ethnicity
 Caucasian
26 (62%)
 Hispanic
7 (17%)
 African American
5 (12%)
 Asian American
2 (5%)
 American Indian
1 (2%)
 Other
1 (2%)
LANSS Score, mean (SD)
16.0 (2.8)
Etiology of Spinal Cord Pain
 Trauma
29
  Automobile Accident
11
  Recreational Sporting Injury (All-Terrain Vehicle, Diving, Snowboard, Snowmobile, Trampoline)
5
  Motorcycle Accident
3
  Fall Injury
3
  Sports Injury (Football, Martial Arts)
2
  Firearm Injury
2
  Assault with Blunt Object
1
  Osteomyelitis with Epidural Abscess
1
  Post-Surgical Wound Hematoma
1
 Disease
13
  Multiple Sclerosis
6
  Cervical Disc Disease
3
  Spinal Cord Tumor
1
  Vertebral Artery Occlusion
1
  Arachnoid Cysts
1
  Syringomyelia
1
Neurological Level
  Cervical
22
  Thoracic
14
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Wilsey et al.
Page 35
  Lumbar
6
  Sacral
0
Duration of Pain, mean years (SD)
11.6 (10.1)
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Wilsey et al.
Page 36
Table 2
Main overall dose effect (left of dotted line) and dose effects at specified timepoints (right of dotted line) for Pain Intensity and related measures. 
Inequalities show the direction of significant dose effects, 0 = placebo, 2.9 = 2.9% THC, 6.7 = 6.7% THC. Higher intensity and allodynia values reflect 
more pain, higher pain relief values reflect more relief from pain.
Measure*
Main
Timepoint (minutes)
Dose Effect
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
Intensity**,n
0 > 2.9 > 6.7
ns
ns
0>2.9,6.7
0>6.7
0>6.7
0>2.9>6.7
0>2.9,6.7
0>2.9,6.7
Pain Relief
0<2.9,6.7
---
0<2.9,6.7
0<2.9,6.7
ns
0<2.9,6.7
0<2.9,6.7
0<2.9
0<6.7
Allodynia**
ns
ns
0>6.7
---
---
ns
---
---
---
Abbreviations: ns, not significant; ---, not measured
*Treatment sequence was tested but dropped in all models since no significance was identified; Intensity and allodynia had a significant time effect (p<0.0001); Intensity had a significant dose x time 
interaction effect (p < 0.01); Recent cannabis use did not alter main effect results.
**Adjusted for baseline values (p < 0.0001).
nNeuropathic pain condition (spinal cord injury vs. disease) was tested but dropped since no significance was identified.
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Wilsey et al.
Page 37
Table 3
Main overall dose effect (left of dotted line) and dose effects at specified timepoints (right of dotted line) for Neuropathic Pain Scale measures. 
Inequalities show the direction of significant dose effects, 0 = placebo, 2.9 = 2.9% THC, 6.7 = 6.7% THC.
Main
Timepoint (minutes)
Measure*
Dose Effect
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
Intensity**
0>2.9,6.7
ns
ns
0>2.9,6.7
0>2.9,6.7
0>2.9,6.7
0>2.9>6.7
0>2.9,6.7
0>2.9,6.7
Sharpness
0>2.9>6.7
ns
ns
0>6.7
0>2.9,6.7
0>6.7
0,2.9>6.7
0>6.7
ns
Burning
0>2.9,6.7
ns
0>2.9,6.7
0>2.9
0>6.7
ns
0>2.9,6.7
0>6.7
0>6.7
Aching
0>2.9,6.7
ns
ns
ns
0>6.7
0>6.7
0>6.7
0>6.7
ns
Cold
0>2.9,6.7
ns
0>2.9,6.7
0>2.9,6.7
0>2.9,6.7
0>2.9,6.7
0>2.9,6.7
0>2.9,6.7
0>2.9,6.7
Sensitivity
0>2.9,6.7
ns
ns
0>6.7
0>6.7
0>6.7
0>6.7
0>2.9,6.7
ns
Itching
0>6.7
ns
2.9>6.7
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
Unpleasantness
0>2.9,6.7
ns
ns
0>6.7
0>6.7
0>6.7
0>2.9,6.7
ns
0>2.9
Deep Pain
0>2.9,6.7
ns
0>2.9
0>2.9
0>2.9,6.7
0>6.7
0>6.7
ns
0>2.9
Superficial Pain**
0>2.9,6.7
ns
0>2.9
0>2.9,6.7
0>2.9,6.7
0>2.9,6.7
0>2.9,6.7
0>2.9,6.7
0>2.9,6.7
Abbreviation: ns, not significant
*All models included an adjustment for the baseline values (p<0.0001) and had a significant time effect (p<0.0001); Only Intensity and sensitivity had a significant dose x time interaction effect (p < 0.04); 
Recent cannabis use did not alter main effect results.
**Adjusted for treatment sequence effect
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Wilsey et al.
Page 38
Table 4
Main overall dose effect (left of dotted line) and dose effects at specified timepoints (right of dotted line) for Subjective and Psychoactive Side Effects. 
Inequalities show the direction of significant dose effects, 0 = placebo, 2.9 = 2.9% THC, 6.7 = 6.7% THC.
Main
Timepoint (minutes)
Measure*
Dose effect
120
180
240
300
360
420
Any Drug Effect
0<2.9<6.7
0<2.9,6.7
0,2.9<6.7
0<2.9<6.7
0<2.9<6.7
0<2.9<6.7
0<2.9<6.7
Good Drug Effect
0<2.9<6.7
0<2.9,6.7
0,2.9<6.7
0<2.9,6.7
0<2.9,6.7
0<2.9<6.7
0<2.9,6.7
Bad Drug Effect
0<2.9,6.7
0<2.9,6.7
ns
ns
0<2.9,6.7
ns
ns
High
0<2.9<6.7
0<2.9<6.7
0,2.9<6.7
0<2.9<6.7
0<2.9<6.7
0<2.9,6.7
0<6.7
Drunk
0,2.9<6.7
0<2.9
ns
2.9<6.7
0,2.9<6.7
ns
2.9<6.7
Impaired
0<2.9<6.7
0<6.7
0<6.7
0<2.9<6.7
0<2.9<6.7
0,2.9<6.7
0,2.9<6.7
Stoned
0<2.9<6.7
0<2.9<6.7
0<6.7
0<2.9<6.7
0<2.9<6.7
0,2.9<6.7
0<6.7
Like the Drug Effect
0<2.9,6.7
0<2.9,6.7
0<2.9,6.7
0<2.9,6.7
0<2.9<6.7
0<2.9,6.7
0<2.9,6.7
Sedated
0<2.9<6.7
0<2.9,6.7
0<6.7
0<2.9,6.7
0<2.9,6.7
0,2.9<6.7
0<6.7
Confused
0,2.9<6.7
ns
ns
0<6.7
0,2.9<6.7
ns
0<6.7
Nauseous
0<2.9,6.7
0<2.9
0<2.9
ns
ns
ns
ns
Desires More
0<6.7
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
Hungry
0<6.7
0<2.9
2.9>6.7
ns
0,2.9<6.7
ns
ns
Changes Perceiving Time
0<2.9,6.7
ns
ns
0<6.7
0<6.7
ns
ns
Changes Perceiving Space
0<2.9<6.7
ns
ns
0<6.7
0,2.9<6.7
0<6.7
0<6.7
Difficulty Paying Attention
0,2.9<6.7
0<6.7
ns
0<6.7
ns
0<6.7
ns
Difficulty Remembering Things
0<6.7
ns
ns
0<6.7
ns
ns
ns
Abbreviation: ns, not significant
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Wilsey et al.
Page 39
*Treatment sequence and recent cannabis use were tested but dropped since no significance was identified; Significant time effects for any drug effect, high, sedated, and hungry had p<0.0001, time effects 
for good drug effect, impaired, and stoned had p<0.01, and bad drug effect and like the drug effect had p<0.04, with no significant time effects for the other side effects; Only hungry had a significant dose x 
time interaction effect (p<0.01).
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Wilsey et al.
Page 40
Table 5
Main overall dose effect (left of dotted line) and dose effects at specified timepoints (right of dotted line) for Spasticity. Inequalities show the direction of 
significant dose effects, 0 = placebo, 2.9 = 2.9% THC, 6.7 = 6.7% THC.
Main
Timepoint (minutes)
Measure*
Dose Effect
0
60
240
420
Spasticity Numerical Scale**
0>2.9
ns
ns
ns
0>2.9
Categorical Spasticity Relief
ns
---
ns
ns
0,6.7<2.9
Abbreviations: ns, not significant; ---, not measured
*Terms for treatment sequence and neuropathic pain condition were included and tested for significance in initial models but were dropped since no significance was identified; There were significant time 
effects (p<0.0001 for spasticity numerical scale and p=0.0227 for categorical spasticity relief); There were no dose x time interaction effects and recent cannabis use did not alter main effect results.
**Adjusted for baseline value (p < 0.0001).
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Wilsey et al.
Page 41
Table 6
Main overall dose effect (left of dotted line) and dose effects at specified timepoints (right of dotted line) for Vital Signs. Inequalities show the direction 
of significant dose effects, 0 = placebo, 2.9 = 2.9% delta 9-THC, 6.7 = 6.7% delta 9-THC.
Main
Timepoint (minutes)
Measure*
Dose Effect
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
Heart rate
0<2.9,6.7
ns
0<2.9,6.7
ns
ns
0<2.9,6.7
ns
ns
Respiration Rate
ns
2.9>6.7
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
Systolic Blood Pressure**
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
0>6.7
ns
Diastolic Blood Pressure
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
0>6.7
ns
*All models included an adjustment for the baseline values (p<0.0001) and had no dose x time interaction effects; There were time effects for heart and respiration rates (p<0.0001), systolic blood pressure 
(p<0.01), and diastolic blood pressure (p=0.02); A term for level of injury was included and tested for significance in initial models but was dropped since no significance was identified; Recent cannabis 
use did not alter main effect results.
**Adjusted for treatment sequence effect
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Wilsey et al.
Page 42
Table 7
Main overall dose effect (left of dotted line) and dose effects at specified timepoints (right of dotted line) for raw NP test measures. Inequalities show the 
direction of significant dose effects, 0 = placebo, 2.9 = 2.9% delta 9-THC, 6.7 = 6.7% delta 9-THC.
Main
Timepoint (minutes)
Measure*
Dose Effect
0
120
180
300
360
420
Digit Symbol
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
HVLT Sum
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
HVLT Delay
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
HVLT True Positive
ns
ns
0,2.9>6.7
0,2.9>6.7
ns
ns
ns
HVLT False Positive
0<6.7
ns
ns
ns
0<6.7
ns
ns
Pegboard D TimeI
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
Pegboard ND Time I
ns
ns
ns
ns
0<6.7
2.9<0,6.7
ns
PASAT Correctc
ns
ns
ns
---
ns
---
2.9<6.7
Trails A Time
***
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
2.9>6.7
Trails B Time**
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
Abbreviations: ns, not significant; ---, not measured.
*All models included an adjustment for the baseline values (all p < 0.0001); Time effects were significant for digit symbol, HVLT delay, PASAT correct, and Trails A and B (p<0.0001), HVLT sum, HVLT 
true positive, and pegboard ND time (p<0.02), and pegboard D time (p<0.05), but not for HVLT false positive; There were no significant dose x time interaction effects.
**Adjusted for treatment sequence effect
***Significant overall dose effect (p=0.047) but no pairwise differences found with Tukey HSD test.
IShorter time with injury below cervical level, but main effects unchanged.
cMore correct with recent cannabis use, but main effects unchanged
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Wilsey et al.
Page 43
Table 8
Neuropsychological Instrument Effect Sizes* Compared to Placebo.
Timepoint (minutes)
Test Measure
delta 9-THC Dose
0
120
180
300
360
420
Digit Symbol
2.9%
0.08
0.02
−0.02
0.05
0.07
0.08
6.7%
0.11
0.03
0.05
−0.06
−0.00
0.05
HVLT, Sum
2.9%
0.02
0.03
−0.01
−0.04
0.15
0.07
6.7%
−0.04
−0.12
−0.14
−0.09
0.08
0.16
HVLT, Delay
2.9%
−0.02
0.24
−0.07
0.02
−0.11
0.09
6.7%
−0.07
0.02
−0.07
−0.23
−0.22
0.05
HVLT, True Positive
2.9%
−0.11
0.12
0.10
−0.03
−0.14
0.03
6.7%
−0.25
−0.46
−0.44
−0.08
−0.09
0.06
HVLT, False Positive
2.9%
0.09
0.17
0.06
0.22
0.23
0.31
6.7%
0.35
0.14
−0.04
0.45
0.38
0.39
Grooved Pegboard, D
2.9%
−0.06
−0.03
0.03
0.00
0.07
0.10
6.7%
−0.02
0.10
0.07
0.04
0.06
0.01
Grooved Pegboard, ND
2.9%
−0.02
−0.05
−0.02
0.02
−0.14
0.07
6.7%
−0.01
0.03
−0.05
0.17
0.01
0.11
PASAT
2.9%
0.09
0.20
---
0.02
---
0.01
6.7%
0.09
0.18
---
0.07
---
0.23
Trails Making A Time
2.9%
−0.11
−0.10
−0.02
0.01
−0.04
0.09
6.7%
0.17
0.01
−0.13
0.02
−0.08
−0.06
Trails Making B Time
2.9%
−0.15
−0.16
−0.18
−0.07
−0.16
−0.10
6.7%
−0.13
−0.01
−0.20
−0.03
−0.21
−0.07
Abbreviations: HVLT, Hopkins Verbal Learning Test Revised; D, dominant hand; ND, non-dominant hand; PASAT, Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test; ---, not measured (PASAT only performed 4 times 
during the visit)
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Wilsey et al.
Page 44
*Bold type represents significant difference between active dose and placebo (Positive values: active dose mean is larger than the placebo mean; Negative values: active dose mean is smaller than the 
placebo mean.)
J Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
