 American Journal of Infection Control 
(2017) 
1 
Applying human factors ergonomics to the misuse of non-sterile clinical gloves in acute care 
Corresponding author: Dr Jennie Wilson 
University of West London, Richard Wells Research Centre, Paragon House, Brentford. Middlesex. 
TW8 9GB 
Jennie.wilson@uwl.ac.uk 
Tel: 02082094175 
 
Aggie Bak 
University of West London, Richard Wells Research Centre, Paragon House, Brentford. Middlesex. 
TW8 9GB 
 
Professor Heather Loveday 
University of West London, Richard Wells Research Centre, Paragon House, Brentford. Middlesex. 
TW8 9GB 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 American Journal of Infection Control 
(2017) 
2 
ABSTRACT 
Background: Healthcare workers (HCW) are recommended to wear non-sterile clinical gloves 
(NSCG) for direct contact with blood and body fluids to reduce transmission of healthcare 
associated infections (HCAI). However, there is evidence that inappropriate NSCG-use increases the 
risk of transmission. 
Methods: A mixed methods study comprising observation of NSCG-use during episodes of care in 
two acute hospitals and semi-structured interviews with HCW. Qualitative data were categorised 
using thematic analysis. Findings were mapped to the Systems Engineering Initiative for Patient 
Safety (SEIPS) model and used to develop a strategy for improving NSCG-use.  
Results: 278 procedures performed in 178 episodes of care involved the use of NSCG.  NSCG were 
inappropriate for 59% (165/278) procedures; risk of cross-contamination occurred in 49% (87/178) 
episodes. 26 HCW were interviewed; emotion and socialisation were key factors influencing 
decisions to use NSCG. Data from observation and thematic analysis were mapped to six interacting 
components of the SEIPS work-system.  Interventions targeting each component were identified to 
inform quality improvement strategies  
Conclusions: Despite more than a decade of intense promotion of hand hygiene as the key measure 
to protect patients from HCAI, NSCG dominate routine clinical practice and potential cross-
contamination occurs in half of care episodes where they are used. Such practice is associated with 
significant environmental and financial costs and adversely affects patient safety. The application of 
HFE to the complex social, professional and emotional drivers of inappropriate NSCG behaviour 
may be more effective than conventional approaches of education and policy in achieving the goal 
of preventing HAI and improving patient safety. 
 
 
Key words: Gloves, infection control, healthcare associated infection, hand hygiene, human factors, 
quality improvement, work systems 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 American Journal of Infection Control 
(2017) 
3 
BACKGROUND 
In healthcare settings, the hands of those delivering patient care act as efficient means of 
transferring pathogens across environmental surfaces, between patients or contaminated and 
clean sites on the same patient.[1,2] The use of non-sterile clinical gloves (NSCG) is a routine part of 
healthcare delivery, forming an element of personal protective equipment and a component of 
standard precautions where a risk of direct contact with blood and body fluids (BBF) is 
anticipated.[3] Non-sterile clinical gloves provide an effective barrier against gross contamination of 
the skin by pathogens potentially present in BBF but pose a risk of cross-contamination when not 
removed.[4,5] Perversely, the use of NSCG to protect staff from potential infection may increase 
the risk of healthcare-associated infection (HAI) transmission between the environment and 
patients and between patients through lack of their timely application and removal.[6,7] There is 
also some evidence that patients are concerned about the use of NSCG by HCW.[8]  
Human factors and ergonomics (HFE) is defined as “the scientific discipline concerned with the 
understanding of interactions among humans and other elements of a system, and the profession 
that applies theory, principles, data and methods to design in order to optimize human well-being 
and overall system performance”.[9] The application of HFE in healthcare is an emerging science 
and while recent work has focused on medication safety, the design of health information 
technologies, and assessment of patient safety culture, the value of HFE in healthcare has yet to be 
fully realised. [10, 11, 12] The Systems Engineering Initiative for Patient Safety (SEIPS) model 
provides a framework for exploring the work system and its impact on processes and outcomes for 
both patients and HCW. [11, 13]  
Research focused on strategies to improve hand hygiene (HH) behaviour fails to adequately 
account for the increasing and inappropriate use of NSCG.[14, 15] Recent studies have identified 
that staff wear NSCG for procedures not involving exposure to BBF; frequently do not remove them 
at the points in care where HH is indicated and do not decontaminate hands following their 
removal.[3,16] These studies suggest that the factors influencing NSCG-use behaviour are complex 
and, like many HFE work processes, unlikely to be modified by education interventions.[17] Disgust 
is an important trigger for HH and glove use; qualitative research also suggests that despite policy 
and guidance, emotion and socialisation are key drivers for healthcare workers’ (HCW) 
inappropriate use of NSCG.[3,18] While the WHO 5 Moments is based on human factors principles 
there is limited applied HFE research on use of the SEIPS 2.0 model in infection prevention and 
control (IPC); applying HFE to the use of NSCG may provide a framework for preventing the 
transmission of infection and promoting appropriate glove use.[19, 20] 
 American Journal of Infection Control 
(2017) 
4 
Our study builds on previous research[3] to confirm if similar behaviour and attitudes are apparent 
in other hospitals and apply SEIPS 2.0 to identify the interacting work systems and processes that 
influence NSCG-use behaviour, informing strategies for reducing inappropriate NSCG-use and 
improving patient safety. 
 
METHODS 
We undertook a mixed methods approach using observation and qualitative interviews. 
 
Observational audit of glove use 
A validated audit tool was used in two acute hospitals to record the sequence of donning and 
removing NSCG, HH and items touched during episodes of care.[21] Observation periods began 
when a HCW donned gloves for an episode of care and ended on when the episode was completed. 
Omission of HH before donning NSCG was not considered as a risk of cross-contamination; HH 
following NSCG removal was considered adequate if local protocol was adhered to; NSCG-use was 
considered appropriate if the procedure involved potential or actual contact with BBF, mucous 
membranes, situations required by local policy (e.g. patient under isolation precautions) or contact 
with substances hazardous to health.[21] Observations were conducted by a member of the IPC 
team during January-June 2014 in different types of wards. Staff were unaware of the purpose of 
the audits to minimise the Hawthorne effect. 
Data were analysed using SPSS 19; Pearson’s Chi-Squared (or Fishers exact test for small samples) 
was used to assess the statistical significance of the variables. 
 
Interviews with healthcare workers 
Healthcare workers were recruited through an advert in the trust staff e-newsletter. To encourage 
openness, a member of the university research team conducted semi-structured interviews with 
staff who responded. Written consent was obtained from participants prior to conducting each 
interview. The interview schedule explored factors that influenced decisions to wear NSCG and to 
challenge their use in other HCW. 
Interviews were digitally recorded and transcribed verbatim; transcripts were analysed using a six-
step thematic analysis described previously.[3,22] Following initial familiarisation, the data were 
manually coded, preliminary themes and categories identified, refined and checked to confirm they 
captured the essence of the data.  Saturation was reached when no further meanings or 
perceptions could be found within the data set. Finally, two researchers integrated the themes with 
 American Journal of Infection Control 
(2017) 
5 
the framework developed in the previous study[3]; descriptors for the themes were agreed and a 
refined framework incorporating the new data generated. 
Application of SEIPS 2.0  
To describe the use of NSCG-use in the context of a work system, the SEIPS 2.0 model was used to 
map the refined thematic framework to the six work system components.[11] This analysis was 
used to consider strategies that could be applied to improve processes and outcomes and reduce 
high-risk NSCG-use behaviour.  
Ethical approval 
Observations of NSCG-use formed part of routine clinical audit undertaken by the IPC team and did 
not require ethical approval. Ethical approval for interviews with HCW was granted by the College 
Research Scrutiny and Ethics Committee and access agreed by the trust Research and Development 
department. 
 
RESULTS 
Observational audit of the NSCG-use 
A total of 194 episodes of care were observed with 178 (91.8%) involving the NSCG-use; 278 
procedures were performed and NSCG-use was inappropriate for 59% (165/278), but varied 
between hospital A (37/88; 42%) and B (128/190; 67.4%) (p <0.001). The procedures for which 
NSGG were most commonly worn are shown in Table 1; few involved a risk of BBF contact and in 
5% of episodes HCW wore NSCG for a prolonged period without performing any procedure.  
Table 1: Ten most common procedures associated with HCW use of non-sterile clinical gloves 
Procedure 
Frequency 
observed 
% of all 
procedures 
Cleaning  
37 
13.3 
Mobilisation of patient 
36 
12.9 
Handling linen/bed making 
35 
12.6 
IV device manipulation 
28 
10.1 
Personal hygiene 
21 
7.6 
Toileting (including contact with commodes/urinals) 
20 
7.2 
Handling equipment 
20 
7.2 
Manipulation of invasive device (non-IV) 
16 
5.8 
Attention to patient 
16 
5.8 
No particular task 
14 
5.0 
 
 American Journal of Infection Control 
(2017) 
6 
The overall rate of cross-contamination associated with episodes of care where NSCG were used 
was 49% (87/178); the rate of cross-contamination varied from 58% (40/69) at hospital A to 42% 
(47/109) at hospital B (p = 0.065) and there was no significant difference between staff groups. The 
moments of HH where cross-contamination occurred are shown in Table 2. 
Table 2: Moments of hand hygiene associated with cross-contamination 
Moment of 
hand hygiene 
Description of cross-contamination 
(from Wilson et al 201521) 
Episodes of care where 
cross-contamination 
observed (N = 178) 
No. (%) 
1 
Gloves in contact with any part of the environment 
outside the patient’s zone before direct contact with the 
patient’s intact skin 
37 (21) 
2 
Gloves touched any non-sterile object e.g. patient skin, 
bed linen or patient sites before an aseptic task e.g. 
wounds, invasive device. 
17 (10) 
3 
Gloves used in contact with BBF subsequently touch a 
surface or patient  
27 (15) 
4 
Gloves used for contact within patient zone not removed, 
or removed but hand hygiene not performed, before 
contact with an object outside patient zone  
53 (30) 
5 
Gloves not removed, or removed but hand hygiene not 
performed after contact within the healthcare zone  
21 (12) 
 
In 62% (54/87) of episodes, cross-contamination occurred at more than one moment of HH as 
NSCG were not removed after or between procedures. Moment 1 cross-contamination occurred 
when NSCG were donned at a dispenser by the door to the room/bay and then touched items 
outside the patient zone prior to contact with the patient. Hand hygiene was not performed after 
NSCG removal in 41% (72/175) of episodes. Nurses were significantly less likely to decontaminate 
hands after NSCG removal than allied health professionals (AHP) (48/111 vs 1/14 p=0.002) 
Themes associated with healthcare workers’ decision to wear NSCG 
Interviews were conducted with 16 nurses, six healthcare assistants, three AHPs and one doctor. 
Thematic analysis confirmed that the use of NSCG was underpinned by two key themes of emotion 
 American Journal of Infection Control 
(2017) 
7 
and socialisation.[3] Socialisation comprised three sub-themes: professional socialisation, which 
reflected the influence of training, peers and usual ways of working; organisational socialisation, 
which reflected the influence of local policy, attitudes and behaviours; empathetic socialisation, 
which reflected consideration of the feelings or opinions of both patients and colleagues. Emotion 
comprised four sub-themes: fear, which reflected the need to protect self, patients and others; 
disgust, which related to touching body fluids or something unpleasant or unsightly; 
depersonalisation of intimate contact; and ease of mind, which related to conferring reassurance, 
safety and reliability (Table 3)  
 
 
 American Journal of Infection Control 
(2017) 
8 
Table 3: Thematic analysis of factors that influence the decision of healthcare workers to wear 
gloves 
Dimension 
Sub-theme 
Category 
Description 
Emotion 
Fear 
Self protection 
(specific 
threats) 
Protect against contamination by substances perceived to 
be dangerous to self such as body fluids, dirt, infection, 
uncleanliness, cleaning agents, antibiotics, something 
contagious 
 
 
Self Protection 
(unknown 
threats) 
Protect from potential threats when patient not known to 
healthcare worker  
 
 
Protect 
patients 
Prevent contamination of the patient or cross-
contamination to other patients; prevent infections 
spreading 
 
 
Making a 
mistake 
Being accused of not being safe or of doing the wrong 
thing 
 
Disgust 
Unsightliness 
Avoid contact with skin or other parts of the patient that 
look nasty or perceived to be unpleasant or messy 
 
 
Dirt  
Avoid contact with anything perceived to be ‘bad’, dirty or 
not clean 
 
 
Body fluids 
Avoid getting body fluids or secretions on bare hands  
 
Psychological 
barrier 
Negative 
Making the patient feel dirty or uncomfortable  
 
 
Positive 
Depersonalisation - avoiding using bare hands to touch 
intimate areas of the patient 
 
Ease of mind 
Safety 
Confer sense of safety against contact with potential 
hazards 
 
 
Reliability 
Hand hygiene is not sufficient, gloves are reliable 
 
 
Reassurance 
Feeling comfortable delivering care, being cautious and 
safe 
Socialisation 
Professional 
Instinctive 
Part of routine practice, something you do automatically 
without thinking or assessing need 
 
 
Role modeling 
Practice adopted from copying behavior of respected peers  
 
 
Training 
Behaviour instilled during ward (informal) or classroom-
based (formal) training 
 
 
Peer pressure 
Follow practice of others to fit in with norm  
 
 
Looking out 
for yourself 
Personal perceptions of situations where you want to wear 
gloves take precedence  
 
Organisational 
Policy 
Decision driven by perceived requirements of policy to 
protect yourself and patients 
 
 
Availability 
Gloves are everywhere, are quick and easy to out on and 
save time  
 
Empathetic 
Patient 
feelings 
Stigmatisation of the patient, creates barrier to touch, 
impersonal 
 
 
Patient 
expectations 
Gloves perceived to confer protection, to be hygienic; gives 
patient confidence hands are clean 
 
 
Staff opinions 
If that is what staff feel they need to do, it is their 
prerogative to wear gloves  
 
 American Journal of Infection Control 
(2017) 
9 
The impact of emotion on the decision to wear NSCG 
The decision to wear NSCG was strongly influenced by an emotional need for protection of self, 
driven by fear and disgust. These emotions were rationalised by misperception of risk, in particular 
the conflation of the concepts of universal precautions and contact precautions (CP) resulting in 
NSCG-use for all patient contact:  
“Obviously the idea is to protect yourself and the patient from infection so I suppose you 
could say that you should wear them all the time, which all of us do to be honest, you don’t 
know what patients have got infections you don’t know that if you haven’t got information 
then you need to treat everybody the same so you’re protecting yourself and you’re 
protecting the public”. 383: p.2; L33 
The need to wear NSCG to prepare intravenous drugs was also commonly cited, with a perception 
that handling antibiotics posed a risk: 
“I’m allergic to penicillin so I can’t get any penicillin on me at all but for other nurses it is just 
about limiting the amount of antibiotic they are exposed to on their skin.” 172: p.2; L24 
Whilst some HCW mentioned avoiding contact with BBF, more commonly NSCG were considered 
necessary as a physical protection against unspecified contamination or with the risk of likely 
contact with BBF being grossly over-estimated: 
“...if you didn’t have gloves [for toileting] because you think well what am I going to get 
from this, you know I am just going to get all sorts of bad stuff on me.” 184: p.1; L16 
The decision to wear NSCG was also influenced by a feeling of disgust and associated with 
perceived ‘uncleanliness’: 
“Some older men or women don’t always get to... you know…can’t always wash their own 
clothes and things. They cannot always be as clean as they might have been when they 
were younger”. 382: p.2; L26 
or ‘unsightliness’:  
“When patients have got skin conditions even when you know that it’s not anything which is 
contagious and catching...it looks horrible…” 174: p.6; L9 
The perception of risk to themselves from contact with patients resulted in HCW using NSCG in 
order to create an ‘ease of mind’: 
 American Journal of Infection Control 
(2017) 
10 
“I was told in Induction that we don’t need gloves for washing patients because of the 
barrier thing but, for me, I don’t feel comfortable not wearing gloves. I feel a lot safer and I 
feel a lot more relaxed.” 184: p.3; L29 
The drive to perform HH triggered by disgust and contact with things perceived to be dirty or 
unpleasant, was counteracted by NSCG-use:    
“Sometimes I get…quite a bit OCD when washing my hands so I find that when I’ve got the 
gloves on I’m less OCD about needing to wash my hands so …when I’ve taken them off they 
still feel like dirty and I’ll wash them, but if I haven’t got them on I’m much more conscious 
that I haven’t got the gloves on.” 176: p. 1; L10 
The decision to wear NSCG was also influenced by the need to depersonalise care and avoid 
inadvertently showing the patient feelings of disgust at carrying out a particular task and to protect 
the dignity of the patient when performing intimate tasks such as washing genital areas:  
“I’d take a judgment from the patient I think because sometimes they might be more 
uncomfortable if you didn’t wear gloves whereas if you’ve got your gloves on I am a bit 
more clinical so they feel a bit more dissociated from it.” 182: p.4; L7 
‘…if I’m doing something that can be quite personal to someone, like giving them a wash or 
things, if I wasn’t confident I know that they would see that I’m not confident and it just 
wouldn’t make it very nice for them.’ 184: p.4; L2 
The impact of socialisation on the decision to wear NSCG 
Organisational socialisation in the form of local policies and procedures were cited as an important 
determinant of when NSCG should be worn. Examples given demonstrated both inconsistency in 
practice and unfamiliarity with local policy (Table 1). 
Additionally, there was a perception that NSCG were more effective at preventing cross-infection 
than HH: 
“Even if you wash your hands well you can’t guarantee that they’re totally clean.” 174: p.1; 
L10 
The organisation was also seen to endorse NSCG-use by making them widely available, and HCW 
considered that their use saved time:  
 American Journal of Infection Control 
(2017) 
11 
“It takes what five seconds to pull a pair of gloves from a dispenser and put them on…” 183: 
p.2; L32 
“People just go from bed to bed and take their gloves off and just put another pair on.” 182: 
p.5; L14 
Responses also suggested that empathy had an effect on the decision to wear NSCG; with HCW 
recognising that wearing NSCG may give the patient the impression they are dirty or contagious and 
the therapeutic relationship would be damaged:  
“Touch is very important I think, when you are touching someone when you are wearing 
gloves it a barrier and I think it raises a lot of stigma.” 182: p.2; L7 
Some HCW mentioned that professional socialisation, the behaviour of peers and content of 
training were important influences on their use of NSCG. They referred to wearing NSCG as being 
‘automatic’, something that they would do routinely without necessarily assessing whether NSCG 
were required for a given situation. More commonly there was a strong sense that wearing NSCG 
was a personal decision that others had no authority to influence:  
“I would use personal experience and knowledge. I wouldn’t be influenced by somebody 
saying you don’t need to wear gloves if I feel I need to wear gloves I would wear them.” 171: 
p.2; L18 
“It’s a personal decision as to whether you feel you want to wear gloves for…because you 
don’t want to touch that skin, that’s a completely personal point of view.” 387: p.3; L8 
The concept that NSCG-use was a matter of individual choice made it difficult for some HCW to 
challenge inappropriate use: 
“Well sometimes I’ve just mentioned that actually you don’t really need your gloves on and 
a couple of them have said ’oh but I prefer to’ and I’m not going to say well take them off 
because that’s not really my place.” 172: p.5; 18 
Application of SEIPS 2.0 
The observational data, themes and subthemes arising from qualitative interviews (Table 3) were 
mapped to the six interacting components of the work system described in SEIPS 2.0.[11] (Table 4).  
 
Table 4: SEIPS 2.0 Human Factors Framework applied to the use of clinical gloves in acute 
healthcare settings 
 American Journal of Infection Control 
(2017) 
12 
 
SEIPS Factor 
Components of the work system influencing use of gloves 
Tools/ Technology 
Dispensers located outside patient zone 
 
Alcohol gel not accessible at bedside 
Person(s) 
Imprecise risk assessment results in gloves being used for 
procedures with no BBF contact 
 
Decision to wear gloves informed by emotion rather than 
policy/evidence 
 
Gloves perceived as more reliable that hand hygiene 
 
HCW not aware of infection control policy 
 
HCW not aware of compromising patient safety through 
inappropriate glove use 
 
Use of gloves perceived as personal decision 
 
Use of gloves as a psychological barrier 
Tasks 
HCW commonly perform more than one task during episode of 
care therefore difficult to apply 5MHH 
 
Ambiguity about when gloves are required 
 
Gloves put on before direct contact with the patient 
 
Gloves not removed between different tasks 
 
Hand hygiene not performed after gloves are removed 
 
Contact precautions drives donning gloves on entering the 
room & not changing between procedures 
Organisational factors 
Appropriate use of gloves not incorporated in standard 
infection control policies 
 
Emphasis on routine use of gloves for contact precautions  
 
Behaviour leant from observing other HCW 
 
Challenging inappropriate use of gloves considered 
unacceptable 
Internal environment 
Pressure to adhere to behaviour norms 
 
No agreement on when and where gloves should be used 
 
Challenging inappropriate use of gloves considered 
unacceptable 
External environment 
Government directives to reduce HAI make HCW cautious 
about making mistakes 
 
Contact precautions policies to prevent transmission of MDRO 
focus on routine use of gloves 
 
Behaviour leant from training/tutors 
 
Gloves to convey hygiene to patients 
 
Patients prefer HCW to use gloves for intimate hygiene 
 
This was used to develop an Ishikawa diagram that begins to describe the processes that could be 
used to redesign the system and make it easier for staff to ‘do the right thing’ in terms of NSCG-use 
(Figure 1).  
 
Figure 1: Strategies for achieving appropriate hand hygiene (HH) and non-sterile clinical gloves use in 
clinical settings based on processes in the SEIPS model.  
 American Journal of Infection Control 
(2017) 
13 
 
 
 
DISCUSSION 
This study demonstrated that in acute healthcare settings NSCG are commonly used for episodes of 
care where their use is not indicated.[3,6,8,16] They are donned too early, removed too late and 
not changed at critical points in the delivery of patient care. Consequently, NSCG-use is associated 
with a significant potential for cross-contamination and transmission of HAI. Whilst a key factor in 
the misuse of NCG is a lack of knowledge and situational understanding, emotion and socialisation 
are also powerful drivers of HCW use of NSCG. The need for self-protection against contact with 
‘dirt’ or ‘unpleasantness’ is strongly personal.  
 
The SEIPS 2.0 model describes six work system components: persons, tasks, tools and technology, 
 American Journal of Infection Control 
(2017) 
14 
organisation, internal and external environments, that are configured at ‘a moment in time’ to 
produce physical, cognitive and socio-behavioural processes that shape desired or undesirable 
outcomes.[11] We have considered our findings on NSCG-use in the context of this framework. 
 
Person 
Person-centredness and wellbeing is a key principle of HFE[23] and is placed at the centre of SEIPS 
2.0 to highlight the need for work systems to support people to do the right thing. In the model, 
‘Person’ relates to the characteristics of professional and non-professional carers and the patient. 
These include physical traits, social skills and experience, but also the beliefs and values that shape 
the performance of a task.[24] These characteristics map our theme of emotion and the sub-theme 
of professional socialisation. 
Our study highlights misconceptions that HCW have about ‘risk’ which drive NSCG-use, as they 
perceive NSCG to offer greater protection than HH in preventing transmission of infection to 
themselves. Since their primary focus is self-protection, HCW are less likely to consider the risk the 
contaminated NSCG present to patients. This is illustrated by the ubiquitous use of NSCG for 
activities that do not involve contact with BBF or other hazardous substances suggesting that the 
use of NSCG to protect hands from contact with pathogens is driven by factors similar to those that 
drive inherent HH. Whitby et al[18] propose that the intention to perform HH in healthcare settings 
is primarily driven by behaviour acquired in childhood and strongly influenced by perceptions of 
exposure to ‘dirt’ or ‘germs’. The perceptions of some HCW in this study that contact with older 
people and their belongings was ‘more risky’ because they could not look after themselves, align 
with our previous findings and Whitby’s assertion that a family source is considered less harmful 
than non-family and public sources of contamination.[18] Also similar is the observation that HCW 
use NSCG to minimise embarrassment when attending to intimate areas and that the intention to 
perform HH is strong when hands have been somewhere considered to be ‘emotionally 
dirty’.[18,25] Healthcare workers also indicated that patient preference was a reason for using 
NSCG for intimate care. These findings suggest that NSCG-use may have the perverse effect of 
neutralising the triggers that would normally induce HH and explain the HH opportunities that are 
missed. Addressing these ‘person factors’ within the work system will be an essential component of 
successful improvement strategies and will require more than the usual approach of information 
and education to modify the powerful driver of emotion in HH and NSCG behaviour. 
 
 
 American Journal of Infection Control 
(2017) 
15 
Task 
Using NSCG would not at first appear to be a complex task, but the interaction of work system 
factors results in complicated decisions about when to don and remove NSCG during episodes of 
care. The observational data demonstrates that several tasks/procedures comprise a single episode 
of patient care, making it difficult for HCW to identify where in the sequence of care NSCG should 
be removed. Healthcare workers develop work-arounds rather than accurately assessing the risk of 
exposure to BBF and fail to recognise the risk of cross-contamination between the environment and 
patients. Thus NSCG are commonly donned long before direct contact with the patient, not 
removed between different tasks, and HH omitted after they are removed. Other work highlights 
that the reality of donning NSCG after performing HH is almost impossible[26], suggesting that 
there needs to be a reappraisal of organisational and current external environment factors such as 
national guidance. 
 
Tools and technology 
The availability and location of NSCG form part of the tools and technology element of SEIPS 2.0; 
this has an impact on how HCW use them for standard infection control precautions (SICP), where 
direct contact with BBF is anticipated, and in CP where ‘high risk’ patients are isolated in single 
rooms and routine use of NSCG for all care is recommended.[27] Our observations indicate that in 
acute wards/units NSCG are widely available but rarely located at the patient’s bedside, thereby 
driving the tendency to don NSCG early in an episode of care and increasing the risk of cross-
contamination. Where CP are in place, NSCG are generally located outside the patient’s room and 
are only removed before leaving. In both SICP and CP the location of NSCG discourages HCW from 
changing them when they move from one task to another during an episode of care for the same 
patient. This increases the risk of infection through contamination of susceptible sites from NSCG. 
The speed and ease with which NSCG can be used and practical problems of donning NSCG 
following HH may prompt HCW to prolong the use NSCG in preference to HH.[28]  
 
Organisation 
The organisation elements of SEIPS 2.0 encompass resources such as time, training, policies as well 
as cultural and social norms or ‘how things are done around here’. This links closely to the theme 
and sub-themes of socialisation (Table 3). The strong influence of cultural norms and lack of 
leadership was evident in our results, with perceived peer pressure to use NSCG.[29]  This, together 
with a perceived social norm that the decision to wear NSCG is a personal one, undermined the 
ability of HCW to challenge the practice of others. 
 American Journal of Infection Control 
(2017) 
16 
 
There was a lack of understanding about how infection is transmitted and the assessment of risk for 
various care and technical tasks, with a gap between the content of training and reality of practice. 
Our study suggests that the trigger points for donning and removing NSCG are not supported by 
clear IPC policy, leading to method and task ambiguity.[28] This may result in HCW attributing their 
confusion and inappropriate NSCG-use to local or national policy, suggesting that IPC policy needs 
to be much clearer about how and when NSCG should be used, and more closely aligned to the 
practical realities of the task, tools and person elements of the work system.  
 
Internal environment 
SEIPS 2.0 relates to the physical environment where work processes occur, and generally includes 
factors such as the layout of wards/units or bed-spaces, space, ventilation and lighting. In this study 
we identified that the location of glove dispensers was the main environmental factor influencing 
NSCG-use. As previously highlighted, dispensers are remote from the patient bed space, often 
located at the entrance to the room or bay or by hand basins.  
 
External environment 
The impact of the external environment on work systems and processes is a new component of the 
SEIPS model. It takes account of the effect that health and social policy, regulation, economic 
conditions and ecological factors may have on the work system.   
Global and national initiatives aimed at reducing infections caused by methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus and Clostridium difficile have included a focus on the contribution hands 
make to spreading HAI.[30,20] This has increased the emphasis on demonstrating poor compliance 
and inadequate technique, contributing to HCW perception that HH is ineffective.[32] Whilst the 
purpose of the HH messaging is to encourage timely and effective HH in patient care, other IPC 
interventions such as CP may have perpetuated this perspective. Contact precautions require the 
HCW to ‘wear a gown and gloves for all interactions that may involve contact with the patient or 
potentially contaminated areas in the patient’s environment’[27], reinforcing the message that the 
universal use of NSCG prevents the transmission of infection and that HH alone is insufficient. 
Universal gloving lacks a sound theoretical base and has an adverse effect on HH practice.[33,34} 
 
The economic and environmental impact of NSCG-use is also an important consideration. Our work 
has demonstrated the widespread use of NSCG by all professional groups, across diverse acute care 
settings and indicated that in approximately 60% of occasions their use is unnecessary as no 
 American Journal of Infection Control 
(2017) 
17 
contact with BBF or other potentially infectious material occurs. Since NSCG are classed as clinical 
waste they are incinerated or disposed of in other managed waste systems.[35] The inappropriate 
and over-use of NSCG means they could be considered as domestic waste. This incurs unnecessary 
cost and increases the potential damage to the environment associated with these disposal 
processes.[36] It is also evident that the ubiquitous use of NSCG in delivering healthcare will have 
an upstream cost implication. Although NSCG are relatively inexpensive, there is some evidence 
that significant potential savings are possible. For a 500-bed hospital in this study the cost of NSCG 
was £300 000 per annum [personal communication: Linda Hosie, 2013]. Since more than half of 
these NSCG are used unnecessarily, service improvement strategies targeting NSCG are not only 
likely to be cost effective but free up resources for other aspects of patient care.  
 
CONCLUSION 
Despite more than a decade of intense promotion of HH as the key measure to protect patients 
from infection, this study has demonstrated that NSCG dominate routine clinical practice and that 
potential cross-contamination occurs in half of the episodes where they are used. The unnecessary 
use of NSCG impacts on patient safety and is associated with significant environmental and 
financial costs.  The conventional approach of using policy and education to change behaviour are 
unlikely to be effective in addressing this multifaceted problem. The application of HFE to the 
complex social, professional and emotional drivers of inappropriate NSCG behaviour may be more 
effective in achieving the goal of preventing HAI and improving patient safety. 
 
Acknowledgements 
Our thanks go to Linda Hosie, Jenny Wyeth and Yvonne Carter for their assistance with data 
capture. 
 
Funding 
The study was funded by a small collaborative grant from the Infection Prevention Society 
 
Conflicts of Interest 
None 
 
 
 
 
 American Journal of Infection Control 
(2017) 
18 
REFERENCES 
1. Mackintosh CA, Hoffman PN. An extended model for transfer of micro-organisms via the 
hands: differences between organisms and the effect of alcohol disinfection. Epidemiol 
Infect 1984; 92(3):345-355. 
2. Loveday HP, Wilson JA, Pratt RP, et al. epic3: National Evidence-Based Guidelines for 
Preventing Healthcare-Associated Infections in NHS Hospitals in England. J. Hosp. Infect 
2014; 86S1 S1–S70 
3. Loveday HP, Lynam S, Singleton J, Wilson J. Clinical glove use: healthcare workers actions 
and perceptions. J. Hosp. Infect 2014; 86: 110-116 
4. Girou E, Chai SHT, Oppein F, et al. Misuse of gloves: the foundation for poor compliance 
with hand hygiene and potential for microbial transmission? J. Hosp. Infect 2004; 57:162-
169. 
5. Snyder GM, Thom KA, Furono JP, et al. Detection of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus and vancomycin-resistant enterococci on the gowns and gloves of healthcare 
workers. Infect. Control Hosp. Epidemiol. 2008; 29: 583-89. 
6. Eveillard M, Joly-Guillou M, Brunel P. Correlation between glove use practices and 
compliance with hand hygiene in a multicenter study with elderly patients. Am J Infect 
Control. 2012; 40(4): 387-8 
7. McBryde ES, Bradley LC, Whitby M, McElwain. An investigation of contact transmission of 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Journal of Hospital Infection (2004) 58, 104–
108 
8. Wilson J, Bak A, Whitfield A, Loveday H. Public perceptions of gloves by healthcare workers 
and compassion with perceptions of student nurses. Journal Infection Prevention. 2017; 
DOI.org/10.1177%2F1757177416680442 
9. International Ergonomics Association. 2015. Available at: http://www.iea.cc/whats/ 
[Accessed 1st November 2016] 
10. Carayon P. Human factors of complex sociotechnical systems. Applied Ergonomics 2012; 
37(4): 525-535. 
11. Holden R, Carayon P, Gurse A, Hoonakker P, Hundt A, Ozok A, Rivera-rodriguez A. SEIPS 2.0: 
a human factors framework for studying and improving the work of healthcare 
professionals and patients. Ergonomics 2013; 56(11): 1669-1686.  
12. Waterson, P.E. and Catchpole, K. Human factors in healthcare: welcome progress, but still 
scratching the surface. BMJ: Quality and Safety. 2016; 25: 480-484 
13. Carayon P, Schoofs Hundt A, Karsh B-T, Gurses AP, Alvarado CJ, Smith M, Flatley, Brennan 
 American Journal of Infection Control 
(2017) 
19 
P. Safety by design: Work system design for patient safety: the SEIPS model. Qual Saf 
Health Care. 2006;15 (suppl 1): i50-i58  
14. World Health Organization: WHO Patient Safety. WHO guidelines on hand hygiene in health 
care. World Health Organization. Geneva: 2009 
15. Sax H, Allegranzi B, Uckay L, Larson E, Boyce J, Pittet D. “My five moments for hand 
hygiene”: a user-centred design approach to understand, train, monitor and report hand 
hygiene. Journal of Hospital Infection 2007; 67:9-21. 
16. Fuller C, Savage J, Besser S, et al. “The dirty hand in the latex glove”: A study of hand 
hygiene compliance when gloves are worn. Infect. Control Hosp. Epidemiol. 2011; 32:1194-
1199. 
17. Cafazzo JA, St-Cyr O. From discovery to design: the evolution of human factors in healthcare. 
Healthcare Quarterly. 2012; 15: 24-29. 
18. Whitby M, McLaws M-L, Ross MW. Why healthcare workers don’t wash their hands: a 
behavioural explanation. Infect. Control Hosp. Epidemiol. 2006;  27: 484-92. 
19. Waterson P. A systems ergonomics analysis of the Maidstone and Tunbridge Wells infection 
outbreaks. Ergonomics. 2009; 52(10): 1196-205. 
20. Storr J, Wigglesworth N, Kilpatrick C. Integrating human factors with infection prevention 
and control. 2013. Health Foundation, London. Available: 
http://www.health.org.uk/publication/integrating-human-factors-infection-prevention-
and-control [Accessed 31st October 2016] 
21. Wilson J, Prieto J, Singleton J, et al. The misuse and overuse of non-sterile gloves: 
application of an audit tool to define the problem. Journal of Infection Prevention. 2015; 
16(1): 24-31. 
22. Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual. Res. Psychol. 2006; 3(2): 77-
101. 
23. Dul J, Bruder R, Buckle R, et al. A strategy for human factors/ergonomics: developing the 
discipline and profession Ergonomics. 2012; 55(4): 377-95.  
24. Karsh BT, Holden RJ, Alper SJ, Or CKL. A human factors engineering paradigm for patient 
safety: designing to support the performance of the healthcare professional Quality Safety 
in Health Care 2006; 15(Suppl I): i59–i65.  
25. Jackson C, Griffiths P. Dirt and disgust as key drivers in nurses' infection control behaviours: 
an interpretative, qualitative study. J Hosp. Infect. 2014; 87(2): 71-6. 
26. Rock C, Harris AD, Reich ND, et al. Is hand hygiene before putting on non sterile gloves in 
the intensive care unit a waste of health care worker time? A randomized controlled trial.  
 American Journal of Infection Control 
(2017) 
20 
Am J Infect Control. 2013; 41(11): 994–996  
27. Siegel JD, Rhinehart E, Jackson M, Chiarello L and Health Care Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee 2007. Guideline for Isolation Precautions: Preventing 
Transmission of Infectious Agents in Health Care Settings. AJIC: American Journal of 
Infection Control. 2007; 35(10): S65-S164. 
28. Gurses A, Seidl K, Vaidya V, et al. Systems ambiguity and guideline compliance: a 
qualitative study of how intensive care units follow evidence-based guidelines to 
reduce healthcare-associated infections. Quality & Safety In Health Care, 2008; 
17(5): 351-359. 
29. P. Griffiths, A. Renz, J. Hughes, A.M. Rafferty, Impact of organisation and management 
factors on infection control in hospitals: a scoping review, Journal of Hospital Infection. 
2009; 73 (1)  1-14. 
30. Duerdin B, Fry F, Johnson AP, Wilcox MH. The Control of Methicillin-Resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus Blood Stream Infections in England. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2015; 
2(2): ofv035. 
31. NHS England. Clostridium difficile infection objectives for NHS organisations in 2014/15 and 
guidance on sanction implementation. 2014. Available:  
https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/c-diff-obj-guidance.pdf 
[Accessed 31st October 2016] 
32. World Health Organisation. Save Lives: Clean your hands. WHO’s Global Annual Campaign 
Advocacy Toolkit. Available: http://www.who.int/gpsc/5may_advocacy-toolkit.pdf?ua=1 
[Accessed 31st October 2016]  
33. Cusini A, Nydegger D, Kaspar T, et al. Improved hand hygiene compliance 
after eliminating mandatory glove use from contact precautions. Is less 
more? American Journal of Infection Control. 2015; 43: 922-7. 
34. Eveillard M. Wearing gloves: the worst enemy of hand hygiene? Future 
Microbiol. 2011; 6(8): 835-7 
35. Health Technical Memorandum 07-01: Safe management of healthcare 
waste .2013. Available:  
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_d
ata/file/167976/HTM_07-01_Final.pdf. [Accessed 29th October 2016]. 
36. Nichols A, Grose J, Bennallick M, Richardson J. Sustainable healthcare 
waste management: a qualitative investigation of its feasibility within a 
 American Journal of Infection Control 
(2017) 
21 
county in the south west of England. Journal Infection Prevention. 2013: 
14(2): 60-64 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
