 Weak correlations between hemodynamic signals and ongoing 
neural activity during the resting state
Aaron T. Winder1,2, Christina Echagarruga1,3, Qingguang Zhang1,2, and Patrick J. 
Drew1,2,3,4
1Center for Neural Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802
2Department of Engineering Science and Mechanics, Pennsylvania State University, University 
Park, PA 16802
3Graduate Program in Bioengineering, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802
4Department of Neurosurgery and Department of Biomedical Engineering, Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, PA 16802
Abstract
Spontaneous fluctuations in hemodynamic signals in the absence of a task or overt stimulation are 
used to infer neural activity. We tested this coupling by simultaneously measuring neural activity 
and changes in cerebral blood volume (CBV) in the somatosensory cortex of awake, head-fixed 
mice during periods of true rest, and during whisker stimulation and volitional whisking. Here we 
show that neurovascular coupling was similar across states, and large spontaneous CBV changes 
in the absence of sensory input were driven by volitional whisker and body movements. 
Hemodynamic signals during periods of rest were weakly correlated with neural activity. 
Spontaneous fluctuations in CBV and vessel diameter persisted when local neural spiking and 
glutamatergic input was blocked, and during blockade of noradrenergic receptors, suggesting a 
non-neuronal origin for spontaneous CBV fluctuations. Spontaneous hemodynamic signals reflect 
a combination of behavior, local neural activity, and putatively non-neural processes.
Introduction
Spontaneous hemodynamic signals are extensively used in resting-state fMRI studies to infer 
neural activity not driven by tasks or stimuli1,2. A cornerstone assumption of these studies is 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence to: Patrick J Drew, pjd17@psu.edu, Department of Engineering Science & Mechanics, W-317 Millennium Science 
Complex, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802. 
Code Availability Code used to generate the figures in this paper is available at: https://github.com/DrewLab/
Winder_Echagarruga_Zhang_Drew_2017_Code
Data availability
The data in this paper is available here: https://psu.app.box.com/v/Winder2017-Code-Data.
Author Contributions: ATW and PJD designed the experiments, ATW, CE and QZ performed experiments and analyzed the data, 
ATW and PJD wrote the paper.
Competing Financial Interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2017 December ; 20(12): 1761–1769. doi:10.1038/s41593-017-0007-y.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that spontaneous hemodynamic signals are coupled to neural activity in the same manner as 
hemodynamic signals elicited by sensory stimuli. Recent studies have cast doubt on the one-
to-one coupling of neural activity to hemodynamic signals during sensory stimulation3–5, 
making it critical to determine how spontaneous hemodynamic signals are coupled to neural 
activity. To determine what aspects of neural activity are reported by spontaneous 
hemodynamic signals during different states, we simultaneously measured neural activity5 
and cerebral blood volume (CBV), using intrinsic optical imaging4–6 in the vibrissa cortex 
of awake, head-fixed mice7,8 (Figure 1a,c,S1a) while monitoring whisker and body 
movements. Increases in CBV, which show up as decreases in reflectance (ΔR/R) in intrinsic 
optical imaging signals, are caused by arterial and capillary dilations7,9,10 and lead to 
increases in oxygenation which can be detected with BOLD fMRI11,12. Although our optical 
signals originated from the superficial layers, CBV changes have similar dynamics and 
amplitudes throughout the depth of cortex13, and CBV increases are tightly related to BOLD 
fMRI signals14.
Results
Behavior drives spontaneous hemodynamic fluctuations
Since humans and animals continuously engage in small bodily motions15,16 and actively 
sense their environment17, we monitored body movement and whisker position to detect 
periods of active behavior and rest (Figure 1f, S1b). We obtained an average of 254±54 
minutes of simultaneous CBV, neural, and behavioral data from each mouse (n=12, Figure 
1b). We categorized the data into several states: stimulation of the whiskers (contralateral to 
the window) with brief, gentle puffs of air directed towards the whiskers but not the face7, 
volitional whisking, and rest (Figure 1b,f see methods). Periods of time greater than 10 
seconds in duration without stimulation where the animals did not volitionally whisk were 
defined as true ‘rest’. Periods of rest lasting less than 10 seconds were considered as 
transitions between behaviors, and were omitted from subsequent analyses. Extended (>2 
seconds) volitional whisker movements were analyzed separately from brief volitional 
movements since they were generally associated with additional body motion and distinct 
vascular responses13. We also used auditory stimulation (air puffs aimed away from the 
body) and stimulation of ipsilateral whiskers, but as these stimuli primarily elicited 
volitional whisking behavior (Figure S1h), we focus below on rest, volitional whisking, and 
stimulation of the contralateral whiskers in subsequent analyses.
We first asked if there were any differences in the amplitude of hemodynamic fluctuations 
across these different states, as non-stationarities in variance have been postulated to account 
for most of resting-state connectivity18, though this non-stationarity has been argued to be 
spurious and driven by head movement and/or sampling variability19. As our signals are 
unaffected by head motion, and as we can parse our data into identified behavioral epochs, 
we can directly address this issue in our system. The variance of hemodynamic signal 
fluctuations in our mice was significantly and substantially larger during all of these states 
than at rest (Figure 1e). These result show that, in the awake brain, active sensation and 
volitional movements drive substantial changes in hemodynamic signals, and variability in 
the amount of these behaviors will contribute to the large trial-to-trial variability observed in 
Winder et al.
Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 hemodynamic signals ‘at rest’20. While our observation that the variance in the CBV signal 
differed among behavioral states does not rule out statistical or head-motion related artifacts 
in generating or contaminating dynamic connectivity patterns seen in human fMRI19, it 
shows that the amplitude of spontaneous hemodynamic signals will be affected by 
behavioral state
Correlations between spontaneous neural activity and CBV changes
We then examined what aspect of neural activity was correlated with the observed CBV 
changes. Electrophysiology is considerably more sensitive to low levels of neural activity 
than calcium imaging, which fails to detect a substantial portion of the action potentials, 
particularly at low firing rates21, and which cannot detect local field potential (LFP) 
oscillations. Consistent with previous measures showing a relatively tight spatial relationship 
between CBV changes and neural activity6, we observed that the measured reflectance from 
pixels near the stereotrode recording site was correlated to the multi-unit average (MUA, a 
measure of local spiking) during periods of rest in all animals (Figure 1d). Passive sensory 
stimulation and volitional whisking both evoked increases in the gamma-band power (40–
100 Hz) of the LFP, low-frequency power (<5 Hz) of the LFP, MUA, and CBV (Figure 
2a,b), similar to responses in the visual system of primates4,22, however the MUA response 
to whisker stimulation and volitional whisking varied among animals23. The heart-rate 
increase induced by the sensory stimulus was small (2.2±1.3%, Figure S2c,e), and the CBV 
responses were localized to the histologically reconstructed vibrissa cortex and the adjacent 
multisensory area24 (Figure S1i). The sensory-evoked CBV-increase was not altered in mice 
with facial nerve transections, which prevented whisking (Figure S3a), showing that 
stimulus-elicited whisking had a negligible effect on the sensory-evoked CBV response25. 
During periods of rest, power increases in the gamma-band20 and the MUA were 
consistently correlated with CBV increases (Figure 2c, S4). The correlations between neural 
activity and CBV in the absence of sensory stimulation were not substantially affected by 
facial motor nerve transection (Figure S3b,c), demonstrating that these spontaneous 
fluctuations in neural activity were centrally generated, not re-afferent signals.
Neurovascular coupling was similar across behavioral states
We first tested if neurovascular coupling was similar across different states (sensory 
stimulation, volitional whisking, and rest). To quantitatively compare the relationship 
between neural activity and CBV, we calculated the hemodynamic response function 
(HRF)4,9,26, which is the kernel that relates neural activity to subsequent changes in blood 
volume. We selected an ROI around the electrode (mean area±std:0.6±0.1mm2) based on the 
resting CBV-MUA correlation map and location of vibrissa cortex (see Figure 1d and 
Methods) to maximize the likelihood of obtaining a strong correlation between neural 
activity and CBV during rest. We compared HRFs calculated from neural and hemodynamic 
data, segregated by behavioral state, in order to determine whether behavior modulated the 
relationship between neural activity and subsequent changes in CBV. Because both sensory-
evoked and spontaneous increases in CBV were most strongly and consistently correlated 
with gamma-band and MUA-band power during rest20 (Figure 2c, see also S4), we focused 
our analysis on these neural measures. Across all states, the HRFs showed that increases in 
gamma-band power and MUA drove a decrease in reflectance (increases in CBV) with 
Winder et al.
Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 similar latency (Figure 2d,e, S5a,b), indicating that the temporal dynamics of the 
hemodynamic response was not different across behavioral states. The similarity of overall 
dynamics (time to peak, full width at half maximum) for all conditions implies that 
neurovascular coupling was constant across behaviors. The shapes of the HRFs were similar 
regardless of electrode depth (Figure S1g, S5c,d).
Predicting the hemodynamic response from neural activity
We then asked how well the CBV signal could be predicted using neural activity for each 
type of behavior, which bears on the ‘decoding’ of fMRI signals27. By neural activity, we 
mean the electrical activity of neurons (action potentials, and the summed action of EPSPs 
and IPSPs that generate fluctuations in the local field potential) that generate multiunit 
average and LFP signals, and when blocked in a brain region perturb sensory perception28 or 
motor behavior29, not the basal metabolic processes that reflect housekeeping functions30 
and that persist in the vegetative coma state. Using HRFs which correspond to each type of 
behavior, we predicted the stimulation- or volitional-whisking-triggered average CBV 
response using the stimulation- or volitional-whisking-triggered average neural response, 
and then calculated the coefficient of determination (R2) between the actual and predicted 
CBV responses4 (Figure 3a,c,d, S6, S7a,b, see Methods). Because the neural and CBV 
signals must be time-locked to an event for averaging, this cannot be done for resting data. 
We observed a strong agreement between our prediction and the actual average CBV 
response to vibrissa stimulation using gamma-band power derived HRFs (median
±interquartile range: R2=0.77±0.24), which was as good as previous measures of 
neurovascular coupling in the visual cortex of primates22,31,32. We also observed a 
reasonably good agreement between predicted and actual CBV responses to volitional 
whisking (median±interquartile range: R2=0.21±0.25). These HRFs were then used to 
predict CBV fluctuations on individual stimulation, volitional whisking, and rest trials in 
order to determine how much of the ongoing CBV could be explained by neural activity. In 
comparison to the averaged data, the median R2 of the CBV prediction over individual trials 
was substantially lower for all behavioral conditions when predicting ongoing CBV changes 
(Figure 3c,d). A sliding window was used to visualize time-varying differences in prediction 
accuracy on a second-by-second basis during an episode containing sensory stimulation, 
volitional whisking, and rest. This result showed that prediction accuracy was higher during 
periods containing large CBV fluctuations (such as would be seen during sensory 
stimulation or movement, see Figure 1e) (Figure 3b,c,f, S7f,g). CBV changes predicted from 
gamma-band power during rest were poor predictors of the actual CBV fluctuations (mean
±st. dev: R2=0.06±0.03), and predicted significantly less CBV variance than predictions 
made from MUA during rest (mean±st. dev: R2 = 0.14±0.09; Figure 3e). The low R2 was not 
due to the quality of HRFs, since the HRF captured the majority of the averaged stimulus-
triggered CBV variance (Figure 3a,c,d). Lower-frequency bands (0.1–8 Hz and 10–30 Hz) of 
the LFP were essentially uncorrelated with resting hemodynamic signals (median R2<0.02 
for both frequency bands, Figure S6). Additionally, when animals were more behaviorally 
active, the CBV predicted from neural activity was in good agreement with measured CBV 
changes (Figure 3f). The disagreement between the predicted and actual CBV on an event-
by-event basis was not due to instrumentation noise (Figure S1d,e), and spontaneous CBV 
fluctuations were not substantially correlated with fluctuations in heart-rate (Figure S2g), 
Winder et al.
Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ruling out a systemic cardiovascular origin33. Lastly, subtracting off the global 
hemodynamic signal within the window (Figure S7e) does not substantially improve the 
quality of the prediction, indicating that the signals are not generated by global blood-
volume fluctuations but rather have complicated spatiotemporal dynamics (Supplementary 
Movie 1). These results show that the hemodynamic response was strongly coupled to the 
gamma band of the LFP and the MUA when neural activity was high, regardless of the 
source of the neural activity, but the correlation broke down when neural activity was low, 
such as during rest.
Separate, additive components within the hemodynamic signal
What could account for the much lower correlation between the predicted and actual CBV 
for individual events versus the average and the poor performance of the HRF in predicting 
CBV fluctuations during rest? As our predictions of sensory-evoked CBV changes from 
neural activity were consistent with previous primate studies4,20,22,32 (see Discussion), and 
performed well during behaviors with large modulations of neural activity (Figure 3f), it 
seems unlikely that the weak correlations between neural activity and CBV changes at rest 
could be due to our experimental conditions. We hypothesized that there are two processes 
that underlie local CBV changes: a neuronal source that drives vasodilation when neurons 
are active34, and a second component which is uncorrelated to the measured local neural 
activity and that additively interacts with the neural-evoked CBV component (Figure 4a). In 
this model, the additional CBV component would be removed by averaging over stimulus 
presentations, since the timing of neural events will be random with respect to the phase of 
these uncorrelated CBV fluctuations. This hypothesis accounts for the substantially better 
predictions of behavior-averaged CBV changes from neural activity compared to individual 
events. In addition, the larger neural responses to sensory stimulation (versus volitional 
whisking or rest) will increase the amplitude of the neural-evoked hemodynamic signal with 
respect to the putatively non-neuronal component. The increased amplitude of the neural-
evoked CBV would also increase the fraction of the signal that can be predicted from neural 
activity, and account for the differences in HRF performance in predicting CBV changes 
from neural activity among behaviors (Figure 3c,d, S7f,g).
Our hypothesis makes two testable predictions. First, the two CBV components should 
combine additively, so that the residuals (corresponding to the portion of CBV uncorrelated 
with local neural activity) of the predicted CBV should have constant amplitude across 
states. To test for additivity, we compared the CBV variance around the mean stimulus-
evoked and whisking-evoked response to the CBV variance at rest. We found that the CBV 
variance during rest was not different from the trial-to-trial variance during behavior (Figure 
4b). The same pattern holds true when we subtracted the neural-evoked CBV component 
(predicted using either the gamma-band and MUA derived HRFs), from the measured CBV 
signal for each of the behavioral conditions and calculated the variance of the residuals. The 
level of putatively non-neuronal noise was roughly constant across conditions, as the ratio of 
the residuals during sensory-evoked and volitional non-neuronal periods to those during rest 
(as measured by the root-mean squared error (RMSE) between the predicted and actual CBV 
signal) was close to 1 (Figure 4c,d). The additive noise hypothesis also predicts that CBV 
should be better predicted by neural activity during periods with greater modulation of 
Winder et al.
Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 spontaneous (non-experimenter evoked) neural activity, which we also see in our data 
(Figure S7f,g,h). These analyses support the hypothesis that there are two additively 
interacting components of the CBV, one of which is linked tightly to the measured neural 
activity.
Origin of spontaneous hemodynamic fluctuations
There are several mechanisms which could give rise to the component of the CBV signal 
that was not predicted by our measures of neural activity. One possibility is that it could be 
local or distant groups of neurons whose activity is not detectable in the LFP/MUA, but can 
elicit a vasodilatory response, which we test below. Examining the power spectra of the 
predicted and actual CBV changes over the entire trial (Figure S7c), we see the largest 
difference in the 0.1–0.3 Hz frequency range, and the power spectrum of the HRF prediction 
error during periods of rest (Figure S7d) shows a similar peak at 0.2 Hz35. The spectral 
power of the residual CBV indicates that it is unlikely that the spontaneous activity of 
astrocytes drives these additive CBV oscillations because the spontaneous calcium signals in 
cortical astrocytes are nearly a hundred times slower than the CBV fluctuations we see here 
(0.1–0.3 Hz vs. 0.005 Hz)36. However, the CBV fluctuations could be due to intrinsic 
oscillations in the membrane potential (and contractility) of the smooth muscle around 
arterioles that additively interact with vasodilatory signals from neurons, similar to the way 
intrinsic membrane oscillations can sculpt response dynamics in neurons. Vascular 
oscillations are plausible mechanism for the persistent CBV changes because isolated 
arterioles show spontaneous fluctuations in their membrane potential and diameters in the 
same frequency range that we observed in the residual of our CBV prediction37. Vessel 
diameter is linearly related to smooth muscle membrane voltage so long as the vessel is not 
maximally dilated38, and our stimulus-induced dilations are in this linear regime (9% peak 
arteriole dilation to punctate contralateral vibrissa stimulation7 vs. >40% maximum arteriole 
dilation39). In contrast to neural-evoked fluctuations, fluctuations of a vascular origin should 
persist when neural activity is silenced.
We tested whether silencing local spiking blocks spontaneous CBV fluctuations during rest 
by infusing muscimol into the cortex via a chronically implanted cannula. The efficacy of 
the muscimol infusion was monitored with a stereotrode placed 1.5±0.5 mm from the 
cannula (Figure 5a, S1g, S8a). A semi-circular ROI centered on the cannula and with a 
radius specified by the distance between the electrode and cannula, was selected to ensure 
that the ROI only included silenced cortex. Since we observed clear suppression of neural 
activity with electrodes placed ~2 mm away, the infusion should affect all cortical layers (as 
the cannula was placed ~200μm below the surface, and the mouse cortex is ~1.2 mm thick).
Muscimol infusion caused a strong decrease in the sensory-evoked and baseline MUA, as 
compared to control aCSF infusions (Figure 5b, S7i, S8a, S9a). Similarly, the standard 
deviation in the MUA signal during periods of rest was decreased by 95±2% of the control 
(see Methods), indicating a nearly total silencing of spontaneous local spiking (Figure 5g). 
The standard deviation of gamma-band power was reduced by 73±15% (Figure 5j). If 
resting hemodynamics arose primarily from local spiking, then the spontaneous fluctuations 
in CBV should show profound reductions in amplitude, essentially disappearing. However, 
Winder et al.
Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 all animals showed a significant and substantial remaining CBV fluctuations during periods 
of rest, despite the nearly complete reduction of local neural activity (resting CBV root 
mean-squared amplitudes after muscimol infusions were 84±41% of aCSF infusions, 95% 
confidence interval: [62–112%], bootstrap of the population mean, 2000 resamples, Figure 
5c,d,g,j, S8a). Muscimol infusions did not appreciably change the spatial patterns of the 
resting CBV fluctuations or the spectral power of the oscillations compared to the HRF 
prediction residuals (Supplementary Movie 2,3; Figure S7d).
We also measured the diameters of arterioles after local infusion of aCSF or muscimol using 
2-photon microscopy7,39. We measured from arterioles that would be well within the 
silenced region (mean vessel distance from infusion cannula: 0.75±0.14 mm). These single 
arteriole measures also showed small decreases in normalized fluctuation amplitudes at rest 
after muscimol infusions relative to aCSF infusions (resting root mean squared diameter 
fluctuations after muscimol infusions were 80±25% of aCSF infusions, mixed-effects 
ANOVA, p=0.0015, t(36)=3.43, n=19 pial arterioles in 4 mice; 71±30%, n=8 penetrating 
arterioles in 2 mice; p=0.36, t(14)=0.94) (Figure 5d,e). These results indicate that at least 
half of the resting CBV fluctuations were not directly linked to local neural spiking.
Several studies have suggested that pre-synaptic activity alone, in the absence of post-
synaptic spiking, is sufficient to drive the hemodynamic response12,40,41. Hence, the 
remaining CBV oscillations could arise from glutamatergic release from distant cortico-
cortical or subcortical projections, which would not be blocked by the local muscimol 
infusions. To determine whether presynaptic activity of long-range glutamatergic projections 
could account for the rest of the CBV oscillations through ionotropic receptors, we infused a 
cocktail of muscimol and ionotropic glutamate receptor antagonists, 6-cyano-7-
nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione (CNQX) and (2R)-amino-5-phosphonopentanoic acid (AP5), 
which inhibit AMPA and NMDA receptors, respectively (n=4, see methods). We again 
observed a strong reduction in the local multi-unit activity (96±2%, Figure 5h) as well as 
strong reduction in gamma-band power (87±9%, Figure 5k, S8b, S9b). However, the 
reduction in CBV amplitude oscillations at rest (40±20%, Figure 5h,k) was not significantly 
lower than the muscimol-only infusion, and did not account for the CBV or arteriole 
diameter oscillation (Figure 5f, 12±47% reduction, n=18 vessels) that remained in the 
absence of local neural activity. These results indicate that though presynaptic activity may 
contribute to some aspect of the spontaneous CBV fluctuations at rest, a large portion of the 
CBV fluctuations were not driven by either pre-synaptic neural activity or post-synaptic 
spiking.
Another possibility is that the remaining resting CBV fluctuations are driven by non-
glutamatergic modulatory input12,42, particularly noradrenergic input, as it has been shown 
in human studies43 to play a role in resting state signals. To determine whether adrenergic 
input drives the remaining CBV oscillations after silencing local neural activity, we infused a 
cocktail of muscimol and adrenergic receptor blockers prazosin, yohimbine, and 
propranolol. The infusion of this cocktail again suppressed local spiking (94±5%, n=5, 
Figure 5i, S8c, S9c) and gamma-band power (79±15%, Figure 5l), and reduced the 
amplitude of the CBV fluctuations by 40±17%, though not significantly lower than the 
infusion of muscimol alone. These data indicate that there was minimal contribution of 
Winder et al.
Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 adrenergic signaling to generating the ongoing CBV fluctuations in the absence of local 
spiking.
Because the cells in the vasculature are electrically coupled, there is a possibility that 
dilations in distant areas could propagate into the silenced region, which has been seen 
before in visual cortex44. To determine whether propagation of vascular dilation could 
account for the observed CBV changes in the silenced region, we calculated the cross-
correlation between CBV fluctuations within the ROI and the rest of the window from data 
taken after the infusion of muscimol and aCSF. If propagation of dilation accounts for the 
remaining CBV fluctuations, the correlation coefficient between these regions should 
increase, and the time-lag at which maximum correlation occurs should be delayed 
following muscimol infusion. We found that neither the correlation or lags were significantly 
different between aCSF and muscimol trials. This indicates that the remaining CBV 
fluctuations did not propagate from other regions within the window44 (Figure S10). Taken 
together, these results indicate that resting CBV consists of contributions from local neural 
populations, but that at least half of the resting CBV amplitude is not due to local neural 
processing, glutamatergic input, or adrenergic modulation. This remaining CBV oscillations 
had most of their power between 0.1–0.3 Hz, which is spectrally indistinguishable from 
neural evoked CBV (Figure 4a, S7d), and were uncorrelated to sensory stimulation and 
movement (Figure 4b,c,d).
Discussion
Comparison to previous measures of spontaneous and sensory-evoked neurovascular 
coupling
The correlations between neural activity and CBV we observed in the absence of sensory 
stimulation agreed well with those obtained in awake monkeys (see Figure S4, mean±std: 
r=0.21±0.07 vs. Schölvinck et al. 201020: 0.2<r<0.3). We found a median R2=0.77 for our 
gamma-band power derived prediction of stimulus-triggered average CBV, comparable to 
previous work in anesthetized primates (Logothetis et al. 200131, R2=0.76, 0.9 reported for 
two different experimental sessions ). Our trial-by-trial R2 values for contralateral sensory 
stimulation were 0.34 and 0.30 for the gamma-band and multiunit average signals, 
respectively, very similar to those obtained by Goense et al.22 in awake primates. It seems 
unlikely that we are missing a signal detectable by conventional electrophysiological 
techniques.
Comparison of our sensory-evoked HRF prediction accuracy to other studies needs to take 
into account the strength and duration of the stimulus used, and whether this is for averaged 
stimulus-evoked hemodynamic changes or calculated on a trial-by-trial basis. The visual 
stimulation in these previous studies produces substantially larger and more prolonged 
spiking activity increases than our whisker stimulation (Logothetis et al. 2001: 10 std above 
rest, stimulus 4–24 seconds duration; Goense et al., 2008, 8–10 std above rest, 15 seconds 
duration; Sirotin & Das 20094:~400% above resting rates, ~5 seconds duration; this study: 
3std/170% above rest, stimulus 10ms duration). Importantly, the R2 between the actual and 
HRF-predicted CBV decreases as the stimulus intensity is reduced32. When we compare our 
results with stimuli that elicit comparable changes in neural activity with the awake primate 
Winder et al.
Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 data (low contrast (~12.5%) visual stimulation in Cardoso et al. 2012: ~200% increase; this 
paper: 170% increase), we are in good agreement (R2 values: Cardoso et al. 2012: 0.26, their 
supp. Figure 3; this paper: 0.31).
Recent work measuring cerebral blood volume and changes in GCaMP fluorescence in 
awake-head fixed mice during periods without locomotion, but no other behavioral 
monitoring, reported good agreement between CBV and fluorescence changes45. However 
behaviors, such as whisking, grooming (Figure 3f) and brief (<1 second) movement 
events9,46 may contaminate these signals. Lastly, “ground truth” experiments that 
simultaneously measured spiking activity with electrophysiology and fluorescence of 
calcium indicators have shown that even the best spike-detection algorithms detect far fewer 
than half the spikes, and that this issue is worse at low firing rates, the regime where resting 
state activity is likely to be taking place21.
Implications of potential non-neuronal signals for hemodynamic imaging
Our results have several important implications for the interpretation of the neural correlates 
of hemodynamic signals. We showed that ‘spontaneous’ hemodynamic signals are driven by 
behaviors, such as active sensing and small body movements, that are typically ignored in 
human and animal imaging studies. These movements drive spatially-localized 
hemodynamic signals and arterial dilations5,39, and because of the spatial specificity of these 
hemodynamic changes, a global regression procedure will be ineffective in removing these 
movement-evoked activations, and may even introduce artifacts47. Our results in particular 
call into question previous studies which used spontaneous hemodynamic signals to assay 
neural differences that accompany disease, aging, and other conditions, as slight differences 
in behavior could drive differences in spontaneous dynamics independent of any underlying 
differences in neural activity.
We demonstrated that unlike the sensory-evoked response, in the true ‘resting-state’, at least 
50% of the CBV signal is unrelated to local cortical processing, glutamatergic input, or 
noradrenergic modulation. While our results are consistent with the idea that these 
uncorrelated fluctuations in CBV have a non-neuronal origin, we cannot completely rule out 
other possible origins. For example, the spontaneous fluctuations could be driven by a 
subpopulation of vasodilatory neurons48 or the recruitment of local astrocytes34 whose 
activity we cannot detect in the MUA/LFP. However, to account for the additive CBV signal, 
any driver must have activity that is completely uncorrelated with other neurons, and have 
activity patterns are unaffected by sensory stimulation or behavior. Additionally, for this 
alternative hypothesis to be true, when all of the vasodilatory input to the blood vessels is 
silenced during the local pharmacological infusions, the arterioles would need to have a 
homeostatic process that drives similar oscillations in diameter when the neural input is 
removed. To our knowledge, there are no such candidate neurons or processes in arteries. 
However, we hope that these results will motivate further investigations in to the details of 
neurovascular coupling and smooth muscle biophysics34. If these persistent CBV 
oscillations are of vascular origin, their function is not clear, though vascular pulsations have 
been implicated in driving fluid exchange in the glymphatic system49.
Winder et al.
Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Whatever the origin of the spontaneous CBV oscillations, our results clearly show that in the 
absence of overt stimulation or behavior, hemodynamic signals are very poorly correlated 
with any conventional measure neural activity (Figure 3). This poor correlation is in direct 
contrast to sensory- and behaviorally-evoked hemodynamic signals, which are relatively 
tightly coupled to the underlying neural activity. Subtracting off the global signal (Figure 
S7e) did not substantially improve this correlation, suggesting that there is no simple fix. 
Because of technical considerations, BOLD fMRI signals will have even lower correlations 
with neural activity than the CBV signals we record here11, making the problems observed 
here even more acute for human studies. This ‘noise’ will limit the ability to detect and 
accurately infer the ongoing neural activity, and can only be surmounted by massive 
averaging. However, we note that these results do not refute the existence of functional 
connectivity, which have been validated using direct assays of neural activity50.
In light of these results, we propose fundamental changes in the way resting-state studies 
should be performed and interpreted. First, it is essential to measure behavior in a very 
detailed way during imaging to ensure that behavioral variability does not drive differences 
in spontaneous activity between groups or across conditions. Small differences in the 
frequency of active sensing behaviors and movements will drive large differences in 
spontaneous hemodynamic signals. Secondly, during periods of true ‘rest’, hemodynamic 
signals should not be interpreted as being solely driven by electrical activity in neurons. 
Rather, these signals have contributions from other processes which are additive to, and 
uncorrelated with, neurally evoked CBV changes.
Methods
Animals Procedures
All procedures outlined below were in accordance with guidelines from the Institutional 
Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of Penn State. Data were acquired from 42 (12 
for HRF and behavior measurements, 3 for window-only controls, 3 for transected motor 
nerve controls, 7 for two-photon laser scanning microscopy (2PLSM), and 17 for cannula 
implantation and infusion experiments) male, C57-BJ6 mice (Jackson Laboratory) between 
3–8 months of age. Mice were given food and water ad libitum and maintained on 12-hour 
light/dark cycles in isolated cages during the period of experiments. All imaging took place 
during the light cycle period. Sample size was chosen to be consistent with previous 
studies6–9. Data collection and analysis were not performed blind to the conditions of the 
experiments. Drug infusions were counter-balanced across animals. See the “Life Sciences 
Reporting Summary” for more details.
Surgery
Electrode, cannula, and window implantation procedure for Intrinsic Optical 
Signal (IOS) imaging experiments—Mice were anesthetized with 2% Isoflurane (in 
oxygen) for all surgical procedures. A custom-machined titanium metal bar, used to fix the 
mice in place during imaging, was attached to the skull with cyanoacrylate glue (Vibra-Tite, 
32402). The bar was positioned along the midline and just posterior to the lambda cranial 
suture. A reinforced thinned-skull window was created over the left hemisphere as described 
Winder et al.
Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 previously5,51. A 4–10 mm2 area of skull was thinned over the whisker representation of 
somatosensory cortex (Figure 1c,d). A Teflon-coated tungsten-wire (AM systems, #795500) 
stereotrode was inserted into the barrel cortex at 30–45 ° from the horizontal along the 
rostral/caudal axis using a micromanipulator (Sutter Instruments, MP285) through a small 
hole made at the edge of the thinned area, so that the electrode tips were within the window 
(Figure 1c). The hole was sealed with cyanoacrylate glue. In a subset of mice (n=17), a 
small craniotomy was made at the edge of the thinned area of skull and a cannula (Plastics 
One, C315DCS, C315GS-4) was inserted into the upper layers of cortex (Figure 5a, S1g, 
S8). The cannula was attached to the skull with cyanoacrylate glue and dental acrylic. The 
thinned area of skull was reinforced with a fitted #1 glass coverslip (Electrode Microscopy 
Sciences, #72200). Three self-tapping, 3/32″ #000 (J.I. Morris) screws were inserted into 
the contralateral parietal and frontal bone and ipsilateral frontal bone. A stainless-steel wire 
(A-M Systems, #792800) was wrapped around the screw implanted in the frontal bone 
contralateral to the window for use as an electrical ground for neural recordings. The 
titanium bar, screws, and tungsten wires were secured with black dental acrylic resin (Lang 
Dental MFG. Co., REF 1530) to minimize light reflection. The animals were allowed to 
recover for 2–3 days before habituation. Neither electrode nor cannula implantation affected 
the hemodynamic response (Figure S1f).
Cannula and window implantation for two-photon laser scanning microscopy 
(2PLSM)—As above, mice were anesthetized with isoflurane for all surgical procedures. A 
titanium head bar was placed as described above, and a 4–6 mm2 polished and reinforced 
thinned-skull window was created over the forepaw/hindpaw representation of 
somatosensory cortex of the left hemisphere51. After polishing the skull with 3F grit 
(Covington Engineering, Step Three 3F-400), a small craniotomy was made to insert the 
cannula into the upper layers of cortex near the forepaw/hindpaw representation of cortex. 
The thinned area of the skull was reinforced with a fitted #0 glass coverslip (Electrode 
Microscopy Sciences, #72198). Two self-tapping screws were inserted into the contralateral 
parietal and ipsilateral frontal bone. The titanium bar, cannula, and screws were secured with 
black dental acrylic resin. The animals were allowed to recover for 2–3 days before 
habituation.
Facial nerve transections—Animals were anesthetized with 2% isoflurane and bilateral 
incisions were made posterior to the whisker pad. The facial nerve was transected with iris 
scissors25 and the incisions were sutured. Topical antibiotic ointment was applied 
(Neosporin), and animals were allowed to recover for 2–3 days before habituation to head 
fixation. Animals were monitored to verify that no vibrissa movement occurred following 
transection.
Histology
At the end of the experiment, animals were deeply anesthetized with 5% isoflurane. The 
mice were transcardially perfused with heparinized saline and then fixed with 4% 
paraformaldehyde. Fiduciary marks were made in each of the corners of the cranial window. 
The brains were extracted and sunk in a 30% sucrose/4% paraformaldehyde solution. The 
flattened cortexes were sectioned tangentially (60 μm per section) using a freezing 
Winder et al.
Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 microtome and stained for the presence of cytochrome-oxidase (CO). Whisker barrels were 
visible in layer IV of CO stained sections, allowing the alignment of the windows and 
stereotrodes with respect to the barrel cortex52,53. The laminar location of the stereotrodes 
were categorized as supragranular, granular, or infragranular by identifying the first cortical 
section without visible electrode tracks relative to sections showing whisker barrels.
Physiological measurements
Data from intrinsic optical signal and electrophysiology experiments were acquired with 
custom LabVIEW program (ATW and PJD, version 11.0, 64-bit Windows 7, National 
Instruments, Austin TX). Data from 2PLSM experiments was acquired using the Sutter 
MCS software (Sutter Instruments, Novato, CA). All experiments were performed with mice 
in sound-attenuating boxes.
Habituation—Animals were gradually acclimated to head-fixation and stimulation over 
three habituation sessions. Mice that received whisker stimulation (n=31) were acclimatized 
to head-fixation for 15–30 minutes during the first session. In the subsequent sessions, they 
began to receive air puffs directed at the whiskers, and were head-fixed for longer durations 
(>60 minutes). Mice which were imaged using 2PLSM (n=7) were acclimated to the 
spherical treadmill (60 mm radius) over 3 days. During the first session, they were head-
fixed for 15 minutes. On subsequent days, the time was increased to ~60 minutes. Mice were 
monitored for any signs of distress during habituation. In all cases, the mice exhibited 
normal behaviors such as exploratory whisking and occasional grooming after being head-
fixed. Heart rate-related fluctuations were detectable in the intrinsic optical signal (see 
below) and remained between 7–14 Hz for all mice during and after habituation. This is near 
the mean heart-rate (~12 Hz) telemetrically recorded from mice in their home cage54. 
Experimental data were taken over 2–5 imaging sessions.
Intrinsic optical signal (IOS) imaging—Twenty minutes before the experiments, the 
mice were briefly (<1 minute) anesthetized with isoflurane (5%), and fixed into the imaging 
apparatus using the attached titanium head bar. When fixed, the animal’s body was 
supported in a clear plastic tube (n=31), or on a ball (n=4). The imaging apparatus and head-
fixing apparatus were arranged to avoid incidental whisker contact during whisking. Blood 
volume was measured by illuminating the cranial window with three collimated and filtered 
530±5 nm LEDs (Thor Labs, FB530-10, M530L2). This wavelength is an isobestic point of 
the hemoglobin light absorption curves. Reflected light intensity from the surface of the 
brain at this wavelength gives a measurement of the total hemoglobin concentration which 
we used as a measure of cerebral blood volume. Decreased reflectance from the cranial 
window corresponds to increased absorption by hemoglobin due to increased CBV. The 
cranial window was imaged with a Dalsa 1M60 Pantera CCD camera (Phase One, 
Cambridge MA) positioned directly above the mouse. Light entering the camera was filtered 
using a mounted green filter (Edmund Optics, Barrington NJ, #46540) to block the light 
used for whisker tracking. Images (256×256 pixels, 15 μm per pixel, 12-bit resolution) were 
acquired at 30 Hz9,55. The data was then low-pass filtered (3 Hz, Butterworth, order=4, 
MATLAB function: butter, filtfilt) to remove heart-rate related fluctuations.
Winder et al.
Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Electrophysiology—Neural activity was recorded simultaneously with the IOS as 
differential potentials between the two leads of Teflon-insulated tungsten micro-wires (A-M 
Systems, #795500)5. Stereotrode micro-wires, with an inter-electrode spacing of ~100μm, 
were threaded through polyimide tubing (A-M Systems, #822200). Electrode impedances 
were between 70–120 kΩ at 1 kHz. The acquired signals were amplified (World Precision 
Instruments, DAM80), band-pass filtered between 0.1 and 10 kHz (Brownlee Precision, 
Model 440) during acquisition, then digitized at 20 kHz (National Instruments, Austin TX, 
PCI-6259). We were able to detect individual spikes in all animals (Figure S1c), however the 
spiking response to whisker stimulation and volitional whisking varied among animals23. 
We quantified spiking activity using the multi-unit average (MUA), which is the power of 
the signal within the 300–3000 Hz band22. Power was calculated by digitally band-pass 
filtering the raw neural signal (MATLAB function: butter, filtfilt; filter order = 4). The result 
was squared, low-pass filtered below 10 Hz, and resampled at 30 Hz. A baseline power (℘b) 
was computed by averaging the band-limited power during periods of the imaging session 
where no stimulation or volitional movement occurred. The normalized power was then 
calculated to be Δ℘/℘b = [℘-℘b]/℘b. Gamma-band power was calculated in the same 
manner using the 40–100 Hz band of the LFP. Neither the LFP nor the MUA signals showed 
significant changes in sensory evoked amplitude (gamma-band power: p=0.94, t(61)=0.08; 
MUA: p=0.19, t(61)=1.33) or neural variance (gamma-band power: p=0.81, t(61)=2.45; 
MUA: p=0.28, t(61)=1.09) from day to day (n=63, iteratively reweighted least squares, 
bisquare weighting, MATLAB function: robustfit), indicating that the recordings were stable 
across imaging sessions. The spatial resolution of the LFP depends on the distance between 
the recording electrodes. Differential recordings will sample the volume of tissue spanned by 
the electrodes, and if these electrodes are closely spaced56,57, they will provide a very 
localized (equivalent to the electrode spacing) measure of the LFP. Using a remote reference 
can contaminate the LFP signal if activity in the remote area is non-stationary, as will be the 
case in an awake animal. Signals from spiking activity will be much more localized, and our 
electrode will record neural activity from a sphere of ~100μm in diameter58. For infusion 
experiments, band-limited neural power was normalized to the mean amplitude during 
periods of rest from the same session prior to infusion.
Two-photon microscopy—Mice (n=7) were briefly anesthetized with isoflurane and 
retro-orbitally injected with 50 μL 5% (weight/volume) fluorescein conjugated dextran (70 
kDa; Sigma-Aldrich)59,60 then fixed upon a spherical treadmill (see behavior tracking 
section below). Imaging was done on a Sutter Movable Objective Microscope with a 20× 
0.9NA objective (Olympus). A MaiTai HP laser tuned to 800 nm was used for fluorophore 
excitation. Individual arteries (n=19 pial, 5 vessels/mouse; n=8 penetrating, 2–3 vessels/
mouse) were imaged at nominal frame rate of 8 Hz for 5 minutes using 10–15 mW of power 
exiting the objective. The same arteriole segments in the limb representation of 
somatosensory cortex were imaged after aCSF and muscimol infusions.
Vibrissa stimulation—Animals were awake and engaged in whisking behavior during 
IOS data acquisition. Brief (0.1 second duration) puffs of air were delivered to the ipsilateral 
and contralateral whiskers7 through a thin plastic tube (length 130mm, diameter 2mm). Air 
puffs were directed to the distal ends of the whiskers at an angle parallel to the face to 
Winder et al.
Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 prevent stimulation of other parts of the head or face. An additional air puffer was set up to 
point away from the body for use as an auditory stimulus. The puffs were delivered via 
solenoid actuator valves (Sizto Tech Corporation, 2V025 1/4) at constant air pressure (10 
psi) maintained by an upstream regulator (Wilkerson, R03-02-000). Air puffs were separated 
by an interval of 10–60 seconds, and the order of all sensory stimulation was randomized 
with a nominal ratio of 3 contralateral stimuli for every ipsilateral or auditory stimulation. 
Auditory and ipsilateral stimuli were omitted from the principal analysis because their 
responses were primarily related to stimulus-provoked movement (see figure S1h).
Behavioral measurement—For IOS imaging experiments, the whiskers contralateral to 
the imaged hemisphere were diffusely illuminated from below with 625 nm light (Edmund 
Optics, #66-833) and imaged using a Basler A602f camera (Edmund Optics, Barrington NJ) 
at 150 frames per second. The imaging region was restricted to the area just adjacent to the 
face with the long axis of the image parallel to the line of the face where whiskers curvature 
is minimal and the full range of whisker movement could be captured. As additional 
behavioral measurements, the animal was monitored using a webcam (Microsoft LifeCam 
CinemaTM), and a force sensor (Tekscan, Flexiforce A201, Boston MA) was placed below 
the clear plastic tube to detect body movement. A threshold was established by examining 
force measurements when each animal was clearly moving during the trial. Changes in force 
which exceeded the threshold were flagged as body movements by the animal.
For 2PLSM imaging (n=7) and for a subset of IOS experiments (n=4), mice were fixed using 
the attached head bar on a spherical treadmill with one degree of freedom5,60. The treadmill 
was coated with anti-slip tape and attached to an optical rotary encoder (US Digital, 
E7PD-720-118) to monitor rotational velocity. For mice on the treadmill, ball movements 
were used to detect animal behavior in lieu of whisker tracking in order to identify periods 
of rest.
Intracortical infusions—For IOS imaging, animals were placed in the imaging apparatus 
as described above. Ten minutes of CBV, neural, and behavioral data were acquired with the 
dummy cannula in place. The dummy cannula was then slowly removed and replaced with 
an infusion cannula (Plastics One, C315IS-4). The interface between the infusion cannula 
and the guide cannula was sealed with Kwik-Cast (World Precision Instruments). Muscimol 
(10mM)61, a muscimol (10 mM) + CNQX (600μM) + AP5(2.5mM) cocktail, a muscimol 
(10mM) + prazosin (1mM) + yohimbine (1mM) + propranolol (1mM) cocktail62, or aCSF 
were infused at a rate of 25 nL/minute for a total volume of 500 nL. CBV and neural activity 
were constantly monitored during the infusion to ensure that cannula placement did not 
affect neural activity or hemodynamic signals. Autoradiography63, immunohistochemistry64, 
and gene expression65 studies have failed to detect GABA-A receptors in the small vessels 
of the cerebral vasculature whose dilations we measured here. Blocking GABA-A mediated 
transmission does not block optogenetically-evoked vasodilation by interneurons66, 
indicating that GABA-A receptors do not mediate activity-evoked vasodilation. To validate 
that the cannula was patent, infusions were combined with 1% Fluorescein isothiocyanate 
(FITC). To verify successful infusion, FITC fluorescence was visualized by capturing 
images of the thinned skull window while being illuminated with blue light (470 nm, Thor 
Winder et al.
Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Labs, M470L2) every ~5 minutes. Pharmacological treatments and aCSF were each infused 
in a counter-balanced order. All mice received both infusions of drugs and an aCSF control, 
so no randomization was needed. Neural and CBV measurements were acquired during the 
infusion as an additional means of assaying the efficacy of pharmacological manipulation. 
Pharmacological data were only used if the MUA amplitude was confirmed to have 
decreased by >80% compared to aCSF. Baseline reflectance from the ROI increased as 
neural activity was increased, indicating decreased CBV. CBV baselines prior to this 
decrease were used for normalization. Some animals exhibited occasional bursts of neural 
activity accompanied by large CBV changes (10–15% peak to peak) approximately one hour 
after muscimol infusions. Data taken after a burst of activity were omitted from subsequent 
analyses. For 2PLSM imaging, mice were head-fixed on the spherical treadmill. Infusion 
cannulas were placed and infusions were conducted as described for IOS imaging, except 
FITC was not infused. Animals were kept in place for 20 minutes after the infusion and then 
moved to the imaging apparatus. The infusion cannulas were kept in place for the duration 
of the imaging session. Baseline diameter constrictions were observed during infusion, in 
accordance with intrinsic data. Vessel measurements occurred >45 minutes after the start of 
infusion.
Data Analysis
All analyses were conducted using custom-written code (ATW, CE, QZ, and PJD) in 
MATLAB 2015a (Mathworks).
Alignment of anatomical areas to CBV imaging data—The location of the thinned-
skull window with respect to anatomical landmarks of the cortex was obtained by aligning 
the surface vasculature in the most superficial histological sections with the vasculature 
visible through the window during imaging. Deeper sections were aligned using fiduciary 
marks and penetrating vessels as landmarks. All image alignment was performed using 
affine transformations in Adobe Illustrator CS6 (Adobe Systems).
Detection and quantification of whisker motion—Images of whiskers during data 
acquisition were converted into a relative whisker position by applying the Radon transform 
(MATLAB function: radon) to each image. Peaks from the resulting sinogram correspond to 
a position and angle of whiskers in the image. The mean whisker angle was extracted by 
identifying the angle of the sinogram which had the largest variance in the position 
dimension59. The mean whisker position was digitally low-pass filtered (<30 Hz) using a 4th 
order Butterworth filter (MATLAB functions: butter, filtfilt). Whisker acceleration was 
obtained from the second derivative of the filtered position and binarized according the 
equation:
where at is the acceleration at time t, and ac is the acceleration threshold. Whisker 
acceleration was used since it is directly related to the force on the whisker. The whisking 
thresholds were empirically defined for each animal by identifying whisker accelerations 
Winder et al.
Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that occur when the animal was clearly whisking. Similarly, periods of rest were identified 
where the animal was not making exploratory whisker movements to establish acceleration 
values during non-whisking periods. Any isolated acceleration values which fell between 
these thresholds were omitted from analysis. Ambiguous acceleration values which occurred 
within 0.5 seconds of a clear whisk were considered part of the bout of whisking.
2PLSM image processing—Individual frames from 2PLSM imaging were aligned using 
a rigid registration algorithm to remove motion artifacts in the x-y plane7,39. Visual 
inspection of movies indicated that there was minimal z-axis motion. A rectangular box was 
manually drawn around a short segment of the vessel and the pixel intensity was averaged 
along the long axis. Pixel intensity was used to calculate diameter from the full-width at 
half-maximum. Diameters of penetrating arterioles were calculated using the Thresholded in 
Radon Space (TiRS) algorithm67. Periods of rest were segregated by using locomotion 
events measured with the rotary encoder9. For each 5-minute trial, diameter measurements 
were normalized to the average diameter during periods of rest. The diameters were 
smoothed with a 3rd order, 15 point Savitzky-Golay filter (MATLAB function: sgolayfilt). 
During all resting periods, the spontaneous fluctuations were compared by calculating the 
normalized standard deviation from the average baseline diameter. The standard deviation of 
the fractional diameter changes after pharmacological infusion were normalized by the 
standard deviations after fractional diameter changes after aCSF infusion for the same vessel 
segment.
Heart rate detection—We tracked heart rates by calculating time-frequency spectrograms 
with a 2-second sliding window on the median window reflectance (Figure S2a, Chronux 
Toolbox version 2.11 function: mtspecgramc; http://chronux.org/)55,68. We took the 
derivative of the median window reflectance to reduce the 1/f trend in the spectrum before 
calculating the time-frequency spectrogram and to improve detection of peaks in spectral 
power. The heart-rate was identified as the frequency with the maximum spectral power in 
the 5–15 Hz band.
Behavioral state categorization—For analysis of HRF dynamics, data were separated 
into three behavioral categories: contralateral whisker stimulation, volitional whisking, and 
rest. The period (6 seconds) following an air puff to the contralateral whiskers was isolated 
provided that the animal was quiescent at the time of stimulation. Volitional whisking 
behaviors were defined as the period following a voluntary movement of the whiskers with 
at least 3 seconds of rest prior to the whisker movement. The duration of the movement was 
also tracked and separated into short (< 2 sec) and long (>2 sec) movements. Resting 
behavior was defined as the absence of stimulation or movement. Periods of rest lasting < 10 
seconds were considered to be transitions between behaviors and omitted from the principal 
analysis. Data corresponding to whisker stimulation and volitional whisking were isolated 
beginning 4 seconds before and 6 seconds after behavior onset.
For 2-photon microscopy data (n=7) and a subset of IOS animals (n=4), behavior was 
categorized by monitoring movement on a spherical treadmill with one degree of 
freedom5,46. Movement events were detected by applying a 5th order low-pass filter (10 Hz, 
Butterworth, MATLAB function: butter, filtfilt) to the velocity signal measured by the 
Winder et al.
Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 velocity encoder, taking the derivative of the velocity, and then comparing the absolute value 
of the resulting acceleration to a threshold of 10 cm/s2 9,39,60. Periods of rest were 
categorized based on the binarized detection of the treadmill acceleration:
where at is the acceleration at time t, and ab is the treadmill acceleration threshold. Resting 
periods starting 2s (2PLSM) and 4s (IOS) after the end of any running event and lasting 
more than 10 seconds with no detected movement.
Region of interest selection and baseline—An ROI for each mouse was created by 
identifying image pixels within the barrel cortex that were correlated with neural activity 
when the animal was at rest. To identify correlated pixels, images of the thinned skull 
window and MUA data during periods of rest were chosen and normalized to the resting 
mean (Figure 1d, top left). The mean reflectance from the entire window at each time point 
(the global signal) was then subtracted from each pixel. The cross-correlation was calculated 
(MATLAB function: xcorr) between the reflectance signal of each mean-subtracted pixel 
and the MUA and normalized by the autocorrelations. The median correlation coefficients 
between lagged MUA (0.5–1.5 seconds, Figure 1d, bottom left) and the intensity of each 
pixel were plotted (Figure 1d, top right). This spatial correlation map was overlaid on a 
histological reconstruction of the window and electrode locations (Figure 1d, top left). In all 
animals, pixels with correlations between lagged MUA (0.5–1.5 seconds, see Figure 1d) and 
CBV greater than r=0.1 were adjacent to the stereotrode site and localized near the whisker 
barrels. A circular region of interest (ROI) was created to encompass pixels that were near 
the stereotrode, within the barrel cortex, and which showed positive correlations between the 
CBV signal and MUA at a 0.5–1.5 second lag (r>0.1) (ROI area: 0.6±0.1mm2). For mice 
with an implanted cannula, regions of interest within the thinned-skull window were created 
by histologically identifying the location of the cannulas and stereotrodes and drawing a 
semicircular region with the cannula at the center and radius equal to the distance from the 
cannula to the electrode (Figure 5a, S8). Calculations of the reflectance baselines and 
normalization procedures were as described above. The ROIs of three animals spanned the 
window and were omitted from the analysis comparing the CBV within the ROI to the rest 
of the window.
Periods of rest were identified for each imaging session, and the mean intensity within the 
ROI was averaged over the duration of the resting data, giving a single reflectance baseline 
(Rb) for each animal and imaging session. The ROI reflectance was used as the measure of 
CBV for all experiments. The fractional change in ROI reflectance was given by ΔR/Rb = [R
−Rb]/Rb. For infusion experiments, only resting periods prior to infusion were used for 
normalization.
Triggered Spectrograms—Time-frequency spectrograms were calculated for the 
duration of the trial using multi-tapered spectral analysis (MATLAB Chronux toolbox 
version 2.11 function: mtspecgramc, www.chronux.org)68. The time bins surrounding 
Winder et al.
Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 stimulation and whisking events were isolated and each frequency band was normalized to 
the resting baseline and then averaged over behavioral events.
Cross-correlation calculations—Neural signals were separated into frequency bands 
(~10 Hz resolution) within the LFP band by calculating the spectrogram (MATLAB 
Chronux toolbox version 2.11 function: mtspecgramc, www.chronux.org)68 from periods of 
spontaneous or resting behavior lasting >10 seconds. Multi-unit activity (MUA) was defined 
as the power between 300 and 3000 Hz. Cross-correlograms were calculated (MATLAB 
function: xcorr) between the reflectance within the whisker barrel ROI and each frequency 
band and normalized by the autocorrelations. To directly compare our result against previous 
results obtained with interleaved electrophysiology and MRI-CBV imaging20, the CBV and 
neural activity were both low-pass filtered below 1 Hz before calculating the cross-
correlation.
Cross-correlations between heart rate and CBV were obtained during periods of rest lasting 
>10 seconds. Statistical significance computed using bootstrap resampling69 from 1000 
reshuffled trials.
Calculation of the hemodynamic response function—We considered the 
neurovascular relationship to be a linear-time invariant (LTI) system26,32,70. Using this 
framework, a hemodynamic response function (HRF) can be calculated numerically using 
the relationship:
H is the HRF, V is the normalized and mean subtracted cerebral blood volume (CBV), T is a 
Toeplitz matrix of size (m+k) · (k+1) containing measurements of normalized neural activity 
(n):
For calculations of behavioral HRFs, a subtractive normalization was performed so that the 
period of rest prior to behavior onset had a mean equal to zero. For sensory evoked HRFs, 
only neural activity within 1.5 seconds of the stimulus was used for calculating the HRF. For 
volitional whisker movement HRFs, we used a 4 second period of neural activity which 
began 1 second before the detected onset. This period includes any neural activity that 
precedes the onset of whisking or continues after super-threshold whisker movement has 
ceased.
Winder et al.
Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 HRFs were calculated from half of the data (described below) corresponding to each 
behavior, and tested on the other half. HRFs for each behavioral dataset were calculated 
from gamma-band power (40–100 Hz) and MUA power (300–3000 Hz) separately. All 
results were smoothed using a 3rd order, 11 point Savitsky-Golay filter (MATLAB function: 
sgolayfilt). Note that this method makes no assumptions as to the shape of the HRF, but 
nonetheless we recovered the canonical gamma-distribution function shaped HRF71.
Comparison of HRF parameters among behaviors—Amplitude, time to peak, and 
full width at half-maximum were used as parameters to compare HRFs obtained from 
various behaviors. The HRF for each behavior was calculated for each animal. Population 
means (two-way ANOVA) or medians (Friedman test) were compared to determine the 
significance of any differences observed in the behavior-specific HRF attributes. Bonferroni 
corrections were applied to correct p-values for multiple comparisons in post-hoc tests. The 
dependence of HRF attributes on cortical depth was also examined. HRF attributes across all 
behaviors were separated by cortical electrode depth and compared non-parametrically using 
a Mann-Whitney U-Test.
Quantifying the variance in the CBV dynamics captured by the HRF—HRFs for 
each behavior were fit with a gamma-distribution function to calculate the correspondence 
between predicted and actual CBV. The gamma-distribution HRF was convolved with neural 
power to predict the measured CBV:
Where v was the predicted CBV, n was the normalized neural measurements, h was the HRF, 
ε was the error, and ⊗ denotes convolution. Data were separated into even and odd trials, 
spanning all imaged days. Even trials were used to generate the HRF, and odd trials were 
used to validate the HRFs predictions. The efficacy of the prediction was quantified by 
calculating the coefficient of determination (R2) between the predicted and actual CBV:
where v̄ is the expected value of the measured CBV. To test the hypothesis that fluctuations 
in R2 were due to behavior, R2 values from individual and average CBV predictions were 
compared using the Friedman test or ANOVA, as appropriate, with Bonferroni correction for 
multiple comparisons in post-hoc analysis.
Subtraction of the global CBV signal—To test the hypothesis that local CBV 
fluctuations arising from local neural activity may be obscured by a non-region specific 
“global” signal72, we obtained the global signal by averaging the reflectance over the area of 
the thinned-skull window. We normalized the global signal to its baseline calculated, as 
described above, from periods of rest and subtracted the normalized global signal from the 
ΔR/R within the ROI in the barrel cortex. This subtraction preserved neurovascular coupling 
Winder et al.
Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Figure 1d, S7e). We then repeated the calculation of the resting HRFs and predicted the 
measured reflectance after global signal subtraction (see Methods above).
Analysis of the putatively non-neural, additive CBV signal—Data were separated 
according to behaviors and normalized to the resting baseline. To determine whether the 
hypothesized CBV component might be uncorrelated, additive “noise”, we compared the 
variance of the behavior-triggered CBV response to the variance of the CBV signal during 
periods of rest (see Figure 4b). Additionally, we compared the root mean squared error of 
the gamma-band or MUA derived HRF predictions across all behavioral conditions (Figure 
4c,d).
To examine the frequency content of the neurally-uncorrelated CBV component, the 
predicted CBV signal was subtracted from the measured CBV during periods of rest, and the 
multi-tapered power spectral density of the residuals were calculated (MATLAB Chronux 
toolbox version 2.11 function: mtspectrumc; http://chronux.org)68 for each animal.
Statistics—Before statistical testing, sample populations were tested for normality 
(Anderson-Darling test, MATLAB function: adtest). If the distribution was not normal, the 
median±interquartile range was used to describe distributions instead of mean±standard 
deviation. For comparisons of multiple populations, the assumption of equal variance needed 
for parametric was also tested (two sample F-test, MATLAB function: vartest2, or Bartlett 
test, MATLAB function: vartestn). If the conditions of normality and equal variance were 
not met, parametric tests (t-test, paired t-test, Welch’s t-test, one-way anova, two-way anova) 
were substituted with a non-parametric counterpart (Mann-Whitney U Test, Wilcoxon 
signed-rank test, Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA, Friedman test). Wherever appropriate we 
accounted for within subject variations by using paired tests, two-factor ANOVA/Friedman 
test, or mixed-effects modeling73 (MATLAB function: fitlme). Where n>10, the 
approximate method of Wilcoxon signed rank testing was used since signed ranks have a 
normal distribution, otherwise the exact sums of the signed ranks were used. All statistical 
comparisons were two-sided tests unless otherwise noted. Confidence intervals were 
obtained from bootstrap resampling (MATLAB function: bootci, 1000 resamples) from 
statistics calculated on randomly reshuffled data, where the size of the reshuffled data was 
equal to the original dataset.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported a Scholar Award from the McKnight Endowment Fund for Neuroscience, and 
R01NS078168, R01EB021703, and R01NS079737 from the NIH to PJD. We thank L. Abbott, M. Adams, P. 
Blinder, D. Feldman, and N. Zhang for comments on the manuscript, and J. Berwick, D. Kleinfeld, and C. Mateo 
for discussions
Winder et al.
Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
1. Fox MD, Raichle ME. Spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity observed with functional magnetic 
resonance imaging. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2007; 8:700–11. [PubMed: 17704812] 
2. Smith SM, Vidaurre D, Beckmann CF, Glasser MF, Jenkinson M, Miller KL, Nichols TE, Robinson 
EC, Salimi-Khorshidi G, Woolrich MW, Barch DM, Uğurbil K, Van Essen DC. Functional 
connectomics from resting-state fMRI. Trends Cogn Sci. 2013; 17:666–682. [PubMed: 24238796] 
3. Maier A, Wilke M, Aura C, Zhu C, Ye FQ, Leopold DA. Divergence of fMRI and neural signals in 
V1 during perceptual suppression in the awake monkey. Nat Neurosci. 2008; 11:1193–200. 
[PubMed: 18711393] 
4. Sirotin YB, Das A. Anticipatory haemodynamic signals in sensory cortex not predicted by local 
neuronal activity. Nature. 2009; 457:475–9. [PubMed: 19158795] 
5. Huo BX, Smith JB, Drew PJ. Neurovascular Coupling and Decoupling in the Cortex during 
Voluntary Locomotion. J Neurosci. 2014; 34:10975–81. [PubMed: 25122897] 
6. Vazquez AL, Fukuda M, Crowley JC, Kim S-G. Neural and Hemodynamic Responses Elicited by 
Forelimb- and Photo-stimulation in Channelrhodopsin-2 Mice: Insights into the Hemodynamic 
Point Spread Function. Cereb Cortex. 2014; :2908–2919. DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bht147 [PubMed: 
23761666] 
7. Drew PJ, Shih AY, Kleinfeld D. Fluctuating and sensory-induced vasodynamics in rodent cortex 
extend arteriole capacity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108:8473–8. [PubMed: 21536897] 
8. Gao YR, Ma Y, Zhang Q, Winder AT, Liang Z, Antinori L, Drew PJ, Zhang N. Time to wake up: 
Studying neurovascular coupling and brain-wide circuit function in the un-anesthetized animal. 
Neuroimage. 2017; 153:382–398. [PubMed: 27908788] 
9. Huo BX, Gao YR, Drew PJ. Quantitative separation of arterial and venous cerebral blood volume 
increases during voluntary locomotion. Neuroimage. 2015; 105:369–379. [PubMed: 25467301] 
10. Hall CN, Reynell C, Gesslein B, Hamilton NB, Mishra A, Sutherland Ba, O’Farrell FM, Buchan 
AM, Lauritzen M, Attwell D. Capillary pericytes regulate cerebral blood flow in health and 
disease. Nature. 2014; 508:55–60. [PubMed: 24670647] 
11. Kim SG, Ogawa S. Biophysical and physiological origins of blood oxygenation level-dependent 
fMRI signals. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2012; 32:1188–1206. [PubMed: 22395207] 
12. Logothetis NK. What we can do and what we cannot do with fMRI. Nature. 2008; 453:869–78. 
[PubMed: 18548064] 
13. Hirano Y, Stefanovic B, Silva AC. Spatiotemporal Evolution of the fMRI Response to Ultrashort 
Stimuli. J Neurosci. 2011; 31:1440–1447. [PubMed: 21273428] 
14. Fukuda M, Rajagopalan UM, Homma R, Matsumoto M, Nishizaki M, Tanifuji M. Localization of 
activity-dependent changes in blood volume to submillimeter-scale functional domains in cat 
visual cortex. Cereb Cortex. 2005; 15:823–833. [PubMed: 15459078] 
15. Guipponi O, Odouard S, Pinede S, Wardak C, Ben Hamed S. fMRI Cortical Correlates of 
Spontaneous Eye Blinks in the Nonhuman Primate. Cereb Cortex. 2014; 25:2333–2345. [PubMed: 
24654257] 
16. Galton F. The Measure of Fidget. Nature. Jun.1885 :174–175.
17. O’Connor DH, Hires SA, Guo ZV, Li N, Yu J, Sun QQ, Huber D, Svoboda K. Neural coding 
during active somatosensation revealed using illusory touch. Nat Neurosci. 2013; 16:958–965. 
[PubMed: 23727820] 
18. Liu X, Duyn JH. Time-varying functional network information extracted from brief instances of 
spontaneous brain activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 110:4392–7. [PubMed: 23440216] 
19. Laumann TO, Snyder AZ, Mitra A, Gordon EM, Gratton C, Adeyemo B, Gilmore AW, Nelson 
SM, Berg JJ, Greene DJ, McCarthy JE, Tagliazucchi E, Laufs H, Schlaggar BL, Dosenbach NUF, 
Petersen SE. On the Stability of BOLD fMRI Correlations. Cereb Cortex. 2016; :1–14. DOI: 
10.1093/cercor/bhw265 [PubMed: 25139941] 
20. Schölvinck ML, Maier A, Ye FQ, Duyn JH, Leopold DA. Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI 
activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 107:10238–43. [PubMed: 20439733] 
Winder et al.
Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 21. Theis L, Berens P, Froudarakis E, Reimer J, Román Rosón M, Baden T, Euler T, Tolias AS, Bethge 
M. Benchmarking Spike Rate Inference in Population Calcium Imaging. Neuron. 2016; 90:471–
482. [PubMed: 27151639] 
22. Goense JBM, Logothetis NK. Neurophysiology of the BOLD fMRI signal in awake monkeys. Curr 
Biol. 2008; 18:631–40. [PubMed: 18439825] 
23. de Kock CPJ, Sakmann B. Spiking in primary somatosensory cortex during natural whisking in 
awake head-restrained rats is cell-type specific. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009; 106:16446–50. 
[PubMed: 19805318] 
24. Chapin JK, Lin CS. Mapping the body representation in the SI cortex of anesthetized and awake 
rats. J Comp Neurol. 1984; 229:199–213. [PubMed: 6438190] 
25. Sachidhanandam S, Sreenivasan V, Kyriakatos A, Kremer Y, Petersen CCH. Membrane potential 
correlates of sensory perception in mouse barrel cortex. Nat Neurosci. 2013; 16:1671–7. [PubMed: 
24097038] 
26. Boynton GM, Engel Sa, Glover GH, Heeger DJ. Linear systems analysis of functional magnetic 
resonance imaging in human V1. J Neurosci. 1996; 16:4207–21. [PubMed: 8753882] 
27. Kay KN, Naselaris T, Prenger RJ, Gallant JL. Identifying natural images from human brain 
activity. Nature. 2008; 452:352–355. [PubMed: 18322462] 
28. O’Connor DH, Clack NG, Huber D, Komiyama T, Myers EW, Svoboda K. Vibrissa-Based Object 
Localization in Head-Fixed Mice. J Neurosci. 2010; 30:1947–1967. [PubMed: 20130203] 
29. Sreenivasan V, Esmaeili V, Kiritani T, Galan K, Crochet S, Petersen CCH. Movement Initiation 
Signals in Mouse Whisker Motor Cortex. Neuron. 2016; 92:1368–1382. [PubMed: 28009277] 
30. Howarth C, Gleeson P, Attwell D. Updated energy budgets for neural computation in the neocortex 
and cerebellum. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2012; 32:1222–32. [PubMed: 22434069] 
31. Logothetis NK, Pauls J, Augath M, Trinath T, Oeltermann a. Neurophysiological investigation of 
the basis of the fMRI signal. Nature. 2001; 412:150–7. [PubMed: 11449264] 
32. Cardoso MMB, Sirotin YB, Lima B, Glushenkova E, Das A. The neuroimaging signal is a linear 
sum of neurally distinct stimulus- and task-related components. Nat Neurosci. 2012; 15:1298–306. 
[PubMed: 22842146] 
33. Murphy K, Birn RM, Bandettini PA. Resting-state fMRI confounds and cleanup. Neuroimage. 
2013; 80:349–359. [PubMed: 23571418] 
34. Attwell D, Buchan AM, Charpak S, Lauritzen M, Macvicar Ba, Newman Ea. Glial and neuronal 
control of brain blood flow. Nature. 2010; 468:232–43. [PubMed: 21068832] 
35. Mayhew JEW, Askew S, Zheng Y, John P, Westby GM, Redgrave P, Rector DM, Harper RM. 
Cerebral Vasomotion: A 0.1-Hz Oscillation in Reflected Light Imaging of Neural Activity. 
Neuroimage. 1996; 4:183–196. [PubMed: 9345508] 
36. Thrane AS, Thrane VR, Zeppenfeld D, Lou N, Xu Q, Nagelhus Ea, Nedergaard M. General 
anesthesia selectively disrupts astrocyte calcium signaling in the awake mouse cortex. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci. 2012; 109:18974–18979. [PubMed: 23112168] 
37. Osol G, Halpern W. Spontaneous vasomotion in pressurized cerebral arteries from genetically 
hypertensive rats. Am J Physiol. 1988; 254:H28–33. [PubMed: 3337256] 
38. Wölfle SE, Chaston DJ, Goto K, Sandow SL, Edwards FR, Hill CE. Non-linear relationship 
between hyperpolarisation and relaxation enables long distance propagation of vasodilatation. J 
Physiol. 2011; 589:2607–23. [PubMed: 21486765] 
39. Gao YR, Greene SE, Drew PJ. Mechanical restriction of intracortical vessel dilation by brain tissue 
sculpts the hemodynamic response. Neuroimage. 2015; 115:162–176. [PubMed: 25953632] 
40. Mishra A, Reynolds JP, Chen Y, Gourine AV, Rusakov DA, Attwell D. Astrocytes mediate 
neurovascular signaling to capillary pericytes but not to arterioles. Nature. 2016; 19:1619–1630.
41. Chaigneau E, Tiret P, Lecoq J, Ducros M, Knöpfel T, Charpak S. The relationship between blood 
flow and neuronal activity in the rodent olfactory bulb. J Neurosci. 2007; 27:6452–6460. [PubMed: 
17567806] 
42. Drew PJ, Duyn JH, Golanov E, Kleinfeld D. Finding coherence in spontaneous oscillations. Nat 
Neurosci. 2008; 11:991–3. [PubMed: 18725901] 
Winder et al.
Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 43. van den Brink RL, Pfeffer T, Warren CM, Murphy PR, Tona KD, van der Wee NJA, Giltay E, van 
Noorden MS, Rombouts SARB, Donner TH, Nieuwenhuis S. Catecholaminergic 
Neuromodulation Shapes Intrinsic MRI Functional Connectivity in the Human Brain. J Neurosci. 
2016; 36:7865–7876. [PubMed: 27466332] 
44. O’Herron P, Chhatbar PY, Levy M, Shen Z, Schramm AE, Lu Z, Kara P. Neural correlates of 
single-vessel haemodynamic responses in vivo. Nature. 2016; 534:378–382. [PubMed: 27281215] 
45. Ma Y, Kozberg MG, Kim SH, Shaik MA, Timmerman D, Hillman EMC. Resting-state 
hemodynamics are spatiotemporally coupled to synchronized and symmetric neural activity in 
excitatory neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2016; 113:E8463–E8471. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1525369113 
[PubMed: 27974609] 
46. Nimmerjahn A, Mukamel EA, Schnitzer MJ. Motor Behavior Activates Bergmann Glial Networks. 
Neuron. 2009; 62:400–412. [PubMed: 19447095] 
47. Murphy K, Birn RM, Handwerker DA, Jones TB, Bandettini PA. The impact of global signal 
regression on resting state correlations: Are anti-correlated networks introduced? Neuroimage. 
2009; 44:893–905. [PubMed: 18976716] 
48. Cauli B, Tong XK, Rancillac A, Serluca N, Lambolez B, Rossier J, Hamel E. Cortical GABA 
interneurons in neurovascular coupling: relays for subcortical vasoactive pathways. J Neurosci. 
2004; 24:8940–9. [PubMed: 15483113] 
49. Iliff JJ, Wang M, Zeppenfeld DM, Venkataraman A, Plog BA, Liao Y, Deane R, Nedergaard M. 
Cerebral arterial pulsation drives paravascular CSF-interstitial fluid exchange in the murine brain. 
J Neurosci. 2013; 33:18190–9. [PubMed: 24227727] 
50. Mohajerani MH, Chan AW, Mohsenvand M, LeDue J, Liu R, McVea Da, Boyd JD, Wang YT, 
Reimers M, Murphy TH. Spontaneous cortical activity alternates between motifs defined by 
regional axonal projections. Nat Neurosci. 2013; 16:1426–35. [PubMed: 23974708] 
51. Drew PJ, Shih AY, Driscoll JD, Knutsen PM, Blinder P, Davalos D, Akassoglou K, Tsai PS, 
Kleinfeld D. Chronic optical access through a polished and reinforced thinned skull. Nat Methods. 
2010; 7:5–11. [PubMed: 20038949] 
52. Drew PJ, Feldman DE. Intrinsic signal imaging of deprivation-induced contraction of whisker 
representations in rat somatosensory cortex. Cereb Cortex. 2009; 19:331–48. [PubMed: 18515797] 
53. Shirey MJ, Smith JB, Kudlik DE, Huo BX, Greene SE, Drew PJ. Brief anesthesia, but not 
voluntary locomotion, significantly alters cortical temperature. J Neurophysiol. 2015; 114:309–
322. [PubMed: 25972579] 
54. Gehrmann J, Hammer PE, Maguire CT, Wakimoto H, Triedman JK, Berul CI. Phenotypic 
screening for heart rate variability in the mouse. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2000; 
279:H733–40. [PubMed: 10924073] 
55. Huo BX, Greene SE, Drew PJ. Venous cerebral blood volume increase during voluntary 
locomotion reflects cardiovascular changes. Neuroimage. 2015; 118:301–312. [PubMed: 
26057593] 
56. O’Connor SM, Berg RW, Kleinfeld D. Coherent electrical activity between vibrissa sensory areas 
of cerebellum and neocortex is enhanced during free whisking. J Neurophysiol. 2002; 87:2137–48. 
[PubMed: 11929931] 
57. Ganguly K, Kleinfeld D. Goal-directed whisking increases phase-locking between vibrissa 
movement and electrical activity in primary sensory cortex in rat. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004; 
101:12348–53. [PubMed: 15297618] 
58. Henze DA, Borhegyi Z, Csicsvari J, Mamiya A, Harris KD, Buzsáki G, Aika Y, Ren J, Kosaka K, 
Kosaka T, Boss B, Turlejski K, Stanfield B, Cowan W, Brooks C, Eccles J, Buhl E, Szilagyi T, 
Halasy K, et al. Intracellular features predicted by extracellular recordings in the hippocampus in 
vivo. J Neurophysiol. 2000; 84:390–400. [PubMed: 10899213] 
59. Drew PJ, Blinder P, Cauwenberghs G, Shih AY, Kleinfeld D. Rapid determination of particle 
velocity from space-time images using the Radon transform. J Comput Neurosci. 2010; 29:5–11. 
[PubMed: 19459038] 
60. Gao YR, Drew PJ. Effects of Voluntary Locomotion and Calcitonin Gene-Related Peptide on the 
Dynamics of Single Dural Vessels in Awake Mice. J Neurosci. 2016; 36:2503–2516. [PubMed: 
26911696] 
Winder et al.
Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 61. Zhao X, Chen H, Liu X, Cang J. Orientation-selective responses in the mouse lateral geniculate 
nucleus. J Neurosci. 2013; 33:12751–63. [PubMed: 23904611] 
62. Constantinople CM, Bruno RM. Effects and mechanisms of wakefulness on local cortical 
networks. Neuron. 2011; 69:1061–1068. [PubMed: 21435553] 
63. Napoleone P, Erd S, Amenta F. Autoradiographic localization of the GABA A receptor agonist 
[ 3H ] muscimol in rat cerebral vessels. Brain Res. 1987; 423:109–115. [PubMed: 2823981] 
64. de Blas AL, Vitorica J, Friedrich P. Localization of the GABAA receptor in the rat brain with a 
monoclonal antibody to the 57,000 Mr peptide of the GABAA receptor/benzodiazepine 
receptor/Cl− channel complex. J Neurosci. 1988; 8:602–14. [PubMed: 2828565] 
65. Lein E, Hawrylycz M, Ao N, Ayres M, Bensinger A, Bernard A, Boe A, Boguski M, Brockway K, 
Byrnes E, Chen L, Chen L, Chen T, Chin M, Chong J, Crook B, Czaplinska A, Dang C, Datta S, et 
al. Genome-wide atlas of gene expression in the adult mouse brain. Nature. 2007; 445:168–176. 
[PubMed: 17151600] 
66. Anenberg E, Chan AW, Xie Y, LeDue JM, Murphy TH. Optogenetic stimulation of GABA neurons 
can decrease local neuronal activity while increasing cortical blood flow. J Cereb Blood Flow 
Metab. 2015; 35:1579–1586. [PubMed: 26082013] 
67. Gao YR, Drew PJ. Determination of vessel cross-sectional area by thresholding in Radon space. J 
Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2014; 34:1180–1187. [PubMed: 24736890] 
68. Mitra, P., Bokil, H. Observed Brain Dynamics. Oxford University Press; 2008. 
69. Hutchison RM, Womelsdorf T, Allen Ea, Bandettini Pa, Calhoun VD, Corbetta M, Della Penna S, 
Duyn JH, Glover GH, Gonzalez-Castillo J, Handwerker Da, Keilholz S, Kiviniemi V, Leopold Da, 
de Pasquale F, Sporns O, Walter M, Chang C. Dynamic functional connectivity: Promise, issues, 
and interpretations. Neuroimage. 2013; 80:360–378. [PubMed: 23707587] 
70. Glover GH. Deconvolution of impulse response in event-related BOLD fMRI. Neuroimage. 1999; 
9:416–429. [PubMed: 10191170] 
71. De Zwart, Ja, Silva, AC., Van Gelderen, P., Kellman, P., Fukunaga, M., Chu, R., Koretsky, AP., 
Frank, Ja, Duyn, JH. Temporal dynamics of the BOLD fMRI impulse response. Neuroimage. 
2005; 24:667–677. [PubMed: 15652302] 
72. Pisauro MA, Benucci A, Carandini M. Local and global contributions to hemodynamic activity in 
mouse cortex. J Neurophysiol. 2016; 115:2931–2936. [PubMed: 26984421] 
73. Aarts E, Verhage M, Veenvliet JV, Dolan CV, van der Sluis S. A solution to dependency: using 
multilevel analysis to accommodate nested data. Nat Neurosci. 2014; 17:491–496. [PubMed: 
24671065] 
Winder et al.
Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Behavior drives cerebral blood volume (CBV) fluctuations
a: Schematic of the experimental setup. b: Total behavioral times, in minutes, for each 
animal (circles, n=12), inset shows the median portion of recorded data corresponding to 
each behavior c: Schematic of the reinforced thinned-skull windows and implanted 
stereotrode. d: Representative example from a single animal showing that correlations 
between CBV (−ΔR/R) and neural activity were largest near the stereotrode for all animals 
(n=12). Top left: image of a thinned skull window. Filled circle indicates the reconstructed 
location of the stereotrode tip. Blue shaded regions show the location of whisker barrels. 
Dashed circular regions designate the locations of ROIs. FL, forelimb; DZ, dysgranular 
zone. Scale bar = 1 mm. Top right:the pixel-wise correlation coefficients between multi-unit 
power (300–3000 Hz) and ΔR/R during rest for the representative animal. Color denotes the 
median correlation coefficient for MUA lag times of 0.5–1.5 seconds (dashed vertical lines, 
below). Bottom left: The cross-correlation between multi-unit power and each of the 
anatomically-determined ROIs. Positive lags indicate that CBV follows neural activity. The 
dashed lines indicate the period over which the median correlation coefficient was calculated 
in the pixel-wise map. e: The variance in CBV for each state, normalized by the CBV 
variance during rest. Each circle represents data from single mouse (n=12). All behaviors 
show CBV variances significantly larger than resting variance. (Wilcoxon signed-rank, 
Winder et al.
Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Bonferroni corrected, extended movement: p=0.01, z=3.06 contralateral stimulation: p=0.01, 
z=3.06 ipsilateral stimulation: p=0.02, z=2.98; behavioral transitions: p=0.02, z=2.98; 
auditory stimulation: p=0.05, z=2.67; volitional whisking: p=0.02, z=2.90. f: Example of 
data from a single trial. Top: periods of volitional whisking (orange), sensory stimulation 
(dark blue) and rest (light blue). Vibrissae stimulation is denoted by the dark blue triangle, 
and volitional whisks/body movement as orange/gray tick marks, respectively. Second from 
top: Normalized CBV changes (ΔR/R) were measured by averaging the reflectance within 
the region of interest in the vibrissa cortex. Second from bottom: Normalized neural power 
(Δ℘/℘) was calculated between 5–150 Hz. Bottom: MUA power was summed between 300–
3000 Hz.
Winder et al.
Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Neurovascular coupling was consistent across behavioral states
a: Average population (n=12 animals) responses to contralateral whisker stimulation. Top: 
average, normalized stimulus-evoked changes in MUA power. Middle: average, normalized 
stimulus-evoked changes in LFP power as a function of frequency. Bottom: reflectance 
change (ΔR/R) within the vibrissa ROI. b: Average population (n=12 animals) responses to 
voluntary whisker movement. Plots are organized as in a. Shaded areas indicate the 
population standard deviation. c: The mean cross-correlations between neural activity and 
ΔR/R calculated during periods of rest show that MUA power (top) and gamma-band power 
(bottom, 40–100 Hz) were reliably correlated with CBV changes. The shaded regions denote 
±1 standard deviation (n=12 animals). CBV increases lagged neural activity changes by 
1.3±0.14 seconds. d: A comparison of the mean gamma-band derived HRFs. Each HRF was 
calculated from a single behavioral state: stimulation (dark blue), volitional whisking 
(orange), and rest (light blue) and averaged across animals (n=12). See Figure S5 for 
individual data. e: Same as d, but for HRFs calculated from MUA.
Winder et al.
Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Predicting CBV changes from neural activity using HRFs
a: An example of the gamma-band power derived (teal blue), and MUA-derived (gray) 
HRFs predicting the average stimulus-triggered CBV response (black) for a single animal. 
Both predictions have the same dynamics as the measured response, and capture 95% of the 
variance (R2=0.955; R2=0.954). b: Predictions of ongoing CBV for a single trial. Top: 
Predictions by gamma-band (teal blue, R2=0.29) and MUA-derived (gray, R2=0.20 HRFs. 
Bottom: The goodness-of-fit (R2) for 8-second long sliding windows. Colored triangles 
indicate sensory stimuli.. Orange tick marks indicate volitional whisking events. c: 
Population summary of the goodness of fit (R2) of gamma-band power derived CBV 
predictions to measured CBV, separated by behavior. Circles represent the median R2 for 
each animal (n=12). R2 calculated on predictions of the average behavior-triggered CBV are 
outlined in black (n=12, 2-way ANOVA, p=8×10−6, F(2,11)=21.02. Post-hoc: Paired t-test, 
Bonferroni corrected, sensory evoked vs. extended movement: p=1×10−3, t(11)=4.36; 
sensory evoked vs volitional whisking: p=6×10−6, t(11)=8.02; extended movement vs. 
Winder et al.
Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 volitional whisking: p=0.14, t(11)=1.57). Colored circles without black outlines indicate the 
median R2 calculated for predictions of CBV during individual periods of behavior, 
(Friedman test, p=3×10−6, χ2(3,33)=26.3. Post-hoc: Wilcoxon signed rank, Bonferroni 
corrected. sensory evoked vs. extended movement: p=0.11, Z=2.35; sensory evoked vs. 
volitional whisking: p=0.02, Z=2.98, sensory evoked vs rest: p=0.01, Z=3.06, extended 
movement vs. volitional whisking: p=0.01, Z=3.05, volitional whisking vs. rest: p=0.51, 
Z=1.73, extended movement vs rest: p=0.02, Z=2.98). Filled black circles show the 
population medians. d: Same as c, but for MUA-derived HRFs (Averaged CBV: Friedman 
test, p=0.02, χ2 (2,22)=8.17. Post-Hoc: Wilcoxon signed rank, Bonferroni corrected, 
sensory-evoked vs. extended movement: p=0.045, z=2.43, sensory evoked vs. volitional 
whisking: p=0.02, z=2.67; extended movement vs. volitional whisking: p=0.64, z=−0.47. 
Individual CBV: Friedman test, p=8×10−3, χ2(3,33)=11.8. Post-Hoc: Wilcoxon signed rank, 
Bonferroni corrected, sensory evoked vs. extended movement: p=0.25, z=2.04; sensory 
evoked vs. volitional whisk: p=0.03, z=2.82, sensory evoked vs rest: p=0.09, z=2.43; 
extended movement vs. volitional whisk: p=0.94, z=−0.08, extended movement vs. rest: 
p=0.88, z=−0.16, volitional whisk vs. rest: p=0.93, z=0.08, n=12). e: The MUA-derived 
HRF was better at predicting resting CBV fluctuations than the gamma-band power derived 
HRF (Paired t-test, p=0.02, t(11)=−2.68). f: An example illustrating that ongoing animal 
behavior, in this case grooming, can lead to very good prediction of measured CBV. 
Compare to b (gamma-band power derived prediction (teal blue): R2=0.48, MUA-derived 
prediction (gray): R2=0.43). Video frames showing periods of animal behavior and rest are 
displayed below the data. Arrows point to the data corresponding to the video frame.
Winder et al.
Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Variance of residual signal is similar across behavioral states
a: Schematic illustrating the hypothesis that the measured hemodynamic signal (bottom left, 
light blue) is comprised of a neural evoked CBV component (top left, dark blue) and a 
separate, additive CBV component which is uncorrelated with the measured local neural 
activity (middle left, gray). The neural evoked CBV component can be subtracted out using 
the mean response from a given behavior (top right, middle right). The variance of the 
residuals after subtracting the neurally-driven CBV component will be equal to the variance 
of the additive CBV component (bottom right). b: Consistent with hypothesis a, the variance 
in the mean CBV response after subtraction of the mean-evoked response was not 
significantly different from the variance in the CBV during rest (t-test: Sensory evoked: 
p=0.86, t(11)=−0.18; Whisking: p=0.61, t(11)=0.52). Each circle represents a single animal 
(n=12), bar indicates the mean. c: Comparison of the root mean squared error (RMSE) of the 
gamma-band derived HRF during stimulation and volitional whisking normalized by the 
RMSE during rest for all animals (n=12). Bars indicate the mean across animals. The RMSE 
was similar between behaviors for the gamma-band (t-test, Bonferroni corrected, Sensory 
Evoked vs. Rest: p=0.06, t(11)=2.70; Sensory Evoked vs. Whisk: 0.73, t(11)=0.35, 
Volitional Whisk vs. Rest: p=0.07, t(11)=2.66) d: Same as c, but for MUA derived HRF 
predictions (Wilcoxon signed rank, Bonferroni corrected, sensory evoked vs rest: p=0.01, 
z=2.90, sensory evoked vs. whisk: p=0.18, z=1.33, whisk vs. rest: p=0.07, z=2.27).
Winder et al.
Page 30
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Spontaneous CBV fluctuations continue in the absence of neural activity and 
noradrenergic input
a: Top: schematic of the window-electrode-cannula preparation. Bottom: an image of a 
thinned-skull window with cannula and electrode implants. The shaded yellow area indicates 
the ROI for CBV measurements. Scale bar = 1 mm. b: The average stimulation-evoked 
MUA following muscimol (n=62 stimuli) and aCSF (n=93 stimuli) infusion in a 
representative animal, showing reduced baseline and sensory evoked MUA (top) and average 
stimulation-evoked increase in CBV (bottom) within the ROI in (a). c: The average 
normalized pixel-wise CBV response to contralateral whisker stimulation (0.5–2 seconds 
after stimulation) across the thinned skull window for a single animal after aCSF infusion 
(top left, n=93 stimuli) and after infusion of muscimol (top center, n=62 stimuli). Top right 
shows the difference between aCSF infusion and muscimol infusion in the stimulation-
triggered CBV response. The root-mean squared deviation (σ) of resting CBV across the 
Winder et al.
Page 31
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 thinned skull window after aCSF infusion (bottom left) and after muscimol infusion is 
shown in the bottom center. The difference in the magnitude of the fluctuations under both 
conditions is shown in the bottom right. Example shows the same animal depicted in a and 
b. d: Example of resting CBV fluctuations following aCSF (black) and muscimol (blue) 
infusions in a single animal (top, same animal as in a). Bottom, normalized diameter 
measurements were made from a single pial arteriole with 2-photon laser scanning 
microscopy following aCSF (black) and muscimol (blue) infusions from a single animal 
during periods of rest. e: Population summary of the root mean-square deviation in pial 
arteriole diameters (circles, n=19) after muscimol infusion for four animals. Orange circle is 
the arteriole in lower plot in d. Bars indicate the mean for each animal. Vessel diameter 
oscillations were reduced following infusion of muscimol compared to aCSF (Mixed-effects 
ANOVA, p=0.0015, t(36)=3.43) f: Same as e, except for measurements taken after infusion 
of muscimol+CNQX+AP5 cocktail. There was no significant difference in the amplitudes of 
the normalized diameter fluctuations between muscimol+CNQX+AP5 and aCSF infusions 
(Mixed-effects ANOVA, n=18 vessels in 3 animals, p=0.22, t(34)=1.26). g: A comparison of 
the root mean-square deviation of resting MUA and CBV fluctuations. Black circles and 
bars outside the axes show the populations mean and standard deviation. Orange circle is the 
mouse in a–c. The dashed gray line is the unity line. h: Same as g, except with a muscimol
+CNQX+AP5 cocktail infusion. The resting CBV oscillation amplitude was not reduced 
compared to muscimol-only infusions (n=4, unpaired t-test, one sided, p=0.15, t(11)=1.11). 
i: Same as g, except with an infusion of muscimol+prazosin+yohimbine+propranolol 
cocktail. The resting CBV oscillation was not significantly reduced as compared to 
muscimol-only infusions (n=5, unpaired t-test, one-sided, p=0.12, t(12)=1.24) j: The root 
mean squared deviation of gamma-band neural power compared to CBV during periods of 
rest following muscimol infusion for all animals. Black circles and bars outside the axes 
show the populations mean and standard deviation. k: Same as j, but for infusion of 
muscimol+CNQX+AP5 cocktail. The resting gamma band power oscillations were reduced 
87% compared to the control, but were not significantly different from reductions due to 
muscimol-only infusions (unpaired t-test, one-sided, p=0.06, t(11)=1.73). l: Same as j, but 
for an infusion of muscimol+prazosin+yohimbine+propranolol cocktail. The oscillations in 
gamma-band power were reduced 79% compared to aCSF control, which was not 
significantly different from muscimol-only infusions (unpaired t-test, two sided, p=0.52, 
t(12)=0.66).
Winder et al.
Page 32
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
