 e98
Purpose—The aim of this guideline is to provide a synopsis of best clinical practices in the rehabilitative care of adults 
recovering from stroke.
Methods—Writing group members were nominated by the committee chair on the basis of their previous work in relevant 
topic areas and were approved by the American Heart Association (AHA) Stroke Council’s Scientific Statement 
Oversight Committee and the AHA’s Manuscript Oversight Committee. The panel reviewed relevant articles on adults 
using computerized searches of the medical literature through 2014. The evidence is organized within the context of the 
AHA framework and is classified according to the joint AHA/American College of Cardiology and supplementary AHA 
methods of classifying the level of certainty and the class and level of evidence. The document underwent extensive AHA 
internal and external peer review, Stroke Council Leadership review, and Scientific Statements Oversight Committee 
review before consideration and approval by the AHA Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee.
Results—Stroke rehabilitation requires a sustained and coordinated effort from a large team, including the patient and 
his or her goals, family and friends, other caregivers (eg, personal care attendants), physicians, nurses, physical and 
occupational therapists, speech-language pathologists, recreation therapists, psychologists, nutritionists, social workers, 
and others. Communication and coordination among these team members are paramount in maximizing the effectiveness 
Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery
A Guideline for Healthcare Professionals From the American Heart 
Association/American Stroke Association
Endorsed by the American Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation and the  
American Society of Neurorehabilitation
The American Academy of Neurology affirms the value of this guideline as an educational tool for 
neurologists and the American Congress of Rehabilitation Medicine also affirms the educational value 
of these guidelines for its members
Accepted by the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
Carolee J. Winstein, PhD, PT, Chair; Joel Stein, MD, Vice Chair;  
Ross Arena, PhD, PT, FAHA; Barbara Bates, MD, MBA; Leora R. Cherney, PhD;  
Steven C. Cramer, MD; Frank Deruyter, PhD; Janice J. Eng, PhD, BSc; Beth Fisher, PhD, PT;  
Richard L. Harvey, MD; Catherine E. Lang, PhD, PT; Marilyn MacKay-Lyons, BSc, MScPT, PhD;  
Kenneth J. Ottenbacher, PhD, OTR; Sue Pugh, MSN, RN, CNS-BC, CRRN, CNRN, FAHA;  
Mathew J. Reeves, PhD, DVM, FAHA; Lorie G. Richards, PhD, OTR/L; William Stiers, PhD, ABPP (RP);  
Richard D. Zorowitz, MD; on behalf of the American Heart Association Stroke Council, Council  
on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing, Council on Clinical Cardiology, and Council on  
Quality of Care and Outcomes Research
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise as a result of an outside relationship 
or a personal, professional, or business interest of a member of the writing panel. Specifically, all members of the writing group are required to complete 
and submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such relationships that might be perceived as real or potential conflicts of interest.
This guideline was approved by the American Heart Association Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee on January 4, 2016, and the American Heart 
Association Executive Committee on February 23, 2016. A copy of the document is available at http://professional.heart.org/statements by using either “Search 
for Guidelines & Statements” or the “Browse by Topic” area. To purchase additional reprints, call 843-216-2533 or e-mail kelle.ramsay@wolterskluwer.com. 
The American Heart Association requests that this document be cited as follows: Winstein CJ, Stein J, Arena R, Bates B, Cherney LR, Cramer SC, 
Deruyter F, Eng JJ, Fisher B, Harvey RL, Lang CE, MacKay-Lyons M, Ottenbacher KJ, Pugh S, Reeves MJ, Richards LG, Stiers W, Zorowitz RD; on 
behalf of the American Heart Association Stroke Council, Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing, Council on Clinical Cardiology, and Council on 
Quality of Care and Outcomes Research. Guidelines for adult stroke rehabilitation and recovery: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the American 
Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2016;47:e98–e169. DOI: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000098.
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is conducted by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA statements and guidelines 
development, visit http://professional.heart.org/statements. Select the “Guidelines & Statements” drop-down menu, then click “Publication Development.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, enhancement, and/or distribution of this document are not permitted without the express 
permission of the American Heart Association. Instructions for obtaining permission are located at http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/General/Copyright-
Permission-Guidelines_UCM_300404_Article.jsp. A link to the “Copyright Permissions Request Form” appears on the right side of the page.
© 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.
Stroke is available at http://stroke.ahajournals.org 
DOI: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000098
AHA/ASA Guideline
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e99
and efficiency of rehabilitation and underlie this entire guideline. Without communication and coordination, isolated 
efforts to rehabilitate the stroke survivor are unlikely to achieve their full potential.
Conclusions—As systems of care evolve in response to healthcare reform efforts, postacute care and rehabilitation are often 
considered a costly area of care to be trimmed but without recognition of their clinical impact and ability to reduce the risk of 
downstream medical morbidity resulting from immobility, depression, loss of autonomy, and reduced functional independence. 
The provision of comprehensive rehabilitation programs with adequate resources, dose, and duration is an essential aspect of stroke 
care and should be a priority in these redesign efforts. (Stroke. 2016;47:e98-e169. DOI: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000098.)
Key Words: AHA Scientific Statements ◼ exercise ◼ paresis ◼ recovery of function ◼ rehabilitation ◼ stroke
B
etween 2000 and 2010, the relative rate of stroke deaths 
dropped by 35.8% in the United States.1 However, each year 
stroke affects nearly 800 000 individuals, with many survivors 
experiencing persistent difficulty with daily tasks as a direct con-
sequence. More than two thirds of stroke survivors receive reha-
bilitation services after hospitalization.2 Despite the development 
of stroke center designation and improved systems to recognize 
stroke symptoms and deliver care promptly, only a minority of 
patients with acute stroke receive thrombolytic therapy, and many 
of them remain with residual functional deficits. Thus, the need 
for effective stroke rehabilitation is likely to remain an essential 
part of the continuum of stroke care for the foreseeable future.
Despite the extensive resources devoted to stroke rehabili-
tation and aftercare, large-scale, rigorous, clinical trials in this 
field have been few and have been conducted only in the past 
decade or so. Thus, many gaps continue to be seen in the evi-
dence base for stroke rehabilitation, for which smaller trials 
of less rigorous design provide the only available data, and in 
some cases, even these are not yet available. Certain aspects 
of stroke rehabilitation care are well established in clinical 
practice and constitute a standard of care that is unlikely to 
be directly tested in a randomized, clinical trial, for example, 
the provision of physical therapy (PT) to early stroke survi-
vors with impaired walking ability. Thus, practice guidelines 
such as this one will likely rely on a mixture of evidence and 
consensus. It is hoped that the relative proportion of recom-
mendations based on rigorous evidence will grow over time.
This guideline uses the framework established by the 
American Heart Association (AHA) concerning classes and lev-
els of evidence for use in guidelines, as shown in Tables 1 and 2.
We have organized this guideline into 5 major sections: 
(1) The Rehabilitation Program, which includes system-level 
sections (eg, organization, levels of care); (2) Prevention and 
Medical Management of Comorbidities, in which reference 
is made to other published guidelines (eg, hypertension); (3) 
Assessment, focused on the body function/structure level of 
the International Classification of Functioning, Disability, and 
Health (ICF)3; (4) Sensorimotor Impairments and Activities 
(treatment/interventions), focused on the activity level of the 
ICF; and (5) Transitions in Care and Community Rehabilitation, 
focused primarily on the participation level of the ICF.
Published guidelines are, by their very nature, a reflection 
of clinical practice at a particular point in time and the evidence 
base available. As new information becomes available, best 
practice can change quickly, and it is incumbent on the users 
of these guidelines to keep the ever-changing nature of clinical 
knowledge in mind. Equally important, no guideline can sub-
stitute for the careful evaluation of the individual patient by an 
experienced clinician, in which the art and science of medicine 
intersect. Guidelines that are correct in the aggregate may not 
represent the best care for any specific individual, and careful 
individualization is needed at the point of care.
We have benefited from the published Veterans Affairs/
Department of Defense stroke rehabilitation guidelines4 and 
several of the prior AHA stroke-related guidelines.4a Although 
the current guideline is a fundamentally new work, it certainly 
reflects the insights and judgments of these prior guidelines.
Because stroke is fundamentally a chronic condition, we 
have attempted to span the entire course of rehabilitation, from 
the early actions taken in the acute care hospital through rein-
tegration into the community. The end of formal rehabilitation 
(commonly by 3–4 months after stroke) should not mean the end 
of the restorative process. In many respects, stroke has been man-
aged medically as a temporary or transient condition instead of a 
chronic condition that warrants monitoring after the acute event. 
Currently, unmet needs persist in many domains, including 
social reintegration, health-related quality of life, maintenance 
of activity, and self-efficacy (ie, belief in one’s capability to carry 
out a behavior). Apathy is manifested in >50% of survivors at 1 
year after stroke5; fatigue is a common and debilitating symptom 
in chronic stroke6; daily physical activity of community-living 
stroke survivors is low7; and depressive symptomology is high.8 
By 4 years after onset, >30% of stroke survivors report persistent 
participation restrictions (eg, difficulty with autonomy, engage-
ment, or fulfilling societal roles).9
The Rehabilitation Program
Organization of Poststroke Rehabilitation Care 
(Levels of Care)
Rehabilitation services are the primary mechanism by which 
functional recovery and the achievement of independence are 
promoted in patients with acute stroke. The array of reha-
bilitation services delivered to stroke patients in the United 
States is broad and highly heterogeneous, varying in the type 
of care settings used; in the duration, intensity, and type of 
interventions delivered; and in the degree of involvement of 
specific medical, nursing, and other rehabilitation specialists. 
The nature and organization of rehabilitation stroke services 
in the United States have changed considerably over time in 
response to various forces, including the increasing integration 
of hospital and outpatient care delivery systems (at both local 
and regional levels), the organization of medical and other 
specialty rehabilitation groups, and most important, repeated 
changes to the federal reimbursement fee structure (specifi-
cally, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services), which is 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e100  Stroke  June 2016
the central driver of much of the system’s organization and 
structure. Further systems-level changes are inevitable, given 
the ongoing federal changes to the healthcare system and the 
recent focus on “episodes of care,” which promises to result in 
wholesale changes to the organization of medical care deliv-
ery in the United States.10
The highly heterogeneous organizational structure of stroke 
rehabilitation care in the United States brings with it challenges 
in terms of determining the quality of care delivered by the sys-
tem (ie, timeliness, effectiveness, efficiency, safety, fairness, 
and patient-centeredness). The unique and somewhat idiosyn-
cratic nature of the stroke rehabilitation system in the United 
States also presents challenges in terms of assessment of which 
research findings, among the expanding evidence base of stroke 
rehabilitation care, are applicable to the system. For example, 
much of the research documenting the benefits of stroke units 
and other aspects of organized integrated interprofessional mod-
els of stroke care was developed in Europe and elsewhere, and 
the degree to which these findings are directly applicable to the 
US system of stroke care is often debated.
Organization of Acute and Postacute Rehabilitation  
Care in the United States
An excellent review of the current organizational structure of 
stroke rehabilitation care in the United States can be found in 
Table 1. Applying Classification of Recommendations and Level of Evidence
A recommendation with Level of Evidence B or C does not imply that the recommendation is weak. Many important clinical questions addressed in the guidelines 
do not lend themselves to clinical trials. Although randomized trials are unavailable, there may be a very clear clinical consensus that a particular test or therapy is 
useful or effective.
*Data available from clinical trials or registries about the usefulness/efficacy in different subpopulations, such as sex, age, history of diabetes, history of prior 
myocardial infarction, history of heart failure, and prior aspirin use.
†For comparative effectiveness recommendations (Class I and IIa; Level of Evidence A and B only), studies that support the use of comparator verbs should involve 
direct comparisons of the treatments or strategies being evaluated.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e101
the 2010 AHA scientific statement “Comprehensive Overview 
of Nursing and Interdisciplinary Rehabilitation Care of the 
Stroke Patient.”11 We briefly review the different stroke neu-
rology, rehabilitation care settings that are essential compo-
nents of this system (Appendix 1).
Ideally, rehabilitation services are delivered by a mul-
tidisciplinary team of healthcare providers with training in 
neurology, rehabilitation nursing, occupational therapy (OT), 
PT, and speech and language therapy (SLT). Such teams are 
directed under the leadership of physicians trained in physi-
cal medicine and rehabilitation (physiatrist) or by neurologists 
who have specialized training or board certification in reha-
bilitation medicine. Other health professionals who play an 
essential role in the process include social workers, psycholo-
gists, psychiatrists, and counselors.11
Health care provided during the acute hospital stay is 
focused primarily on the acute stabilization of the patient, the 
delivery of acute stroke treatments, and the initiation of pro-
phylactic and preventive measures. Although the delivery of 
rehabilitation therapies (OT/PT/SLT) is generally not the first 
priority, data strongly suggest that there are benefits to starting 
rehabilitation as soon as the patient is ready and can tolerate it.11 
The cardinal feature of acute inpatient care for stroke patients 
in the United States is its brevity; the median length of stay 
for patients with ischemic stroke in only 4 days. Regardless of 
whether rehabilitation is started during the inpatient stay, all 
patients should undergo a formal assessment (often conducted 
by the OT/PT/SLT services) of the patient’s rehabilitation needs 
before discharge.12 The discharge process may also involve 
rehabilitation nursing case managers and social workers who 
can assess psychosocial issues that may influence the transition.
Healthcare services provided after hospital discharge are 
referred to as postacute care services and are designed to sup-
port patients in their transition from the hospital to home and 
in their pursuit of achieving the highest level of functioning 
possible. In addition to the rehabilitation care provided by 
OT/PT/SLT, care may include physiatrists or other physicians, 
rehabilitation nurses, and nursing aides. The intensity of reha-
bilitation care varies widely, depending on the setting, with 
the most intensive rehabilitation care provided in inpatient 
rehabilitation facilities (IRFs), followed by skilled nursing 
facilities (SNFs), which provide “subacute” rehabilitation.
IRFs provide hospital-level care to stroke survivors who 
need intensive, 24-hour-a-day, interdisciplinary rehabilitation 
care that is provided under the direct supervision of a physi-
cian. Medicare (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services) 
regulations specify that admission to IRFs should be limited to 
patients for whom significant improvement is expected within 
a reasonable length of time and who are likely to return to a 
community setting (rather than being transferred to another set-
ting such as a SNF or long-term care facility). Medicare regula-
tions also generally dictate that IRFs provide at least 3 hours 
of rehabilitation therapy (defined as PT, OT, and SLT) per day 
for at least 5 d/wk.11 Physicians are expected to have training 
or experience in rehabilitation, and daily physician visits are 
typical. Registered nurses are present on a continuous basis and 
commonly have specialty certification in rehabilitation nursing. 
An IRF can be located as a geographically distinct unit within 
an acute care hospital or as a free-standing facility.
SNFs (also known as subacute rehabilitation) provide 
rehabilitation care to stroke survivors who need daily skilled 
nursing or rehabilitation services. Admission to SNFs may be 
requested for patients who the rehabilitation team determines 
may not reach full or partial recovery or if skilled nursing ser-
vices are required to maintain or prevent deterioration of the 
patient. SNFs are required to have rehabilitation nursing on 
site for a minimum of 8 h/d, and care must still follow a physi-
cian’s plan, although there is no requirement for direct daily 
supervision by a physician.13 SNFs can be stand-alone facili-
ties, but when located within an existing nursing home or hos-
pital, they must be physically distinguishable from the larger 
institution (eg, a separate designated wing, ward, or building).
Nursing homes provide long-term residential care for indi-
viduals who are unable to live in the community. Many indi-
viduals who reside in nursing homes initially enter the facility 
under their Medicare short-term SNF benefit and then transi-
tion to long-term care once the needs for skilled nursing are 
no longer present. Medicare will provide insurance coverage 
for up to 100 days in an SNF but does not cover long-term 
nursing home care, which is generally paid out of pocket, by 
long-term care insurance, or through the Medicaid program.
Table 2. Definition of Classes and Levels of Evidence Used 
in AHA/ASA Recommendations
Class I
Conditions for which there is evidence for 
and/or general agreement that the procedure  
or treatment is useful and effective
Class II
Conditions for which there is conflicting 
evidence and/or a divergence of opinion 
about the usefulness/efficacy of a 
procedure or treatment
 Class IIa
The weight of evidence or opinion is in 
favor of the procedure or treatment
 Class IIb
Usefulness/efficacy is less well  
established by evidence or opinion
Class III
Conditions for which there is evidence and/
or general agreement that the procedure 
or treatment is not useful/effective and in 
some cases may be harmful
Therapeutic recommendations
 Level of Evidence A
Data derived from multiple randomized, 
clinical trials or meta-analyses
 Level of Evidence B
Data derived from a single randomized  
trial or nonrandomized studies
 Level of Evidence C
Consensus opinion of experts, case 
studies, or standard of care
Diagnostic recommendations
 Level of Evidence A
Data derived from multiple prospective 
cohort studies using a reference  
standard applied by a masked evaluator
 Level of Evidence B
Data derived from a single grade A study, 
≥1 case-control studies, or studies using  
a reference standard applied by  
an unmasked evaluator
 Level of Evidence C
Consensus opinion of experts
AHA/ASA indicates American Heart Association/American Stroke Association.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e102  Stroke  June 2016
Long-term acute care hospitals are another inpatient setting 
that delivers postacute rehabilitation care. Long-term acute care 
hospitals provide extended medical and rehabilitative care to 
stroke patients with complex medical needs resulting from a 
combination of acute and chronic conditions (eg, ventilator-
dependent care, pain management). As a consequence of this 
high-needs patient population, facilities must demonstrate an 
average length of stay of at least 25 days.14,15 Because of these 
requirements, long-term acute care hospitals provide care to a 
relatively small but growing minority of stroke patients.14
For stroke patients who go home after an acute hospital-
ization, rehabilitation care can be provided in the community 
either by a home healthcare agency (HHCA) or through out-
patient offices and clinics. The intensity of rehabilitation care 
can vary tremendously across these 2 settings. For patients in 
the Medicare program to be eligible for HHCA services, they 
must be certified as being homebound by a physician (defined 
by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services as unable to 
leave the home except to receive medical care or to have occa-
sional nonmedical trips). HHCAs focus on delivering skilled 
nursing care and rehabilitation therapy (eg, OT, PT, SLT), as 
well as some limited assistance with daily tasks provided by 
home health aides supervised by nurses. Care encompasses 
medical and social needs and services that are designed to assist 
the patient in living in his or her own home.13 Currently, home 
healthcare services are reimbursed under a prospective payment 
system that covers up to 60 days of services. These services may 
be extended if they can be clinically justified. Home healthcare 
services may also be performed in assisted living facilities or 
other group homes but are not reimbursed if the services are 
duplicative of the services of another facility or agency.
Appropriateness of Early Supported Discharge 
Rehabilitation Services
For selected stroke patients, early discharge to a community set-
ting for ongoing rehabilitation may provide outcomes similar 
to those achieved in an inpatient rehabilitation unit. This early 
supported discharge (ESD) model of care links inpatient care 
with community services and allows certain patients to be dis-
charged home sooner with support of the rehabilitation team.
The efficacy of ESD for patients with acute stroke was 
evaluated in the ESD Trialists’ systematic review.16 This 2012 
review concluded that “appropriately resourced ESD services 
provided for a selected group of stroke patients can reduce long-
term dependency and admission to institutional care as well 
as reducing the length of hospital stay.” No adverse impacts 
were identified on either mood or the subjective health status 
of patients or caregivers with ESD. ESD has been studied pri-
marily in Europe and Australia/New Zealand, where systems of 
care are different than in the United States and where the aver-
age acute care hospitalization length of stay for stroke is longer 
than in the United States. Extrapolation of these results to the 
United States should take these distinctions into account.
A meta-analysis conducted by Langhorne et al17 and updated 
by Langhorne and Holmqvist18 found that ESD services reduce 
inpatient length of stay and adverse events (eg, readmission rates) 
while increasing the likelihood of independence and living at 
home. Several recent systematic reviews have also reported that 
ESD after stroke was associated with shorter hospital lengths of 
stay, lower overall costs of care, lower risk of institutionaliza-
tion, and no adverse effects on functional recovery.19–21
To be effective, ESD should be considered for patients 
with mild to moderate stroke when adequate community ser-
vices for both rehabilitation and caregiver support are avail-
able and can provide the level of intensity of rehabilitation 
service needed.22 Patients should remain in an inpatient set-
ting for their rehabilitation care if they are in need of skilled 
nursing services, regular contact by a physician, and multiple 
therapeutic interventions.
Examples for need of skilled nursing services include (but 
are not limited to) the following:
• Bowel and bladder impairment
• Skin breakdown or high risk for skin breakdown
• Impaired bed mobility
• Dependence for activities of daily living (ADLs)
• Inability to manage medications
• High risk for nutritional deficits
Examples for need of regular contact by a physician include 
(but are not limited to) the following:
• Medical comorbidities not optimally managed (eg, dia-
betes mellitus and hypertension)
• Complex rehabilitation issues (eg, orthotics, spasticity, 
and bowel/bladder)
• Acute illness (but not severe enough to prevent rehabili-
tation care)
• Pain management issues
Examples for need of multiple therapeutic interventions 
include (but are not limited to) the following:
• Moderate to severe motor/sensory deficits, and/or
• Cognitive deficits, and/or
• Communication deficits
Outpatient therapies require patients to travel from their home to 
obtain care at hospital-based or free-standing facilities. All outpa-
tient OT, PT, and SLT services must be certified by a physician 
who is responsible for establishing a planned set of therapy ser-
vices. These therapies must be complex enough that they can be 
performed only by a qualified healthcare professional. Treatment 
plans need to be reviewed and recertified every 30 days.
Multiple transitions in care are typical for individuals recov-
ering from stroke and pose particular challenges for healthcare 
providers, stroke survivors, and their caregivers in terms of main-
taining continuity of care and avoiding undesirable lapses in the 
rehabilitation program of care. Moreover, stroke survivors need 
to navigate the transition from a medical model of treatment to a 
more community-based model that includes return to work (for 
some), leisure activities, and exercise for fitness. The Transitions 
in Care and Community Rehabilitation section addresses tran-
sitions to the community after discharge.
Trends in the Use of Acute and Postacute Stroke 
Rehabilitation in the United States
The organization of rehabilitation stroke services in the 
United States has changed considerably over time in 
response to the frequent changes to the federal reimburse-
ment fee structure for both acute (inpatient) and postacute 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e103
care. Currently, ≈70% of Medicare beneficiaries discharged 
for acute stroke use Medicare-covered postacute care,23 with 
most receiving rehabilitation care from multiple providers 
in several different settings.24,25 Considering the first set-
ting after the acute hospitalization, the largest proportion 
of stroke patients are referred for rehabilitation to an SNF 
(32%), followed by an IRF (22%) and then HHCA (15%).26 
Major changes in the Medicare postacute care reimburse-
ment policies starting in the 1990s dramatically affected use 
patterns,26 particularly for HHCAs, after the introduction of 
an interim payment system in 1997 with extensive changes 
to its rules and regulations in 2000. The introduction of pro-
spective payment systems for SNFs (1998), IRFs (2002), 
and long-term acute care hospitals (2002) also affected their 
use.13,27 Between 1996 and 2003, the proportion of Medicare 
stroke patients who received care from HHCAs declined by 
>25% during this period (from 20% to 15%),26 whereas the 
proportion who received SNF or IRF care remained rela-
tively unchanged. However, the proportion of stroke patients 
not referred to any postacute care increased from 26% to 
31% during this period,26 and an analysis of 2006 Medicare 
data found that this proportion had increased to 42%.28 
Although legislated payment changes have had major influ-
ences on where rehabilitation services are provided, several 
other nonclinical factors affect the use of postacute care 
rehabilitation services. There is considerable geographic 
variability in the use of these services in the United States,29 
which is driven in part by local differences in the availabil-
ity of postacute care settings and regulatory practices.29–33 
Factors such as the daily census, case mix, teaching status, 
ownership, and urbanicity of the hospital and the percentage 
of patients served by Medicare have been shown to influence 
use patterns of postacute services.30,34,35 At the patient level, 
sociodemographic factors such as age, income, race, and liv-
ing circumstances have also been shown to affect the use and 
type of rehabilitation services provided.30–33,36–38
Of central interest to researchers and policy makers is the 
need for a better understanding of the impact of rehabilita-
tion care at these different rehabilitation settings on patient 
outcomes, especially relative to resource use and costs. The 
studies that have compared outcomes in hospitalized stroke 
patients first discharged to an IRF, an SNF, or a nursing home 
have generally shown that IRF patients have higher rates of 
return to community living39,40 and greater functional recov-
ery,39–42 whereas patients discharged to an SNF or a nursing 
home have higher rehospitalization rates43 and substantially 
poorer survival.44,45 However, all of these studies have limita-
tions resulting from their observational designs, which rely on 
administrative data39–41 or data from a limited number of facili-
ties.42 Importantly, most of these studies demonstrate substan-
tial baseline differences in patient case mix between settings, 
with IRF patients having a more favorable prognostic out-
look because of their younger age, lower prestroke disability, 
fewer comorbidities, and greater caregiver/family support and 
because they have been selected for their potential to return 
to the community.39–41,45 These differences serve to illustrate 
that the decision to refer a stroke patient to a particular setting 
after discharge is dictated by a complex set of demographic, 
clinical, and nonclinical factors that are also inevitably related 
to patient outcomes. This inherent confounding or channel-
ing bias46 has been addressed by these studies through the 
application of complex statistical methods.39–41 However, 
uncertainty remains about how much of the final difference 
in outcome is attributable to residual confounding resulting 
from unmeasured factors (particularly stroke severity and pre-
stroke disability). Despite these concerns, the consistency of 
the findings in favor of IRF referral suggests that stroke survi-
vors who qualify for IRF services should receive this care in 
preference to SNF-based care.
Rehabilitation Interventions in the Inpatient 
Hospital Setting
There is strong evidence that organized, interprofessional stroke 
care not only reduces mortality rates and the likelihood of insti-
tutional care and long-term disability but also enhances recov-
ery and increases independence in ADLs.47–50 Although many 
small, randomized, clinical trials have studied interventions 
in the acute rehabilitation phase, the only large, randomized, 
clinical trials in stroke recovery and rehabilitation have focused 
on the chronic recovery phase.51,52 This section updates the sci-
entific statement on the comprehensive overview of nursing 
and interprofessional rehabilitation care of the stroke patient 
and previously summarized recommendations for care of the 
stroke survivor in the inpatient rehabilitation phase.11
Although acute stroke units have higher levels of nurse staff-
ing, earlier assessments of stroke type and treatment, and more 
intensive physiological monitoring, rehabilitation units (includ-
ing comprehensive stroke units in Europe) emphasize recovery 
and rehabilitation, involving rehabilitation physicians and allied 
health professionals, increased interprofessional staff education 
and training, greater patient and caregiver participation in reha-
bilitation, and early mobilization protocols.53 Age, cognition, 
functional level after stroke, and to a lesser extent continence 
have shown consistent associations with poststroke outcomes, 
and stroke severity is associated with acute discharge disposi-
tion, final discharge disposition, and functional level.54 In recent 
years, lengths of stay in IRFs have decreased significantly, but 
in survivors with mild to moderate stroke, patient satisfaction 
does not appear to be diminished, and recovery actually may be 
faster.55 In the United States, data after the initiation of prospec-
tive payment for rehabilitation in 2002 suggest that discharges 
from IRFs to institutional settings have increased.56
Recommendations: Organization of Poststroke 
Rehabilitation Care (Levels of Care)
Class
Level of 
Evidence
It is recommended that stroke patients who are 
candidates for postacute rehabilitation receive 
organized, coordinated, interprofessional care.
I
A
It is recommended that stroke survivors who 
qualify for and have access to IRF care receive 
treatment in an IRF in preference to a SNF.
I
B
Organized community-based and coordinated 
interprofessional rehabilitation care is 
recommended in the outpatient or home-based 
settings.
I
C
ESD services may be reasonable for people  
with mild to moderate disability.
IIb
B
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e104  Stroke  June 2016
Timing and intensity of acute rehabilitation also are impor-
tant issues in poststroke functional outcomes but remain contro-
versial. Overall, a 2009 meta-analysis demonstrated insufficient 
evidence to support or refute the efficacy of routine very early 
mobilization after stroke compared with conventional care.57 
In the recently completed randomized, controlled trial (RCT) 
of the efficacy and safety of very early mobilization within 
24 hours of stroke onset (A Very Early Rehabilitation Trial 
[AVERT]), the high-dose, very early mobilization protocol was 
associated with a reduction in the odds of a favorable outcome 
at 3 months.58 Early mobilization after stroke is recommended 
in many clinical practice guidelines worldwide. The AVERT 
findings should affect clinical practice by refining present 
guidelines, but clinical recommendations should be informed 
by future analyses of dose-response associations.
The only evidence assessing the intensity of stroke reha-
bilitation comes from literature comparing IRFs with subacute 
rehabilitation. In a study of 222 subjects, Chan et al59 reported 
that subjects whose care included an IRF stay experienced 
functional scores at least 8 points higher (twice the minimally 
detectable change) on the Activity Measure for Post-Acute 
Care than those who went to SNFs or received home health/
outpatient care. A retrospective cohort study of 360 subjects 
demonstrated that subjects who received >3.0 hours of ther-
apy daily made significantly more functional gains than those 
receiving <3.0 hours daily, although hemorrhagic stroke, left-
sided brain injury, earlier IRF admission, and longer IRF stay 
also were associated with total functional improvement.60
Finally, the efficacy of complementary medicine tech-
niques has been studied in the IRF environment. In a random-
ized, clinical trial of 274 subjects receiving acupuncture, PT, 
or both, no synergistic effect was found when acupuncture 
was added to PT, although all subjects exhibited functional 
gains.61 An RCT of 53 subjects receiving whole-body somato-
sensory stimulation or exercise therapy in addition to conven-
tional rehabilitation demonstrated no significant increases in 
the recovery of balance and ADLs.62
For evidence pertaining to dysphagia; interventions for upper 
limb rehabilitation, including upper extremity activities (ie, 
ADLs, instrumental ADLs [IADLs]), touch, and proprioception; 
lower extremity rehabilitation, including mobility (eg, locomo-
tion) and balance/vestibular rehabilitation; and therapies for cog-
nitive impairments and hemi-spatial neglect, the reader is directed 
to those subsections in The Rehabilitation Program section.
Prevention and Medical  
Management of Comorbidities
Prevention of Skin Breakdown and Contractures
Hemiparesis, sensory changes, and altered levels of con-
sciousness place the patient with stroke at risk for joint and 
muscle contractures and skin breakdown. Pressure ulcers 
are also associated with impaired circulation, older age, 
and incontinence. Regular assessment of skin and the use 
of objective scales of risk such as the Braden scale are valu-
able in the prevention of skin injury and should be followed 
by regular skin inspection with documentation.63 Agency 
for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) guidelines 
recommend minimizing or eliminating friction, minimizing 
pressure, providing appropriate support surfaces, avoiding 
excessive moisture, and maintaining adequate nutrition and 
hydration.63 Specific measures include regular turning (at 
least every 2 hours), good hygiene, and the use of special 
mattresses and proper wheelchair seating to prevent skin 
injury.11
After stroke with hemiparesis, 60% of patients will 
develop joint contracture on the affected side within the first 
year, with wrist contractures occurring most commonly in 
patients who do not recover functional hand use.65,66 The 
occurrence of elbow contractures within the first year after 
stroke is associated with the presence of spasticity within the 
first 4 months.67 These contractures can cause pain and make 
self-care, including dressing and hygiene, difficult. Many 
clinicians recommend daily stretching of the hemiplegic 
limbs to avoid contractures, and patients and families should 
be taught proper stretching techniques to avoid injury and 
to maximize effectiveness. Resting hand splints are often 
applied to prevent contractures in hemiplegic wrist and fin-
gers, but their effectiveness is not well established.68,69 There 
is controversy over the benefit of resting hand splints such 
that the Royal College of Physicians National Institute for 
Clinical Excellence guidelines recommend against the use 
of resting hand splints but the Veterans Affairs/Department 
of Defense clinical practice guidelines recommend their 
use.4,70,71 Application of resting hand splints combined with 
other treatments, including early botulinum toxin injection 
to wrist and finger flexors, may be beneficial.72 Early after 
stroke, positioning of the hemiplegic shoulder in maximum 
external rotation for 30 minutes each day either in bed or in 
a chair can be useful for preventing shoulder contracture.73,74 
Applying serial casting or static adjustable splints may be 
beneficial in preventing elbow or wrist contractures, although 
data are conflicting.4,72,75,76 Surgical release of the brachialis, 
brachioradialis, and biceps muscles is a reasonable option to 
treat pain and range-of-motion limitations in patients with 
substantial established elbow flexor contractures.77
Ankle plantarflexion contractures after stroke can affect 
gait quality and safety. The use of an ankle-foot orthosis 
(AFO) can improve gait in patients with active plantarflex-
ion during the swing phase of gait but also may be benefi-
cial in preventing ankle contracture.78 For nonambulatory 
patients, the use of a resting ankle splint at night, set in the 
plantigrade position (ankle at 90° and subtalar neutral), or 
Recommendations: Rehabilitation  
Interventions in the Inpatient Hospital Setting
Class
Level of 
Evidence
It is recommended that early rehabilitation 
for hospitalized stroke patients be provided in 
environments with organized, interprofessional 
stroke care.
I
A
It is recommended that stroke survivors receive 
rehabilitation at an intensity commensurate with 
anticipated benefit and tolerance.
I
B
High-dose, very early mobilization within 24 
hours of stroke onset can reduce the odds of 
a favorable outcome at 3 months and is not 
recommended.
III
A
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e105
standing on a tilt table for 30 min/d is probably useful in 
preventing contracture.78
Prevention of Deep Venous Thrombosis
Survivors of acute stroke are at high risk of deep venous throm-
bosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE) as a result of a 
combination of limb immobility and reduced activity level.79 
Prevention of DVT and PE can be divided into pharmacologi-
cal and mechanical methods in both ischemic and hemorrhage 
strokes. Prophylactic treatment is initiated depending on the 
type of stroke and use of thrombolytic therapy. Therapy usu-
ally is continued throughout the rehabilitation stay or until 
the stroke survivor regains mobility, with few studies exam-
ining the optimal duration of prophylaxis. For patients with 
mild motor impairments who are discharged directly home 
from the hospital, DVT prophylaxis may not be needed. For 
patients discharged to an SNF with a stay that extends beyond 
the active rehabilitation program, the duration of prophylactic 
treatment remains at the discretion of the treating physician.
Recommendations for the prevention of DVT and PE in 
ischemic stroke are delineated in great detail in the American 
College of Chest Physicians’ “Antithrombotic Therapy and 
Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th edition.”80 One meta-analysis 
of 16 trials involving 23 043 patients with acute ischemic 
stroke compared stroke survivors receiving varying amounts 
of unfractionated heparin (UFH) with control subjects.81 The 
use of high-dose UFH (>15 000 U/d) was associated with a 
reduction in PE (odds ratio [OR], 0.49; 95% confidence inter-
val [CI], 0.29–0.83) but also with an increased risk of intrace-
rebral hemorrhage (ICH; OR, 3.86; 95% CI, 2.41–6.19) and 
extracerebral hemorrhage (ECH; OR, 4.74; 95% CI, 2.88–
7.78). Low-dose UFH (<15 000 U/D) decreased the thrombo-
sis risk (OR, 0.17; 95% CI, 0.11–0.26) but had no influence 
on the risk of PE (OR, 0.83; 95% CI, 0.53–1.31). The risk 
of ICH or ECH was not significantly increased (OR, 1.67; 
95% CI, 0.97–2.87 for ICH; OR, 1.58; 95% CI, 0.89–2.81 for 
ECH) with prophylactic-dose UFH.
Adjusted-dose low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) 
decreased the risk of both DVT (OR, 0.07; 95% CI, 0.02–0.29) 
and PE (0.44; 95% CI, 0.18–1.11), but this benefit was offset 
by an increased risk of ICH (OR, 2.01; 95% CI, 1.02–3.96) 
and ECH (OR, 1.78; 95% CI, 0.99–3.17). Prophylactic-dose 
LMWH (defined as 3000–6000 IU/d) reduced the incidence of 
both DVT (OR, 0.34; 95% CI, 0.19–0.59) and PE (OR, 0.36; 
95% CI, 0.15–0.87) without an increased risk of ICH (OR, 
1.39; 95% CI, 0.53–3.67) or ECH (OR, 1.44; 95% CI, 0.13–16). 
For prophylactic-dose LMWH, the number needed to treat to 
avoid 1 event was 7 for DVT and 38 for PE.
Overall, the guidelines of the American College of Chest 
Physicians (9th edition) found an estimated reduction in over-
all mortality of 12 deaths per 1000 individuals receiving either 
UFH or LMWH compared with no anticoagulation80; no form 
of prophylaxis is 100% effective in preventing venous throm-
boembolism in this population, however.
A meta-analysis82 and a Cochrane systematic review of 
9 trials involving 3137 subjects confirmed the superiority of 
LMWH over UFH.83 Only 1 high-quality cost-effectiveness 
analysis comparing LMWH with UFH in acutely ill medical 
subjects (not stroke) demonstrated fewer complications with 
LMWH at a lower overall cost.84
Intermittent pneumatic compression or sequential compres-
sion devices are designed to spur blood flow by intermittently 
applying pressure on the calf muscles and vasculature. One 
Cochrane systematic review of 2 small studies including 177 
subjects demonstrated a nonsignificant trend toward a lower 
risk of DVT (OR, 0.45; 95% CI, 0.19–1.10) with no significant 
effect on mortality (OR, 1.04; 95% CI, 0.37–2.89).85
Elastic compression stockings, also referred to as graduated 
compression stockings, are designed to promote venous blood 
flow by applying a pressure gradient from the ankle more proxi-
mally. One large, randomized, clinical trial involving 2518 sub-
jects failed to demonstrate a positive or negative effect on the 
occurrence of symptomatic proximal DVT or PE.86 However, 
subjects using elastic compression stockings had an increase in 
skin complications (relative risk [RR], 4.18; 95% CI, 2.4–7.3). 
One Cochrane systematic review of 2 trials including 2615 sub-
jects demonstrated no significant reduction in DVT (OR, 0.88; 
95% CI, 0.72–1.08) or death (OR, 1.13; 95% CI, 0.87–1.47).85
The addition of elastic compression stockings to intermit-
tent pneumatic compression has been studied in a few small 
studies but has failed to demonstrate a positive or negative 
effect.87 Studies in other patient populations have demonstrated 
Recommendations: Prevention of Skin 
Breakdown and Contractures
Class
Level of 
Evidence
During hospitalization and inpatient 
rehabilitation, regular skin assessments are 
recommended with objective scales of risk  
such as the Braden scale.
I
C
It is recommended to minimize or eliminate  
skin friction, to minimize skin pressure, to  
provide appropriate support surfaces, to avoid 
excessive moisture, and to maintain adequate 
nutrition and hydration to prevent skin 
breakdown. Regular turning, good skin hygiene, 
and use of specialized mattresses, wheelchair 
cushions, and seating are recommended until 
mobility returns.
I
C
Patients, staff, and caregivers should be educated 
about the prevention of skin breakdown.
I
C
Positioning of hemiplegic shoulder in  
maximum external rotation while the patient  
is either sitting or in bed for 30 minutes daily  
is probably indicated.
IIa
B
Resting hand/wrist splints, along with  
regular stretching and spasticity management  
in patients lacking active hand movement, may 
be considered.
IIb
C
Use of serial casting or static adjustable splints 
may be considered to reduce mild to moderate 
elbow and wrist contractures.
IIb
C
Surgical release of brachialis, brachioradialis,  
and biceps muscles may be considered for 
substantial elbow contractures and  
associated pain.
IIb
B
Resting ankle splints used at night and 
during assisted standing may be considered 
for prevention of ankle contracture in the 
hemiplegic limb.
IIb
B
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e106  Stroke  June 2016
that the combination of elastic compression stockings and 
pharmacological prophylaxis significantly reduced the inci-
dence of symptomatic or asymptomatic DVT (OR, 0.40; 95% 
CI, 0.25–0.65). However, the benefit of treatment should be 
weighed against the increase in skin complications observed 
with the use of elastic compression stockings.88
With respect to hemorrhagic stroke, prophylactic-dose hepa-
rin does not increase the risk of recurrent intracranial bleeding 
significantly, although the overall quality of the evidence is low.80 
In 1 small study comparing the initiation of prophylactic heparin 
on the second and fourth hospital days, there were no harmful or 
beneficial effects on any outcomes.89 This study provides very 
low-quality evidence that early use of prophylactic-dose hepa-
rin is safe in stroke survivors with primary ICH.
Comparisons of the effects between UFH and LMWH and 
the effects of intermittent pneumatic compression and elastic 
compression stockings have not been done in stroke survivors 
with primary ICH. Therefore, recommendations are consistent 
with those of ischemic stroke.80
Treatment of Bowel and Bladder Incontinence
Urinary incontinence and fecal incontinence are common 
problems after stroke. Approximately 40% to 60% of stroke 
patients have urinary incontinence during their acute admis-
sion for stroke, falling to 25% by hospital discharge. At 1 
year, 15% will remain incontinent of urine.90 Age, cognition, 
and motor impairments are risk factors for bladder inconti-
nence. Fecal incontinence prevalence is ≈40% acutely but 
diminishes to 20% by discharge from rehabilitation. Age 
and functional impairment are risk factors for fecal incon-
tinence on admission for stroke.91 Impaired awareness of 
urinary incontinence is correlated with mortality92 and the 
need for nursing home care 3 months after stroke.93 On a 
positive note, many patients recover continence after stroke. 
Because of the risk of skin breakdown, the social stigma, 
and the burden of care associated with incontinence, man-
agement of bowel and bladder continence is an essential part 
of the rehabilitation process.
Although considerable data on the rate of urinary incon-
tinence exist, there is a paucity of published studies on ther-
apeutic interventions to improve rates of continence. The 
recommendation to remove indwelling urinary catheters 
within 24 hours is based on the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention recommendations for all hospitalized patients 
to prevent catheter-associated urinary tract infections and is 
not specific to stroke.94
The studies reported by Pettersen et al92 and Myint et al95 
combined multiple recommendations representing “best prac-
tice” for bladder management and applied them to a modest-
sized population of stroke patients. Their studies showed 
success but limited generalizability because of study design. It 
is impossible to ascertain which of the multiple interventions 
were responsible for the improvements seen.
Cognitive awareness plays a role in continence and ulti-
mately in overall stroke outcome. There are many types and 
causes of incontinence, ranging from impaired awareness of the 
need to void to difficulty with mobility in reaching the bathroom 
to communication difficulties resulting from aphasia.
We were unable to identify any high-quality studies of 
treatment for fecal incontinence after stroke, and recommen-
dations are based on the general population of adults.96
Recommendations: Prevention of DVT
Class
Level of 
Evidence
In ischemic stroke, prophylactic-dose 
subcutaneous heparin (UFH or LMWH) should 
be used for the duration of the acute and 
rehabilitation hospital stay or until the stroke 
survivor regains mobility.
I
A
In ischemic stroke, it is reasonable to use 
prophylactic-dose LMWH over prophylactic-
dose UFH for prevention of DVT.
IIa
A
In ischemic stroke, it may be reasonable to  
use intermittent pneumatic compression over no 
prophylaxis during the acute hospitalization.
IIb
B
In ICH, it may be reasonable to use 
prophylactic-dose subcutaneous heparin  
(UFH or LMWH) started between days 2 and  
4 over no prophylaxis.
IIb
C
In ICH, it may be reasonable to use prophylactic-
dose LMWH over prophylactic-dose UFH.
IIb
C
In ICH, it may be reasonable to use intermittent 
pneumatic compression devices over no 
prophylaxis.
IIb
C
In ischemic stroke, it is not useful to use  
elastic compression stockings.
III
B
In ICH, it is not useful to use elastic 
compression stockings.
III
C
Recommendations: Treatment of Bowel  
and Bladder Incontinence
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Assessment of bladder function in acutely hospitalized stroke patients  
is recommended.
  
A history of urological issues before stroke 
should be obtained.
I
B
  
Assessment of urinary retention through 
bladder scanning or intermittent  
catheterizations after voiding while recording 
volumes is recommended for patients  
with urinary incontinence or retention.
I
B
  
Assessment of cognitive awareness of need  
to void or having voided is reasonable.
IIa
B
Removal of the Foley catheter (if any) within 
24 hours after admission for acute stroke is 
recommended.
I
B
It is reasonable to use the following treatment 
interventions to improve bladder incontinence  
in stroke patients:
IIa
B
 P 
rompted voiding
  
Pelvic floor muscle training (after discharge home)
It may be reasonable to assess prior bowel 
function in acutely hospitalized stroke patients 
and include the following:
IIb
C
  
Stool consistency, frequency, and timing (before stroke)
  
Bowel care practices before stroke
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e107
Assessment, Prevention, and Treatment of 
Hemiplegic Shoulder Pain
Shoulder pain is common after stroke, with an incidence dur-
ing the first year of 1% to 22%.97,98 The reported prevalence of 
shoulder pain varies between 5% and 84%, depending on the 
acuity and definition of shoulder pain used.99 The development of 
shoulder pain after stroke is associated with shoulder subluxation 
and motor weakness. Importantly, these 2 factors have strong 
covariance, suggesting that motor impairment may be the more 
important predictive factor.100 However, motor weakness is not 
predictive of pain severity in the hemiplegic shoulder. Spasticity 
is believed to contribute to the genesis of shoulder pain in some 
patients, although a causal relationship has not been confirmed. 
Other predictors of shoulder pain include older age, left hemiple-
gia, the presence of tactile extinction and reduced proprioception 
in the painful limb, early complaints of pain, reduced passive 
shoulder abduction and external rotation of glenohumeral joint, 
a positive Neer impingement sign (shoulder pain with passive 
abduction of the internally rotated arm), and tenderness to pal-
pation over the biceps tendon and supraspinatus.101–105
Hemiplegic shoulder pain is multifactorial. Pain is associ-
ated with shoulder tissue injury, abnormal joint mechanics, and 
central nociceptive hypersensitivity. About one third of patients 
with acute stroke have abnormal ultrasound findings in the 
hemiplegic shoulder when studied at the time of admission to 
acute inpatient rehabilitation, including effusion in biceps ten-
don or subacromial bursa; tendinopathy of biceps, supraspina-
tus, or subscapularis; and rotator cuff tear.106,107 Such findings 
are more prevalent in the hemiplegic shoulder than in the non-
hemiplegic shoulder and in those with more severe hemiple-
gia, subluxation, spasticity, limited joint range, and shoulder 
pain.106 The frequency of abnormal ultrasound findings in the 
hemiplegic shoulder increases over the course of rehabilitation 
in patients with more severe motor impairment.106,107 Although 
there is an association between abnormal findings on shoulder 
ultrasound and hemiplegic shoulder pain in patients with acute 
stroke, a causal association has not been established. Among 
patients with acute and chronic stroke with hemiplegic shoulder 
pain, the presence of shoulder tissue injury on imaging is not 
associated with the severity of pain.108,109
Patients with stroke-related hemiplegia demonstrate 
altered movement patterns at certain stages of recovery. In the 
acute phase of stroke, shoulder subluxation is associated with 
pain. In those with chronic stroke and hemiplegic shoulder 
pain, there is capsular stiffness and altered resting position of 
the scapula in lateral rotation.103,110 Compared with those with-
out voluntary movement, patients with some movement in the 
painful hemiparetic shoulder have a higher rate of shoulder 
joint tissue injury on magnetic resonance imaging, suggest-
ing that more physical activity promotes injury.109 However, 
the relationship between altered kinematics and pain in the 
hemiparetic shoulder has not been established. For example, 
shoulder joint kinematics are altered with spasticity, yet there 
are no clear correlations between reductions in Ashworth and 
pain scores or reductions in subluxation and pain.111 Thus, the 
exclusive role of peripheral nociceptive pain in the mechani-
cally altered hemiplegic shoulder has been questioned.112
There is recent evidence supporting both a peripheral and 
a central neuropathic role for shoulder pain.112–114 Patients with 
hemiplegic shoulder pain have a higher prevalence of altered 
somatosensory function with reduced sensory thresholds and 
decreased kinesthesia than patients without pain and normal 
control subjects.105,115–117 In addition, patients with shoulder 
pain have higher rates of allodynia and hyperpathia on both 
the affected and less affected sides than stroke patients without 
pain.116,117 Patients with painful shoulders also have higher heat 
pain thresholds and lower pain pressure thresholds.117,118 Soo 
Hoo and colleagues118 found lower pain pressure thresholds on 
the affected and less affected sides in patients with shoulder pain. 
Somatosensory evoked responses from the affected upper limb 
differ between stroke patients with and those without shoulder 
pain.119 Although diagnostically distinct from hemiplegic shoul-
der pain, complex regional pain syndrome (also called shoulder-
hand syndrome) is characterized by allodynia and hyperpathia 
and includes shoulder pain as a key component. Thus, there is 
growing recognition that hemiplegic shoulder pain is a syndrome 
with biomechanical and central nervous system components and 
overlaps with complex regional pain syndrome.
Interventions to prevent the onset of and to treat shoul-
der pain in patients with stroke-related hemiplegia include 
proper positioning, maintenance of shoulder range of motion, 
and motor retraining. For people in wheelchairs, lap trays and 
arm troughs might be useful positioning devices to reduce 
shoulder pain and subluxation. Some suggest that consistent 
performance of aggressive passive range-of-motion exer-
cises may reduce or prevent later shoulder problems, but the 
evidence in support of or against this suggestion is missing. 
Aggressive range of motion of the complex shoulder joint, 
if done improperly, could do more harm than good. The use 
of slings, especially during ambulation training to protect the 
shoulder from traction injury, may be considered, and the use 
of overhead pulley exercises should be avoided.70,120 Research 
has focused on several adjuvant treatments, including strap-
ping, acupuncture, and neuromuscular electrical stimulation 
(NMES). There are a few RCTs with mixed results on shoul-
der strapping for the prevention of shoulder pain after acute 
stroke.121–123 Each study used different strapping (or taping) 
techniques and measured different pain outcomes. In the larg-
est of these, Pandian and others123 randomized 162 patients 
with acute stroke to either shoulder taping or sham taping. 
There was a trend toward a difference in visual analog pain 
scale and pain-related disability scores over 30 days, but these 
differences were not statistically or clinically significant. 
Currently, there is insufficient evidence to support or refute 
the efficacy of shoulder strapping (taping) for the prevention 
of hemiplegic shoulder pain.
Acupuncture in combination with standard therapeutic 
exercise may be a safe and effective adjuvant for the treat-
ment of hemiplegic shoulder pain. This was suggested by Lee 
and colleagues124 in a recent systematic review of this topic. 
They found 7 RCTs, all showing positive effects. However, 
they could not recommend concrete conclusions because of 
the limited number of available trials.
Various types of skin surface electrical stimulation have 
been evaluated for the treatment of hemiplegic shoulder pain, 
including transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) 
and NMES. These modalities have not been evaluated suffi-
ciently, and their efficacy for pain prevention and treatment 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e108  Stroke  June 2016
remains inconclusive.125 The largest RCT to date testing sur-
face NMES to a hemiplegic shoulder showed no effect on pain 
prevention in patients with acute stroke; however, pain was 
not a primary outcome measure in this study.126 Compliance 
with the use of surface NMES has been variable in these stud-
ies, and surface NMES has been shown to be less well tol-
erated than intramuscular NMES.126–128 Intramuscular NMES 
for 6 h/d over 6 weeks with 4 implanted electrodes showed 
efficacy in 2 open-label trials.129,130 Pain differences between 
treatment and control groups remained significant 12 months 
after treatment, and NMES was more effective in patients with 
less chronic stroke (defined as <77 months after stroke in this 
study).131,132 Although fully implanted intramuscular stimula-
tors for hemiplegic shoulder have been developed, there are 
insufficient data to support efficacy to date.133
Corticosteroid injection into glenohumeral joint or sub-
acromial space is commonly used to treat shoulder pain. There 
are limited studies on the use of steroid injection in the pain-
ful hemiplegic shoulder. Observational studies have shown a 
significant reduction in hemiplegic shoulder pain after either 
glenohumeral or subacromial injection, but the long-term pain 
reduction has not been verified.134,135 These injections result 
in superior short-term pain reduction compared with standard 
care.136 There are only 2 randomized trials of shoulder joint 
injections for pain. Snels and colleagues137 showed no signifi-
cant effect on pain reduction after glenohumeral injection. In 
contrast, Rah and others138 showed a significant reduction in 
pain after corticosteroid injection compared with placebo. In 
the latter study, Rah et al selected only patients with shoulder 
joint pathology that was verified by ultrasonography.
Botulinum toxin injections into the shoulder musculature 
have shown mixed results in the management of shoulder pain. 
de Boer and colleagues139 showed no impact of botulinum toxin 
injection into the subscapularis of painful hemiplegic shoulders, 
whereas Yelnick and colleagues140 showed significant reductions 
in pain scores in patients treated for shoulder spasticity. Some 
investigators have noted reduced pain with shoulder movement 
after botulinum toxin injections to the pectoralis major and biceps 
brachii, but others found no change in reported pain scores after 
pectoralis major injection.141–143 Lim et al144 found botulinum 
toxin injections to the pectoralis major, infraspinatus, and sub-
scapularis muscles superior to glenohumeral steroid injection. 
Botulinum toxin injections may decrease shoulder spasticity and 
pain associated with spasticity-related joint mobility restrictions 
but are not sufficient to reduce shoulder pain in general.
Suprascapular nerve blocks may be effective in reducing 
shoulder pain through a reduction of both nociceptive and 
neuropathic pain mechanisms. A recent randomized, clinical 
trial showed that suprascapular nerve blocks were superior to 
placebo injections in reducing hemiplegic shoulder pain for 
up to 12 weeks after treatment.145,146 In another small, com-
parison study of patients with nonneuropathic hemiplegic 
shoulder pain, suprascapular nerve blocks were as effective as 
glenohumeral triamcinolone injections.147
Surgical tenotomy of the pectoralis major, lattisimus 
dorsi, teres major, and subscapularis muscles may reduce pain 
in patients with severe hemiplegia and restrictions in shoul-
der range of motion.148 In patients with clinical evidence of 
a central pain component associated with sensory changes, 
allodynia, and hyperpathia, medication management with 
neuromodulating medications may be considered.70,120,149
Central Pain After Stroke
Central poststroke pain is pain that results from a lesion in the 
somatosensory system rather than from a peripheral nociceptive 
or psychogenic cause.150,151 Diagnostic criteria include require-
ments that the pain occur after stroke, be located in an area of 
the body that corresponds to the lesion in the central nervous sys-
tem, and not be accounted for by nociceptive or peripheral neuro-
pathic pain.100 Central pain is classically associated with thalamic 
stroke (Dejerine-Roussy syndrome) but can result from a lesion 
anywhere along the spinothalamic and thalamocortical tracts 
within the central nervous system.150 Central pain symptoms 
are usually described as burning or aching and often include 
Recommendations: Assessment, Prevention,  
and Treatment of Hemiplegic Shoulder Pain
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Patient and family education (ie, range of motion, 
positioning) is recommended for shoulder pain 
and shoulder care after stroke, particularly 
before discharge or transitions in care.
I
C
Botulinum toxin injection can be useful to reduce 
severe hypertonicity in hemiplegic shoulder muscles.
IIa
A
A trial of neuromodulating pain medications is 
reasonable for patients with hemiplegic shoulder 
pain who have clinical signs and symptoms of 
neuropathic pain manifested as sensory change 
in the shoulder region, allodynia, or hyperpathia.
IIa
A
It is reasonable to consider positioning and use 
of supportive devices and slings for shoulder 
subluxation.
IIa
C
A clinical assessment can be useful, including:
 Musculoskeletal evaluation
IIa
C
 Evaluation of spasticity
IIa
C
 Identification of any subluxation
IIa
C
 Testing for regional sensory changes
IIa
C
NMES may be considered (surface or 
intramuscular) for shoulder pain.
IIb
A
Ultrasound may be considered as a diagnostic 
tool for shoulder soft tissue injury.
IIb
B
Usefulness of acupuncture as an adjuvant 
treatment for hemiplegic shoulder pain is of 
uncertain value.
IIb
B
Usefulness of subacromial or glenohumeral 
corticosteroid injection for patients with 
inflammation in these locations is not well 
established.
IIb
B
Suprascapular nerve block may be considered 
as an adjunctive treatment for hemiplegic 
shoulder pain.
IIb
B
Surgical tenotomy of pectoralis major, lattisimus 
dorsi, teres major, or subscapularis may be 
considered for patients with severe hemiplegia 
and restrictions in shoulder range of motion.
IIb
C
The use of overhead pulley exercises is not 
recommended.
III
C
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e109
allodynia associated with touch, cold, or movement.152–155 Use 
of diagnostic criteria for central poststroke pain such as those 
proposed by Klit et al151 can be helpful. The incidence of cen-
tral poststroke pain is estimated at 7% to 8%, and it typically 
begins within a few days after stroke, with the majority of 
patients becoming symptomatic within the first month.152,154
There is limited evidence on the efficacy of proposed treat-
ments for central poststroke pain. Pharmacotherapy combined 
with therapeutic exercise and psychosocial support is a reason-
able approach.156 Response to treatment is best assessed with 
standardized serial measurements such as pain diaries, visual 
analog scales, or pain questionnaires.157 Pharmacotherapy has 
relied primarily on antidepressant medications and anticon-
vulsants. Amitriptyline 75 mg at bedtime has been shown to 
lower daily pain ratings and to improve global functioning.158 
Lamotrigine can reduce daily pain ratings and cold-induced pain, 
but only 44% of patients given this medication have a good clini-
cal response.159 Results for pregabalin have been mixed, with 2 
clinical trials finding that daily pain reporting with pregabalin 
was not significantly better than with placebo.160,161 Sleep and 
anxiety were improved with pregabalin, however. Gabapentin 
has not been well studied for poststroke central pain but has been 
effective in other forms of neuropathic pain.162,163 Other options 
for central pain management include carbamazepine and phe-
nytoin, but their usefulness is not well established.158,164
There are few nonpharmacological options for the manage-
ment of central poststroke pain. TENS was shown to be inef-
fective in a small trial.165 Motor cortex stimulation can be given 
with a surgically implanted dural electrode overlying the motor 
cortex that is connected to a subcutaneous pulse generator. In 
several case series, pain reductions of >50% on the visual ana-
log scale were achieved in 50% to 83% of patients, with effec-
tiveness for up to 2 years after implantation.166–169 However, 
cortical stimulator implantation is associated with several com-
plications, including infection, hardware failure, postoperative 
seizures, and long-term epilepsy. Motor cortex stimulation may 
be an option for intractable central poststroke pain. Deep brain 
stimulation has conflicting evidence for the management of 
central pain and currently cannot be recommended.170,171
Prevention of Falls
A great deal of research literature exists on the epidemiology, 
risk factors, and development of prevention programs for falls 
in the general population of older adults.172 Less information 
is available for individuals with stroke. Falls and their preven-
tion in individuals with stroke require special considerations.173 
Risk factors, interventions, and prevention programs devel-
oped for the community-living older population will not neces-
sarily translate to the population of individuals with stroke. The 
Balance and Ataxia section provides more discussion.
Up to 70% of individuals with a stroke fall during the first 
6 months after discharge from the hospital or rehabilitation 
facility.174 Individuals with stroke are also at risk to be repeat 
fallers and to experience an injury associated with a fall.175 A 
larger portion of fractures occurring in individuals with stroke 
(27%) involve the hip or pelvis compared with <10% of the 
general population of older adults who fall.176 The loss of bone 
mineral density (BMD) associated with stroke may contribute 
to the higher hip fracture rate for individuals with stroke.177
In addition to the physical consequences associated with 
fractures and related injuries, falls have psychological and social 
consequences. The impairments in balance, gait, motor control, 
perception, and vision contribute to a heightened fear of falling 
in individuals with stroke. Studies indicate that 30% to 80% of 
individuals with stroke report various levels of fear associated 
with falling and mobility.178 Fear of falling can lead to reduced 
levels of physical activity and deconditioning, creating a cas-
cade that may result in greater declines in physical activity, a 
decrease in ADLs, a loss of independence, fewer community 
interactions, social isolation, and depression. Ironically, the 
reduction in physical activity resulting from fear of falling can 
itself contribute to an increased risk of falls.179
Risk Factors and Assessment
Evaluation of risk factors is widely recognized as the first step 
in preventing falls. A systematic review180 of factors contributing 
independently to falls in the general older population identified 
previous falls, low muscle strength, impaired gait, poor balance, 
and use of specific and multiple medications as the strongest risk 
factors for falls. Research suggests that risk factors in the stroke 
population are similar overall but with some differences.173 For 
example, a history of falls before a stroke does not appear to be 
as strong a risk factor as it is in the general older population.173
The probability of falling also increases with the number 
of risk factors. Tinetti and others181 reported that the 1-year 
risk of falling among the general elderly population increased 
from a range of 8% to 19% for individuals with no risk factors 
to >70% for individuals with ≥4 risk factors.
Recommendations: Central Pain After Stroke
Class
Level of 
Evidence
The diagnosis of central poststroke pain should  
be based on established diagnostic criteria after 
other causes of pain have been excluded.
I
C
The choice of pharmacological agent for the 
treatment of central poststroke pain should 
be individualized to the patient’s needs and 
response to therapy and any side effects.
I
C
Amitriptyline and lamotrigine are reasonable 
first-line pharmacological treatments.
IIa
B
Interprofessional pain management is probably 
useful in conjunction with pharmacotherapy.
IIa
C
Standardized measures may be useful to 
monitor response to treatment.
IIb
C
Pregabalin, gabapentin, carbamazepine, or 
phenytoin may be considered as second-line 
treatments.
IIb
B
TENS has not been established as an effective 
treatment.
III
B
Motor cortex stimulation might be reasonable 
for the treatment of intractable central 
poststroke pain that is not responsive to other 
treatments in carefully selected patients.
IIb
B
Deep brain stimulation has not been  
established as an effective treatment.
III
B
Recommendations: Central Pain After Stroke 
(Continued 
)
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e110  Stroke  June 2016
The assessment of risk factors varies across settings and 
circumstances. For example, a majority of falls for individu-
als with stroke that occur during hospitalization are associated 
with transfers and attempting activities without supervision, 
whereas the majority of falls for individuals with stroke living 
in the community are associated with walking.182
Numerous fall risk assessment tools are available. A 
recent systematic review183 identified 8 commonly used fall 
risk assessment tools with existing reliability and validity. 
The most commonly used assessment instrument in the 43 
prevention studies reviewed was the Morse Fall Scale.184 The 
Berg Balance Scale has demonstrated good sensitivity and 
specificity in predicting falls in individuals with stroke.185 
Several federal and professional associations have developed 
fall prevention toolkits that include risk assessment instru-
ments and protocols (eg, the National Center of Patient Safety 
Falls Toolkit, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
Stopping Elderly Accidents, Deaths and Injuries Toolkit, the 
AHRQ Preventing Falls in Hospitals–A Toolkit for Improving 
Quality Care, and the AHRQ Step-Up to Stop Falls Toolkit ).
Prevention Programs
The most comprehensive assessment of preventing falls in 
the general population of older adults is the recent Cochrane 
database review.172 The evidence specific for fall prevention in 
individuals with stroke is limited. A recent randomized trial of 
a multifactorial falls prevention program for individuals with 
stroke186 reported no benefit for this intervention compared 
with usual care among 156 participants. Tai Chi has been 
found to be more effective than strength and range-of-move-
ment exercises in a clinical trial.187 A nonrandomized, small-
scale, controlled study found a community-based progressive 
group exercise program that included walking and strength 
and balance training for 1 hour 3 times a week for participants 
with mild to moderate hemiparesis to be safe, feasible, and 
efficacious in a community setting.188
Seizure Prophylaxis
A new seizure diagnosis after stroke can be classified as 
early (beginning within the first few days of stroke) or late. 
A seizure is most likely to arise during the first 24 hours after 
stroke onset, is usually partial at onset, and has a variable ten-
dency to secondarily generalize. A poststroke seizure is more 
common with ICH189 or when the stroke involves cerebral 
cortex190; seizures in patients with lacunar stroke are rare.191 
Estimates of the percentage of patients having a seizure dur-
ing the first few days after a stroke range from 2% to 23% in 
various studies, with the true risk toward the lower end of this 
range.191,192 A minority of such patients will have a recurrent 
seizure, and status epilepticus is uncommon.193
Estimates for the incidence of a seizure developing late 
after stroke are even more variable, ranging from 3% to 
67%.192 One study found a 1.5% rate of seizures specifically 
during inpatient admission for stroke rehabilitation.194 The 
probability of a late seizure is higher in patients with preexist-
ing dementia.195 Seizures with onset within 2 weeks of stroke 
are usually easy to control medically.196
No data are available to guide the utility of prophylactic 
administration of antiepileptic drugs after stroke, and limited 
data are available on the efficacy of antiepileptic drugs in the 
treatment of stroke patients who have experienced a seizure. 
Any patient who develops a seizure should be treated with stan-
dard management approaches, including a search for revers-
ible causes of seizure and any potential antiepileptic drugs. 
Subclinical seizures can be difficult to detect unless suspected, 
so the treating physician might consider pursuing this diagnosis 
in a patient with otherwise unexplained rapidly shifting senso-
rium or other deficits or transient fluctuations in vital signs.
Prophylactic administration of antiepileptic drugs to pre-
vent a seizure is not recommended for patients with stroke,192 
including patients with ICH.197 RCTs are also lacking for the 
prevention or treatment of seizures in patients with subarach-
noid hemorrhage.198 However, prophylactic therapy with anti-
epileptic drugs is advocated by some on the basis of theoretical 
concerns such as an association of increased rate of seizures 
among subgroups of patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage 
with selected features such as thicker clot or rebleeding.198
In all cases, it must be understood that prescribing a new 
antiepileptic drug carries a significant risk of side effects.199,200 
Furthermore, some data suggest that prophylactic use of antiepi-
leptic drug therapy may be associated with poorer outcome.199–202 
The risk-benefit analysis of antiepileptic drug use after a recent 
stroke includes an important concern that does not pertain to 
many neurological settings. Evidence suggests that many of the 
medicines used to treat seizures, including phenytoin and ben-
zodiazepines, dampen some mechanisms of neural plasticity 
that contribute to behavioral recovery after stroke.203–205
Recommendations: Prevention of Falls
Class
Level of 
Evidence
It is recommended that individuals with stroke 
discharged to the community participate in 
exercise programs with balance training to 
reduce falls.
I
B
It is recommended that individuals with stroke 
be provided a formal fall prevention program 
during hospitalization.
I
A
It is reasonable that individuals with stroke 
be evaluated for fall risk annually with an 
established instrument appropriate to the setting.
IIa
B
It is reasonable that individuals with stroke and 
their caregivers receive information targeted 
to home and environmental modifications 
designed to reduce falls.
IIa
B
Tai Chi training may be reasonable for fall 
prevention.
IIb
B
Recommendations: Seizures
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Any patient who develops a seizure should 
be treated with standard management 
approaches, including a search for reversible 
causes of seizure in addition to potential use of 
antiepileptic drugs.
I
C
Routine seizure prophylaxis for patients 
with ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke is not 
recommended.
III
C
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e111
Secondary Stroke Prevention
Stroke shares many risk factors with other forms of cardio-
vascular disease such as hypertension, smoking, hyperlipid-
emia, and inactivity.206 With hospitalization for acute stroke 
brief, it is particularly important to address the second-
ary prevention of stroke and other cardiovascular diseases 
during the postacute rehabilitation phase of care. Readers 
are directed to the most recent AHA/American Stroke 
Association (ASA) secondary stroke prevention guideline 
for further information.206
Poststroke Depression, Including Emotional and 
Behavioral State
In the United States and globally, depression and anxiety 
are common after stroke and are associated with increased 
mortality and poor functional outcomes.207–214 There is evi-
dence that the likelihood of depression increases with stroke 
severity,215 but the mechanisms of poststroke depression are 
incompletely understood. Depression has been reported in 
up to 33% of stroke survivors compared with 13% of age- 
and sex-matched control subjects,216 but reliable estimates 
of the incidence and prevalence of depression in a stroke 
cohort are limited.217 Predictors of poststroke depression 
include a history of depression, severe disability, cogni-
tive impairment, previous stroke, a positive family history 
of psychiatric disorder, and female sex.216–220 As poststroke 
psychosocial issues are studied, greater understanding of 
the complexity of the problem is obtained. For example, 
Vickery et al214 analyzed how the stability of self-esteem 
plays a role in the rate of depressive symptoms. The depres-
sion and emotionalism section of the 2005 stroke reha-
bilitation clinical practice guidelines does an excellent job 
of describing the incidence of poststroke depression and 
pseudo-bulbar affect.149 What is clear from the literature is 
that these issues are real and warrant assessment and treat-
ment as early as possible and on an ongoing basis. The sec-
tion on poststroke depression in the AHA/ASA “Palliative 
and End-of-Life Care in Stroke”221 scientific statement gives 
highlights of prevention, assessment, and treatment. Here, 
we highlight how poststroke depression affects stroke reha-
bilitation and recovery and, vice versa, how rehabilitation 
and exercise affect depression.
Although data are inconclusive as to whether improve-
ment of poststroke depression is independently associated 
with functional improvement,222 depression can negatively 
affect a patient’s ability to actively participate in rehabili-
tation therapies.223 It is important to address symptoms 
early in the rehabilitation process, especially given the 
recent trend for less time in rehabilitation. Depression fre-
quently coexists with other psychiatric symptoms. Anxiety 
in particular is found to coexist with depression in the 
poststroke patient population but frequently goes undiag-
nosed.224 Anxiety can create uncomfortable or disabling 
feelings of worry/fear accompanied by physical symptoms 
that make participation in therapy more difficult. Shimoda 
and Robinson225 reported that generalized anxiety disor-
der accompanied by poststroke depression delayed recov-
ery from depression, delayed ADL recovery, and reduced 
overall social functioning. Unfortunately, few studies have 
been conducted to address the treatment of and recovery 
from poststroke generalized anxiety disorder.226 Anxiety 
symptoms in poststroke patients should be assessed and 
treated, particularly in those patients with a diagnosed 
depressive disorder. Any patient diagnosed with 1 form of 
mood disorder should be assessed for others.
A review of intervention trials for treatment of poststroke 
depression yielded no evidence of benefits of psychotherapy 
in treating depression after stroke.227 de Man-van Ginkel et 
al228 identified additional nursing practices that had a posi-
tive impact on reducing depression symptoms, including life 
review therapy, motivational interviewing, nursing support 
programs, and physical exercise.
Rehabilitation, Exercise, and Recovery
A study with 49 depressed patients (24 treated for depres-
sion and 25 not treated as determined by physician prefer-
ence) was conducted to evaluate the effects of poststroke 
depression and antidepressant therapy on the improvement 
of motor scores and disability.229 Poststroke depression was 
found to have negative effects on functional recovery, and 
the pharmacological treatment of depression was found 
to counterbalance this effect. Similarly, a study with 55 
patients with poststroke major or minor depression found 
that remission of poststroke depression over the first few 
months after stroke is associated with greater recovery of 
ADL function than continued depression.230 Early effective 
treatment of depression may have a positive effect on the 
rehabilitation outcome. No larger-scale studies following up 
on this line of research were found.
Physical exercise may provide a complementary treat-
ment for depression. Exercise may affect depressive symp-
toms through a number of mechanisms. For example, the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis may be dysregulated 
in depression, resulting in elevated cortisol levels. Exercise 
can improve regulation of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal 
responses.231 Depression also has direct and indirect con-
sequences on immune function,232 and regular exercise 
may serve as a nonpharmacological stimulus for enhanc-
ing immune function.233 Furthermore, social contact through 
group exercise may be beneficial for individuals with 
depression.
Meta-analyses in adults with depression (but without 
stroke) have shown positive effects of exercise on depressive 
symptoms. A Cochrane review reported a large clinical effect 
with a standardized mean difference of −0.82 of physical 
exercise on depressive symptoms.234 A systematic review sug-
gested that physical exercise was effective in treating depres-
sion, especially in individuals with high baseline levels of 
depression.235
In a meta-analysis of 13 studies (n=1022 patients), Eng 
and Reime236 found that depressive symptoms after stroke 
were lower immediately after ≥4 weeks of exercise (stan-
dardized mean difference=−0.13 [95% CI, −0.26 to −0.01]). 
Exercise appeared to have a small beneficial effect on 
depressive symptoms across both the subacute and chronic 
stages of stroke recovery, but these effects were not retained 
after the exercise was terminated. Saunders et al237 reviewed 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e112  Stroke  June 2016
8 exercise studies that included a depression outcome in a 
stroke population and meta-analyzed 3 of these studies. They 
concluded that the results were inconsistent among the tri-
als. A major criticism is that the majority of the stroke stud-
ies used depressive symptoms as a secondary outcome, and 
as a result, the levels of depressive symptoms varied widely 
in these studies. Given the strong evidence in nonstroke 
populations with depression, coupled with the preliminary 
evidence in stroke populations, exercise may be useful as a 
potential treatment to reduce depressive symptoms in indi-
viduals with stroke.
Depression and other psychological disorders, specifi-
cally anxiety, can occur at any time after stroke. Healthcare 
providers should evaluate these issues during poststroke 
follow-up visits. One study compared different diagnostic 
tools to determine whether one was superior over another. 
Bergersen et al238 reported that patients and their caregivers 
fail to discuss psychosocial issues or symptomology with 
their providers. There are cultural differences in reporting 
psychosocial issues, resulting in part from perceived cul-
tural morays discouraging personal feelings.209 Varying post-
stroke assessments on the basis of cultural background is an 
important consideration specifically in poststroke depres-
sion. Nonpharmacological treatment options can provide 
some successful outcomes. Unfortunately, there are no well-
designed RCTs in which various treatment interventions are 
compared to determine superiority. Because of the complex-
ity of the psychosocial diseases and limited understanding, 
a number of treatment options should be tried to determine 
patient-specific effectiveness. This supports the need for 
ongoing monitoring after treatment.
Medication
Poststroke depression is treatable with a variety of anti-
depressant medications, with selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs) and tricyclic antidepressants being the 
most widely studied.223,239 Treatment with heterocyclic anti-
depressant medications and SSRIs appears to be a viable 
option for poststroke depression, but their absolute or rela-
tive efficacy has yet to be fully established.240 In 1 study of 
870 veterans with poststroke depression, poststroke SSRI 
treatment was associated with longer survival. The authors 
concluded that after a stroke, SSRI initiation or resumption 
of treatment should be considered as part of a medication 
therapy management service, especially if the patient has 
a history of depression or was taking an SSRI before the 
stroke.241 A 2008 Cochrane review analyzing data for 13 
pharmaceutical agents, including tricyclic antidepressants, 
SSRIs, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors, found some ben-
efit of pharmacotherapy in terms of a complete remission 
of depression and improvement in scores on depression 
rating scales, but there was also an associated increase in 
adverse events.227 The analyses were complicated by a lack 
of standardized diagnostic and outcome criteria and differ-
ing analytic methods. To the best of our knowledge, there 
have been no studies on the effectiveness of a combined 
drug intervention (eg, SSRIs) and rehabilitation interven-
tion on recovery outcomes after stroke.
Poststroke Osteoporosis
BMD and lean tissue mass commonly decline after stroke.242–244 
Although declines in BMD and lean tissue mass can occur in 
both limbs, changes on the paretic side are more profound. 
BMD can decrease by >10% in <1 year in the paretic lower 
limb.242 Moreover, the decline in BMD, coupled with balance 
deficits resulting from stroke, increases fracture risk.245 Changes 
in BMD after stroke are correlated with functional deficits in 
the paretic limb(s). Jørgensen et al246 assessed 40 patients at 6 
days, 7 months, and 1 year after stroke. Seventeen patients were 
Recommendations: Poststroke Depression, 
Including Emotional and Behavioral State
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Administration of a structured depression 
inventory such as the Patient Health 
Questionnaire-2 is recommended to routinely 
screen for poststroke depression.
I
B
Patient education about stroke is recommended. 
Patients should be provided with information, 
advice, and the opportunity to talk about the 
impact of the illness on their lives.
I
B
Patients diagnosed with poststroke depression 
should be treated with antidepressants in 
the absence of contraindications and closely 
monitored to verify effectiveness.
I
B
A therapeutic trial of an SSRI or 
dextromethorphan/quinidine is reasonable for 
patients with emotional lability or pseudobulbar 
affect causing emotional distress.
IIa
A
Periodic reassessment of depression, anxiety,  
and other psychiatric symptoms may be useful  
in the care of stroke survivors.
IIa
B
Consultation by a qualified psychiatrist or 
psychologist for stroke survivors with mood 
disorders causing persistent distress or 
worsening disability can be useful.
IIa
C
The usefulness of routine use of prophylactic 
antidepressant medications is unclear.
IIb
A
Combining pharmacological and 
nonpharmacological treatments of poststroke 
depression may be considered.
IIb
A
The efficacy of individual psychotherapy alone 
in the treatment of poststroke depression is 
unclear.
IIb
B
Patient education, counseling, and social 
support may be considered as components of 
treatment for poststroke depression.
IIb
B
An exercise program of at least 4 
weeks duration may be considered as a 
complementary treatment for poststroke 
depression.
IIb
B
Early effective treatment of depression may 
have a positive effect on the rehabilitation 
outcome.
IIb
B
No recommendation for the use of any 
particular class of antidepressants is made. 
SSRIs are commonly used and generally well 
tolerated in this patient population.
III
A
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e113
initially nonambulatory, and 23 were ambulatory. Ambulatory 
status was predictive of changes in BMD 1 year after stroke. 
The nonambulatory patients had a 10% reduction in BMD in the 
paretic lower limb compared with a 3% reduction in BMD in 
ambulatory patients. Moreover, among the 17 patients who were 
initially nonambulatory, 12 regained walking ability with assis-
tance 2 months after stroke. Those patients who regained ambu-
lation ability had an 8% reduction in BMD in the paretic lower 
limb compared with a 13% reduction in those who remained 
nonambulatory. Pang et al247 found that femur BMD and lean 
mass were significantly lower and fat mass was significantly 
higher on the paretic side compared with the nonparetic side in 
ambulatory men and women who suffered a stroke >1 year ear-
lier. However, the degree to which BMD was preserved in the 
paretic lower extremity was significantly correlated with 6-min-
ute walk test distance, peak oxygen consumption (V
.
O2), and 
handheld dynamometry. Multiple regression analysis revealed 
that peak V
.
O2 was a significant predictor of paretic limb BMD 
and lean tissue mass. Paretic upper limbs also demonstrate 
significant declines in BMD and lean mass after stroke. The 
decline in BMD and lean mass is associated with paretic upper 
limb strength assessed by handheld dynamometry.248
The US Preventive Services Task Force249 recommends osteo-
porosis screening in all women ≥65 years of age; women <65 
years of age whose fracture risk is greater than or equal to that 
of older white women with no additional risk factors should also 
undergo osteoporosis screening. The US Preventive Services Task 
Force concludes that there is inconclusive evidence to make any 
osteoporosis screening recommendations for men. Individuals 
with stroke have an increased risk for osteoporosis, particularly on 
the paretic side.250 The risk of fracture is also increased in patients 
with stroke.251 In men with stroke, although osteoporosis and 
fracture risks are higher, no clear guidance on screening can be 
provided at this time.252 The current US Preventive Services Task 
Force recommendations are appropriate in the stroke population.
Limited research indicates that increased levels of physi-
cal activity such as ambulation and resistance training attenu-
ate the decline in, maintain, or increase BMD and lean tissue 
mass after stroke.245,246,253–257
Assessment
Level of Disability
Stroke can affect numerous aspects of neural function and 
structure. Clinically, this most often manifests as weakness, 
with other common impairments being aphasia, neglect, visual 
field deficit, cognitive changes such as executive dysfunction 
or memory loss, major depression, sensory deficits, dysar-
thria, and problems with coordination.11,258,259
Measures of body function tend to be more objective, eas-
ier to define, and easier to measure compared with other levels 
of the World Health Organization’s ICF but may have less rel-
evance to a patient’s function and independence. Limited cor-
relation exists across ICF dimensions.11,260 The reason is that 
numerous factors have a greater influence on outcome as one 
moves from body function/structure to activity limitations, 
participation restrictions, and quality of life.261 During acute 
stroke management, the focus tends to be more on measures of 
body function, whereas toward the more chronic phases, the 
emphasis shifts to activities and participation.11 Regardless of 
ICF dimension, formal standardized and validated measures 
should be used to the extent possible.
Many methods are available to measure loss of body func-
tion/structure. Chief among these is the physical examination. 
Many scales have been devised.262 Some are global scales that 
aim to capture all major deficits and to combine the assessment 
into a single score, whereas others are modality specific. In the 
United States, the most widely used global assessment of impair-
ment is the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale, which 
ranges from 0 to 42, with higher scores indicating more severe 
loss of body function/structure. Training and formal certification 
on National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale scoring are widely 
available, increasing the precision of this measure and permit-
ting the use of this tool by a variety of disciplines. The National 
Institutes of Health Stroke Scale is a good predictor of short-term 
and long-term morbidity and mortality263 and has been found to 
be sensitive to change in numerous studies. Limitations of the 
National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale include low granular-
ity for defining differences in level of impairment and insensi-
tivity to many common poststroke deficits such as depression, 
hand-motor deficits, swallowing, or memory loss.
Many modality-specific measures have been constructed 
for measuring loss of body function/structure across the many 
brain neural systems. Common examples include the upper limb 
motor section of the Fugl-Meyer scale or the Box and Block 
Test for measuring arm motor deficits; the leg motor section of 
the Fugl-Meyer scale or gait velocity for measuring leg motor 
deficits; the Western Aphasia Battery or the Boston Naming Test 
for language deficits; the Behavioral Inattention Test or The Line 
Cancellation test for measuring neglect; the Nottingham Sensory 
Assessment or the sensory section of the Fugl-Meyer scale for 
measuring somatosensory deficits; the Hamilton Depression 
Scale or the Beck Depression Inventory II for measuring sever-
ity of depression symptoms; and the Mini-Mental Status Exam 
or Trail Making Tests (A and B) for cognitive deficits. More 
complete lists of such tests have been compiled.11,258 In addition, 
the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke has 
compiled a set of common data elements for each dimension 
of the ICF,3 including the 3 major dimensions of body struc-
tures/body functions (impairments), activities (activity limita-
tions), and participation (participation restrictions).
Some scales focus on measures that require specific equip-
ment such as a dynamometer for measuring hand grip strength, 
various perimetry devices (eg, Humphrey or octopus) for mea-
suring visual field loss, an electric goniometer for measuring 
Recommendations: Poststroke Osteoporosis
Class
Level of 
Evidence
It is recommended that individuals with stroke 
residing in long-term care facilities be evaluated  
for calcium and vitamin D supplementation.
I
A
It is recommended that US Preventive 
Services Task Force osteoporosis screening 
recommendations be followed in women with 
stroke.
I
B
Increased levels of physical activity are 
probably indicated to reduce the risk and 
severity of poststroke osteoporosis.
IIa
B
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e114  Stroke  June 2016
range of motion, or von Frey filaments for measuring tactile sen-
sory deficits. Robotic devices are receiving increasing attention 
for their ability to quantify loss of body function/structure,264 in 
some cases generating data that cannot be obtained by a human 
examiner.265 Telemedicine may be used by examiners in remote 
locations to measure level of disability.266
The assessment of body function/structure in a patient 
recovering from stroke may be performed to predict outcome, 
to monitor recovery, to monitor response to a new therapy, to 
guide new treatment decisions, to document clinical status as 
part of reimbursement, to inform patient stratification such as 
in selecting postdischarge setting, in the context of a clinical 
trial, as part of stroke center or rehabilitation ward certifica-
tion requirements, or in compliance with a stroke care plan 
protocol. Valid reliable measures have been defined for each 
of these purposes. Similar considerations apply to choosing 
the frequency with which impairments are measured.
Assessing Overall Rehabilitation Needs
After acute hospital admission for stroke, patients should have 
comprehensive assessments of body structures and function, 
activity limitations, and participation restrictions according to 
the ICF.11,267,268 These assessments can be performed concur-
rently with diagnostic testing as soon as 24 hours after admis-
sion, as the patient’s medical stability allows. Evaluation of a 
stroke survivor’s rehabilitation needs is best performed by an 
interprofessional team that can include a physician with exper-
tise in rehabilitation, nurses, physical therapists, occupational 
therapists, speech/language therapists, psychologists, and ortho-
tists.4,149,258 Prvu Bettger and colleagues12 noted that among acute 
hospitals participating in the AHA’s Get With The Guidelines 
program, 90% of patients have an assessment for postacute 
rehabilitation services documented, but little information is 
available about the nature or reliability of these assessments. 
If clinically indicated, appropriate postacute rehabilitation set-
tings include outpatient rehabilitation or day rehabilitation pro-
grams, skilled nursing–level rehabilitation, long-term acute 
care hospitals, and acute rehabilitation hospitals.
Selection of the most appropriate level of care requires con-
sideration of many factors, including the severity of residual 
neurological deficits, resulting activity limitations, cognitive and 
communicative ability, psychological status, swallowing ability, 
premorbid functional ability, medical comorbidities, level of fam-
ily/caregiver support, likelihood of returning to community liv-
ing, and ability to participate in a rehabilitation program.70,269,270 
Certain factors such as older age, impaired cognition, lower func-
tional level after stroke, and urinary incontinence are predictors 
of the need for inpatient rehabilitation care.54,271 The presence of 
neglect syndrome can predict a longer rehabilitation stay and 
lower functional status at discharge.272 Among patients with less 
neurological impairment, assessment of balance ability with stan-
dardized measures such as the Berg Balance Scale or the Postural 
Assessment Scale for Stroke can help determine the risk of fall 
and need for inpatient rehabilitation rather than discharge home 
with outpatient services273–275 (The Prevention of Falls section 
provides more information). For patients who can walk, assess-
ment of gait speed with the 10-m walk test can help determine 
functional ambulatory ability.276,277 Risk of fall with ambula-
tion is important for counseling patient and family on safety.
A comprehensive determination of functional abilities 
appears to be useful before acute hospital discharge with 
standardized assessments such as the Barthel Index or the 
Functional Independence Measure (FIM). Both the Barthel 
Index and the FIM are strong predictors of discharge func-
tional status, discharge destination after inpatient rehabilita-
tion, and length of rehabilitation stay.278–281 The FIM is the 
most commonly used functional measure in the United States 
because it is tied to the prospective payment system of the 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
There currently is no single functional assessment with 
measurement properties that is used throughout the entire 
clinical course of stroke care (acute hospital, inpatient rehabil-
itation, and outpatient care) for tracking stroke rehabilitation 
outcome. A computerized questionnaire called the Activity 
Measure for Post-Acute Care is not specific to stroke but 
has demonstrated feasibility as such a tool in stroke popula-
tions.282 Although it requires cognitive and language ability to 
complete, proxy responses to the Activity Measure for Post-
Acute Care are well correlated with patient responses.283 Thus, 
the Activity Measure for Post-Acute Care may prove to be a 
suitable longitudinal outcome measure for stroke patients, 
including those with cognitive deficits and aphasia.
ADLs, IADLs, and Disability Measurement
The term ADLs typically refers to routine self-care tasks that 
people perform as part of their everyday life.284 ADLs are gen-
erally subdivided into those associated with personal self-care 
and fundamental mobility, often referred to as basic ADLs, 
and tasks involving more complex domestic, community, and 
leisure activities, referred to as IADLs.285
An evidence-based consensus conference on improving 
measurement of disability sponsored by the AHRQ concluded 
that a single consensus definition of disability is not feasible 
or desirable.286 The AHRQ report contends that the meaning of 
disability is dependent on context and the purpose for which the 
definition will be used. The ICF uses disability as a generic term 
that includes aspects of body functions and structure, activity, 
and participation within the context of the environment and per-
sonal/social factors.3,287 The recommendations below for ADLs, 
IADLs, and disability are based on the conceptual approach to 
disability endorsed by the World Health Organization.3
In the 2005 stroke rehabilitation clinical practice guidelines, 
there were 2 recommendations on the assessment of function. 
The first was that a standardized assessment tool be used to 
evaluate functional status in individuals with stroke. The second 
recommendation was to consider using the FIM as the stan-
dardized assessment for function in individuals with stroke.149
Over the past decade, there has been substantial progress 
in 2 general areas pertaining to measurement of function and 
disability, including ADLs and IADLs. The first is more sophis-
ticated methodological approaches to assessment, specifically 
the development of methods based on item response theory and 
computer-adapted testing.288 The second is the recent attention 
to patient-centered and patient-reported outcome measures. The 
emphasis on patient-centered and patient-reported measures 
is related to healthcare reform and the implementation of the 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.289
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e115
New tools for assessment include the Patient-Reported 
Outcomes Measurement Information System290 and the NIH 
Toolbox.291 Both the Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement 
Information System and the NIH Toolbox are designed to help 
clinicians and healthcare consumers by providing a common 
platform based on procedures and metrics that will generate 
outcomes comparable across large populations, including 
individuals with stroke.
The largest and most comprehensive source of evidence-
based reviews and reports focused on stroke rehabilitation 
is available from the Evidence-Based Review of Stroke 
Rehabilitation (EBRSR) program supported by the Canadian 
Stroke Network.270,292 Information and the evidence-based 
reports from EBRSR are available online.292a
Specific to the assessment of ADLs and IADLs (disabil-
ity), the EBRSR has produced an evidence-based report titled 
“Outcome Measures in Stroke Rehabilitation.”292b All reviewed 
assessments are classified according to the World Health 
Organization’s ICF conceptual framework. The frequently 
used modified Rankin Scale is included within the Activity/
Disability Outcome Measures section. With the use of the ICF, 
each assessment is categorized as providing information at the 
level of body functions and structure, activities, or participation. 
All assessment instruments in the EBRSR report are evaluated 
with 8 criteria. The criteria were derived from a comprehen-
sive review of 413 articles on measurement methodology by 
the Health Technology Assessment Program.293 The criteria 
include operationally defined ratings for appropriateness, reli-
ability, validity, responsiveness, precision, interpretability, 
acceptability, and feasibility. Appendix 2 includes measures 
reviewed in the EBRSR report as of November 2012.
Assessment Challenges
The instruments included in Appendix 2 and the evidence-based 
reviews in the EBRSR are based on traditional measurement 
models. As noted above, new assessments are being developed 
with the use of item response theory and computer-adapted test-
ing. These assessments are difficult to evaluate with the tradi-
tional criteria such as validity and reliability normally used in 
evidence-based reviews. For example, Hsueh and colleagues329 
reported the development of a computer-adapted test for evalu-
ating ADLs in individuals with stroke referred to as the ADL-
CAT (computer-adapted test). The authors report the ADL-CAT 
produced scores that were highly correlated with traditional 
ADL measures such as the Barthel Index but could be com-
pleted in one-fifth the time required to administer the Barthel 
Index.329 New or refined criteria consistent with advances in 
measurement approaches need to be developed and incorpo-
rated into existing levels of evidence hierarchies to accommo-
date the evaluation and evidence-based reviews of assessments.
Another challenge in establishing functional assessment 
guidelines is how to incorporate the growing emphasis on patient 
reported and patient-centered measures within the assessment of 
ADLs, IADLs, and other disability measures. The solution to this 
challenge extends beyond simply asking patients or consumers 
to respond to traditional ADL questions such as “Can you put 
on an article of clothing?” Rather, it requires patients and other 
stakeholders to be active partners in the assessment process and 
to help identify the items and outcomes that should be measured. 
Until computer-adapted tests (eg, ADL-CAT) for ADLs and 
IADLs become routine in practice, a combination of assessments 
such as a basic ADL measure (eg, the 10-item Barthel Index)330 
or the FIM and an IADL measure (eg, the 15-item Frenchay 
Activity Index)331 is recommended to capture the broad spectrum 
of ADL function. Recently, a Rasch analysis was used to validate 
a combined measure of basic and extended daily life function-
ing after stroke.332 Even those recovering from mild stroke or 
transient ischemic attack (eg, those scoring 100 on the Barthel 
Index) continue to demonstrate deficits in health status. Although 
basic ADL measures may not be sufficiently sensitive to change 
among the least impaired stroke survivors, the IADL assessment 
tool will likely be more sensitive to these more subtle deficits at 
discharge and provide useful information for discharge planning.
Assessment of Motor Impairment,  
Activity, and Mobility
Motor impairments are common after stroke and occur when 
the stroke lesion includes the corticospinal system, that is, the 
motor cortical areas and the corticospinal tract.333 Indeed, the 
Recommendations: Assessment of Disability  
and Rehabilitation Needs
Class
Level of 
Evidence
It is recommended that all individuals with 
stroke be provided a formal assessment of 
their ADLs and IADLs, communication abilities, 
and functional mobility before discharge from 
acute care hospitalization and the findings be 
incorporated into the care transition and the 
discharge planning process.
I
B
It is recommended that all individuals with 
stroke discharged to independent community 
living from postacute rehabilitation or SNFs 
receive ADL and IADL assessment directly 
related to their discharge living setting.
I
B
A functional assessment by a clinician with 
expertise in rehabilitation is recommended 
for patients with an acute stroke with residual 
functional deficits.
I
C
Determination of postacute rehabilitation needs 
should be based on assessments of residual 
neurological deficits; activity limitations; cognitive, 
communicative, and psychological status; 
swallowing ability; determination of previous 
functional ability and medical comorbidities; level 
of family/caregiver support; capacity of family/
caregiver to meet the care needs of the stroke 
survivor; likelihood of returning to community 
living; and ability to participate in rehabilitation.
I
C
It is reasonable that individuals with stroke 
discharged from acute and postacute hospitals/
centers receive formal follow-up on their ADL 
and IADL status, communication abilities, and 
functional mobility within 30 days of discharge.
IIa
B
The routine administration of standardized 
measures can be useful to document the 
severity of stroke and resulting disability, 
starting in the acute phase and progressing 
over the course of recovery and rehabilitation.
IIa
C
A standardized measure of balance and gait speed 
(for those who can walk) may be considered for 
planning postacute rehabilitation care and for 
safety counseling with the patient and family.
IIb
B
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e116  Stroke  June 2016
extent of damage to the corticospinal system is predictive of 
motor outcomes and response to treatment.334–336 Assessment of 
motor impairments enables the clinician to understand which 
aspects of movement and motor control are disrupted after stroke. 
Assessment of activity such as upper extremity function, balance, 
and mobility is used to quantify the functional consequences of 
the motor impairments. Accurate assessment provides prognostic 
information337–341 and guides the selection of motor interventions 
and the tailoring of these interventions to each individual.294
Assessment of motor impairments and activity is critical for 
delivering efficient, high-quality rehabilitation services to indi-
viduals with stroke. Assessment results are used to determine 
who needs further services, what types of services are required, 
what is the most appropriate setting for those services, which 
interventions to select, how to tailor the interventions to individ-
ual patients, and whether the rehabilitation services are achiev-
ing the desired outcomes.342–344 When standardized assessments 
are implemented within and across facilities, measures that are 
familiar and clinician friendly and meet the clinical needs of 
the service are generally implemented most easily.345–347
Technology to objectively measure real-world activity has 
been emerging over the past decades. Alternatively, clinicians 
have relied on self-report measures to gain insight into what 
a person is doing in daily life. The assumption that clinic per-
formance is equivalent to outside-of-clinic performance may 
not be true.321 Whereas patient-reported outcomes allow a 
more patient-centered approach, some self-report measures are 
prone to reporting biases.348,349 Commercially available devices 
to measure movement when people are outside the rehabilita-
tion clinic are now readily available and becoming more user 
friendly. These devices include wrist-worn accelerometers,294,326 
ankle-worn accelerometers,325 step-activity monitors,328,350 and 
the more economical alternative, pedometers.327 Recording 
movements allow the clinician to measure the quantity and 
sometimes the types of movements occurring in everyday life.
Assessment of Communication Impairment
Communication is a vital aspect of daily functioning, and 
stroke frequently results in communication impairment. One 
million people in the United States are estimated to have 
aphasia, commonly as a result of stroke.351 Communication 
impairment can negatively affect participation in life activi-
ties immediately after the stroke and can result in long-term 
deficits. It is important to identify problems early with a thor-
ough and holistic assessment. It is equally important to iden-
tify strengths and compensatory strategies that can enable the 
patient to maximize independence and to reenter life activities 
with as much competency and confidence as possible.
In recent years, more attention has been given to incor-
porating the ICF framework and principles into the assess-
ment of communication. Communication is required for most 
daily activities, so everyday life can be significantly affected 
by impairment. In previous years, assessment focused on dis-
ability; now attention is focused on maximizing quality of life 
and participating in daily activities. Additionally, caregivers 
are increasingly included in the evaluation process because 
their skill and attitude have a significant impact on creating 
successful communication exchanges.
Telerehabilitation is becoming an accepted alternative to 
face-to-face communication assessment for people with com-
munication impairment; however, telerehabilitation requires 
adequate technology. Multiple studies have demonstrated that 
telepractice for communication assessment is feasible and 
effective.352–354
Assessment of Cognition and Memory
Cognitive impairment is found in a substantial portion of stroke 
survivors, affecting more than one third of stroke survivors at 3 
and 12 months after stroke.355 These impairments persist in many 
individuals for years356,357 and are associated with poor long-
term survival, higher disability, and greater institutionalization 
rates. Tatemichi et al358 found that the RR for dependent living 
associated with cognitive impairment was 2.4 at 3 months after 
stroke after adjustment for age and physical impairment. Another 
study found the RR of death associated with dementia 5 years 
after stroke was 3.11 (95% CI, 1.79–5.41) after adjustment for 
the effects of demographic factors, cardiac disease, severity of 
stroke, stroke type, and recurrent stroke.359 The cognitive domains 
most likely to be defective in patients with stroke compared with 
Recommendations: Assessment of Motor 
Impairment, Activity, and Mobility
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Motor impairment assessments (paresis/muscle 
strength, tone, individuated finger movements, 
coordination) with standardized tools may be useful.
IIb
C
Upper extremity activity/function assessment 
with a standardized tool may be useful.
IIb
C
Balance assessment with a standardized tool 
may be useful.
IIb
C
Mobility assessment with a standardized tool 
may be useful.
IIb
C
The use of standardized questionnaires 
to assess stroke survivor perception of 
motor impairments, activity limitations, and 
participation may be considered.
IIb
C
The use of technology (accelerometers, step-
activity monitors, pedometers) as an objective 
means of assessing real-world activity and 
participation may be considered.
IIb
C
Periodic assessments with the same 
standardized tools to document progress in 
rehabilitation may be useful.
IIb
C
Recommendations: Assessment of 
Communication Impairment
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Communication assessment should consist 
of interview, conversation, observation, 
standardized tests, or nonstandardized 
items; assess speech, language, cognitive-
communication, pragmatics, reading, and 
writing; identify communicative strengths and 
weaknesses; and identify helpful compensatory 
strategies.
I
B
Telerehabilitation is reasonable when face-to-
face assessment is impossible or impractical.
IIa
A
Communication assessment may consider 
the individual’s unique priorities using the ICF 
framework, including quality of life.
IIb
C
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e117
control subjects were memory, orientation, language, and atten-
tion. Because physical and cognitive impairments after stroke 
have independent prognostic implications, evaluation of both 
domains should be routine in the clinical care of stroke patients. 
Prospective studies have shown that cognitive status is an impor-
tant determinant of poststroke success. The Neurobehavioral 
Cognitive Status Examination is a brief screening tool that 
assesses cognition in the ability areas of language, constructions, 
memory, calculation, and reasoning. A small prospective study 
found that the Neurobehavioral Cognitive Status Examination 
both provides a rapid and sensitive measure of cognitive func-
tion and appears to predict functional status change as a result 
of inpatient stroke rehabilitation.360 A formal neuropsychological 
examination (including assessment of language, neglect, praxis, 
memory, emotional responses, and specific cognitive syndromes) 
may be helpful after the detection of cognitive impairment with 
a screening instrument. Neuropsychological protocols must be 
sensitive to a wide range of abilities, especially the assessment 
of executive and attentional functions. Brief mental status scales 
inadequately assess executive skills and other higher-level cogni-
tive functions. Specific areas that should be included in this 
type of assessment include the following:
• Processing speed
• Simple attention and complex attention (“working 
memory”)
• Receptive, expressive, and repetition language abilities
• Praxis (performing skilled actions such as using a tool)
• Perceptual and constructional visual-spatial abilities, 
including issues related to visual fields and neglect
• Memory, including language-based memory and visual-
spatial memory, and differentiating learning, recall, rec-
ognition, and forced-choice memory
• Executive functioning, including awareness of strengths 
and weaknesses, organization and prioritization of tasks, 
task maintenance and switching, reasoning and problem 
solving, error awareness and safety judgment, and emo-
tional regulation
Sensory Impairments, Including Touch,  
Vision and Hearing
Stroke may result in a variety of different types of sensory impair-
ment such as loss of vision, touch, proprioception, hearing, and 
others. Sensory impairments are often assessed through physical 
examination, although methods exist for more precise measure-
ment of certain sensory deficits such as automated perimetry 
for visual field loss or audiometry for hearing loss. Although 
these are not routinely used, such testing may be useful when a 
 
detailed understanding of sensory impairment is needed.
Various forms of sensory deficit are commonly seen 
after stroke. For example, somatosensory deficits are present 
in 45%259 to 80%362 of patients, and visual field loss occurs 
in roughly 30%363 (estimates range from 15%259–52%364) of 
patients. The high degree of connectivity365 in the human brain 
not only results in loss of function directly in the affected sen-
sory modality but also affects complex behaviors that require 
distributed multimodal processing such as fine motor con-
trol.362,366 As a result, sensory impairments are directly linked 
to activity limitations and participation restrictions after 
stroke367 and can improve with therapeutic intervention,368 
particularly those based on multimodal interventions such as 
virtual reality369 and augmented reality.370
Somatosensory Impairments
Somatosensory impairments include tactile, pain, tempera-
ture, pressure, vibration, proprioception, stereognosis, and 
graphesthesia. Tactile deficits may be the most common form 
of sensory deficit after stroke.367 In the months after a stroke, 
patients show substantial but variable somatosensory recov-
ery, especially for proprioception.371 Studies of experimental 
stroke in primates372,373 and rats374 describe the neurobiologi-
cal basis of sensory recovery after stroke, with overall similar 
findings in human subjects scanned with functional mag-
netic resonance imaging.375,376 Assessment of sensory deficits 
remains largely a matter of bedside examination377; however, 
sensory scales are under study,378,379 and new devices can 
quantify deficits.380,381
Visual Impairments
The most common visual impairment after stroke is visual 
field loss, affecting ≈30% of stroke survivors.363 Vision plays a 
central role in many human functions, so a reduction in vision 
can affect many roles, quality of life, motivation, and social 
behaviors.382 Although assessment of visual field loss is most 
often obtained with confrontation methods at the bedside, 
automated perimetry methods are more sensitive and precise 
and thus may be preferred in settings where such clarity is 
deemed important such as evaluation for driving.364 Some 
degree of spontaneous restoration of visual fields generally 
occurs after stroke. However, the percentage of patients who 
achieve significant recovery is uncertain, with estimates rang-
ing from 7% to 85%,383 and the degree of recovery is vari-
able.364 As with many features of spontaneous behavioral 
recovery after stroke, gains are highest early after the injury, 
with the maximum period of spontaneous recovery of visual 
fields being reported to be in the first 2 to 10 days,384 the first 
month,385 or the first 3 months.363 Numerous other forms of 
visual impairment may be seen after stroke such as abnormal 
eye movements, reduced visual acuity, diplopia, impaired 
color vision, difficulty with reading, and deficits in higher-
order visual processing.
Hearing Impairments
Stroke can also result in acute hearing loss. This may be 
present in as many as 21% of patients with posterior cir-
culation ischemia,386 often resulting from ischemia in the 
distribution of the anterior inferior cerebellar artery, and 
in most cases is attributable to infarction in the inner ear. 
As a result, stroke-related hearing loss is usually accom-
panied by vertigo and often with additional deficits 
related to brainstem/cerebellar infarction.387 Audiometry 
Recommendations: Assessment of Cognition  
and Memory
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Screening for cognitive deficits is recommended  
for all stroke patients before discharge home.
I
B
When screening reveals cognitive deficits, a 
more detailed neuropsychological evaluation 
to identify areas of cognitive strength and 
weakness may be beneficial.
IIa
C
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e118  Stroke  June 2016
is more sensitive than bedside assessment of hearing loss. 
Neurootologic testing may provide insights by characteriz-
ing and measuring associated forms of vestibular dysfunc-
tion. Most patients show partial or complete recovery by 1 
year after stroke.388
Sensorimotor Impairments and Activities
Dysphagia Screening, Management, and  
Nutritional Support
Dysphagia is common after stroke, affecting 42% to 67% 
of patients within 3 days after stroke. Of these patients, 
about half aspirate, and one third of those patients develop 
pneumonia.389 Dysphagia or aspiration can lead to pneu-
monia, malnutrition, dehydration, weight loss, and over-
all decreased quality of life. Aspiration may be “silent” 
or “occult” and not clinically obvious. Early identification 
through screening can reduce the risk of developing these 
adverse health consequences.389 Additionally, observational 
studies suggest that dysphagia screening reduces the risk of 
pneumonia.390
A systematic review of 8 studies demonstrated that the 
odds of being malnourished were increased if dysphagia was 
present after stroke.391 Despite the potential consequences of 
dysphagia, a review of nursing nutritional care concluded that 
a functional, supportive, and educational nursing nutritional 
role was essential, but little evidence was of sufficient qual-
ity to support policy and practice development or to inform 
education.392
In 2012, a group of dysphagia experts came to the consen-
sus that early dysphagia screening should be conducted and 
that although no one screening tool can be recommended, a 
valid tool should be used.393 Additional systematic reviews and 
studies also support early screening for dysphagia. However, 
because dysphagia screening has not been well standardized 
and its utility has not been established rigorously in RCTs, 
it has been removed from The Joint Commission perfor-
mance standards and from Get With The Guidelines–Stroke 
performance measures. Nonetheless, it remains an important 
component of clinical care. Therefore, we include the same 
recommendation that appears in the most recent “Guidelines 
for the Early Management of Patients With Acute Ischemic 
Stroke.”394
Once dysphagia or aspiration risk has been identified, a 
clinical bedside evaluation can provide valuable diagnostic 
information about the swallow mechanism and how to pro-
ceed with managing the patient. However, a bedside evalua-
tion alone cannot predict the presence or absence of aspiration 
because patients can aspirate without overt clinical signs or 
symptoms.395
Instrumental evaluation (videofluoroscopy, fiberoptic 
endoscopic evaluation of swallowing, or fiberoptic endo-
scopic evaluation of swallowing with sensory testing) 
allows the clinician to visualize swallow physiology, thus 
determining the presence or absence of aspiration, the quan-
tity of aspiration, and the physiological or structural causes 
for dysphagia. This information is necessary for forming an 
appropriate and effective treatment plan, which can include 
swallow therapy and diet recommendations.396–398 There is 
no consensus in the literature on a preferred instrumental 
study. Both videofluoroscopy and fiberoptic endoscopic 
evaluation of swallowing can be used to evaluate the swal-
low mechanism.
Additionally, a large cohort study was completed, show-
ing that fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing with 
sensory testing is a relatively safe procedure for evaluating the 
sensory and motor aspects of dysphagia. Clinical judgment 
should be used to weigh the advantages and disadvantages of 
each study for each individual patient.399
Multiple systematic reviews showed that behavioral 
interventions, including “swallowing exercises, environmen-
tal modifications such as upright positioning for feeding, safe 
swallowing advice, and appropriate dietary modifications,”400 
should be considered for the management and treatment of 
dysphagia.400,401 A group of dysphagia and swallow rehabili-
tation experts reviewed 10 principles of neural plasticity and 
discussed how they should be incorporated into dysphagia 
rehabilitation strategies and interventions to promote evi-
dence-based practice.402 Other therapies considered in sys-
tematic reviews, including drug therapy, NMES, pharyngeal 
electric stimulation, physical stimulation, transcranial direct 
current stimulation (tDCS), and transcranial magnetic stimu-
lation, have no conclusive evidence supporting their use in 
dysphagia treatment.400 Additionally, acupuncture may be a 
beneficial alternative treatment of dysphagia.403 Cohort stud-
ies have shown that oral hygiene protocols may help reduce 
aspiration pneumonia after stroke.404,405
Recently, there have been a series of clinical trials called 
the Feed or Ordinary Diet (FOOD) trials, which are large, 
well-designed RCTs that address when and how to feed 
patients after stroke.406–408 As a result of underrecruitment, 
definitive conclusions cannot be made; however, these studies 
and a Cochrane review400 offer much information.
Nutritional supplements are recommended only for 
patients with malnutrition or those at risk of malnutrition. 
Routine oral nutritional supplements are not associated with 
improved functional outcome at 6 months after stroke. This 
clinical trial has found that few participants (8%) were mal-
nourished at baseline and that supplements may contribute to 
hyperglycemia if the patient is not malnourished.408
Early tube feeding (started within 7 days) may increase 
the survival of dysphagic patients who cannot safely eat by 
mouth; however, this may keep patients alive “in a severely 
disabled state when they otherwise would have died.”407 
Therefore, to reduce case fatality, providers should initiate 
early tube feeds; however, they can wait up to 7 days after a 
stroke to initiate tube feeds, especially when conversations 
about the goals of care are needed. Tube feeds via naso-
gastric route are reasonable for the first 2 to 3 weeks after 
stroke unless there is a strong reason to opt for percutane-
ous endoscopic gastrostomy placement (eg, cannot pass a 
nasogastric tube).407
Recommendation: Sensory Impairments, 
Including Touch, Vision, and Hearing
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Evaluation of stroke patients for sensory 
impairments, including touch, vision, and 
hearing, is probably indicated.
IIa
B
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e119
Early percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy place-
ment is not supported for stroke patients.406 After this time 
period, percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy placement 
is recommended because it is associated with fewer treat-
ment failures, higher feed delivery, and improved albumin 
concentration.400
Nondrug Therapies for Cognitive Impairment, 
Including Memory
Impairments in multiple domains of cognition, including 
attention, processing speed, executive function, verbal and 
visual memory, language, and perception, occur frequently 
after stroke. Stroke doubles an individual’s risk for dementia 
(including Alzheimer disease).409
Cognitive rehabilitation has been the traditional nonphar-
macological method to treat cognitive impairment and has 
been defined as a “systematic, functionally-oriented service 
of therapeutic cognitive activities, based on an assessment 
and understanding of the person’s brain-behavior deficits.”410 
These treatments are directed at the restoration or reestab-
lishment of cognitive activity, the acquisition of strategies 
to compensate for impaired cognitive function, and the use 
of adaptive technique or equipment for increasing indepen-
dence. Few studies have assessed interventions for cognitive 
deficits in the IRF environment. An RCT (n=83 at >4 months 
after stroke) compared a multicomponent cognitive therapy 
and graded activity training with cognitive therapy alone 
over 12 weeks and demonstrated that the multicomponent 
therapy exceeded the cognitive therapy in fatigue reduction 
and improved physical endurance.411 A systematic review412 
published in 2011 of cognitive rehabilitation in stroke that 
searched guidelines in stroke management, other system-
atic reviews, and clinical RCTs concluded that compensa-
tory strategies can be used to improve memory outcomes. 
However, use of an external memory aid is in itself a memory 
task, so those with the greatest need also have the greatest 
problems using them. One solution to this problem has been 
the development of a paging system whereby a paging ser-
vice with a customized set of reminders and appropriate date 
and time sends out reminders to the individual pager that is 
carried by the person who needs to be reminded. Recently, 
this idea has been modernized by the use of text message 
reminders to one’s mobile device. The use of a paging sys-
tem can significantly reduce everyday failures of memory and 
planning in stroke survivors. However, there was not enough 
evidence from RCTs to determine whether cognitive rehabili-
tation for memory problems after stroke is helpful.
Recently, attention has focused on the application of phys-
ical activity and exercise to improve cognitive function after 
stroke. Meta-analysis suggests that physical activity has a 
protective effect against cognitive decline413 and may improve 
cognitive function in older adults without cognitive impair-
ment.414 A number of mechanisms have been suggested to 
explain the effects of exercise on cognition after stroke, includ-
ing the increase in cerebral blood volume, increased expres-
sion of growth factors such as brain-derived neurotrophic 
factor, and a positive effect on depressive symptoms, which 
may mediate an improvement in cognitive performance.415
In animal models, a stimulating and enriched environment 
has been shown to improve neurobehavioral function and 
learning after stroke.416 Although it is not yet known exactly 
what type of environment might provide optimal stimulation 
for a person who has had a stroke, it has been suggested that 
the setting should be conducive to participating in physical 
activity and cognitive and social activities.417
Recommendations: Dysphagia Screening, 
Management, and Nutritional Support
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Early dysphagia screening is recommended 
for acute stroke patients to identify dysphagia 
or aspiration, which can lead to pneumonia, 
malnutrition, dehydration, and other 
complications.
I
B
Dysphagia screening is reasonable by a 
speech-language pathologist or other trained 
healthcare provider.
IIa
C
Assessment of swallowing before the patient 
begins eating, drinking, or receiving oral 
medications is recommended.
I
B
An instrumental evaluation is probably 
indicated for those patients suspected of 
aspiration to verify the presence/absence of 
aspiration and to determine the physiological 
reasons for the dysphagia to guide the 
treatment plan.
IIa
B
Selection of instrumental study (fiberoptic 
endoscopic evaluation of swallowing, 
videofluoroscopy, fiberoptic endoscopic 
evaluation of swallowing with sensory 
testing) may be based on availability or other 
considerations.
IIb
C
Oral hygiene protocols should be implemented 
to reduce the risk of aspiration pneumonia  
after stroke.
I
B
Enteral feedings (tube feedings) should be 
initiated within 7 days after stroke for patients 
who cannot safely swallow.
I
A
Nasogastric tube feeding should be used for 
short term (2–3 weeks) nutritional support for 
patients who cannot swallow safely.
I
B
Percutaneous gastrostomy tubes should be 
placed in patients with chronic inability to 
swallow safely.
I
B
Nutritional supplements are reasonable to 
consider for patients who are malnourished or 
at risk of malnourishment.
IIa
B
Incorporating principles of neuroplasticity into 
dysphagia rehabilitation strategies/interventions 
is reasonable.
IIa
C
Behavioral interventions may be considered as 
a component of dysphagia treatment.
IIb
A
Acupuncture may be considered as a  
adjunctive treatment for dysphagia.
IIb
B
Drug therapy, NMES, pharyngeal electrical 
stimulation, physical stimulation, tDCS, and 
transcranial magnetic stimulation are of uncertain 
benefit and not currently recommended.
III
A
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e120  Stroke  June 2016
Cognitive Rehabilitation
Systematic reviews that include people with both traumatic 
brain injury and stroke are generally more positive on the ben-
efits of cognitive rehabilitation418 than those involving people 
with stroke alone.419–421 This may be due in part to the smaller 
number of stroke-only studies and the confounding factors of 
age and vascular involvement with stroke. A Cochrane review 
of 6 RCTs found a benefit of cognitive rehabilitation after 
stroke on some aspects of attention deficits at the end of the 
treatment period.420 Not all aspects of attention are similarly 
affected; attention training had a positive effect on divided 
attention immediately after the intervention (4 studies) but no 
effect on selective attention (6 studies), alertness (4 studies), 
or sustained attention (4 studies).420 Two cognitive rehabili-
tation RCTs found improvements in subjective measures of 
attention422 and mental slowness423 after stroke immediately 
after treatment and at follow-up.
The European Federation of Neurological Societies guide-
lines on cognitive rehabilitation424 summarized a number of 
publications related to memory rehabilitation interventions 
without external memory aids, rehabilitation interventions 
with nonelectronic external memory aids, and rehabilitation 
interventions with assistive electronic technologies (the spe-
cific number of studies identified and reviewed was not given).
They concluded the following:
• That memory strategies without electronic aids are pos-
sibly effective (Level C recommendation)
• That specific learning strategies such as errorless learn-
ing are probably effective (Level B recommendation)
• That nonelectronic external memory aids such as diary 
or notebook keeping are possibly effective (Level C 
recommendation)
• That electronic external memory devices such as com-
puters, paging systems, and portable voice organizers are 
probably effective (Level B recommendation)
• That the use of virtual environments has shown positive 
effects on verbal, visual, and spatial learning and that 
memory training in virtual environments is rated as pos-
sibly effective (Level C recommendation)
• That a direct comparison of memory training in virtual 
environments versus nonvirtual environments is still 
lacking and no recommendation can be made as to the 
specificity of the technique
An updated review of the literature (2003–2008)418 con-
cluded that (1) for individuals with mild memory impairments, 
memory strategy training, including the use of internalized 
strategies (eg, visual imagery) and external memory com-
pensations (eg, notebooks), is recommended as a practice 
standard; (2) for individuals with severe memory deficits, the 
use of external compensations, including assistive technol-
ogy, with direct application to functional activities is recom-
mended as a practice guideline; and (3) for individuals with 
severe memory impairments, errorless learning techniques 
may be effective for learning specific skills or knowledge, 
although with limited transfer to novel tasks or reduction in 
overall functional memory problems
However, a recent Cochrane meta-analysis425 with 13 cog-
nitive rehabilitation RCTs reported no benefit to executive 
functioning after stroke, whereas other systematic reviews 
using a broader range of evidence have suggested some lim-
ited evidence.426,427 Current studies are small and have highly 
varied content, making comparisons difficult. Notably, an 
RCT delivered strategies focused on problem solving by 3 
methods (face to face, online, and computer training) and 
found that although all improved problem-solving and IADL 
abilities, the face-to-face training group resulted in the most 
improvement in problem-solving self-efficacy.428 Another 
RCT429 found that using a pager was effective in increasing 
goal attainment (ie, medication and appointments) but that 
stroke participants’ performance returned to baseline levels 
when the pager was discontinued. In contrast, specific aspects 
of memory (eg, visual-spatial recall, subjective memory expe-
rience, verbal and prospective memory, working memory, and 
attention) have been shown to improve after stroke in 6 differ-
ent controlled trials that used very diverse cognitive training 
strategies.430–435
A systematic review of the literature (1995–2011) focused 
specifically on information and communication technology 
tools for individuals with acquired brain injury, including 
stroke,436 reviewed 5 studies that addressed memory problems. 
The quality of the studies was so low that it was not possible 
to determine whether the tools were beneficial.
Only 2 studies have examined the effects of tDCS on 
attention in stroke patients.437,438 The first study438 found 
that anodal tDCS over the left dorsolateral prefrontal cor-
tex was associated with enhanced complex attention (work-
ing memory) performance. The second study437 found that 
noninvasive anodal tDCS applied to the left dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex improved attention compared with sham 
stimulation. Although improved attention may result in 
improved memory because people are better able to ini-
tially register information, neither addressed whether the 
performance benefits resulted in improved memory learn-
ing and retention.
In summary, most cognitive rehabilitation programs use 
a variety of activities, including practice requiring attention, 
planning or working memory with pencil and paper or com-
puterized activities, and teaching of compensatory strategies. 
Although a growing number of RCTs have addressed immedi-
ate effects on standardized psychobehavioral tests, few studies 
have assessed the durability of treatment effects or relevance 
to everyday functioning.
Exercise
Cumming et al415 performed a systematic review through 2011 
and found 12 RCTs and controlled, clinical trials that studied 
the effects of a physical activity or exercise-based interven-
tion on cognitive function in stroke. They concluded that there 
are reasonably consistent and relatively small positive effects 
of exercise on cognition, with some studies finding specific 
positive effects on memory. However, the pool of studies 
identified was small, and methodological shortcomings were 
widespread.
Because most studies measured cognition or memory as 
a secondary outcome, there was a wide range of baseline 
cognitive abilities, including those without cognitive impair-
ment. The dose and content of the exercise protocols have 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e121
been highly diverse,415,440,441 preventing recommendations 
on the optimal intensity or timing. Although no longitudinal 
exercise or physical activity studies have been undertaken 
to prevent cognitive impairment or dementia after stroke, it 
would seem reasonable to extend the results of studies in 
older adults that suggest a protective effect of exercise on 
cognitive decline.413
Enriched Environment
An RCT that modified the stroke rehabilitation environment 
with the provision of a computer with Internet, books, games, 
virtual reality gaming technology, and encouragement from 
staff to use the activities increased the engagement of patients 
with cognitive activities and reduced time spent inactive and 
alone.417 Särkämö et al442 performed a single-blind RCT to 
determine whether listening to music everyday can facilitate 
the recovery of cognitive functions after stroke. Two months 
of daily listening (95 minutes daily) to self-selected music 
after acute stroke improved verbal memory, focused attention, 
and depressive symptoms compared with listening to an audio 
book or not listening to music.442
Four weeks of playing virtual reality games for 30-minute 
sessions 3 times weekly improved visual attention and short-
term visuospatial memory in a very small RCT of patients 
early after stroke.443 These games required primarily paretic 
arm movements (eg, raise a hand to stop soccer balls from 
entering the goal).
Use of Drugs to Improve Cognitive Impairments, 
Including Attention
Several medications are used to treat general cognitive dis-
orders, but little literature addresses their use for poststroke 
cognitive deficits. Dextroamphetamine has been studied for 
poststroke motor recovery,444 but no studies have substantiated 
its use for cognitive disorders. Although the effect of methyl-
phenidate in 1 small trial might rely partly on an improvement 
in attention and effort through cingulum modulation,445 no 
studies have assessed its use in cognitive rehabilitation after 
stroke. Modafinil has been studied for the treatment of post-
stroke depression446 and fatigue447 but not cognitive recovery. 
Atomoxetine also has been studied for the treatment of post-
stroke depression but not cognitive deficits.
Donepezil has been studied in a small, randomized, 
clinical trial.448 Ten right-hemispheric stroke survivors 
were randomized to receive either 5 mg donepezil or 
placebo. The donepezil group demonstrated significant 
improvements on the Mini-Mental Status Examination 1 
month after completion of treatment, and functional mag-
netic resonance imaging showed increased activation in 
both prefrontal areas, both inferior frontal lobes, and the 
left inferior parietal lobe.
A pilot study randomized 50 subjects to receive either 
rivastigmine or placebo.449 Subjects receiving rivastigmine 
demonstrated statistically significant improvement (1.70 
versus 0.13; P=0.02) on the animal subtask of the verbal flu-
ency measure compared with those on placebo, but a non-
significant trend toward improvement was observed in the 
Color Trails II test, described as a culture-fair test of visual 
attention, graphomotor sequencing, and effortful executive 
processing abilities.
A study of 47 subjects at least 6 months after stroke 
were randomized to receive fluoxetine, nortriptyline, or pla-
cebo.450 Although no significant group effect was found at 
the end of treatment, the placebo group exhibited deterio-
ration in executive functioning 21 months after treatment, 
whereas the groups who received fluoxetine or nortriptyline 
significantly improved, independently of depressive symp-
toms (F=12.1 df=1, 45; P=0.001). The improvement was 
attributed to possible reorganization of neuronal networks 
associated with prefrontal functions based on modulation 
of monoaminergic neurotransmission and the activity of 
neurotrophins.
Recommendations: Nondrug Therapies for 
Cognitive Impairment, Including Memory
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Enriched environments to increase engagement 
with cognitive activities are recommended.
I
A
Use of cognitive rehabilitation to improve 
attention, memory, visual neglect, and 
executive functioning is reasonable.
IIa
B
Use of cognitive training strategies that 
consider practice, compensation, and  
adaptive techniques for increasing 
independence is reasonable.
IIa
B
Compensatory strategies may be considered  
to improve memory functions, including the  
use of internalized strategies (eg, visual 
imagery, semantic organization, spaced 
practice) and external memory assistive 
technology (eg, notebooks, paging systems, 
computers, other prompting devices).
IIb
A
Some type of specific memory training 
is reasonable such as promoting global 
processing in visual-spatial memory and 
constructing a semantic framework for 
language-based memory.
IIb
B
Errorless learning techniques may be  
effective for individuals with severe memory 
impairments for learning specific skills or 
knowledge, although there is limited transfer  
to novel tasks or reduction in overall  
functional memory problems.
IIb
B
Music therapy may be reasonable for  
improving verbal memory.
IIb
B
Exercise may be considered as adjunctive 
therapy to improve cognition and memory  
after stroke.
IIb
C
Virtual reality training may be considered for 
verbal, visual, and spatial learning, but its 
efficacy is not well established.
IIb
C
Anodal tDCS over the left dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex to improve language-based 
complex attention (working memory) remains 
experimental.
III
B
Recommendations: Nondrug Therapies for 
Cognitive Impairment, Including Memory 
(Continued 
)
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e122  Stroke  June 2016
Limb Apraxia
Limb apraxia is “a decrease or difficulty in performing purpose-
ful, skilled movements” that cannot be attributed to hemiplegia 
or lack of effort.451 It is more common after left hemispheric 
than right hemispheric stroke.452 Although not traditionally 
believed to affect daily life function,453,454 there is now evidence 
that apraxia is associated with reduced independence in daily 
life activities.455–457 Despite its incidence and its impact on inde-
pendent functioning, there is a paucity of research on therapeu-
tic interventions for limb apraxia. Several systematic reviews 
have been conducted since 2005,458–461 reviewing 5 small RCTs 
across the 4 reviews. Since these reviews, no additional RCTs 
and only 1 case study have been published.462 Two reviews 
concluded that there was not enough information to determine 
whether interventions for apraxia were efficacious.458,459 Some 
studies have found immediate postintervention improvements 
on apraxia tests or in daily life activities, but few have found 
lasting advantages for the trained groups.459
Hemispatial Neglect or Hemi-Inattention
Hemispatial neglect, also called hemiagnosia, hemineglect, 
unilateral neglect, spatial neglect, contralateral neglect, 
unilateral visual inattention, hemi-inattention, neglect syn-
drome, or contralateral hemispatialagnosia, is a neuropsy-
chological condition in which, after damage to a part of 1 
hemisphere of the brain is sustained, a deficit in attention to 
and awareness of 1 side of space is observed. These symp-
toms are not attributable to a primary sensory (eg, visual) or 
motor deficit; they are typically contralateral to the lesion. 
Hemispatial neglect is common after stroke463 and signifi-
cantly impairs the ability to participate effectively in reha-
bilitation.464 Although neglect improves over time, neglect 
symptoms continue to interfere with daily functioning long 
after stroke.465–467 The interventions developed for neglect fall 
into 2 general categories: bottom-up approaches, designed 
to remediate attention processes for the left hemispace and 
internal representations of space, and top-down approaches, 
aimed at teaching the person strategies for compensating 
for neglect.468 Most studies of neglect have been plagued by 
low-quality methods and small sample sizes.
Three systematic reviews have been completed since 
2005,468–470 reviewing 24 unique randomized, clinical trials and 
14 additional studies with weaker designs. The interventions 
studied and outcome measures varied widely in these reviews. 
Fifteen additional RCTs investigating neglect were found that 
were not included in those reviews (prism adaptation, 2; virtual 
reality, 2; limb activation, 2; neck vibration with prism adapta-
tion, 1; visual scanning with limb activation, 1; mental practice, 
1; repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation, 4; and optoki-
netic stimulation, 2).471–483 There is evidence for the efficacy of 
several top-down and bottom-up approaches in improving both 
immediate performance and long-term performance on stan-
dard neglect tests such as cancellation tests and line bisection 
tests.* These include half-field eye patching, visual scanning 
training, prism adaptation, limb activation, optokinetic stimu-
lation, mental imagery (but see the work by Welfringer and col-
leagues482), and brain stimulation with repetitive transcranial 
magnetic stimulation, theta burst transcranial magnetic stimu-
lation, or tDCS. Two randomized, clinical trials of eye patching 
for unilateral neglect in 35 subjects487 and 60 subjects488 did not 
demonstrate any significant functional improvement. None of 
these treatments resulted in improvement on all neglect tests.
Few studies have examined the efficacy of these inter-
ventions on daily life functioning. Several have used the 
behavioral tests from the Behavioral Inattention Test489or the 
Baking Tray Test,490 which are simulated real-life activities. 
Some studies have examined functional outcomes with the 
Catherine Bergego Scale,491 which measures neglect symp-
toms during everyday activities or paragraph reading tasks. 
Others have used the less sensitive, general tests of function-
ing in ADLs such as the Barthel Index330 and the FIM.492 There 
is limited evidence to date that these interventions increase 
daily life functioning, even when performance on neglect 
tests has improved,468,470 although some individual RCTs have 
found positive results on daily function.469,471,475,481,484
Cognitive rehabilitation may have immediate benefits on tests 
of neglect, as supported by a meta-analysis of 23 RCTs, but it is 
uncertain whether disability associated with neglect was altered.419 
Finally, a meta-analysis493 found that compensatory scanning 
training improved reading and visual scanning in people with 
visual field defects (and possibly coexisting visual neglect).
It is important to note that in many of the studies, the tar-
get intervention was provided in addition to regular therapy or 
scanning training. Therefore, there is not sufficient evidence 
to ascertain whether neglect interventions are effective when 
provided in isolation. In addition, several issues in under-
standing how to treat neglect exist. These include understand-
ing the heterogeneous response to treatment across clients, 
the heterogeneous response to treatment across measured 
tasks, the parameters of treatment (dosing, type of practice 
activity during or after treatment), and the relative efficacy 
of the various interventions, either alone or in combination.
Recommendations: Limb Apraxia
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Strategy training or gesture training for apraxia 
may be considered.
IIb
B
Task practice for apraxia with and without 
mental rehearsal may be considered.
IIb
C
Recommendations: Use of Drugs to Improve 
Cognitive Impairments, Including Attention
Class
Level of 
Evidence
The usefulness of donepezil in the treatment 
of poststroke cognitive deficits is not well 
established.
IIb
B
The usefulness of rivastigmine in the treatment 
of poststroke cognitive deficits is not well 
established.
IIb
B
The usefulness of antidepressants in the 
treatment of poststroke cognitive deficits is not 
well established.
IIb
B
The usefulness of dextroamphetamine, 
methylphenidate, modafinil, and atomoxetine 
in the treatment of poststroke cognitive deficits 
is unclear.
IIb
C
*References 469–471, 473, 475, 476, 478, 480, 481, 484–486
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e123
Communication Disorders
Disorders of communication and related cognitive impair-
ments are common after stroke and include aphasia, cognitive-
communication disorders, dysarthria, and apraxia of speech. 
Communication disorders may affect speaking, listening, 
reading, writing, gestures, and pragmatics. The presence of a 
communication disorder may negatively affect social partici-
pation, psychosocial well-being, and quality of life.
A certified speech and language pathologist normally 
performs the evaluation and treatment of communication 
disorders. The overall goals of speech and language treat-
ment are to facilitate the recovery of communication, to 
assist patients in developing strategies to compensate for 
communication disorders, and to counsel and educate peo-
ple in the patient’s environment on assistive communication 
supports to facilitate communication, to decrease isolation, 
and to meet the patient’s wants and needs. Compensatory 
and assistive communication supports may range from 
low-tech strategies such as paper/pencil and communica-
tion boards/books to high-tech devices that include smart 
phones and speech-generating devices.
Cognitive-Communication Disorders
There is great diversity in the presentation of cognitive-com-
munication problems after stroke.494 A systematic review of 
cognitive-communication disorders after right hemispheric 
stroke suggested that many individuals at both the chronic and 
acute phases of recovery benefit from sentence- or discourse-
level communication treatments.495
Several reviews summarize research evidence for treat-
ments of attention, visual neglect, memory training, and other 
cognitive treatments for individuals with acquired brain inju-
ries, including right hemispheric stroke. Although RCTs are 
lacking,419,420,425 a systematic review concludes that there is 
now sufficient information to support evidence-based proto-
cols to implement empirically supported treatments for cogni-
tive and communication disability after stroke.418 The Nondrug 
Therapies for Cognitive Impairment, Including Memory sec-
tion above provides more information on nonpharmacological 
treatments for cognitive disorders after stroke.
Aphasia
An RCT indicated that daily aphasia therapy in very early 
stroke recovery (starting at 3 days) improved communication 
outcomes in people with moderate to severe aphasia.496 One 
systematic review of treatment in patients at >6 months after 
stroke concluded that aphasia therapy continued to be effica-
cious in the chronic stages,497 whereas another concluded that 
there was no significant relationship between time after onset 
and response to treatment.498 Insufficient evidence exists 
to know when treatment should start or how long it should 
continue.
Several systematic reviews have indicated that inten-
sive treatment is favored,499–501 but there is no consensus on 
the optimum amount, intensity, distribution, or duration of 
treatment.353 For subacute aphasia, 1 RCT has shown that a 
short duration (3 weeks) of intensive therapy is efficacious,502 
whereas another RCT indicated that intensive treatment over 
a longer duration (12 weeks) may not always be feasible.503 
Therefore, intensive therapy should be provided as tolerated 
and feasible.
A variety of different treatment approaches for aphasia 
have been developed. Small-group and single-subject studies 
support their efficacy.497 A systematic review of RCTs of apha-
sia treatment stated that no conclusions can be made about the 
effectiveness of one treatment over another.499
Three RCTs evaluated computer-based therapy, with 1 
RCT comparing it with no treatment, 1 comparing it with 
the same treatment provided by a speech and language 
therapist, and the third comparing it with the same amount 
of nonlinguistic computer training.504–506 These 3 trials con-
cluded that computer-based therapy is feasible and effica-
cious. Therefore, computerized treatment is beneficial and 
can be used to supplement treatment provided by a speech-
language pathologist.
A systematic review concluded that communication part-
ner training is effective in improving communication activi-
ties or the participation of the communication partner. It is 
also probably effective in improving communication activities 
or the participation of individuals with chronic aphasia when 
they are interacting with trained communication partners.507 
Communication partners may include family members and 
caregivers, healthcare professionals, and others in the com-
munity or organization. Further studies are needed to examine 
the impact of communication partner training with individuals 
with acute aphasia.507
Two systematic reviews have addressed group ther-
apy.499,508 Group treatments for people with aphasia occur 
across the continuum of care.508 Overall, results indicate 
that group participation can improve specific linguistic pro-
cesses with no significant difference in outcomes between 
individual one-on-one therapy and group therapy. There is 
also some evidence that outpatient and community-based 
group participation can benefit social networks and com-
munity access.508
Several small RCTs have shown that drug therapy appears 
to be beneficial in conjunction with SLT, whereas other 
studies have failed to show a benefit. Drugs showing prom-
ise include donepezil,509 memantine,510 and galantamine.511 
Bromocriptine512 and piracetam513 do not appear beneficial. 
More extensive studies of pharmacotherapy for aphasia 
are needed before the routine use of any medication can be 
Recommendations: Hemispatial Neglect or 
Hemi-Inattention
Class
Level of 
Evidence
It is reasonable to provide repeated top-down 
and bottom-up interventions such as prism 
adaptation, visual scanning training, optokinetic 
stimulation, virtual reality, limb activation, 
mental imagery, and neck vibration combined 
with prism adaptation to improve neglect 
symptoms.
IIa
A
Right visual field testing may be considered.
IIb
B
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation of 
various forms may be considered to ameliorate 
neglect symptoms.
IIb
B
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e124  Stroke  June 2016
recommended. Further research on the dose and timing of 
administration is needed.
Brain stimulation techniques, including epidural cortical 
stimulation, repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation, 
and tDCS, have been used to modulate cortical excitabil-
ity during poststroke language recovery. Small studies have 
shown therapeutic benefits when brain stimulation tech-
niques are used, typically in combination with behavioral 
language therapy.504,514–516 Most studies are small-group or 
single-subject studies and have been conducted in patients 
with chronic aphasia. Two RCTs investigating repetitive 
transcranial magnetic stimulation in acute and subacute 
aphasia517,518 found mixed results. Brain stimulation com-
bined with speech language therapy may benefit selected 
patients, but more information on the site of stimulation and 
stimulation parameters is needed before it can be used in 
routine clinical practice.437,438,516
Motor Speech Disorders: Dysarthria and Apraxia  
of Speech
Dysarthria is a collective term for a group of speech disorders 
that result from paralysis, weakness, or incoordination of the 
speech musculature after neurological damage. Dysarthria can 
affect, singly or in combination, any of the subsystems under-
lying speech production: the respiratory, laryngeal, velopha-
ryngeal, and oral-articulatory subsystems. It is estimated that 
20% of stroke patients present with dysarthria,519 although the 
type of dysarthria and its specific characteristics vary, depend-
ing on factors such as lesion site and severity.
Apraxia of speech is a disorder of motor planning or pro-
gramming resulting in difficulty in volitionally producing the 
correct sounds of speech. In addition to articulatory disturbances, 
prosodic deficits such as slow rate of speech and restricted varia-
tions in pitch and loudness may be present. Apraxia of speech 
typically co-occurs with nonfluent aphasia, and the existence 
of a pure apraxia of speech without aphasia is debatable.
Motor speech disorders affect the intelligibility, natural-
ness, and efficiency of communication. The presence of a 
motor speech disorder may negatively affect social participa-
tion, psychosocial well-being, and quality of life.
Speech and language therapists use a range of behavioral 
treatments to address motor speech disorders in individuals 
after stroke.520–523 Behavioral treatments for motor speech dis-
orders are diverse in their focus and theoretical underpinnings 
and should be tailored to the individual’s unique strengths, defi-
cits, goals, priorities, and circumstances. Behavioral treatments 
may focus on improving the physiological support for speech 
and target impairments in respiration, phonation, articulation, 
and resonance. Behavioral treatments may also include strate-
gies to increase the precision of articulation, to modify the rate 
and loudness of speech, and to improve prosody. To date, no 
randomized, clinical trials have addressed the efficacy of these 
approaches,524,525 but small, nonrandomized group studies and 
carefully designed, single-subject, experimental studies have 
demonstrated positive results.521,526–528 Individuals with motor 
speech disorders may improve as a result of treatment, even 
when the condition is chronic.521,522,528,529 There is no consensus 
on the optimum amount, distribution, or variability of practice 
or the best type, frequency, and timing of treatment.
Patients with motor speech disorders may benefit from 
using augmentative and alternative communication devices to 
supplement their communication. Augmentative and alterna-
tive communication devices range from simple picture boards 
or spelling boards to portable amplification systems and high-
tech electronic devices with eye-tracking capability.522,530 
Supplemental strategies such as gesture or writing can be used 
to enhance communication attempts. Two systematic reviews 
have concluded that augmentative and alternative communica-
tion and speech supplementation techniques may be useful for 
individuals with motor speech disorders, when speech is insuf-
ficient to meet the individual’s communication needs.527,531
The effects of motor speech disorders after stroke extend 
beyond the physiological characteristics of the impairment. 
Studies have shown that the resulting communication difficul-
ties affect social participation and quality of life532,533 and that 
the psychosocial impact of a motor speech disorder is dispro-
portionate to the severity of the physiological impairment.532,533 
Recommendation: Cognitive Communication 
Disorders
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Interventions for cognitive-communication 
disorders are reasonable to consider if they are 
individually tailored and target:
IIa
B
  
The overt communication deficit affecting prosody, comprehension, 
expression of discourse, and pragmatics
  
The cognitive deficits that accompany or underlie the  
communication deficit, including attention, memory, and executive 
functions
Recommendations: Aphasia
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Speech and language therapy is recommended 
for individuals with aphasia.
I
A
Treatment for aphasia should include 
communication partner training.
I
B
Intensive treatment is probably indicated, but 
there is no definitive agreement on the optimum 
amount, timing, intensity, distribution, or 
duration of treatment.
IIa
A
Computerized treatment may be considered to 
supplement treatment provided by a speech-
language pathologist.
IIb
A
A variety of different treatment approaches 
for aphasia may be useful, but their relative 
effectiveness is not known.
IIb
B
Group treatment may be useful across the 
continuum of care, including the use of 
community-based aphasia groups.
IIb
B
Pharmacotherapy for aphasia may be 
considered on a case-by-case basis in 
conjunction with speech and language therapy, 
but no specific regimen is recommended for 
routine use at this time.
IIb
B
Brain stimulation techniques as adjuncts  
to behavioral speech and language  
therapy are considered experimental and 
therefore are not currently recommended  
for routine use.
III
B
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e125
Behavioral management of motor speech disorders includes 
support and counseling. Interventions addressing the broad 
life implications of motor speech disorders are being devel-
oped, and pilot studies are underway.534
Addressing environmental factors during rehabilitation 
is consistent with the ICF and warrants consideration.535–537 
For individuals with motor speech disorders, this may 
include providing education that addresses the knowledge 
and attitudes of communication partners or modifying the 
characteristics of the physical environment such as reducing 
noise levels.535–537
Telerehabilitation may be used to overcome barriers of 
access to services.538 The quality of telerehabilitation services 
must be consistent with the quality of services delivered face 
to face.538 Studies demonstrating the feasibility of telerehabili-
tation in the management of dysarthria are emerging.353
Spasticity
Spasticity, classically defined as a velocity-dependent resis-
tance to stretch of a muscle, is a component of the upper 
motor neuron syndrome. Poststroke spasticity may have dys-
tonic features, including involuntary muscle activity and limb 
positioning. Spasticity is correlated with activity limitations 
associated with hygiene, dressing, and pain. These activity 
limitations increase caregiver burden and reduce quality of life 
as measured by the EuroQol-5.539
When spasticity is present, the cost of care is 4 times higher 
than when spasticity is absent; however, because spasticity is 
strongly associated with stroke severity, the independent impact 
of spasticity on costs is not known.540 Thus, the cost of treating 
spasticity may not reduce the overall cost of stroke-related care. 
For example, in 1 study, the use of botulinum toxin injections 
for upper limb spasticity combined with therapy was not found 
to be cost-effective compared with therapy alone.541
The prevalence of poststroke spasticity in any limb is in 
the range of 25% to 43% over the first year after stroke.542–545 
For patients who require acute rehabilitation after stroke, the 
prevalence of spasticity in any limb is 42%.546 The incidence 
of upper limb spasticity over the first 3 months in patients 
admitted to rehabilitation is 33%.9 The strongest predictor 
of moderate to severe spasticity (Ashworth scale score ≥2) is 
severe proximal and distal limb weakness on acute hospital or 
rehabilitation admission.543,547
The use of resting hand splints is not effective for reduc-
ing wrist and finger spasticity, and the use of such splints is 
controversial for the prevention of contracture in the setting of 
spasticity.75 For ankle plantarflexor spasticity, a short course 
of ankle casting may facilitate spasticity reduction after injec-
tion of botulinum toxin. Taping, however, has no effect on 
spasticity after lower limb botulinum toxin injection and is 
not recommended.548,549
NMES combined with therapy may improve spasticity, 
but there is insufficient evidence that the addition of NMES 
improves functional gait or hand use.550 Vibration applied to 
spastic muscle groups might be considered to reduce spastic-
ity transiently, but it is not effective for long-term reduction of 
spastic hypertonia.551–553
Injection of botulinum toxin is used commonly to treat upper 
limb spasticity in patients with stroke and is recommended in 
several recent review articles and previously published guide-
lines as an important tool in the comprehensive management of 
poststroke spastic hypertonia.149,554–557 Injections of botulinum 
toxin A can reduce spasticity significantly as measured by the 
Ashworth scale. In a meta-analysis, botulinum toxin was shown 
to have a small but statistically significant effect on activity as 
measured by the Disability Assessment Scale after injection into 
the upper limb.558 However, improvements were attributable to 
the lowered resistance to muscle stretch during passive reposi-
tioning of the upper limb rather than to the actual skilled func-
tional use of the arm and hand. Thus, there is no evidence to 
suggest that botulinum toxin injections will improve functional 
upper limb use, but it may improve limb active or passive limb 
positioning for activities such as dressing and hygiene.559,560 
Although botulinum toxins are clinically recommended for 
spasticity reduction, it is not clear that they are a cost-effective 
means to manage spastic hypertonia compared with physical or 
occupational therapies alone.541 However, if a reduction in care-
giver burden is taken into account, the use of botulinum tox-
ins with therapy may be cost-effective.561 The early injection of 
botulinum toxins as soon as hypertonia appears may be effective 
in preventing later spasticity, but this needs further study.562,563
Botulinum toxins injected into the ankle plantarflexor 
and inverter muscles significantly reduce lower limb spastic-
ity as measured by the Ashworth scale.564–566 Injections may 
also improve gait speed, although only slightly.567 Botulinum 
toxin injections into the rectus femoris muscle may improve 
tonic knee extension during the swing phase of gait in stroke, 
but further study is needed.568 Although botulinum toxins have 
been used to improve orthotic fit, no studies of this application 
have been reported.
Oral antispasticity agents, including baclofen, dantrolene 
sodium, and tizanidine, have a marginal effect on reducing 
generalized spasticity, but dose-limiting side effects such 
as tiredness and lethargy are common.569–577 Intrathecal 
baclofen therapy is effective in reducing generalized spastic 
Recommendations: Motor Speech Disorders: 
Dysarthria and Apraxia of Speech
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Interventions for motor speech disorders  
should be individually tailored and can  
include behavioral techniques and strategies 
that target:
I
B
  
Physiological support for speech, including respiration, phonation, 
articulation, and resonance
  
Global aspects of speech production such as loudness, rate,  
and prosody
Augmentative and alternative communication 
devices and modalities should be used to 
supplement speech.
I
C
Telerehabilitation may be useful when face-to-
face treatment is impossible or impractical.
IIa
C
Environmental modifications, including listener 
education, may be considered to improve 
communication effectiveness.
IIb
C
Activities to facilitate social participation and 
promote psychosocial well-being may be 
considered.
IIb
C
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e126  Stroke  June 2016
hypertonia in patients with stroke.570,578–582 A consensus panel 
in 2006 recommended that intrathecal baclofen therapy is 
appropriate in those patients with spasticity who do not 
respond well to other interventions or in patients who expe-
rience adverse effects from other treatments. They also con-
cluded that intrathecal baclofen therapy can be considered as 
early as 3 to 6 months after stroke for patients refractory to 
other treatments.583
Balance and Ataxia
Balance depends on sensory inputs from the visual, ves-
tibular, and somatosensory systems. These sensory inputs 
are integrated and used to control anticipatory and reactive 
motor output to postural disturbances. Balance impairment 
(inclusive of postural control impairment) is common after 
stroke182,584,585 because stroke can affect 1 or more of the sen-
sory and motor networks. Impaired balance makes it diffi-
cult to safely complete ADLs, to move about the home and 
community, and to live independently. A large percentage of 
people report falling at least once in the first 6 months after 
stroke.182,585 People with stroke who fall are twice as likely 
to sustain a hip fracture compared with those who fall but 
do not have a stroke.586 Balance impairments can result in 
low balance confidence, which in turn may further reduce 
activity.587 If left undetected or untreated, balance impair-
ments can result in a cascade of serious, undesirable, and 
expensive events.175,245
Evaluation of balance abilities is considered part of 
routine clinical practice in individuals with stroke.308,588,589 
Standardized tests of balance challenge different aspects of 
postural control such as anticipatory postural reactions during 
a variety of functional behaviors. Specific balance limitations 
identified during the evaluation will help determine the risk of 
falling and guide the selection and tailoring of balance-spe-
cific interventions.308,591
Although balance training programs have been shown to 
be beneficial after stroke, no specific approach or program has 
been demonstrated to be superior, nor is the optimal timing 
clear. Balance training has been successfully implemented as 
group and one-on-one sessions, circuit training, and hospital- 
versus home- versus community-based programs. Content of 
the training typically includes balance-specific activities, (eg, 
practice responding to challenges in standing) and more gen-
eral activities (eg, strengthening exercises, gait activities).592 
Shorter, more time-intensive programs appear comparable to 
longer, less time-intensive programs.592 Progression to more 
challenging training activities over the course of training is 
important. The one type of training that has not been shown to 
be beneficial for balance is water-based programs.593
Studies of balance training have generally been small, typ-
ically 10 to 60 subjects. Subjects typically have been able to 
ambulate independently (with or without an assistive device) 
and be relatively cognitively intact. Four systematic reviews 
and meta-analyses have reviewed the effects of various inter-
ventions on balance after stroke, with the latest one published 
in 2013. Findings across these reviews show inconsistent 
effects on balance outcomes. Subsequent published RCTs 
have tested a variety of types of balance training devices (slid-
ing board, trunk exercises on a physioball, shoe wedge) or 
programs (yoga, Tai Chi,187 gait training, motor imagery). The 
later studies have similar methodological challenges (8–40 
subjects per group) and lead to similar, inconsistent conclu-
sions about the superiority of any 1 specific treatment.594–604 
Likewise, a systematic review of fall prevention after stroke 
has shown that inconsistencies in outcome measures, inter-
vention type, and implementation in previous research make it 
difficult to determine the effectiveness of fall prevention pro-
grams after stroke.174 The Prevention of Falls section provides 
more discussion.
Use of devices and orthotics (eg, cane, AFO) also improves 
balance.605 Finally, it should be noted that improving balance 
alone may not be sufficient for preventing falls because falls 
may have multiple contributing causes.
Ataxia is a disorder of coordinated muscle activity during 
voluntary movement associated with injury to the cerebel-
lum, cerebellar peduncles, and brainstem cerebellar tracts. 
Patients with ataxia have delayed movement initiation, tim-
ing errors, abnormal limb trajectories, and dysmetria.606,607 
Ataxia is present in 68% to 86% of patients with brainstem 
stroke. Ataxia typically improves during acute rehabilita-
tion.608,609 Ataxia without concurrent hemiparesis has a better 
prognosis for functional recovery in acute rehabilitation.610 
However, the presence of ataxia with or without weakness 
does not affect general functional recovery negatively.608,609 
Ataxia can affect the quality of use of the functional hand 
negatively because patients with cerebellar lesions can have 
impaired motor learning (eg, reduced skill improvement on 
a pursuit rotor task or ability to learn a finger sequence).611,612 
Despite this, case studies indicate that intensive task-ori-
ented therapy may improve motor performance and actual 
use of ataxic limbs in patients with stroke-related ataxia. 
Recommendations: Spasticity
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Targeted injection of botulinum toxin into 
localized upper limb muscles is recommended 
to reduce spasticity, to improve passive or 
active range of motion, and to improve dressing, 
hygiene, and limb positioning.
I
A
Targeted injection of botulinum toxin into 
lower limb muscles is recommended to reduce 
spasticity that interferes with gait function.
I
A
Oral antispasticity agents can be useful for 
generalized spastic dystonia but may result in 
dose-limiting sedation or other side effects.
IIa
A
Physical modalities such as NMES or vibration 
applied to spastic muscles may be reasonable 
to improve spasticity temporarily as an adjunct 
to rehabilitation therapy.
IIb
A
Intrathecal baclofen therapy may be useful for 
severe spastic hypertonia that does not respond 
to other interventions.
IIb
A
Postural training and task-oriented therapy may 
be considered for rehabilitation of ataxia.
IIb
C
The use of splints and taping are not 
recommended for prevention of wrist and finger 
spasticity after stroke.
III
B
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e127
After participating in a task-oriented training program, 
patients improved reaching speed and had reduced trunk 
motion during reaching.613 Stoykov and others606 noted that 
postural training and provision of trunk support could have 
a positive impact on upper limb motor control and dexter-
ity in a patient with upper limb ataxia. There is a paucity of 
research on rehabilitation approaches to limb ataxia, but at 
present, postural training and task-oriented upper limb training 
are recommended.
Mobility
The loss or difficulty with ambulation is one of the most dev-
astating sequelae of stroke, and restoration of gait is often one 
of the primary goals of rehabilitation. Gait-related activities 
include such tasks as mobility during rising to stand, sitting 
down, stair climbing, turning, transferring (eg, wheelchair to 
bed or bed to chair), using a wheelchair after stroke, walking 
quickly, and walking for specified distances.614 Limitations in 
gait and gait-related activities are associated with an increase 
in fall risk. A number of systematic reviews have demon-
strated enhanced outcomes of gait, gait-related activities, and 
ADLs615 after intensive, repetitive task training.616–618 The role 
of treadmill training and electromechanics-assisted gait train-
ing remains under study.619
Key training parameters for improving mobility after 
stroke are activity-specific and functional task practice; prac-
tice that is progressively more difficult and challenging; prac-
tice that is of sufficient intensity, frequency, and duration; 
and practice that is at an appropriate time relative to stroke 
onset.616,620 These parameters pertain to treadmill training with 
or without body weight support, circuit training, mobility 
training, and electromechanics-assisted training.616
Dickstein621 reviewed a variety of mobility training tech-
niques and found that gains were comparable across treat-
ments but generally insufficient for patients to advance to a 
higher functional walking category on the basis of the catego-
ries defined by Perry et al.277 No benefit was seen for more 
complex methods such as treadmill and robotic-based inter-
ventions compared with more traditional approaches.
Circuit class therapy is a form of group treatment with exer-
cises focused on repetitive practice of functional tasks.622–624 
A 2009 meta-analysis and recent systematic review concluded 
that circuit class therapy was a safe and effective method for 
improving mobility after stroke.623,625
Treadmill training in the context of task-specific training 
may be used with or without body weight support or therapists 
to assist the paretic lower extremity in stepping. A recent sys-
tematic review concluded that compared with no intervention 
or with an intervention with no walking component, tread-
mill training without body weight support improved walking 
speed and distance among ambulatory people after stroke. 
Although these benefits were maintained beyond the interven-
tion period, it is not yet known whether treadmill training is 
superior to overground walking training.621,626 Recently, it was 
demonstrated that treadmill training with body weight support 
and traditional gait training were equally effective in improv-
ing walking and transfers in patients dependent on walk-
ing assistance after stroke.51,627 A recent systematic review, 
including those <3 months after stroke and unable to walk, 
reported that those individuals who are earlier after stroke 
and more severe are more likely to have a better gait recovery 
outcome with mechanically assisted training compared with 
overground training and by using a harness in conjunction 
with the mechanical device. Mechanically assisted walking 
(eg, treadmill, electromechanical gait trainer, robotic device, 
servo-motor) with body weight support was found to be more 
effective than overground walking at increasing independent 
walking in nonambulatory patients early after stroke.628
Lower Extremity Strengthening
A 2007 review concluded that graded strength training improves 
the ability to generate force but does not transfer to improve-
ments in walking.618 However, a more recent meta-analysis 
demonstrated that providing lower limb resistance training to 
community-dwelling individuals who are 6 months after stroke 
has the capacity to improve comfortable gait speed and total dis-
tance walked.629 Similarly, a 2008 review concluded that despite 
limited long-term follow-up data, there is evidence that resis-
tance training produces increased strength, gait speed, and 
functional outcomes, as well as improved quality of life.630
NMES has been used to stimulate the ankle dorsiflexors 
during the swing phase of the gait cycle. A recent systematic 
review revealed a small but significant treatment effect of 
NMES on gait capacity in individuals in the chronic phase 
after stroke.631 Similarly, a meta-analysis revealed the effec-
tiveness of NMES at improving gait speed in subjects after 
stroke.632 Several RCTs have observed improved recovery 
of gait function after stroke in the chronic550,633–635 and acute 
phases636,637 when NMES was applied in conjunction with 
a conventional rehabilitation program. Studies comparing 
the use of an AFO to NMES in controlling foot drop during 
walking have found similar results.638,639 Although subjects 
preferred the foot drop stimulator used in 2 multisite RCTs, 
both the stimulator and a conventional AFO produced equiva-
lent functional gains.638,640,641 Similar results were obtained 
in a comparison of surface peroneal nerve stimulation and 
use of an AFO.642,643 Significant improvements in functional 
mobility were found with both peroneal nerve stimulation and 
AFO during the treatment period and were maintained at the 
6-month follow-up.
Medications for Motor Recovery
Several medications have been studied as potential contribu-
tors to stroke recovery in general and to motor recovery in 
Recommendations: Balance and Ataxia
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Individuals with stroke who have poor balance, 
low balance confidence, and fear of falls or 
are at risk for falls should be provided with a 
balance training program.
I
A
Individuals with stroke should be prescribed 
and fit with an assistive device or orthosis if 
appropriate to improve balance.
I
A
Individuals with stroke should be evaluated for 
balance, balance confidence, and fall risk.
I
C
Postural training and task-oriented therapy  
may be considered for rehabilitation of ataxia.
IIb
C
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e128  Stroke  June 2016
particular, including dextroamphetamine, methylphenidate, 
levodopa, and SSRIs. Fluoxetine was found to be helpful for 
motor recovery in a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial,644 
and several smaller studies of SSRIs were also suggestive of 
benefit.645–648 A systematic review and meta-analysis found 
evidence of benefit for SSRIs in overall disability after 
stroke.649 The overall quality of these studies was not suf-
ficient, however, to make a definitive recommendation, and 
larger, well-controlled trials are in progress. A randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of dextroamphetamine 
in 71 subjects was negative,444 and a subsequent systematic 
review of the use of amphetamines for improving motor 
recovery after stroke found inconsistent findings,650 and 
these carry a risk of adverse cardiovascular effects. A ran-
domized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of levodopa 
found short-term benefit of this therapy compared with pla-
cebo for motor function but was limited by relatively small 
size (47 subjects analyzed), baseline differences in stroke 
severity and patient age between the 2 treatment groups, and 
the short-term follow-up of only 3 weeks after the comple-
tion of therapy.651
Acupuncture
The Ottawa Panel recommends that there is good scientific 
evidence to consider including acupuncture as an adjunct to 
standard stroke rehabilitation to improve walking mobility.639 
Shiflett652 reviewed a number of RCTs of acupuncture for 
stroke recovery and performed a reanalysis suggesting that 
acupuncture may be effective as an adjunctive treatment for 
improving walking speed.
Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulation
TENS provides electrically induced sensory input to the lower 
limb. A meta-analysis revealed that there was insufficient 
research to make conclusions about the effectiveness of TENS 
in improving gait and gait-related activities.632 Three subse-
quent RCTs provided evidence of a potential benefit of TENS 
on physical function after stroke, particularly when combined 
with task-related activity.653–655
Rhythmic Auditory Cueing
Rhythmic auditory cueing is a therapy approach in which 
overground walking is synchronized to a rhythmic auditory 
cue to improve temporal and spatial gait measures. An evi-
dence synthesis found moderate evidence of improved veloc-
ity and stride length in people with stroke after gait training 
with rhythmic music. Synchronizing walking to rhythmic 
auditory cues can result in short-term improvement in gait 
measures of people with stroke. Further high-quality studies 
are needed before recommendations for clinical practice can 
be made.656
Use of AFOs
Use of AFOs is an effective method of compensating for 
motor impairments in the lower limb after stroke.657–660 The 
reader is referred to the section below on adaptive equipment 
for details.
Robotic and Electromechanics-Assisted Training Devices
Robots and electromechanics-assisted training devices have 
been used in an effort to promote gait recovery after stroke. 
Most of these devices incorporate body weight support along 
with treadmills or foot platform pedals analogous to an ellipti-
cal trainer. Their main advantage over conventional gait train-
ing is that they reduce the need for intensive therapist support. 
These devices include the Lokomat, the Gait Trainer GT 1, and 
the AutoAmbulator. A Cochrane systematic review updated in 
2013 concluded that patients with stroke who received elec-
tromechanics-assisted gait training in combination with PT 
were more likely to achieve independent walking than patients 
receiving gait training without these devices, but it did not find 
an increase in gait velocity.661 The review concluded that the 
individuals most likely to benefit from this therapy appear to 
be those who are within the first 3 months after stroke and 
those who are unable to walk. In contrast, a study by Hornby 
et al662 demonstrated greater improvement in gait velocity and 
single limb support time on the paretic limb after therapist-
assisted locomotor training compared with robotic-assisted 
locomotor training.662 A systematic review found improved 
balance for stroke survivors receiving robotic gait training, but 
there was insufficient evidence comparing robotic gait train-
ing with conventional gait training to determine whether these 
therapies are similar in this regard.663
Exoskeletal wearable lower limb robotic devices are also 
available for gait training after stroke and allow overground 
walking with the device. Most of these devices (eg, Ekso, 
Ekso Bionics, Richmond, CA; Indego, Parker-Hannifin; and 
ReWalk, Marlborough, MA) are bilateral in design, although 
unilateral exoskeletal wearable devices have also been devel-
oped (eg, Bionic Leg, AlterG, Fremont, CA). Although a 
pilot study of a unilateral device did not demonstrate benefit 
compared with conventional exercise therapy,664 most of the 
devices in this class have not yet been examined in controlled 
trials for stroke survivors. Overall, although robotic therapy 
remains a promising therapy as an adjunct to conventional 
gait training, further studies are needed to clarify the optimal 
device type, training protocols, and patient selection to maxi-
mize benefits.
Electromyographic Biofeedback
Electromyographic biofeedback is a technique that uses visual 
or audio signals to provide the patient with feedback on his/
her muscle activity. The literature on the use of electromyo-
graphic biofeedback plus conventional rehabilitation includes 
some studies suggesting improved motor power, functional 
recovery, and gait quality compared with conventional reha-
bilitation alone. However, a 2007 Cochrane database system-
atic review did not find a treatment benefit. The results of the 
systematic review are limited because the trials were small, 
were generally poorly designed, and used varying outcome 
measures, making it difficult to compare across studies.665
Virtual Reality
Virtual reality is the use of computerized technology to allow 
patients to engage in specific task practice within a computer-
generated visual environment in a naturalistic fashion. An 
environment that may be more interesting to a subject may 
enhance motivation to practice. In 2011, the Cochrane Stroke 
Group concluded that there was insufficient evidence to reach 
conclusions about the effect of virtual reality and interactive 
video gaming on gait speed.666 However, a recent systematic 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e129
review667 suggests that virtual reality promotes changes in gait 
parameters despite diversity of protocols, participant charac-
teristics, and number of subjects included.
Traditional Physiotherapeutic Approaches 
(Neurodevelopmental Therapy/Bobath, Brunnstrum, 
Proprioceptive Neuromuscular Facilitation)
A recent systematic review conducted by Langhammer and 
Stanghelle668 assessed the efficacy of the traditional phys-
iotherapeutic approaches. Although improvements in motor 
function were demonstrated, no trial showed that these 
approaches were superior to the respective comparison 
therapies.668 Similarly, it was concluded that neurodevel-
opmental approaches were equivalent or inferior to other 
approaches in improving walking ability in a 2007 system-
atic review.618
Water-Based Exercises
The conclusions drawn in a 2012 Cochrane systematic review 
revealed that the evidence from RCTs to date does not confirm 
or refute that water-based exercises after stroke might help to 
improve gait and gait-related activities.593
Upper Extremity Activity (Includes ADLs, IADLs, 
Touch, Proprioception)
The majority of individuals with stroke experience problems with 
the upper extremity, most commonly paresis,670,671 which is the 
key impairment in most cases.333,337,341,672,673 Only a small portion 
of people fully recover from upper limb paresis after a stroke, 
with the remainder left with lingering upper extremity impair-
ments, activity limitations, and participation restrictions.338,674 An 
inability to use the upper extremity in daily life can lead to loss 
of independence with ADLs and of important occupations (eg, 
work, driving) and can even contribute to institutionalization.
Task-specific training, or functional task practice, is based 
on the premise that practice of an action results in improved 
performance of that action and is focused on learning or 
relearning a motor skill.675,676 Task-specific practice is an ele-
ment of or used in combination with many upper extremity 
interventions such as constraint-induced movement therapy 
(CIMT) and NMES. Across a large number of studies, the key 
elements of task-specific training are repeated, challenging 
practice of functional, goal-oriented activities. Trunk restraint 
during task-specific training is beneficial in reducing compen-
satory trunk movements and promoting proximal movement 
control.677,678 Strengthening upper extremity muscles may be 
beneficial as an adjunct to task-specific training,679,680 when 
therapy time permits, or when the strengthening activities can 
be performed outside formal therapy sessions.
CIMT has been demonstrated to improve upper extremity 
activity, participation, and quality of life in individuals with 
baseline ability to control wrist and finger extension compared 
with usual care.52,678,681–685 It is less clear whether CIMT has 
Recommendations: Mobility
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Intensive, repetitive, mobility- task training 
is recommended for all individuals with gait 
limitations after stroke.
I
A
An AFO after stroke is recommended in 
individuals with remediable gait impairments 
(eg, foot drop) to compensate for foot drop 
and to improve mobility and paretic ankle and 
knee kinematics, kinetics, and energy cost of 
walking.
I
A
Group therapy with circuit training is a 
reasonable approach to improve walking.
IIa
A
Incorporating cardiovascular exercise and 
strengthening interventions is reasonable to 
consider for recovery of gait capacity and gait-
related mobility tasks.
IIa
A
NMES is reasonable to consider as an 
alternative to an AFO for foot drop.
IIa
A
Practice walking with either a treadmill (with 
or without body-weight support) or overground 
walking exercise training combined with 
conventional rehabilitation may be reasonable 
for recovery of walking function.
IIb
A
Robot-assisted movement training to improve 
motor function and mobility after stroke in 
combination with conventional therapy may be 
considered.
IIb
A
Mechanically assisted walking (treadmill, 
electromechanical gait trainer, robotic device, 
servo-motor) with body weight support may be 
considered for patients who are nonambulatory 
or have low ambulatory ability early after 
stroke.
IIb
A
There is insufficient evidence to recommend 
acupuncture for facilitating motor recovery and 
walking mobility.
IIb
B
The effectiveness of TENS in conjunction with 
everyday activities for improving mobility, lower 
extremity strength, and gait speed is uncertain.
IIb
B
The effectiveness of rhythmic auditory cueing 
to improve walking speed and coordination is 
uncertain.
IIb
B
The usefulness of electromyography 
biofeedback during gait training in patients  
after stroke is uncertain.
IIb
B
Virtual reality may be beneficial for the 
improvement of gait.
IIb
B
The effectiveness of neurophysiological approaches 
(ie, neurodevelopmental therapy, proprioceptive 
neuromuscular facilitation) compared with other 
treatment approaches for motor retraining after 
an acute stroke has not been established.
IIb
B
The effectiveness of water-based exercise for 
motor recovery after an acute stroke is unclear.
IIb
B
The effectiveness of fluoxetine or other SSRIs to 
enhance motor recovery is not well established.
IIb
B
The effectiveness of levodopa to enhance motor 
recovery is not well established.
IIb
B
The use of dextroamphetamine or methylphenidate 
to facilitate motor recovery is not recommended.
III
B
Recommendations: Mobility (Continued 
)
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e130  Stroke  June 2016
any advantage over dose-matched conventional upper limb 
therapy.686,687 CIMT can be delivered in its original form 3 to 6 
h/d for 5 d/wk for 2 weeks or in a modified version 1 h/d for 3 
d/wk for 10 weeks. The modified CIMT intervention appears 
to result in improvements that are comparable to the original 
version, although it has not been as extensively tested.688–694
Bilateral upper limb training has not been as well studied 
as CIMT. Two meta-analyses and more recent trials suggest 
that there is a small but measurable benefit compared with no 
intervention, but no consistent evidence of superiority over other 
task-specific training interventions has been shown.695–699 Recent 
trials comparing bilateral training with CIMT or modified CIMT 
indicate that they may have similar efficacy for individuals 
with preserved isolated wrist and finger movement.700–702
For individuals with more severe paresis, the potential for 
recovery of upper extremity function is greatly reduced, par-
ticularly later after stroke.674 Robotic therapy can deliver larger 
amounts of upper extremity movement practice for these indi-
viduals. There are a variety of types of upper extremity robots, 
consisting primarily of workstation devices used in a rehabili-
tation facility but also including some wearable exoskeletal 
devices that can be used in a home environment. A Cochrane 
review updated in 2012 found that upper limb robotic therapy 
provided benefit with regard to ADLs and arm function but 
not arm muscle strength.703 The variation within the trials with 
regard to duration and amount of training, the specific devices 
used, and patient populations studied limits the interpretation 
of these results. Moreover, many of the studies performed with 
robot-aided therapy have compared it with usual care rather 
than dose-matched conventional upper limb exercise therapy. 
Those studies incorporating dose-matched exercise as a com-
parison treatment show minimal or no differences in the effi-
cacy between these 2 treatments.704,705 Overall, robotic therapy 
appears to provide some benefit for upper extremity motor abili-
ties and participation but is of uncertain utility compared with 
dose-matched conventional upper limb exercise therapies.706–713
NMES can be used for those with minimal ability for voli-
tional muscle activation. It may be beneficial for improving 
upper extremity activity if used in combination with task-
specific training, particularly when applied to the wrist and 
hand muscles.714–716 Alternatively, it is beneficial in preventing 
or correcting shoulder subluxation.125,132,717
Mental practice, or mental imagery, may be useful as an 
adjunct to upper extremity exercise therapies.718–722 Initial training 
in mental practice occurs within a therapy session, but additional 
practice can happen outside formal therapy time. It is feasible to 
integrate mental practice with physical practice.723 Longer dura-
tions of mental practice appear to produce more benefit.724
Virtual reality and video gaming have the potential to 
increase participant engagement and the amount of upper 
extremity movement practice. Computer-based video games 
are widely available for recreational purposes for the general 
public, including those with handheld controllers (eg, Wii) 
and motion capture systems (Xbox Kinect, Microsoft, Inc). 
In addition, these systems can be used as remotely monitored 
telerehabilitation systems.725 To date, most studies of efficacy 
have been small and have used a variety of technologies and 
training programs, making generalization difficult. 
A Cochrane 
review666 found benefit in terms of upper limb function and 
ADLs but no improvements in upper limb strength. The stud-
ies were of low quality in many cases, reducing confidence in 
this finding. Efficacy of Virtual Reality Exercises in STroke 
rehabilitation (EVREST),727 a multicenter, randomized, 
clinical trial, is under way that may provide more definitive 
evidence. At present, virtual reality and video gaming are rea-
sonable alternative methods to engage individuals with stroke 
in the rehabilitation process and to increase the amount of 
movement practice.666,728,729,731–733
A variety of interventions have been the focus of ≥1 stud-
ies but have not yet been shown to be consistently beneficial 
for upper limb motor rehabilitation. These include somato-
sensory stimulation734–738 and noninvasive brain stimulation 
(transcranial magnetic stimulation or tDCS) in combination 
with upper extremity exercise therapy,739–746 interventions tar-
geting motor apraxia,458 and manual therapy approaches such 
as stretching, passive exercise, and mobilization,748 although 
these approaches are a routine part of practice for individuals 
with more severely affected upper extremities to prevent con-
tractures and to manage spasticity.
Finally, upper extremity rehabilitation programs can be 
delivered in a variety of settings such as inpatient hospitals and 
outpatient clinics and within the home. A recent systematic 
review and subsequent RCT indicate that both outpatient and 
home service delivery models produce similar results on upper 
extremity activity, including the ability to perform ADLs.749,750
Recommendations: Upper Extremity Activity, 
Including ADLs, IADLs, Touch, and Proprioception
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Functional tasks should be practiced; that is, 
task-specific training, in which the tasks are 
graded to challenge individual capabilities, 
practiced repeatedly, and progressed in  
difficulty on a frequent basis.
I
A
All individuals with stroke should receive 
ADL training tailored to individual needs and 
eventual discharge setting.
I
A
All individuals with stroke should receive 
IADL training tailored to individual needs and 
eventual discharge setting.
I
B
CIMT or its modified version is reasonable to 
consider for eligible stroke survivors.
IIa
A
Robotic therapy is reasonable to consider to 
deliver more intensive practice for individuals 
with moderate to severe upper limb paresis.
IIa
A
NMES is reasonable to consider for individuals 
with minimal volitional movement within the 
first few months after stroke or for individuals 
with shoulder subluxation.
IIa
A
Mental practice is reasonable to consider as 
an adjunct to upper extremity rehabilitation 
services.
IIa
A
Strengthening exercises are reasonable to 
consider as an adjunct to functional task 
practice.
IIa
B
Virtual reality is reasonable to consider as 
a method for delivering upper extremity 
movement practice.
IIa
B
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e131
Adaptive Equipment, Durable Medical Devices, 
Orthotics, and Wheelchairs
Many patients require assistive devices, adaptive equipment, 
mobility aids, wheelchairs, and orthoses to maximize inde-
pendent functioning after stroke. Many types of adaptive 
devices and equipment are available. Type and level of func-
tional deficit, degree of achieved adaptation, and the structural 
characteristics of the living environment determine the need 
for a particular item.
A vast array of adaptive devices are available, including 
devices to make eating, bathing, grooming, and dressing eas-
ier for patients with functional limitations. The Convention on 
the Rights of Persons With Disabilities supports facilitating 
access by individuals with disabilities to quality mobility aids, 
devices, and assistive technologies by making them available 
at affordable cost.751 Many patients may need to use adaptive 
devices early during rehabilitation but will not require long-
term use. This should be taken into account when the provi-
sion of a device is considered. Examples of adaptive devices 
include (but are not limited to) eating utensils with built-up 
handles, rocker knives, plate guards, nonskid placemats, 
long-handled sponges for bathing, handheld showers, tub and 
shower chairs, grab bars for bathrooms, and elevated toilet 
seats. A meta-analysis found that OT increased independence 
in ADLs.752 The protocols in these studies focused on improv-
ing personal ADLs, including the provision and training in the 
use of adaptive equipment.
Stroke can cause a number of gait impairments; conse-
quently, stroke patients often have an unstable, inefficient 
walking pattern and a high risk for falls (see the sections 
Prevention of Falls and Mobility). More than half of stroke 
patients require an assistive device (cane, walker, wheelchair) 
to assist mobility, most frequently a cane.753 Studies that have 
assessed the immediate effects of different assistive devices 
provided in random order have shown that ambulatory func-
tion (speed, step length, functional ambulation category) was 
improved with a cane after stroke.754,755 Patients felt that their 
walking, walking confidence, and walking safety improved 
and said they would rather walk with an assistive device than 
delay walking to achieve a normal gait pattern.755 Walking 
devices increase the base of support around a patient’s center 
of gravity and reduce the balance and effort needed to walk. 
Walking aids include (but are not limited to) the following:
• Single-point cane: a conventional cane that provides 1 
point of contact and limited improvement in balance and 
stability.
• Tripod and quad cane: canes that have 3 or 4 points 
of contact and offer more stability than a single-point 
cane but are heavier, bulkier, and more awkward to 
use. A quad cane has been shown to reduce postural 
sway more than a single-point cane in patients with 
stroke.756
• Two-wheeled walkers, 4-wheeled walkers, or rollators 
(ie, 4-wheeled walker with a seat): devices that require 
the use of both arms and legs. They support more body 
weight than a cane and are more energy efficient but can-
not be used on stairs. They should be lightweight and 
foldable for use outside the home. Four-wheeled walkers 
may require hand-motor coordination to manage hand-
brakes on a downhill slope.
For individuals with stroke who cannot ambulate safely, 
a wheelchair can enhance mobility. Up to 40% of stroke 
patients have been reported to use a manual wheelchair at 
rehabilitation discharge.757 A wheelchair may be required 
when a patient is unable to ambulate or when there is concern 
about his/her ability to ambulate safely or functionally.758 
The patient often propels the chair by using the less affected 
hand on 1 wheel and foot on the floor. Self-propulsion in 
a wheelchair early after a stroke has not been shown to be 
detrimental to muscle tone or functional outcomes.759 Many 
stroke survivors also use manual wheelchairs for longer-
distance travel such as shopping or physician appointments 
although they are capable of short-distance ambulation 
within the home. In these situations, the wheelchair is typi-
cally propelled by a caregiver.
Although powered wheelchairs are less commonly used 
after stroke, many stroke patients can learn to use powered 
wheelchairs safely with appropriate training.760 Wheelchair 
designs vary greatly, and a wheelchair prescription should be 
specific to the patient’s needs and environment and patient and 
family/caregiver preferences. The prescription of a wheelchair 
(manual or powered) in the community can increase participa-
tion and improve quality of life.761,762
A common approach to managing the lower limb motor 
impairments resulting from a stroke is to use an orthotic 
device (an orthosis), most commonly an AFO. Meta-analyses 
have shown a favorable impact of lower limb orthoses on 
walking disability (speed), walking impairment (step/stride 
length), and balance (weight distribution in standing).659,605 
However, the included studies examined only the immediate 
effects while the orthosis was worn.659 A recent meta-analysis 
and systematic review suggested the potential mechanism(s) 
associated with the above effects by demonstrating a posi-
tive effect of an AFO on ankle kinematics, knee kinematics 
in stance phase, kinetics, and energy cost.658 Two RCTs763,764 
showed that after 3 months of AFO use, AFO users had better 
mobility while wearing the AFO. One small RCT764 found 
that although a dynamic hinged AFO improved ambulatory 
function over a standard AFO, it induced some dependence; 
the standard AFO group performed better after 3 months 
of use when walking without any orthosis. With respect 
to the patient’s perspective, it is important to determine 
whether an individual is willing to wear an AFO regularly. 
Considerations to improve compliance with using an AFO 
Somatosensory retraining to improve sensory 
discrimination may be considered for stroke 
survivors with somatosensory loss.
IIb
B
Bilateral training paradigms may be useful for 
upper limb therapy.
IIb
A
Acupuncture is not recommended for the 
improvement of ADLs and upper extremity activity.
III
A
Recommendations: Upper Extremity Activity, 
Including ADLs, IADLs, Touch, and Proprioception 
(Continued 
)
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e132  Stroke  June 2016
include verification that it fits correctly and comfortably and 
is acceptable in appearance.
Motor Impairment and Recovery: Deconditioning 
and Fitness After Stroke
People having sustained a stroke present with varying degrees 
of compromised cardiorespiratory fitness, as reflected in peak 
V
.
O2 levels of 8 to 22 mL O2·kg−1·min−1 (an average of ≈53% 
of age- and sex-matched normative values).765 Given that 15 
to 18 mL O2·kg−1·min−1 is deemed necessary for independent 
living, the state of fitness after stroke is a significant health, 
functional, and quality-of-life issue.766 Multiple factors before 
stroke, at the time of stroke, and after stroke help explain this 
state. The result is often a profound and persistent decondi-
tioned state that leads to further physical inactivity, reduced 
socialization, and heightened risk of further vascular events, 
including a second stroke.
The lifetime risk of stroke recurrence among people with 
stroke is ≈30%, and the risk of either nonstroke vascular death 
or myocardial infarction is ≈2%/y.767 Recurrence of stroke 
has been found to vary by sex: 24% of women and 42% of 
men experience a recurrence within 5 years of onset.768,769 The 
reported rates of vascular risks are high among people who 
have a recurrence: The prevalence of hypertension (75%), 
ischemic heart disease (37%), hyperlipidemia (56%), atrial 
fibrillation (29%), and diabetes mellitus (24%) is significant in 
individuals who sustain a second stroke.770 For a comprehen-
sive and timely set of evidence-based recommendations for 
all clinicians who manage secondary prevention, the reader 
is directed to the AHA/ASA guidelines for the prevention of 
stroke in patients with stroke and transient ischemic attack.206
Activity level after stroke is an independent predictor of 
life satisfaction, after controlling for demographic variables 
and depression.771 Low levels of physical activity have been 
documented across the continuum of stroke severity and care, 
even among people who have had what is considered a mild 
stroke.772 A behavioral mapping study revealed that activity 
out of bed during acute stroke care (ie, <14 days after the 
onset of stroke) varied widely among the European countries 
studied, ranging between 2% and 56% of the total time of the 
observation periods.773 Stroke rehabilitation sessions have 
been reported to be of inadequate intensity to induce a car-
diovascular training effect,774,775 with an average of 17 minutes 
spent in standing and walking per session.776 Daily ambula-
tory activity of community-dwelling stroke survivors has been 
reported to be 50%777 to 61%778 of that of nondisabled con-
trol subjects, less than that of older adults with other chronic 
health conditions of the musculoskeletal or cardiovascular 
system.779 At the same time, self-reports of physical activity 
among people with chronic stroke tend to be highly inflated.780
Sedentary behavior is defined as a waking behavior such 
as sitting or lying that involves an energy expenditure of <1.5 
metabolic equivalents (METs; 1 MET is the amount of oxygen 
consumed while sitting at rest and is ≈3.5 mL O2·kg−1·min−1). 
Less sedentary behavior has been found to be an independent 
predictor of successful aging among individuals ≥45 years of 
age.781 Moreover, prolonged bouts of sedentary behavior and 
total amount of physical inactivity appear to be independently 
related to risk factors associated with metabolic syndrome 
(eg, increased waist circumference, body mass index, triglyc-
erides, and plasma glucose).782 To date, little research has been 
conducted on patterns of sedentary behavior after stroke. A 
cohort study reported that people after stroke (n=25) spent less 
time being physically active and had fewer breaks in sedentary 
behavior at 1 week, 3 months, and 6 months after stroke com-
pared with nondisabled control subjects matched by age, sex, 
and body mass index.781
Intervention strategies are needed to break the relentless 
poststroke cycle of reduced physical activity leading to further 
reductions in functional capacity and heightened risk of sec-
ondary complications. The central role that aerobic exercise 
plays in improving cardiorespiratory fitness is well known and 
strongly supported by evidence.783 It is now clear that peo-
ple with mild or moderate stroke are capable of improving 
their exercise capacity through exercise or structured physical 
activity.784–786 Enhanced fitness enables individuals to engage 
in daily physical activities at a lower percentage of their maxi-
mal capacity and hence with a lower physiological burden.787 
Exercise-induced gains in peak V
.
O2 have been relatively mod-
est, with the magnitude of improvement ranging from 0.3 
METs788 to 1.2 METs789 in trials of individuals in the subacute 
poststroke period and averaging ≈0.5 METs in trials of indi-
viduals with chronic stroke. However, even modest improve-
ments in exercise capacity are associated with reduced cardiac 
complications in people with coronary artery disease790 and 
increased survival (10%–25% reduction in mortality for every 
1-MET increase in exercise capacity).791
Emerging research suggests that aerobic exercise after 
stroke confers clinically meaningful health benefits in numer-
ous physical and psychosocial domains that extend well 
beyond the cardiorespiratory system. At the impairment 
level, some evidence exists that exercise positively affect 
bone health792 (but not risk of fracture253), fatigue,411 execu-
tive functioning and memory, depressive symptoms,794,795 
and emotional well-being188 (see the earlier section on the 
benefits of exercise for poststroke depression). At the activ-
ity level, improvements have been noted in walking ability796 
(endurance more than speed797) and upper extremity muscle 
strength.680 At the participation level, preliminary evidence 
has reported an association between exercise training after 
Recommendations: Adaptive Equipment, Durable 
Medical Devices, Orthotics, and Wheelchairs
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Ambulatory assistive devices (eg, cane, walker) 
should be used to help with gait and balance 
impairments, as well as mobility efficiency and 
safety, when needed.
I
B
AFOs should be used for ankle instability or 
dorsiflexor weakness.
I
B
Wheelchairs should be used for 
nonambulatory individuals or those with 
limited walking ability.
I
C
Adaptive and assistive devices should be used 
for safety and function if other methods of 
performing the task/activity are not available or 
cannot be learned or if the patient’s safety is a 
concern.
I
C
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e133
stroke and social participation,188 as well as return to work.799 
Finally, a meta-analysis reported that exercise interventions 
for community-based stroke survivors have significant effects 
on health-related quality of life, which is arguably the ultimate 
goal of stroke rehabilitation.800
The role of exercise in preventing further vascular events 
after stroke, including a second stroke, myocardial infarction, 
and vascular death, has not been firmly established.786 There 
is evidence that aerobic exercise as a stand-alone intervention 
after stroke improves certain vascular risk factors, including 
glucose intolerance,801 vascular stiffness,802 high resting blood 
pressure,803,804 and elevated total cholesterol.803 A multifaceted 
approach that combines nonpharmacological interventions 
(ie, exercise, dietary advice, lifestyle counseling, and patient 
education) and appropriate pharmacological therapy has been 
encouraged,805 but the effectiveness of specific nonpharma-
cological components remains to be investigated.806 Pilot 
studies of second stroke prevention using a cardiac rehabilita-
tion approach have demonstrated a reduction in cardiac risk 
scores807 and improvements in total cholesterol, body compo-
sition, and resting blood pressure,808 but these results must be 
confirmed in larger, controlled trials. Despite a lack of robust 
evidence, exercise and physical activity are regarded as key 
components of comprehensive stroke risk-reduction efforts.206
Individually Tailored Exercise Program Prescription
Active participation in exercise should be initiated early after 
stroke for several reasons: to minimize the detrimental effects 
of bedrest and inactivity, to capitalize on heightened neuro-
plasticity present in the early poststroke period, and to begin 
the important process of fostering exercise self-efficacy and 
self-monitoring. Mobilization within 24 hours after stroke has 
been shown in a phase II trial to accelerate recovery of walk-
ing and functional ability809; however, a recent study reported 
possible detrimental effects with such early activity.810 In the 
recently completed AVERT RCT, the high-dose, very early 
mobilization protocol was associated with a reduction in the 
odds of a favorable outcome at 3 months.58 In contrast to very 
early mobilization, there is growing evidence that the initia-
tion of aerobic exercise in the subacute period (ie, a mean 
of 11–78 days after stroke) is safe and effective in improv-
ing exercise capacity and walking endurance.784,789 Specific 
recommendations for graded exercise testing can be found 
in the AHA guideline on stable ischemic heart disease.811,812 
The ASH/ASA scientific statement “Physical Activity and 
Exercise Recommendations for Stroke Survivors”813 provides 
more details on the pre-exercise evaluation.
As with all aspects of stroke rehabilitation, the training 
regimen should emphasize repetition, gradually progressive 
task difficulty, and functional practice.814 The standard param-
eters of exercise prescription, that is, mode, frequency, dura-
tion, and intensity, require careful consideration to ensure a 
safe intervention that accommodates the individual’s func-
tional limitations, comorbidities, motivation, and goals. 
Because the optimal training parameters have not been deter-
mined specifically for the stroke population,815 current recom-
mendations are based on general exercise guidelines816 and on 
protocols shown to be effective in training studies involving 
people after stroke.796 A wide range of exercise modes (eg, 
treadmill, body weight–supported treadmill, recumbent bicy-
cle, cycle ergometer, stepper, aqua aerobics) have been used 
effectively in training studies.796 Because overground walking 
at self-selected speeds after stroke elicits oxidative stress in 
the range of 2.6 METs818 to 3.4 METs,819 it may be an appro-
priate aerobic modality for people who are moderately unfit. 
Preliminary evidence also suggests that participants in the 
chronic poststroke period can achieve low to moderate exer-
cise intensities when playing an active video game (Nintendo 
Wii Sports).820 Furthermore, a recent trial involving people 
with subacute stroke demonstrated greater gains in peak V
.
O2 
with a combination of robot-assisted gait training and conven-
tional PT than conventional therapy alone.821
There is some evidence that the combination of aero-
bic and strengthening exercises in nonstroke populations 
enhances health outcomes (eg, reducing resting blood pres-
sure822 and metabolic syndrome risk factors823). However, con-
clusions from a meta-analysis indicated the need for further 
investigation to determine whether combining aerobic and 
strengthening exercises bestows similar advantages in the 
stroke population.785 Since then, a small, single-cohort study 
involving individuals with chronic stroke reported improved 
muscle strength and walking endurance but no change in 
peak V
.
O2 after an 8-week program of lower extremity strength 
training at 85% to 95% of 1-repetition maximum.825
Benefits derived from aerobic training are dose dependent. 
The appropriate total volume of exercise, achieved through 
various combinations of frequency, duration, and intensity, 
is key to attaining and maintaining cardiorespiratory fitness. 
Nevertheless, there appears to be a minimal threshold for each 
parameter to achieve the most favorable outcomes. The fre-
quency of structured aerobic exercise should be at least 3 d/
wk for a minimum of 8 weeks, with lighter forms of physical 
activity (eg, brisk walking, stair climbing) promoted on the 
other days of the week. The duration of each session should be 
a minimum of 20 minutes in the training zone in addition to 3- 
to 5-minute periods of low-intensity warm-up and cool-down. 
For very deconditioned individuals, including many people 
after stroke, exercise may be delivered in multiple bouts of ≤5 
minutes in a single session or throughout the day.783
Exercise intensity is the most challenging parameter to 
determine but also the most critical to ensure that a dose that is 
safe, attainable, and adequate to elicit a training effect. Factors 
that affect intensity are baseline fitness level, neurological and 
cardiac status, comorbidities, motivation, and goals of the pro-
gram. Heart rate is typically used to establish and monitor train-
ing intensity, with resting rate measured after a minimum of 5 
minutes of quiet sitting and exercise heart rate measured with an 
electronic device. It is important to note that β-blocker medica-
tion depresses the heart rate response to exercise and that atrial 
fibrillation (common after stroke) yields a chronically irregular 
ventricular rate, thus posing challenges in the prescription of 
exercise intensity.826 Various recommendations have been made 
on the appropriate exercise intensity for patients after stroke, 
including “moderate training intensities,”206 40% to 70% of heart 
rate reserve (maximal heart rate minus resting heart rate),827 and 
50% to 80% of maximal heart rate.785 A meta-analysis con-
cluded that for extremely unfit individuals, intensities as low as 
30% of heart rate reserve can induce a cardiovascular training 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e134  Stroke  June 2016
effect.828 At the other end of the spectrum, 2 pilot exercise stud-
ies provided early evidence supporting the safe and effective 
use, at least in the chronic stroke population, of high-intensity 
exercise (ie, 60%–80% of heart rate reserve,829 85%–95% of 
peak heart rate830). The recent AHA/ASA scientific statement 
“Physical Activity and Exercise Recommendations for Stroke 
Survivors”813 gives more details on exercise/physical activity 
recommendations for stroke survivors.
Chronic Care Management: Home- and 
Community-Based Participation
Because exercise confers health benefits even years after 
stroke, participation in physical activity should be encouraged 
regardless of how much time has elapsed since stroke onset. 
The effectiveness of exercise training in the chronic stages of 
stroke is no longer in question; in fact, the vast majority of 
fitness trials have involved people at this stage of stroke chro-
nicity.796 Moreover, it has long been recognized that benefits 
of training decline significantly without ongoing participation 
in physical activity.831 Thus, physical activity designed to pro-
mote cardiovascular fitness should be an important aspect of 
community reintegration after stroke. However, adherence to 
regular physical activity is influenced by a host of individual 
factors (eg, stroke severity, preexisting/comorbid conditions, 
motivation, health beliefs, exercise history, fatigue, depression, 
adaptability, coping skills, cognition), social/cultural factors 
(eg, family support, social policies, professionals’ attitudes 
about exercise, social norms and stigmas), and environmen-
tal factors (eg, program costs, access to transportation, fitness 
facilities and equipment).832,833 These factors must be systemat-
ically addressed to achieve the goal of long-term commitment 
to healthy, active living behaviors among stroke survivors.
Strategies to instill long-term commitment to a physi-
cally active lifestyle should be initiated during formal stroke 
rehabilitation, but evidence to guide intervention is lacking.834 
Considering the high likelihood of a prestroke history of sed-
entary behavior, fostering exercise self-efficacy is particularly 
important to ease the transition from structured, institution-
based aerobic training to home- and community-based physi-
cal activity.834 Incorporating principles of adult learning (eg, 
observation, practice, repetition, relevance) and self-manage-
ment (eg, problem solving, goal setting, making choices, tak-
ing action, using available resources) is essential.835,836 Early 
participation in fitness training and education on lifestyle 
choices, risk factor reduction, and secondary prevention may 
facilitate uptake of healthy behaviors. Myths about exercise 
(exercise is unsafe, causes second stroke, increases fatigabil-
ity)833,837,838 need to be dispelled in the process of rehabilitation. 
Most important, patients’ preferences concerning exercise 
must be sought out and respected.839 Finally, stroke survivors 
who are unable to exercise will need alternative solutions to 
maintain an active and engaged lifestyle.
The fitness program should be customized on the basis 
of the participant’s functional limitations, long-term health-
related goals, and social and environmental factors. Periodic 
monitoring of the intensity of the program and the par-
ticipant’s fitness level and adherence may be reasonable. 
Investigations of the effectiveness of predischarge counseling 
in increasing long-term adherence to activity after stroke have 
yielded mixed results.840,841 In addition, a self-guided stroke 
workbook did not elicit demonstrable changes in physical 
activity.842 It appears that passive approaches (professional 
advice, written material) alone are not adequate to increase 
physical activity after stroke.841 Given that the most common 
motivator to physical activity after stroke is the opportunity to 
meet other stroke survivors,833 together with the findings that 
stroke survivors report greater preferences for exercising in 
groups and at fitness centers,839 it is prudent to direct resources 
to facilitating participation in physical activity in community 
settings. Developing partnerships between healthcare profes-
sionals and fitness centers or community exercise programs 
could help to address a concern expressed by patients after 
stroke that exercise instructors must be suitably trained and 
knowledgeable about stroke.837 Integrated care models that 
include periodic liaison between care providers and patients 
after stroke via telephone or electronic follow-up may be the 
solution to providing ongoing support for physical activity.843
Treatments/Interventions for Visual Impairments
Treatments and interventions for visual impairments after stroke 
focus on 3 areas: deficits in eye movements, deficits in visual 
fields, and deficits in visual-spatial or perceptual deficits. There 
have been 7 systematic reviews of treatments for visual impair-
ments after stroke.382,418,493,737,844,846,847 These systematic reviews 
covered reports up to 2011. The literature is generally limited 
in this area, and the methodological quality was poor in general 
or poorly reported, providing insufficient high-quality evidence 
on which to reach generalizable conclusions. However, lim-
ited evidence suggested that compensatory scanning training is 
effective at improving scanning and reading outcomes but not 
improving visual field deficits. There was insufficient evidence 
of the impact of compensatory scanning training on ADLs. 
There was also insufficient evidence about the benefits of 
vision restoration therapy (restitutive intervention) after stroke. 
Across these systematic reviews, 2 studies targeted eye move-
ment deficits, 2 case studies and 1 nonrandomized prospective 
study assessed interventions for visual field cuts, and 3 stud-
ies dealt with perceptual deficits. In general, there was insuf-
ficient evidence to reach conclusions about the effectiveness of 
interventions for patients with any of these visual deficits after 
stroke. Barrett844 reviewed the behavioral optometry literature. 
Behavioral optometry proposes that eye and visual function can 
be improved through various vision therapy methods, including 
Recommendations: Chronic Care 
Management: Home- and Community-
Based Participation
Class
Level of  
Evidence
After successful screening, an 
individually tailored exercise program is 
indicated to enhance cardiorespiratory 
fitness and to reduce the risk of stroke 
recurrence.
I
A (for improved 
fitness); B (for 
reduction of 
stroke risk)
After completion of formal stroke 
rehabilitation, participation in a 
program of exercise or physical  
activity at home or in the community  
is recommended.
I
A
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e135
eye exercises and the use of lenses, prisms, filters, occluders, 
specialized instruments, and computer programs to improve 
vision skills such as eye movement control, eye focusing, and 
coordination. Barrett concluded that there is a paucity of con-
trolled trials in the literature to support behavioral optometry 
approaches and that a large majority of behavioral manage-
ment approaches are not evidence based. However, there was 
evidence supporting the use of eye exercises for treatment of 
convergence insufficiency, the use of yoked prisms in stroke 
patients with visual field cuts, and the use of vision rehabilita-
tion of visual field defects (selecting areas of residual vision 
that are then stimulated during computer-assisted training to 
achieve visual field enlargement).
A number of studies included as part of a broader review 
dealing with rehabilitation of cognitive deficits418 focused on 
visual neglect, which is addressed elsewhere in this guideline. 
However, with regard to other forms of visual deficits, those 
studies concluded that systematic training of visual organi-
zation skills may be considered for individuals with visual 
perceptual deficits, without visual neglect, and after right 
hemispheric stroke as part of acute rehabilitation and that 
computer-based interventions intended to produce extension 
of damaged visual fields may be considered for people with 
traumatic brain injury or stroke.
In addition to those covered by the 7 systematic reviews, 
3 studies dealt with treatments for visual impairments after 
stroke.848–850 Mödden et al850 concluded that computer-based 
compensatory therapy improved functional deficits after 
visual field loss compared with compensation strategies train-
ing (ie, standard OT). A 2010 study848 concluded that multi-
modal audiovisual exploration training is more effective than 
exploration training alone. Finally, a 2012 study849 reported 
that a virtual reality training group showed a significant differ-
ence in all Motor-Free Visual Perception Test raw scores and 
response times, with improvements in recognizing shapes, 
solving pictorial puzzles, and object perception.
Hearing Loss
The healthcare provider’s ability to effectively communicate 
with a patient who has had a stroke is essential to provide ade-
quate patient care. Unfortunately, hearing impairment is com-
mon among stroke patients, and this may significantly affect 
communication. This impairment must be considered when 
communicating with patients to provide effective patient-
centered care.
Hearing impairment is commonly associated with aging, 
and the associated communication difficulties are only further 
exacerbated after stroke. It has been reported that the most 
common type of communication impairment within an acute 
hospital stroke unit is a hearing impairment, with estimates 
that 67% to 90% of these patients have a mild or greater hear-
ing impairment.851 Although a sudden onset of hearing loss 
resulting from a stroke is uncommon, stroke patients often 
have a preexisting or an undiagnosed hearing loss. In some 
instances, difficulty hearing may simply be caused by ceru-
men impaction or may be attributable to age-related hear-
ing loss.851 Stroke patients with communication or cognitive 
impairments may be unable to relay information about their 
hearing history. Reports from family or significant others 
often give healthcare providers some indication of the patient’s 
hearing abilities before the stroke. It is recommended that any 
noticeable hearing impairment be assessed and documented 
to improve patient care. Edwards et al852 reported that 86% of 
stroke patients in acute care facilities had a hearing impair-
ment that was not documented in their chart.
Amplification can often help patients who have had a 
stroke to overcome the barrier of a hearing impairment. One 
study reported that of 52 patients who had suffered a stroke 
and had a hearing impairment, 11 (21%) owned hearing 
aids.851 By verifying that the hearing aids or amplification 
devices are working and reminding the patients to wear them, 
healthcare providers will be able to better communicate with 
these patients. Unfortunately, not all patients with a hearing 
impairment have hearing aids. In this case, it is important to 
incorporate communication strategies such as looking at the 
Recommendations: Treatments/Interventions for 
Visual Impairments
Class
Level of 
Evidence
For deficits in eye movements:
  
Eye exercises for treatment of convergence 
insufficiency are recommended.
I
A
  
Compensatory scanning training may be 
considered for improving functional ADLs.
IIb
B
  
Compensatory scanning training may be 
considered for improving scanning and 
reading outcomes.
IIb
C
For deficits in visual fields:
  
Yoked prisms may be useful to help  
patients compensate for visual field cuts.
IIb
B
  
Compensatory scanning training may be 
considered for improving functional deficits 
after visual field loss but is not effective at 
reducing visual field deficits.
IIb
B
  
Computerized vision restoration training  
may be considered to expand visual fields, 
but evidence of its usefulness is lacking.
IIb
C
For visual-spatial/perceptual deficits:
  
Multimodal audiovisual spatial exploration 
training appears to be more effective than 
visual spatial exploration training alone and  
is recommended to improve visual scanning
I
B
  
There is insufficient evidence to support or 
refute any specific intervention as effective  
at reducing the impact of impaired perceptual 
functioning.
IIb
B
  
The use of virtual reality environments  
to improve visual-spatial/perceptual 
functioning may be considered.
IIb
B
  
The use of behavioral optometry approaches 
involving eye exercises and the use of lenses 
and colored filters to improve eye movement 
control, eye focusing, and eye coordination is 
not recommended.
III
B
Recommendations: Treatments/Interventions for 
Visual Impairments (Continued 
)
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e136  Stroke  June 2016
patient when talking to him/her and minimizing the level of 
background noise.
Transitions in Care and  
Community Rehabilitation
Ensuring Medical and Rehabilitation Continuity 
Through the Rehabilitation Process and Into the 
Community
The transition from inpatient care to home after a stroke can be 
difficult for patients and caregivers. Those patients who require 
ongoing rehabilitation after discharge should continue to be 
followed up by a care team with expertise in stroke rehabilita-
tion whenever possible. Patients who do not require additional 
rehabilitation services and are discharged to home or who are 
profoundly and permanently disabled and discharged to a long-
term care setting can be managed by a primary care provider.
One recent systematic review of 9 RCTs looked at the effec-
tiveness of various models of primary care–based follow-up after 
stroke. The studies included interventions using stroke support 
workers, care coordinators, or case managers. As a result of 
the wide variability of the methodological quality of the stud-
ies, interpretation was limited. The authors noted that although 
patients and caregivers receiving follow-up were generally more 
satisfied with some aspects of communication and had a greater 
knowledge of stroke, there did not appear to be any gains in 
physical function, mood, or quality of life compared with those 
who did not.853 Another systematic review examining transitional 
care models after stroke or myocardial infarction showed that 
hospital-initiated transitional care could improve some outcomes 
in adults hospitalized for stroke or myocardial infarction.854
Although not specific to stroke, a 2012 Cochrane study 
to determine the effectiveness of discharge planning for 
patients moving from an acute hospital stay to a home set-
ting evaluated the results of 24 RCTs comparing individu-
alized discharge plans with routine discharge care that was 
not tailored to the individual patient. Using data from 8098 
patients, the investigators found that hospital length of stay 
and hospital readmissions were “statistically significantly 
reduced for patients admitted to hospital with a medical diag-
nosis and who were allocated to discharge planning (mean 
difference length of stay −0.91, 95% CI −1.55 to −0.27, 
10 trials; readmission rates RR 0.82, 95% CI 0.73 to 0.92, 
12 trials).” For elderly patients with a medical condition, 
they found no significant difference between groups with 
respect to mortality (RR, 0.99; 95% CI, 0.78–1.25, 5 trials) 
 
or being discharged from hospital to home (RR, 1.03; 95% 
 
CI, 0.93–1.14, 2 trials). The authors concluded that a “dis-
charge plan tailored to the individual patient probably brings 
about reductions in hospital length of stay and readmission 
rates for older people admitted to hospital with a medical con-
dition” but that the impact of discharge planning on mortality, 
health outcomes, and cost remained unclear.855 For patients 
who have suffered a stroke and are being discharged from 
acute care, the discharge planning should include rehabilita-
tion professionals who can identify long-term needs and help 
organize provision of those services.
Alternative methods of communication and support such 
as telephone visits, telehealth, or Web-based support are newer 
options that should be considered, particularly for patients in 
rural settings who may have difficulty traveling for medi-
cal care once they are discharged from formal rehabilitation 
services.856 These technologies can be used for long-distance 
counseling, problem solving, and educational sessions, as 
well as for transmitting critical data such as blood pressure 
readings, weight, or laboratory results.
Social and Family Caregiver Support
As a result of the complexity of the disease, the deficits and 
disability, and the change in family and significant other 
dynamics, the caregiver and family are integral to the post-
stroke treatment plan. A major challenge is that 12% to 55% of 
caregivers suffer from some emotional distress,209 most com-
monly depression.238 A growing body of research is focused 
on the caregiver’s quality of life and on treatment strategies to 
benefit both the caregiver and the stroke survivor.
Families and caregivers of stroke survivors sustain a signifi-
cant impact on their psychosocial health. Worldwide, depression is 
observed not only in the patient but also in the caregiver. Untreated 
depression is associated with a lower quality of life and increased 
burden for the caregiver and survivor.857 In Korea, increased bur-
den was related to increased patient depression and insufficient 
support. In contrast, an American study found that increased 
caregiver burden is more closely correlated with lack of time for 
self.858 Smith and colleagues859 found that the caregiver needs var-
ied as a function of age. Younger caregivers want information and 
training and are more inclined to criticize the healthcare system, 
whereas older caregivers need support to maintain a positive 
outlook and are less inclined to criticize the healthcare system.
Since the previous guidelines published in 2005, many 
researchers have investigated the caregiver perspective and bet-
ter understand the interventions most likely to improve qual-
ity of life and to decrease burden. The Cochrane Collaboration 
Recommendations: Hearing Loss
Class
Level of 
Evidence
If a patient is suspected of a hearing impairment, 
it is reasonable to refer to an audiologist for 
audiometric testing.
IIa
C
It is reasonable to use some form of 
amplification (eg, hearing aids).
IIa
C
It is reasonable to use communication 
strategies such as looking at the patient  
when speaking.
IIa
C
It is reasonable to minimize the level of 
background noise in the patient’s environment.
IIa
C
Recommendation: Ensuring Medical and 
Rehabilitation Continuity Through the 
Rehabilitation Process and Into the Community
Class
Level of 
Evidence
It is reasonable to consider individualized 
discharge planning in the transition from  
hospital to home.
IIa
B
It is reasonable to consider alternative methods 
of communication and support (eg, telephone 
visits, telehealth, or Web-based support), 
particularly for patients in rural settings.
IIa
B
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e137
found that information improved the patient’s and caregiver’s 
knowledge while also slightly decreasing patient depres-
sion. The most effective educational programs included active 
involvement and follow-up by the educator. Education pro-
grams for caregiver and stroke participant should include sup-
portive problem solving and skill development,860 “how to’s” of 
physical care needs and financial assistance,861 medications,862 
respite, domestic assistance, and reassurance.863 Ongoing sup-
port for the caregiver favorably affects the stroke survivor 
and caregiver. This support comes in many different actions. 
Steiner et al864 studied physical and emotional support, whereas 
Campos de Oliveira865 more clearly defined the support as a 
needed support structure. The caregivers need either family or 
friends to provide emotional and physical assistance, and the 
caregivers need the healthcare providers to help them establish 
and maintain this over time.866 Counseling can also be a helpful 
intervention.867 In summary, healthcare professionals need to 
consider the patient, along with a diverse set of support options 
and treatments for the family and primary caregiver.
Referral to Community Resources
Successful transition to the community requires careful assess-
ment of the match between patient needs and the availability 
of formal and informal resources. Referral to appropriate local 
community resources can help to support the needs and priori-
ties of the patient and the family or caregiver. Some services can 
be organized and in place before hospital discharge, whereas 
referral to some community resources may be provided on tran-
sition to the community. A range of community resources are 
available that patients and their families/caregivers may desire 
to access immediately or in the future as their needs change.
Formal referral may be required for services such as voca-
tional counseling, psychological services, social services, 
sexual health counseling, driver evaluation, or home environ-
ment assessment. Referral to a day service program may be 
appropriate for a patient who may benefit from a structured 
program and for caregivers who need respite time.
Multiple potential resources may assist stroke patients and 
their families/caregivers in the management of the long-term 
effects of stroke such as local stroke survivor and caregiver 
support groups, leisure and exercise programs, respite care, self-
management programs, and home support (eg, Meals on Wheels).
More than 50% of stroke survivors require support with 
IADLs.868 A high proportion of stroke survivors 1 to 5 years 
after injury use community services, with the most frequently 
accessed being household services (housework, lawn/garden 
care, and Meals on Wheels) and then therapy services (eg, 
PT).868
Caregivers have identified that it is important to know what 
resources are available and to be able to access them.869 Stroke 
patients and their caregivers can be active in managing their 
chronic condition if they have appropriate information and 
resources. If stroke survivors and caregivers are to be active 
in their decision making and the management of the long-term 
effects of stroke, appropriate information delivered in a timely 
and effective format is necessary. It is critical that the process 
involve assessment of an individual’s needs, education about 
available resources, linking of patient and resources, referrals, 
and follow-up to ensure the individual receives the necessary 
services. Health providers may wish to use a checklist to iden-
tify whether referral to other services is warranted.870 A meta-
analysis of 21 trials showed that the provision of information 
(including local resources) to patients and their caregivers 
may improve aspects of patient satisfaction, improve knowl-
edge of stroke, and reduce patient depression scores.871
A systematic review872 and meta-analysis873 demonstrated 
the growing recognition that functional outcomes (including 
motor, cognitive, and psychosocial function) can be improved 
or at least maintained in chronic stroke with community inter-
ventions. In addition, a meta-analysis of 17 RCTs showed 
that lifestyle interventions (eg, health promotion or education, 
lifestyle counseling) may reduce the risks leading to another 
stroke or cardiovascular event.874 A meta-analysis of 8 RCTs 
showed that exercise referral schemes that provide a clear refer-
ral by primary care professionals to third-party professionals 
to increase exercise or physical activity can increase the num-
ber of participants who achieve 90 to 150 min/wk of moderate 
physical activity and reduce depressive symptoms in sedentary 
individuals with or without a medical diagnosis (obesity, hyper-
tension, depression, diabetes mellitus).875 In a qualitative study, 
stroke survivors described great physical and psychological 
well-being after participation in an exercise referral scheme.876
Recommendations: Social and Family  
Caregiver Support
Class
Level of 
Evidence
It may be useful for the family/caregiver to be  
an integral component of stroke rehabilitation.
IIb
A
It may be reasonable that family/caregiver 
support include some or all of the following on 
a regular basis:
IIb
A
 Education
 Training
 Counseling
 Development of a support structure
 Financial assistance
It may be useful to have the family/caregiver 
involved in decision making and treatment 
planning as early as possible and throughout 
the duration of the rehabilitation process.
IIb
B
Recommendations: Referral to Community 
Resources
Class
Level of 
Evidence
It is recommended that acute care hospitals 
and rehabilitation facilities maintain up-to-date 
inventories of community resources.
I
C
Patient and family/caregiver preferences for 
resources should be considered.
I
C
It is recommended that information about local 
resources be provided to the patient and family.
I
C
It is recommended that contact with community 
resources be offered through formal or informal 
referral.
I
C
Follow-up is recommended to ensure that 
the patient and family receive the necessary 
services.
I
C
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e138  Stroke  June 2016
Rehabilitation in the Community
The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services define com-
munity as one of the following settings: home, board and care, 
transitional living, intermediate care, or assisted living resi-
dence. More than 80% of the >6 million survivors of stroke 
in the United States live in the community, most of them at 
home, and the majority with some residual functional limita-
tions. Studies have documented that 35% to 40% of individu-
als have limitations in basic ADLs 6 months after a stroke. 
More than 50% have limitations in ≥1 IADLs.794,877
There is substantial evidence that rehabilitation services, 
particularly exercise-based programs, provided in the com-
munity after discharge from acute or institutional care can 
improve cardiovascular health and decrease the risk of car-
diovascular events, leading to increased short-term survival 
rates for individuals who have experienced a stroke.878,879 
Other community-based intervention trials have demonstrated 
enhanced ambulation and mobility, better self-care, and 
greater functional independence.880
Benefits associated with community- and home-based 
rehabilitation programs have been reported for a variety of 
outcomes, including reduced costs, decreased length of stay 
in hospitals or institutional settings, more opportunity for 
patient and family involvement in the treatment process, and 
less stress on caregivers and family members.881,882
It has also been consistently reported that individuals 
recovering from a stroke and their family members or caregiv-
ers prefer home- or community-based rehabilitation programs 
over center- or institutionally located rehabilitation services 
for a variety of practical and personal reasons.881 Patient satis-
faction with home-based rehabilitation programs is generally 
higher than for institutionally based alternatives.882 Because 
the potential for recovery exists regardless of age and time 
after stroke and because fewer financial resources appear to 
be dedicated to providing optimal care during the later phases 
of stroke recovery, family caregiver education and support 
are recommended. Intervention, referrals, and follow-up care 
based on detailed caregiver assessments conducted during the 
survivor’s inpatient stay are likely to smooth the transition 
of care to the home setting.11 There is growing evidence for 
the effectiveness of stroke family caregiver and dyad (care-
giver and patient) interventions.883 Among the Class I, Level 
of Evidence A recommendations about caregiver and dyad 
interventions were the following: (1) Interventions that com-
bine skill building with psycho-educational strategies should 
be chosen over interventions that only use psycho-educational 
strategies; (2) interventions that are tailored or individual-
ized on the basis of the needs of stroke caregivers should be 
chosen over nontailored, one-size-fits-all interventions; (3) 
postdischarge assessments with tailored interventions based 
on changing needs should be performed to improve caregiver 
outcomes; (4) interventions that are delivered face to face or 
by telephone are recommended; and (5) interventions consist-
ing of 5 to 9 sessions are recommended.
The ability to translate these findings into targeted inter-
vention programs and guidelines for the care of individuals 
with stroke is complicated by several factors.884,885 There is 
substantial variability in the timing of the initiation of home-
based treatment programs. Home-based rehabilitation may 
not be appropriate for all individuals with stroke, depending 
on level of severity, comorbidities, or the need for specialized 
treatment or equipment. Existing studies comparing commu-
nity- and home-based rehabilitation vary substantially in the 
duration and intensity of the intervention and in the nature and 
complexity of the treatment programs provided.881 For exam-
ple, some treatment programs are single interventions such as 
exercise; other programs involve multiple components requir-
ing levels of specialized expertise.
Issues related to the fidelity and integrity of the treat-
ment, patient safety, and the lack of equipment and capacity 
to provide selected interventions in a home or community set-
ting have been identified as concerns associated with home-
based rehabilitation.886 Research-based evidence on potential 
adverse effects associated with rehabilitation programs con-
ducted in the home and community is limited.
The majority of trials and reviews of community-based 
rehabilitation programs have compared home-based interven-
tion programs with programs provided in centers or hospital/
clinic-based outpatient programs.881 Several studies published 
since the 2005 stroke rehabilitation clinical practice guide-
lines have examined a combination of ESD programs and 
community rehabilitation and compared these programs 
with standard inpatient and outpatient rehabilitation services. 
Langhorne and colleagues17,18 found that the combination of 
ESD and community rehabilitation reduced inpatient length of 
stay and hospital readmission rates and increased functional 
independence and the ability of patients to live at home and 
participate in the community.
A systematic review by Hillier and Inglis-Jassiem881 exam-
ined data comparing the benefits of home-based programs and 
programs in rehabilitation centers for individuals with stroke 
living in the community. Eleven trials met the inclusion cri-
teria. Functional outcome data were pooled for the Barthel 
Index across the majority of the trials. Functional status was 
significantly improved for the home-based cohort at 6 weeks 
and 3 to 6 months. The difference between home-based and 
rehabilitation center groups was less clear after 6 months. 
Cost benefits and caregiver satisfaction were secondary mea-
sures and favored the home-based intervention trials.
A widely cited Cochrane Collaboration review887,888 exam-
ined therapy-based rehabilitation services for stroke patients 
at home (Outpatient Service Trialists). The review examined 
trials meeting the Cochrane Collaboration criteria and com-
pared home-based therapy with conventional care or no care 
within 1 year of hospital discharge for individuals with stroke. 
The primary outcomes were adverse events, deterioration in 
ability to perform ADLs, and level of improvement in ADL 
outcomes. The authors concluded that home-based therapy 
reduced the odds of a poor outcome, that is, death or deterio-
ration in the ability to perform ADLs. Patients in the home-
based therapy program also demonstrated improved ADL 
abilities compared with individuals in the usual or no treat-
ment groups.887,888
The majority of trials and reviews examining community- 
and home-based rehabilitation programs in individuals with 
stroke have focused on functional, mobility, or motor out-
comes. A recent meta-analysis by Graven and others794 exam-
ined the impact of community-based rehabilitation on reducing 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e139
depression and increasing participation and health-related qual-
ity of life in individuals with stroke. The 54 studies included in 
the review were divided into 9 intervention categories. Analyses 
revealed significant reductions in depressive symptoms. The 
reduction in depressive symptoms was associated with exercise 
interventions. Treatments involving leisure and recreational 
activities showed moderate effects for the outcomes of par-
ticipation and health-related quality of life. Comprehensive, 
multifactorial rehabilitation interventions demonstrated limited 
evidence for depression and participation but showed strong 
evidence for health-related quality-of-life outcomes.794
Sexual Function
Sexuality is an important aspect of poststroke quality of life 
for both patients and their significant others. Although there 
is substantial individual variation, overall stroke survivors 
tend to experience a high prevalence of sexual dysfunction. 
Comorbid medical conditions (eg, diabetes mellitus, hyper-
tension, depression), medication side effects, stroke-related 
physical and functional deficits, lack of knowledge, and con-
cerns about safety, role changes, and change in libido can 
affect the patient’s sexual function. Healthcare workers need 
to help the patient and significant other navigate through the 
issues surrounding sexual function.
Multiple studies indicate that stroke survivors and their 
significant others have concerns about sexuality but are fre-
quently reluctant to ask their healthcare providers about these 
concerns.889 This reluctance may stem from the patient’s 
embarrassment or other cultural barriers, as well as a lack of 
knowledge on the part of the healthcare provider. The greater 
the patient’s disability is, the greater is the likelihood of sexual 
dysfunction and decreased sexual life satisfaction.890 Stroke 
survivors report a desire for more information about sexu-
ality from healthcare providers, physicians in particular.891 
It is important for the patient and significant other to know 
that sex is not contraindicated after stroke. The most com-
mon sexual dysfunctions after stroke are decreased libido, 
erection and ejaculation disorders in men, lubrication and 
orgasm in women, and self-image and role changes for both 
men and women. Interventions and education about sexual-
ity that address these concerns such as positioning, timing, 
open communication, and functional treatments can be help-
ful. Additional training for healthcare providers on this topic, 
including methods of appropriately approaching patients and 
their partners to discuss sexuality, may be needed.892
Recreational and Leisure Activity
Engagement in leisure and recreational pursuits is important 
to health.893–896 Active leisure and recreational activities have 
been targeted as particularly important.894,895,897 However, 
individuals with stroke are limited in their ability to engage 
in leisure and recreational activities, particularly active 
ones.779,898–900
In general, poststroke rehabilitation in the United 
States provides little attention to leisure and recreation.902 
Individuals with stroke report that they engage in signifi-
cantly fewer leisure and recreation activities than they did 
before the stroke.898,899 In addition, the leisure activities in 
which they do engage have shifted from active to seden-
tary activities such as television watching and reading.898 
Limited research examines the efficacy of rehabilitation for 
increasing participation in leisure and recreation activities. 
However, several studies (1 qualitative study, 2 RCTs, and 2 
systematic reviews) suggest that therapy targeted at leisure/
recreation and the provision of some adaptive equipment 
may facilitate increased engagement in leisure or recreation 
activities.794,903,904,906 Although therapy was variable across 
the studies, in several, the therapy consisted of education 
about the importance of being physically active, education 
on community resources, and training in problem solving 
around barriers to being physically active.794,903 One study 
that showed that such programming facilitated long-term 
increased physical activity engagement offered this kind 
of programming during rehabilitation, suggesting that such 
programming could begin early during rehabilitation.908,909 It 
must be noted, however, that this study took place in Europe, 
involved much longer durations of rehabilitation than indi-
viduals experience in the United States, and involved indi-
viduals with a variety of disabling conditions (only 26% 
were individuals with stroke); in addition, results were not 
broken down by disability condition. The provision of a 
wheelchair may be critical because many individuals with 
stroke who are able to ambulate do not have the endurance to 
ambulate for long periods in the community.906
Recommendations: Rehabilitation in the 
Community
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Patients with stroke receiving comprehensive 
ADL, IADL, and mobility assessments, including 
evaluation of the discharge living setting,  
should be considered candidates for community- 
or home-based rehabilitation when feasible. 
Exclusions include individuals with stroke who 
require daily nursing services, regular medical 
interventions, specialized equipment,  
or interprofessional expertise.
I
A
It is reasonable that caregivers, including family 
members, be involved in training and education 
related directly to home-based rehabilitation 
programs and be included as active partners in 
the planning and implementation or treatment 
activities under the supervision of professionals.
IIa
B
A formal plan for monitoring compliance and 
participation in treatment activities may be 
useful for individuals with stroke referred for 
home- or community-based rehabilitation 
services. A case manager or professional 
staff person should be assigned to oversee 
implementation of the plan.
IIb
B
Recommendation: Sexual Function
Class
Level of 
Evidence
An offer to patients and their partners to 
discuss sexual issues may be useful before 
discharge home and again after transition to 
the community. Discussion topics may include 
safety concerns, changes in libido, physical 
limitations resulting from stroke, and emotional 
consequences of stroke.
IIb
B
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e140  Stroke  June 2016
Return to Work
In the United States, ≈20% of strokes occur in individuals 
who are of vocational age.910 Vocational roles provide a social 
identity and contribute to increased self-esteem and life satis-
faction.911 It is estimated that about one third of the economic 
burden of stroke through the year 2050 will be attributable to 
lost earnings after stroke.912
The percentage of individuals who were working before 
their stroke who return to work after stroke varies widely across 
studies, from 20%913 to 66%.914 This stems from large differ-
ences in sample characteristics, healthcare and social system 
differences in different countries, various definitions of work, 
and variable follow-up periods. It is clear, however, that a large 
percentage of individuals with stroke who are of vocational age 
do not return to work. It is estimated that one third of the $1.75 
trillion in annual costs1 associated with stroke are attributable to 
lost earnings in the United States alone.912 The factors associ-
ated with return to work have also varied across different stud-
ies. Factors most frequently found to be associated with return 
to work are younger age, less severe impairments, indepen-
dence in ADLs, good communication skills, good higher-level 
cognitive skills and processing speed, and a white collar profes-
sion.915–921 Some of those who do return to work have been able 
to return full-time to their previous jobs; some have required job 
modifications or alternative jobs; and others were able to return 
only part-time.890,917,919 The ability to resume driving may also 
be an important factor in being able to return to employment.915
Because several of the variables presenting barriers to return 
to work are modifiable, therapy targeted at vocational goals has 
the potential to increase return-to-work rates for individuals with 
stroke. However, no controlled trials have examined the efficacy 
or effectiveness of therapy targeted at vocational goals or voca-
tional rehabilitation programs, and a structured review found 
insufficient evidence to support or refute the efficacy of any spe-
cific vocational rehabilitation program.922 Several case studies 
suggest that for some individuals, therapy targeted at vocational 
goals can result in successful return to work.923,924 Chan and col-
leagues925 reported that their vocational rehabilitation program 
facilitates 55% of their enrollees to return to work. However, the 
lack of enrollee description makes it unclear how to interpret their 
success rate because several studies have found similar return-
to-work rates without formal vocational rehabilitation. Although 
evidence is limited, many clinicians advise that for individuals 
considering return to work, an assessment of cognitive, percep-
tion, physical, and motor abilities be performed to determine 
readiness and the needed accommodations to return to work. 
This assessment should be tailored to the individual’s needs and 
capabilities for the specified job situation and may include execu-
tive functions, high-level oral and written communication, and 
fatigue. Once performance under the best conditions has been 
assessed, further assessment under conditions of fatigue and 
stress may be useful to mimic potential job situations.
Discrimination against individuals with disabilities 
remains common in the workplace and may not be identified 
by the prospective employer as a reason for denying a dis-
abled candidate employment. Familiarity with the provisions 
of the Americans With Disabilities Act and its requirements 
for “reasonable accommodation” is important for individuals 
seeking to return to a job after stroke or seeking a new posi-
tion. Rehabilitation professionals can serve as a resource for 
motivated employers to help overcome workplace barriers for 
employees with disabilities.
Return to Driving
Driving is an essential IADL for many individuals in that it 
has a major impact on participation in activities outside the 
home.926 Between one third and two thirds of individuals after 
stroke resume driving after 1 year.927,928 However, because 
driving is a highly complex activity that requires skills in cog-
nition, perception, emotional control, and motor control,929 
the ability to drive is often affected by stroke.928 State law 
determines whether someone with a stroke is eligible to drive. 
The law concerning this topic varies by state. For example, 
in some states, individuals who have a neurological condition 
(stroke, traumatic brain injury, Parkinson disease, multiple 
sclerosis), among other non-neurological health conditions, 
are required to report their health condition to the appropriate 
state agency (eg, Department of Transportation or Department 
of Public Safety). After this reporting, the physician should 
assess patients’ physical or mental impairments that might 
adversely affect driving abilities. Each case must be evaluated 
individually because not all impairments may give rise to an 
obligation on the part of the physician. In other states without 
self-reporting, physicians must take several initial steps before 
reporting: have a tactful but candid discussion with the patient 
and family about the risks of driving, suggest to the patient 
that he or she seek further treatment such as substance abuse 
treatment or OT, and encourage the patient and the family to 
decide on a restricted driving schedule. Efforts made by physi-
cians to inform patients and families, to advise them of their 
options, and to negotiate a workable plan may render report-
ing unnecessary. Physicians should use their best judgment 
Recommendations: Recreational and  
Leisure Activity
Class
Level of 
Evidence
It is reasonable to promote engagement in 
leisure and recreational pursuits, particularly 
through the provision of information on the 
importance of maintaining an active and  
healthy lifestyle.
IIa
B
It is reasonable to foster the development of 
self-management skills for problem solving for 
overcoming barriers to engagement in active 
activities.
IIa
B
It is reasonable to start education and self-
management skill development about leisure/
recreation activities during and in conjunction 
with in-patient rehabilitation.
IIa
B
Recommendations: Return to Work
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Vocationally targeted therapy or vocational 
rehabilitation is reasonable for individuals with 
stroke considering a return to work.
IIa
C
An assessment of cognitive, perception, physical, 
and motor abilities may be considered for stroke 
survivors considering a return to work.
IIb
C
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e141
when determining when to report impairments that could limit 
a patient’s ability to drive safely. The physician’s role is to 
report medical conditions that would impair safe driving as 
dictated by his or her state’s mandatory reporting laws and 
standards of medical practice. Physicians should disclose and 
explain to their patients this responsibility to report. Physicians 
should protect patient confidentiality by ensuring that only the 
minimal amount of information is reported and that reason-
able security measures are used in handling that information. 
Physicians should work with their state medical societies to 
create statues that uphold the best interests of patients and 
community and that safeguard physicians from liability when 
reporting in good faith.930 The appropriate state agency deter-
mines whether the individual is allowed to keep his/her license 
or obtain a restricted license or whether another option is nec-
essary. However, the decision about return to driving should 
happen with the physiatrist or primary care provider, patient 
with stroke, and family. If necessary, a driving rehabilitation 
specialist can perform a formal driving evaluation. The ASA 
Driving after Stroke Web site provides information on life 
after stroke.930a
The majority of individuals who sustain a stroke want 
to and do return to driving within a year after stroke.927,928,931 
Despite a significant number of individuals in whom driving 
ability is reduced928,932 and the incidence of reduced self-aware-
ness of driving difficulties after stroke,933 very few individuals 
are ever formally assessed for driving, nor is return to driving 
discussed with them.72,928,934 This is clearly a neglected area in 
the current healthcare system surrounding rehabilitation ser-
vices after stroke.
There are no standardized driving assessment batteries. 
Many assessments contain both neuropsychological tests and 
on-the-road testing. There is no clear consensus on whether 
neuropsychological tests adequately predict the ability to 
drive. Two recent reviews (1 systematic review,936 1 meta-
analysis937) examined the ability of neuropsychological tests 
to predict on-the-road driving test performance or voluntary 
cessation of driving across 37 studies (8 overlapping studies). 
The only neuropsychological test that was a significant pre-
dictor of fitness to drive in both reviews was the Trail Making 
Test B. There is great variation across studies in sample selec-
tion and in which neuropsychological tests were used to pre-
dict fitness to drive. For example, finding no effect for vision 
is likely the result of a biased sample excluding subjects with 
visual impairments consistent with state laws restricting such 
individuals from driving.937 Driving simulators offer the abil-
ity to test an individual for fitness to drive in dynamic environ-
ments that are safer than on-the-road tests.938 One cautionary 
note is that currently few studies have tested to what degree (if 
any) driving simulator performance is a sufficient predictor of 
on-the-road driving to determine the safety of return to driv-
ing. One study of 23 participants939 showed that the simulator 
performance variables of complex reaction time and distance 
to collision were able to correctly classify 85% of the partici-
pants as fit to drive or not. Because there is no single set of 
neuropsychological tests that can accurately predict fitness to 
drive, an on-the-road driving test should also be strongly con-
sidered, especially for individuals who possess the cognitive 
ability and are eligible on the basis of local laws.
Several studies have shown that some individuals with 
stroke who are unable to pass fitness-to-drive tests can do 
so after intervention.938,940–942 Intervention programs may 
involve adaptive equipment and training for the specific 
impairments interfering with driving (eg, infrared controls 
for 1-handed driving, cognitive training, vision training) or 
simulator training, on-road training, or their combination. 
Although few studies have tested the efficacy of driving 
training on driving ability, 2 studies have found simulator 
training to be superior to traditional cognitive training.938,941 
One study showed that visual training with the Dynavision 
system (Dynavision LLC, West Chester, OH) did not result 
in increased driving ability.943 Unfortunately, other studies 
that investigated vision training and showed improved driv-
ing-related visual skills did not include measures of actual 
driving ability.944 Thus, the evidence is insufficient to deter-
mine whether visual training improves driving performance 
in those individuals with insufficient visual skills. In general, 
studies examining the efficacy of driver training suffer from 
small, heterogeneous samples. In addition, intervention pro-
grams in these studies do not appear to be specific to the 
impairments of the participants.
Conclusions
Stroke rehabilitation requires a sustained and coordinated effort 
from a large team, including the patient and his or her goals, 
family and friends, other caregivers (eg, personal care atten-
dants), physicians, nurses, physical and occupational therapists, 
speech-language pathologists, recreation therapists, psycholo-
gists, nutritionists, social workers, and others. Communication 
and coordination among these team members are paramount in 
maximizing the effectiveness and efficiency of rehabilitation 
and underlie this entire guideline. Without communication and 
coordination, isolated efforts to rehabilitate the stroke survivor 
are unlikely to achieve their full potential.
The evidence base on specific stroke rehabilitation inter-
ventions has expanded considerably in recent years, although 
many gaps remain. In addition to summarizing the current 
evidence base, this document serves to highlight areas where 
additional research is needed to clarify the most effective 
treatment strategies.
Recommendations: Return to Driving
Class
Level of 
Evidence
Individuals who appear to be ready to return 
to driving, as demonstrated by successful 
performance on fitness-to-drive tests, should 
have an on-the-road test administered by an 
authorized person.
I
C
It is reasonable that individuals be assessed 
for cognitive, perception, physical, and motor 
abilities to ascertain readiness to return to 
driving according to safety and local laws.
IIa
B
It is reasonable that individuals who do not  
pass an on-the-road driving test be referred  
to a driver rehabilitation program for training.
IIa
B
A driving simulation assessment may be 
considered for predicting fitness to drive.
IIb
C
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e142  Stroke  June 2016
Treatment gaps and future research directions identified 
include the following:
• Investigate multimodal interventions (eg, drug and ther-
apy, brain stimulation, and therapy)
• Consider including multiple outcomes such as patient-
centered, self-report outcomes in future interven-
tion effectiveness trials (Patient Reported Outcomes 
Measurement Information System [PROMIS290])
• Consider computer-adapted assessments for personal-
ized and tailored interventions
• Explore effective models of care that consider stroke 
as a chronic condition rather than simply a single 
acute event
• Capitalize on newer technologies such as virtual real-
ity, body-worn sensors, and communication resources, 
including social media
• Develop interventions for individuals with severe 
stroke
• Develop better predictor models to identify responders 
and nonresponders to different therapies
As systems of care evolve in response to healthcare 
reform efforts, postacute care and rehabilitation are often 
considered a costly area of care to be trimmed, but without 
recognition of their clinical impact and their ability to reduce 
the risk of downstream medical morbidity caused by immo-
bility, depression, loss of autonomy, and reduced functional 
independence. The provision of comprehensive rehabilita-
tion programs with adequate resources, dose, and duration 
is an essential aspect of stroke care and should be a priority 
in these redesign efforts. We hope that these guidelines help 
inform these efforts.
Appendix 1. Structure and Organization of Stroke Rehabilitation Care in the United States
Setting
Admission
Median Length of Stay
Specialist Involvement
Acute inpatient facility (hospital)
Near onset
4 d for ischemic stroke
7 d for hemorrhagic stroke
Major: MD, RN
More limited: OT, PT, SLT, SW
IRF
5–7 d
15 d (range, 8–30 d)
Major: MD, RN, OT, PT, SLT
More limited: SW
SNF
5–7 d
Highly variable (maximum, 100 d)
Major: LPN/LVN, NA, OT, PT, SLT
More limited: MD, RN
Long-term care (nursing home)
Highly variable
Prolonged and highly variable
Major: LPN/LVN, NA
More limited: RN, OT, PT, SLT, MD
Long-term care hospital
Variable
25-d average (required)
Major: RN, MD
More limited: OT, PT, SLT
HHCA
Variable (typically 5–30 d)
Maximum 60-d episode
Major: NA, RN
More limited: OT, PT, SLT, MD
Outpatient office
Variable (typically 5–30 d)
Variable
Major: OT, PT, SLT, MD
HHCA indicates home healthcare agency; IRF, inpatient rehabilitation facility; LPN/LVN, licensed practical or vocational nurse; MD, medical 
doctor; NA, nurse assistant; OT, occupational therapist; PT, physical therapist; RN, registered nurse (preferably with training in rehabilitation); SLT, 
speech-language therapist; SNF, skilled nursing facility; and SW, social worker. Modifed from Miller et al.11 Copyright © 2010, American Heart 
Association, Inc.
Appendix 2. Recommended* Measures Table
Construct/Measure
Comments
Approximate Time  
to Administer, min
References for  
Further Information
Impairment
 Paresis/strength
  Motricity Index
Consists of strength testing via manual muscle testing at 3 key UE segments and 
3 key LE segments; yields a score from 0–100 indicating strength of each limb
<5 for UEs;  
<5 for LEs
294–299
  Muscle strength
Via manual muscle testing, graded on a 0–5 scale or handheld 
dynamometry
<5 
  Grip, pinch dynamometry
Grip and pinch dynamometers are available in most rehabilitation clinics and 
hospitals; normative data are available for comparison
<5 
 Tone
  Modified Ashworth scale
Quantifies spasticity on a scale measuring resistance to passive movement 
from 0–4, with higher numbers indicating greater severity; can assess at all 
joints or only a few
10 
294, 298, 299
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e143
  
Sensorimotor impairment measures
  Fugl-Meyer
Quantifies sensorimotor impairment of the UE (0–66 points) and LE (0–34 
points) on separate subscales; items are rated on ability to move out of 
abnormal synergies
25 
298–302
   
Chedoke McMaster  
Stroke Assessment,  
impairment inventory
Quantifies impairments in 6 dimensions of shoulder pain, postural control, 
arm, hand, leg, and foot, each on a 7-point scale, with higher scores 
equalling less impairment
45 
 Activity
 UE function
  Action Research Arm Test
Criteria based with 19 items; scores are from 0–57, with normal=57; allows 
observation of multiple grasps, grips, and pinches
10
294, 298–300, 
302–306
  Box and Block Test
Score is the number of blocks moved in 1 min; higher scores equal better 
performance; normative data are available for comparison
<5 
   
Chedoke Arm and Hand  
Activity Index
Criterion based with functional items requiring bilateral UE movement; 
available in 7-, 8-, 9-, and 13-item versions
25 
  Wolf Motor Function Test
Time- and criterion-based scores on 15 items; contains some isolated joint 
movements and some functional tasks
15 
 Balance
  Berg Balance Scale
Criterion-based assessment of static and dynamic balance; widely used in 
multiple settings
15 
307–311
  Functional Reach Test
A single-item test that measures how far one can reach in standing; 
normative data are available for comparison
<5 
 Mobility
  Walking speed†
Brief and widely used; categories based on speed are:
<0.4 m/s=household ambulation
0.4–0.8 m/s=limited community ambulation
>0.8 m/s=community ambulation;
normative data available for comparison
<5 
307, 308, 312–314
  Timed Up and Go
Quantifies more than straight walking, including sit/stand and a turn; scored 
by time to complete; criterion values available for comparison
<5 
  6-Min walk test
Quantifies walking endurance; normative and criterion values for community 
ambulation distances available
<10 
   
Functional ambulation  
category
Classification made after observation or self-report of walking ability; 
6-point scale with higher equals better walking ability; this tool allows 
assessment of walking ability in people who are not independent 
ambulators
<5 
   
Observational gait 
analysis
Commonly used in many clinics to plan treatment programs; several 
standardized formats are available; appropriate to use in conjunction with 
one of the above more quantifiable measures
5 
Participation
  
Self-reported impairments, limitations, and restrictions
   
Stroke Impact Scale:  
Strength, Mobility, ADL,  
and Hand Function  
subscales
These 4 subscales measure different aspects of physical performance; 
people rate their perceived ability to do different items; each subscale 
ranges from 0–100, with higher scores indicating better abilities
5 per subscale
294, 304, 307, 315
  Motor Activity Log
14 or 28 questions about how the affected UE is used in daily life; scores 
range from 0–5, with 5 equal to similar to before the stroke
20 
   
Activities-specific Balance 
Confidence Scale
16 questions in which people with stroke rate their balance confidence 
during routine activities; scores range from 0–100, with higher scores 
indicating more confidence
20 
316–319
(Continued )
Appendix 2. Continued
Construct/Measure
Comments
Approximate Time  
to Administer, min
References for  
Further Information
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e144  Stroke  June 2016
(Continued )
Writing Group Disclosures
Writing 
Group 
Member
Employment
Research Grant
Other  
Research  
Support
Speakers’  
Bureau/ 
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/ 
Advisory Board
Other
Carolee J. 
Winstein
University of  
Southern California
NIH (UO1 award, NINDS/NICHD 
support)†; NIH (R01-NICHD 
HD065438)†
None
None
None
None
St. Jude Medical  
Business Services, Inc*
None
Joel Stein
Columbia University
Tyromotion, Inc.*; Myomo Inc.*;  
Tibion (now Alter-G)†; Nexstim, Inc.†
None
None
None
None
Myomo, Inc.*
None
Ross Arena
University of  
Illinois Chicago
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Barbara 
Bates
VAMC Physical 
Medicine and 
Rehabilitation
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Leora R. 
Cherney
Rehabilitation 
Institute of Chicago 
for Aphasia  
Research and 
Treatment
NIDCD (NIH): principal investigator  
on grants 1R01DC011754 and  
1R21 DC009876†; NIDILRR-HHS 
(principal investigator on grants 
H133G201101, H133P120013, and  
a subproject on H133E130019)†
None
None
None
None
None
Rehabilitation 
Institute of 
Chicago†
Steven C. 
Cramer
University of  
California, Irvine
NIH†
None
None
None
Personal  
RN†
MicroTransponder*; Dart 
Neuroscience†; Roche*; 
RAND Corporation*
None
Frank 
Deruyter
Duke University
NIDRR†
None
None
None
None
None
None
Janice J. 
Eng
University of  
British Columbia
Canadian Institutes of Health  
Research (peer-reviewed grants 
related to stroke rehabilitation)*
None
None
None
None
None
None
Beth Fisher
University of  
Southern California
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Richard  
L. Harvey
Rehabilitation 
Institute of Chicago
Nexstim Corporation*
None
None
None
None
St. Jude Medical*;  
Nexstim Corporation†
None
Catherine  
E. Lang
Washington  
University  
School of  
Medicine  
(St. Louis)
NIH (grant to test interventions  
for individuals with stroke)†;  
NIH (coinvestigator on grant 
investigating brain connectivity  
after stroke)*; Barnes Jewish  
Hospital Foundation*; NIH 
(coinvestigator on grant  
to investigate postacute  
rehabilitation for general  
medical population)*
None
None
None
None
Neurolutions, Inc*; 
Rehabilitation Institute of 
Chicago’s NIDRR National 
Center for Rehabilitation 
Robotics*; Centers of 
Excellence in Stroke 
Collaborative Research  
for Regeneration,  
Resilience, and Secondary 
Prevention*; American 
Heart/American Stroke 
Association*;  
Bugher Foundation*
Royalties for 
book, AOTA 
Press Inc*
Disclosures
  
Technology for monitoring activity and participation
   
Accelerometers,  
step activity monitors,  
pedometers
Numerous commercially available options; issues to consider when 
purchasing: cost, expected wear and tear, accompanying software, ease 
of use, wearing comfort; pedometers are the most economic option but 
need to be checked for ability to register steps of individuals with slow 
walking speeds
<5 to don/doff; 
additional  
processing time
7, 294, 321–328, 350
ADL indicates activity of daily living; LE, lower extremity; and UE, upper extremity.
*Note that it is recommended that clinicians select a single measure for each construct; it is often unnecessary to use >1 measure.
†Generally tested on 5- or 10-m walkways.
Appendix 2. Continued
Construct/Measure
Comments
Approximate Time  
to Administer, min
References for  
Further Information
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e145
Marilyn 
MacKay-
Lyons
Dalhousie  
University School  
of Physiotherapy
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Kenneth J. 
Ottenbacher
University of Texas  
at Galveston
NIH (principal  
investigator)*; NIDILRR  
(principal investigator)*
None
None
None
None
None
None
Sue Pugh
Johns Hopkins 
Bayview Medical 
Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Mathew J. 
Reeves
Michigan State 
University
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Lorie G. 
Richards
University of Utah
NIH (R21- principal  
investigator of pending grand to  
run a small clinical trial of sildenafil  
in stroke rehabilitation)†; NIH  
(RO1 coinvestigator on grant to 
develop magnetic resonance  
imaging methods to predict  
who benefits from motor  
rehabilitation after stroke)*
None
None
None
None
Medbridge, Inc.*
None
William 
Stiers
Johns Hopkins 
University School  
of Medicine
None
None
National 
Stroke 
Association*
None
None
None
None
Richard D. 
Zorowitz
Medstar National 
Rehabilitation 
Network
Nexstim*; SPR Therapeutics*
None
None
None
None
Allergan, Inc.*; Avanir 
Pharmaceuticals*
None
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the 
Disclosure Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives 
$10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, 
or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
Writing Group Disclosures Continued
Writing 
Group 
Member
Employment
Research Grant
Other  
Research  
Support
Speakers’  
Bureau/ 
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/ 
Advisory Board
Other
Reviewer Disclosures
Reviewer
Employment
Research Grant
Other  
Research  
Support
Speakers’  
Bureau/ 
Honoraria
Expert  
Witness
Ownership  
Interest
Consultant/ 
Advisory  
Board
Other
Wuwei Feng
Medical University  
of South Carolina
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Walter N. 
Kernan
Yale University School  
of Medicine
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Barbara J. Lutz
University of North  
Carolina–Wilmington
PCORI (consultant on a  
PCORI grant comparing  
outcomes for stroke patients
receiving care from an  
inpatient rehabilitation  
hospital and subacute care)*
None
None
None
None
None
None
Stephen Page
Ohio State University  
Medical Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Elliot J. Roth
Northwestern University  
Feinberg School of Medicine
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure 
Questionnaire, which all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or more during 
any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more 
of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e146  Stroke  June 2016
References
 1. Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, Arnett DK, Blaha MJ, Cushman 
M, de Ferranti S, Després JP, Fullerton HJ, Howard VJ, Huffman MD, 
Judd SE, Kissela BM, Lackland DT, Lichtman JH, Lisabeth LD, Liu 
S, Mackey RH, Matchar DB, McGuire DK, Mohler ER 3rd, Moy CS, 
Muntner P, Mussolino ME, Nasir K, Neumar RW, Nichol G, Palaniappan 
L, Pandey DK, Reeves MJ, Rodriguez CJ, Sorlie PD, Stein J, Towfighi 
A, Turan TN, Virani SS, Willey JZ, Woo D, Yeh RW, Turner MB; on 
behalf of the American Heart Association Statistics Committee and 
Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Heart disease and stroke statis-
tics—2015 update: a report from the American Heart Association [pub-
lished corrections appear in Circulation. 2015;131:e535 and Circulation. 
2016;133:e417]. Circulation. 2015;131:e29–e322. doi: 10.1161/CIR. 
0000000000000152.
 2. Buntin MB, Colla CH, Deb P, Sood N, Escarce JJ. Medicare spending 
and outcomes after postacute care for stroke and hip fracture. Med Care. 
2010;48:776–784. doi: 10.1097/MLR.0b013e3181e359df.
 3. World Health Organization. ICF: International Classification of 
Functioning, Disability and Health. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health 
Organization; 2011.
 4. Management of Stroke Rehabilitation Working Group. Management of 
Stroke Rehabilitation. Washington, DC: Veterans Affairs/Department of 
Defense; 2010. 
 4a. American Heart Association. Stroke statements & guidelines. http://pro-
fessional.heart.org/professional/GuidelinesStatements/UCM_316885_
Guidelines-Statements.jsp. Accessed March 5, 2016.
 5. Mayo NE, Fellows LK, Scott SC, Cameron J, Wood-Dauphinee S. 
A longitudinal view of apathy and its impact after stroke. Stroke. 
2009;40:3299–3307. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.554410.
 6. Duncan F, Kutlubaev MA, Dennis MS, Greig C, Mead GE. 
Fatigue after stroke: a systematic review of associations with 
impaired physical fitness. Int J Stroke. 2012;7:157–162. doi: 
10.1111/j.1747-4949.2011.00741.x.
 7. Gebruers N, Vanroy C, Truijen S, Engelborghs S, De Deyn PP. 
Monitoring of physical activity after stroke: a systematic review of accel-
erometry-based measures. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2010;91:288–297. 
doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2009.10.025.
 8. Lincoln NB, Brinkmann N, Cunningham S, Dejaeger E, De Weerdt 
W, Jenni W, Mahdzir A, Putman K, Schupp W, Schuback B, De Wit L. 
Anxiety and depression after stroke: a 5 year follow-up. Disabil Rehabil. 
2013;35:140–145. doi: 10.3109/09638288.2012.691939.
 9. Gadidi V, Katz-Leurer M, Carmeli E, Bornstein NM. Long-term out-
come poststroke: predictors of activity limitation and participation 
restriction. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2011;92:1802–1808. doi: 10.1016/j.
apmr.2011.06.014.
 10. National Quality Forum. Measurement Framework: Evaluation 
Efficiency Across Patient-Focused Episodes of Care. Washington, DC: 
National Quality Forum; 2009.
 11. Miller EL, Murray L, Richards L, Zorowitz RD, Bakas T, Clark P, 
Billinger SA; on behalf of the American Heart Association Council on 
Cardiovascular Nursing and the Stroke Council. Comprehensive over-
view of nursing and interdisciplinary rehabilitation care of the stroke 
patient: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. 
Stroke. 2010;41:2402–2448. doi: 10.1161/STR.0b013e3181e7512b.
 12. Prvu Bettger JA, Kaltenbach L, Reeves MJ, Smith EE, Fonarow GC, 
Schwamm LH, Peterson ED. Assessing stroke patients for rehabilita-
tion during the acute hospitalization: findings from the Get With The 
Guidelines-Stroke program. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2013;94:38–45. 
doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2012.06.029.
 13. Buntin MB. Access to postacute rehabilitation. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
2007;88:1488–1493. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2007.07.023.
 14. MedPAC. Healthcare Spending and the Medicare Program: A Data Book. 
Washington, DC: Medicare Payment Advisory Commission; 2008.
 15. Liu K BC, Wissoker D, Maxwell S, Haley J, Long S. Long-term care 
hospitals under Medicare: facility-level characteristics. Health Care 
Financ Rev. 2001;23:1–8.
 16. Early Supported Discharge Trialists. Services for reducing duration of 
hospital care for acute stroke patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2005:CD000443.
 17. Langhorne P, Taylor G, Murray G, Dennis M, Anderson C, Bautz-
Holter E, Dey P, Indredavik B, Mayo N, Power M, Rodgers H, Ronning 
OM, Rudd A, Suwanwela N, Widen-Holmqvist L, Wolfe C. Early 
supported discharge services for stroke patients: a meta-analysis of 
individual patients’ data. Lancet. 2005;365:501–506. doi: 10.1016/
S0140-6736(05)17868-4.
 18. Langhorne P, Holmqvist LW; Early Supported Discharge Trialists. 
Early supported discharge after stroke [published correction appears in 
J Rehabil Med. 2007;39:269]. J Rehabil Med. 2007;39:103–108. doi: 
10.2340/16501977-0042.
 19. Olson DM, Bettger JP, Alexander KP, Kendrick AS, Irvine JR, Wing L, 
Coeytaux RR, Dolor RJ, Duncan PW, Graffagnino C. Transition of care 
for acute stroke and myocardial infarction patients: from hospitalization 
to rehabilitation, recovery, and secondary prevention. Evid Rep Technol 
Assess (Full Rep). 2011:1–197.
 20. Rousseaux M, Daveluy W, Kozlowski R. Value and efficacy of early 
supported discharge from stroke units. Ann Phys Rehabil Med. 
2009;52:224–233.
 21. Brady BK, McGahan L, Skidmore B. Systematic review of economic 
evidence on stroke rehabilitation services. Int J Technol Assess Health 
Care. 2005;21:15–21.
 22. Fisher RJ, Gaynor C, Kerr M, Langhorne P, Anderson C, Bautz-Holter 
E, Indredavik B, Mayo NE, Power M, Rodgers H, Rønning OM, 
Widén Holmqvist L, Wolfe CD, Walker MF. A consensus on stroke: 
early supported discharge. Stroke. 2011;42:1392–1397. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.110.606285.
 23. Buntin MB, Escarce JJ, Hoverman C, Paddock SM, Totten M, Wynn 
BO. Effects of Payment Changes on Trends in Access to Post-Acute 
Care. Baltimore, MD: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, US 
Department of Health and Human Services; 2005. TR-259-CMS.
 24. Kramer A, Holthaus D, Goodrish G, Epstein A. A Study of Stroke Post-
Acute Care Costs and Outcomes: Final Report. Washington. DC: US 
Department of Health and Human Services; 2006.
 25. Berg K, Intrator O. Postacute care following stroke or hip fracture: single 
services and combinations used by Medicare beneficiaries (1987–1992). 
J Aging Health. 1999;11:27–48.
 26. Buntin MB, Colla CH, Escarce JJ. Effects of payment changes on 
trends in post-acute care. Health Serv Res. 2009;44:1188–1210. doi: 
10.1111/j.1475-6773.2009.00968.x.
 27. Segal M, Pedersen AL, Freeman K, Fast A. Medicare’s new restrictions 
on rehabilitation admissions: impact on the elderly. Am J Phys Med 
Rehabil. 2008;87:872–882. doi: 10.1097/PHM.0b013e31818a67b3.
 28. Gage B, Morley M, Spain P, Ingber M. Examining Post Acute Care 
Relationships in an Integrated Hospital System. Waltham, PA: US 
Department of Health and Human Services; 2009.
 29. Kane RL, Lin WC, Blewett LA. Geographic variation in the use of post-
acute care. Health Serv Res. 2002;37:667–682.
 30. Buntin MB, Garten AD, Paddock S, Saliba D, Totten M, Escarce JJ. How 
much is postacute care use affected by its availability? Health Serv Res. 
2005;40:413–434. doi: 10.1111/j.1475-6773.2005.00365.x.
 31. Liu K, Wissoker D, Rimes C. Determinants and costs of Medicare post-
acute care provided by SNFs and HHAs. Inquiry. 1998;35:49–61.
 32. Report to Congress: Variations and Innovation in Medicare. Washington, 
DC: Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC); 2003.
 33. Report to Congress: Medicare Payment Policy. Washington, DC: 
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC); 2003.
 34. Blewett LA, Kane RL, Finch M. Hospital ownership of post-acute 
care: does it increase access to post-acute care services? Inquiry. 
1995–1996;32:457–467.
 35. Bronskill SE, Normand SL, McNeil BJ. Post-acute service use follow-
ing acute myocardial infarction in the elderly. Health Care Financ Rev. 
2002;24:77–93.
 36. Ellis C, Breland HL, Egede LE. Racial/ethnic differences in utilization 
of post-stroke rehabilitation services: a systematic review. Ethn Dis. 
2008;18:365–372.
 37. Finlayson M. Changes predicting long-term care use among the oldest-
old. Gerontologist. 2002;42:443–453.
 38. Shatto A. Comparing Medicare beneficiaries, by type of post-acute care 
received: 1999. Health Care Financ Rev. 2002;24:137–142.
 39. Deutsch A, Granger CV, Heinemann AW, Fiedler RC, DeJong G, Kane 
RL, Ottenbacher KJ, Naughton JP, Trevisan M. Poststroke rehabilita-
tion: outcomes and reimbursement of inpatient rehabilitation facilities 
and subacute rehabilitation programs. Stroke. 2006;37:1477–1482. doi: 
10.1161/01.STR.0000221172.99375.5a.
 40. Kramer AM, Steiner JF, Schlenker RE, Eilertsen TB, Hrincevich CA, 
Tropea DA, Ahmad LA, Eckhoff DG. Outcomes and costs after hip 
fracture and stroke: a comparison of rehabilitation settings. JAMA. 
1997;277:396–404.
 41. Kane RL, Chen Q, Finch M, Blewett L, Burns R, Moskowitz M. 
Functional outcomes of posthospital care for stroke and hip fracture 
patients under Medicare. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1998;46:1525–1533.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e147
 42. Keith RA, Wilson DB, Gutierrez P. Acute and subacute rehabilitation for 
stroke: a comparison. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 1995;76:495–500.
 43. Prvu Bettger J, Liang L, Xian Y, Peterson ED, Bushnell C, Duncan PW, 
Federspiel JJ, Stein J, Montalvo C, Lutz BJ, Hoenig H, Schwamm 
LH, Wu J, Stafford J, Thomas L. Inpatient rehabilitation facil-
ity care reduces the likelihood of death and re-hospitalization after 
stroke compared with skilled nursing facility care [abstract]. Stroke. 
2015;46:A146.
 44. Kane RL, Chen Q, Blewett LA, Sangl J. Do rehabilitative nursing homes 
improve the outcomes of care? J Am Geriatr Soc. 1996;44:545–554.
 45. Wang H, Sandel ME, Terdiman J, Armstrong MA, Klatsky A, Camicia 
M, Sidney S. Postacute care and ischemic stroke mortality: findings 
from an integrated health care system in northern California. PM R. 
2011;3:686–694. doi: 10.1016/j.pmrj.2011.04.028.
 46. Petri H, Urquhart J. Channeling bias in the interpretation of drug effects. 
Stat Med. 1991;10:577–581.
 47. Stroke Unit Trialists’ Collaboration. Organised inpatient (stroke unit) 
care for stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007:CD000197.
 48. Kalra L, Langhorne P. Facilitating recovery: evidence for organized stroke 
care. J Rehabil Med. 2007;39:97–102. doi: 10.2340/16501977-0043.
 49. Maulden SA, Gassaway J, Horn SD, Smout RJ, DeJong G. Timing 
of initiation of rehabilitation after stroke. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
2005;86(suppl 2):S34–S40. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2005.08.119.
 50. Prvu Bettger JA, Stineman MG. Effectiveness of multidisciplinary 
rehabilitation services in postacute care: state-of-the-science: a 
review. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2007;88:1526–1534. doi: 10.1016/j.
apmr.2007.06.768.
 51. Duncan PW, Sullivan KJ, Behrman AL, Azen SP, Wu SS, Nadeau 
SE, Dobkin BH, Rose DK, Tilson JK, Cen S, Hayden SK; LEAPS 
Investigative Team. Body-weight-supported treadmill rehabilita-
tion after stroke. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:2026–2036. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMoa1010790.
 52. Wolf SL, Winstein CJ, Miller JP, Taub E, Uswatte G, Morris D, Giuliani 
C, Light KE, Nichols-Larsen D; EXCITE Investigators. Effect of con-
straint-induced movement therapy on upper extremity function 3 to 9 
months after stroke: the EXCITE randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 
2006;296:2095–2104. doi: 10.1001/jama.296.17.2095.
 53. West T, Langhorne P, Bernhardt J, Chan DKY, Guidetti D. How do com-
prehensive and acute stroke units differ? A critical review. Int J Ther 
Rehabil. 2013;20:41–53.
 54. Hakkennes SJ, Brock K, Hill KD. Selection for inpatient rehabilitation 
after acute stroke: a systematic review of the literature. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil. 2011;92:2057–2070. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2011.07.189.
 55. Tistad M, Ytterberg C, Sjöstrand C, Holmqvist LW, von Koch L. 
Shorter length of stay in the stroke unit: comparison between the 
1990s and 2000s. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2012;19:172–181. doi: 10.1310/
tsr1902-172.
 56. Rinere O’Brien S. Trends in inpatient rehabilitation stroke outcomes 
before and after advent of the prospective payment system: a sys-
tematic review. J Neurol Phys Ther. 2010;34:17–23. doi: 10.1097/
NPT.0b013e3181cfd3ac.
 57. Bernhardt J, Thuy MN, Collier JM, Legg LA. Very early versus delayed 
mobilisation after stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009:CD006187. 
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006187.pub2.
 58. AVERT Trial Collaboration Group, Bernhardt J, Langhorne P, Lindley 
RI, Thrift AG, Ellery F, Collier J, Churilov L, Moodie M, Dewey H, 
Donnan G. Efficacy and safety of very early mobilisation within 24 h of 
stroke onset (AVERT): a randomised controlled trial [published correc-
tion appears in Lancet. 2015;386:30]. Lancet. 2015;386:46–55.
 59. Chan L, Sandel ME, Jette AM, Appelman J, Brandt DE, Cheng P, 
Teselle M, Delmonico R, Terdiman JF, Rasch EK. Does postacute care 
site matter? A longitudinal study assessing functional recovery after 
a stroke. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2013;94:622–629. doi: 10.1016/j.
apmr.2012.09.033.
 60. Wang H, Camicia M, Terdiman J, Mannava MK, Sidney S, Sandel 
ME. Daily treatment time and functional gains of stroke patients dur-
ing inpatient rehabilitation. PM R. 2013;5:122–128. doi: 10.1016/j.
pmrj.2012.08.013.
 61. Zhuangl LX, Xu SF, D’Adamo CR, Jia C, He J, Han DX, Lao LX. An 
effectiveness study comparing acupuncture, physiotherapy, and their 
combination in poststroke rehabilitation: a multicentered, randomized, 
controlled clinical trial. Altern Ther Health Med. 2012;18:8–14.
 62. van Nes IJ, Latour H, Schils F, Meijer R, van Kuijk A, Geurts AC. 
Long-term effects of 6-week whole-body vibration on balance recov-
ery and activities of daily living in the postacute phase of stroke: 
a randomized, controlled trial. Stroke. 2006;37:2331–2335. doi: 
10.1161/01.STR.0000236494.62957.f3.
 63. Pressure Ulcer Prevention and Treatment Protocol: Health Care Protocol. 
Bloomington, MN; Institute for Clinical Systems Improvement (ICSI); 
2012.
 64. Deleted in proof.
 65. Malhotra S, Pandyan AD, Rosewilliam S, Roffe C, Hermens H. 
Spasticity and contractures at the wrist after stroke: time course of devel-
opment and their association with functional recovery of the upper limb. 
Clin Rehabil. 2011;25:184–191. doi: 10.1177/0269215510381620.
 66. Sackley C, Brittle N, Patel S, Ellins J, Scott M, Wright C, Dewey ME. The 
prevalence of joint contractures, pressure sores, painful shoulder, other 
pain, falls, and depression in the year after a severely disabling stroke. 
Stroke. 2008;39:3329–3334. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.518563.
 67. Ada L, O’Dwyer N, O’Neill E. Relation between spasticity, weak-
ness and contracture of the elbow flexors and upper limb activity after 
stroke: an observational study. Disabil Rehabil. 2006;28:891–897. doi: 
10.1080/09638280500535165.
 68. Harvey L, de Jong I, Goehl G, Mardwedel S. Twelve weeks of nightly 
stretch does not reduce thumb web-space contractures in people with a 
neurological condition: a randomised controlled trial. Aust J Physiother. 
2006;52:251–258.
 69. Lannin NA, Cusick A, McCluskey A, Herbert RD. Effects of splinting 
on wrist contracture after stroke: a randomized controlled trial. Stroke. 
2007;38:111–116. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000251722.77088.12.
 70. National Clinical Guideline for Stroke. 3rd ed. London, UK: Royal 
College of Physicians Intercollegiate Stroke Working Party; 2008.
 71. Mayer NH, Harvey RL. Use of a resting hand orthosis for the hemi-
paretic hand after stroke. PM R. 2014;6:188–195. doi: 10.1016/j.
pmrj.2014.01.012.
 72. Hesse S, Mach H, Fröhlich S, Behrend S, Werner C, Melzer I. An 
early botulinum toxin A treatment in subacute stroke patients may 
prevent a disabling finger flexor stiffness six months later: a ran-
domized controlled trial. Clin Rehabil. 2012;26:237–245. doi: 
10.1177/0269215511421355.
 73. Ada L, Goddard E, McCully J, Stavrinos T, Bampton J. Thirty minutes 
of positioning reduces the development of shoulder external rotation 
contracture after stroke: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil. 2005;86:230–234. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2004.02.031.
 74. de Jong LD, Nieuwboer A, Aufdemkampe G. Contracture preventive 
positioning of the hemiplegic arm in subacute stroke patients: a pilot ran-
domized controlled trial [published correction appears in Clin Rehabil. 
2010;24:767]. Clin Rehabil. 2006;20:656–667.
 75. Basaran A, Emre U, Karadavut KI, Balbaloglu O, Bulmus N. Hand 
splinting for poststroke spasticity: a randomized controlled trial. Top 
Stroke Rehabil. 2012;19:329–337. doi: 10.1310/tsr1904-329.
 76. Tyson SF, Kent RM. The effect of upper limb orthotics after stroke: a 
systematic review. NeuroRehabilitation. 2011;28:29–36. doi: 10.3233/
NRE-2011-0629.
 77. Namdari S, Horneff JG, Baldwin K, Keenan MA. Muscle releases 
to improve passive motion and relieve pain in patients with spastic 
hemiplegia and elbow flexion contractures. J Shoulder Elbow Surg. 
2012;21:1357–1362. doi: 10.1016/j.jse.2011.09.029.
 78. Robinson W, Smith R, Aung O, Ada L. No difference between wearing 
a night splint and standing on a tilt table in preventing ankle contrac-
ture early after stroke: a randomized trial. Australian J Physiotherapy. 
2008;54:33–38.
 79. Kelly J, Rudd A, Lewis R, Hunt BJ. Venous thromboembolism after 
acute stroke. Stroke. 2001;32:262–267.
 80. Lansberg MG, O’Donnell MJ, Khatri P, Lang ES, Nguyen-Huynh MN, 
Schwartz NE, Sonnenberg FA, Schulman S, Vandvik PO, Spencer FA, 
Alonso-Coello P, Guyatt GH, Akl EA; American College of Chest 
Physicians. Antithrombotic and thrombolytic therapy for ischemic 
stroke: Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th 
ed: American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Chest. 2012;141(suppl):e601S–e636S. doi: 10.1378/
chest.11-2302.
 81. Kamphuisen PW, Agnelli G. What is the optimal pharmacological 
prophylaxis for the prevention of deep-vein thrombosis and pulmo-
nary embolism in patients with acute ischemic stroke? Thromb Res. 
2007;119:265–274. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2006.03.010.
 82. Shorr AF, Jackson WL, Sherner JH, Moores LK. Differences between 
low-molecular-weight and unfractionated heparin for venous thrombo-
embolism prevention following ischemic stroke: a metaanalysis. Chest. 
2008;133:149–155. doi: 10.1378/chest.07-1826.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e148  Stroke  June 2016
 83. Sandercock PA, Counsell C, Tseng MC. Low-molecular-weight heparins 
or heparinoids versus standard unfractionated heparin for acute isch-
aemic stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008:CD000119.
 84. McGarry LJ, Thompson D, Weinstein MC, Goldhaber SZ. Cost effec-
tiveness of thromboprophylaxis with a low-molecular-weight heparin 
versus unfractionated heparin in acutely ill medical inpatients. Am J 
Manag Care. 2004;10:632–642.
 85. Naccarato M, Chiodo Grandi F, Dennis M, Sandercock PA. Physical 
methods for preventing deep vein thrombosis in stroke. Cochrane 
Database 
Syst 
Rev. 
2010:CD001922. 
doi: 
10.1002/14651858.
CD001922.pub3.
 86. CLOTS Trials Collaboration, Dennis M, Sandercock PA, Reid J, Graham 
C, Murray G, Venables G, Rudd A, Bowler G. Effectiveness of thigh-
length graduated compression stockings to reduce the risk of deep vein 
thrombosis after stroke (CLOTS trial 1): a multicentre, randomised con-
trolled trial. Lancet. 2009;373:1958–1965.
 87. Roderick P, Ferris G, Wilson K, Halls H, Jackson D, Collins R, Baigent 
C. Towards evidence-based guidelines for the prevention of venous 
thromboembolism: systematic reviews of mechanical methods, oral anti-
coagulation, dextran and regional anaesthesia as thromboprophylaxis. 
Health Technol Assess. 2005;9:iii-iv, ix-x, 1–78.
 88. Gould MK, Garcia DA, Wren SM, Karanicolas PJ, Arcelus JI, Heit JA, 
Samama CM; American College of Chest Physicians. Prevention of 
VTE in nonorthopedic surgical patients: Antithrombotic Therapy and 
Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians 
Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines [published correction 
appears in Chest. 2012;141:1369]. Chest. 2012;141(suppl):e227S–
e277S. doi: 10.1378/chest.11-2297.
 89. Boeer A, Voth E, Henze T, Prange HW. Early heparin therapy in patients 
with spontaneous intracerebral haemorrhage. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry. 1991;54:466–467.
 90. Thomas LH, Cross S, Barrett J, French B, Leathley M, Sutton CJ, 
Watkins C. Treatment of urinary incontinence after stroke in adults. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008:CD004462. doi: 10.1002/14651858.
CD004462.pub3.
 91. Kovindha A, Wattanapan P, Dejpratham P, Permsirivanich W, 
Kuptniratsaikul V. Prevalence of incontinence in patients after stroke 
during rehabilitation: a multi-centre study. J Rehabil Med. 2009;41:489–
491. doi: 10.2340/16501977-0354.
 92. Pettersen R, Saxby BK, Wyller TB. Poststroke urinary incontinence: 
one-year outcome and relationships with measures of attentiveness. 
J Am Geriatr Soc. 2007;55:1571–1577. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415. 
2007.01396.x.
 93. Pettersen R, Wyller TB. Prognostic significance of micturition distur-
bances after acute stroke. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2006;54:1878–1884. doi: 
10.1111/j.1532-5415.2006.00984.x.
 94. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Guidelines for prevention of 
catheter-associated urinary tract infections: CDC Guidelines. 2009. http://
www.cdc.gov/hicpac/cauti/001_cauti.html. Accessed March 5, 2016.
 95. Myint PK, Vowler SL, Redmayne O, Fulcher RA. Cognition, continence 
and transfer status at the time of discharge from an acute hospital set-
ting and their associations with an unfavourable discharge outcome after 
stroke. Gerontology. 2008;54:202–209. doi: 10.1159/000126491.
 96. National Institute of Health, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Disease. Fecal incontinence. 2013. http://www.digestive.
niddk.nih.gov/ddiseases/pubs/fecalincontinence/. Accessed July 13, 
2013.
 97. Lindgren I, Jönsson AC, Norrving B, Lindgren A. Shoulder pain after 
stroke: a prospective population-based study. Stroke. 2007;38:343–348. 
doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000254598.16739.4e.
 98. O’Donnell MJ, Diener HC, Sacco RL, Panju AA, Vinisko R, Yusuf 
S; PRoFESS Investigators. Chronic pain syndromes after ischemic 
stroke: PRoFESS trial. Stroke. 2013;44:1238–1243. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.111.671008.
 99. Chae J, Mascarenhas D, Yu DT, Kirsteins A, Elovic EP, Flanagan SR, 
Harvey RL, Zorowitz RD, Fang ZP. Poststroke shoulder pain: its rela-
tionship to motor impairment, activity limitation, and quality of life. Arch 
Phys Med Rehabil. 2007;88:298–301. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2006.12.007.
 
100. Paci M, Nannetti L, Taiti P, Baccini M, Rinaldi L. Shoulder subluxation 
after stroke: relationships with pain and motor recovery. Physiother Res 
Int. 2007;12:95–104.
 
101. Dromerick AW, Edwards DF, Kumar A. Hemiplegic shoulder pain 
syndrome: frequency and characteristics during inpatient stroke reha-
bilitation. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2008;89:1589–1593. doi: 10.1016/j.
apmr.2007.10.051.
 
102. Lindgren I, Lexell J, Jönsson AC, Brogårdh C. Left-sided hemiparesis, 
pain frequency, and decreased passive shoulder range of abduction are 
predictors of long-lasting poststroke shoulder pain. PM R. 2012;4:561–
568. doi: 10.1016/j.pmrj.2012.04.007.
 
103. Niessen MH, Veeger DH, Meskers CG, Koppe PA, Konijnenbelt MH, 
Janssen TW. Relationship among shoulder proprioception, kinematics, 
and pain after stroke. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2009;90:1557–1564. doi: 
10.1016/j.apmr.2009.04.004.
 
104. Rajaratnam BS, Venketasubramanian N, Kumar PV, Goh JC, Chan YH. 
Predictability of simple clinical tests to identify shoulder pain after 
stroke. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2007;88:1016–1021. doi: 10.1016/j.
apmr.2007.05.001.
 
105. Roosink M, Renzenbrink GJ, Buitenweg JR, Van Dongen RT, Geurts 
AC, IJzerman MJ. Persistent shoulder pain in the first 6 months after 
stroke: results of a prospective cohort study. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
2011;92:1139–1145. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2011.02.016.
 
106. Huang YC, Liang PJ, Pong YP, Leong CP, Tseng CH. Physical find-
ings and sonography of hemiplegic shoulder in patients after acute 
stroke during rehabilitation. J Rehabil Med. 2010;42:21–26. doi: 
10.2340/16501977-0488.
 
107. Pong YP, Wang LY, Wang L, Leong CP, Huang YC, Chen YK. 
Sonography of the shoulder in hemiplegic patients undergoing rehabili-
tation after a recent stroke. J Clin Ultrasound. 2009;37:199–205. doi: 
10.1002/jcu.20573.
 
108. Lee IS, Shin YB, Moon TY, Jeong YJ, Song JW, Kim DH. Sonography 
of patients with hemiplegic shoulder pain after stroke: correlation with 
motor recovery stage. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2009;192:W40–W44. doi: 
10.2214/AJR.07.3978.
 
109. Shah RR, Haghpanah S, Elovic EP, Flanagan SR, Behnegar A, Nguyen V, 
Page SJ, Fang ZP, Chae J. MRI findings in the painful poststroke shoulder. 
Stroke. 2008;39:1808–1813. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.502187.
 
110. Yi Y, Lee KJ, Kim W, Oh BM, Chung SG. Biomechanical proper-
ties of the glenohumeral joint capsule in hemiplegic shoulder pain. 
Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 2013;28:873–878. doi: 10.1016/j.
clinbiomech.2013.09.002.
 
111. Koog YH, Jin SS, Yoon K, Min BI. Interventions for hemiplegic shoulder 
pain: systematic review of randomised controlled trials. Disabil Rehabil. 
2010;32:282–291. doi: 10.3109/09638280903127685.
 
112. Roosink M, Renzenbrink GJ, Geurts AC, Ijzerman MJ. Towards a mech-
anism-based view on post-stroke shoulder pain: theoretical consider-
ations and clinical implications. NeuroRehabilitation. 2012;30:153–165. 
doi: 10.3233/NRE-2012-0739.
 
113. Jones AK, Brown CA. Post-stroke shoulder pain: nociceptive or neuro-
pathic? Pain. 2013;154:189. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2012.11.009.
 
114. Roosink M, Renzenbrink GJ, Geurts AC, Ijzerman MJ. RE: Underlying 
pathology and associated factors of hemiplegic shoulder pain. Am J Phys 
Med Rehabil. 2012;91:279–280. doi: 10.1097/PHM.0b013e3182412145.
 
115. Gamble GE, Barberan E, Laasch HU, Bowsher D, Tyrrell PJ, Jones AK. 
Poststroke shoulder pain: a prospective study of the association and risk 
factors in 152 patients from a consecutive cohort of 205 patients present-
ing with stroke. Eur J Pain. 2002;6:467–474.
 
116. Roosink M, Renzenbrink GJ, Buitenweg JR, van Dongen RT, Geurts AC, 
Ijzerman MJ. Somatosensory symptoms and signs and conditioned pain 
modulation in chronic post-stroke shoulder pain. J Pain. 2011;12:476–
485. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2010.10.009.
 
117. Zeilig G, Rivel M, Weingarden H, Gaidoukov E, Defrin R. Hemiplegic 
shoulder pain: evidence of a neuropathic origin. Pain. 2013;154:263–
271. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2012.10.026.
 
118. Soo Hoo J, Paul T, Chae J, Wilson RD. Central hypersensitivity in 
chronic hemiplegic shoulder pain. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 2013;92:1–9; 
quiz 10–13.
 
119. Roosink M, Buitenweg JR, Renzenbrink GJ, Geurts AC, Ijzerman MJ. 
Altered cortical somatosensory processing in chronic stroke: a relation-
ship with post-stroke shoulder pain. NeuroRehabilitation. 2011;28:331–
344. doi: 10.3233/NRE-2011-0661.
 
120. Management of Patients With Stroke: Rehabilitation, Prevention and 
Management of Complications, and Discharge Planning: A National 
Guideline. Edinburgh, Scotland: Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines 
Network; 2010.
 
121. Griffin A, Bernhardt J. Strapping the hemiplegic shoulder prevents 
development of pain during rehabilitation: a randomized controlled trial. 
Clin Rehabil. 2006;20:287–295.
 
122. Hanger HC, Whitewood P, Brown G, Ball MC, Harper J, Cox R, 
Sainsbury R. A randomized controlled trial of strapping to prevent post-
stroke shoulder pain. Clin Rehabil. 2000;14:370–380.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e149
 
123. Pandian JD, Kaur P, Arora R, Vishwambaran DK, Toor G, Mathangi 
S, Vijaya P, Uppal A, Kaur T, Arima H. Shoulder taping reduces injury 
and pain in stroke patients: randomized controlled trial. Neurology. 
2013;80:528–532. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318281550e.
 
124. Lee JA, Park SW, Hwang PW, Lim SM, Kook S, Choi KI, Kang 
KS. Acupuncture for shoulder pain after stroke: a systematic 
review. J Altern Complement Med. 2012;18:818–823. doi: 10.1089/
acm.2011.0457.
 
125. Price CI, Pandyan AD. Electrical stimulation for preventing and treating 
post-stroke shoulder pain: a systematic Cochrane review. Clin Rehabil. 
2001;15:5–19.
 
126. Church C, Price C, Pandyan AD, Huntley S, Curless R, Rodgers H. 
Randomized controlled trial to evaluate the effect of surface neuromus-
cular electrical stimulation to the shoulder after acute stroke. Stroke. 
2006;37:2995–3001. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000248969.78880.82.
 
127. Malhotra S, Rosewilliam S, Hermens H, Roffe C, Jones P, Pandyan 
AD. A randomized controlled trial of surface neuromuscular electri-
cal stimulation applied early after acute stroke: effects on wrist pain, 
spasticity and contractures. Clin Rehabil. 2013;27:579–590. doi: 
10.1177/0269215512464502.
 
128. Yu DT, Chae J, Walker ME, Hart RL, Petroski GF. Comparing stimula-
tion-induced pain during percutaneous (intramuscular) and transcutane-
ous neuromuscular electric stimulation for treating shoulder subluxation 
in hemiplegia. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2001;82:756–760. doi: 10.1053/
apmr.2001.23310.
 
129. Renzenbrink GJ, IJzerman MJ. Percutaneous neuromuscular elec-
trical stimulation (P-NMES) for treating shoulder pain in chronic 
hemiplegia: effects on shoulder pain and quality of life. Clin Rehabil. 
2004;18:359–365.
 
130. Yu DT, Chae J, Walker ME, Kirsteins A, Elovic EP, Flanagan SR, 
Harvey RL, Zorowitz RD, Frost FS, Grill JH, Feldstein M, Fang ZP. 
Intramuscular neuromuscular electric stimulation for poststroke shoulder 
pain: a multicenter randomized clinical trial. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
2004;85:695–704.
 
131. Chae J, Ng A, Yu DT, Kirsteins A, Elovic EP, Flanagan SR, Harvey 
RL, Zorowitz RD, Fang ZP. Intramuscular electrical stimulation for 
shoulder pain in hemiplegia: does time from stroke onset predict treat-
ment success? Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2007;21:561–567. doi: 
10.1177/1545968306298412.
 
132. Chae J, Yu DT, Walker ME, Kirsteins A, Elovic EP, Flanagan SR, Harvey 
RL, Zorowitz RD, Frost FS, Grill JH, Fang ZP. Intramuscular electri-
cal stimulation for hemiplegic shoulder pain: a 12-month follow-up of 
a multiple-center, randomized clinical trial. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 
2005;84:832–842.
 
133. Yu DT, Friedman AS, Rosenfeld EL. Electrical stimulation for treating 
chronic poststroke shoulder pain using a fully implanted microstimulator 
with internal battery. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 2010;89:423–428. doi: 
10.1097/PHM.0b013e3181d8d06f.
 
134. Chae J, Jedlicka L. Subacromial corticosteroid injection for poststroke 
shoulder pain: an exploratory prospective case series. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil. 2009;90:501–506. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2008.10.011.
 
135. Dekker JH, Wagenaar RC, Lankhorst GJ, de Jong BA. The painful hemi-
plegic shoulder: effects of intra-articular triamcinolone acetonide. Am J 
Phys Med Rehabil. 1997;76:43–48.
 
136. Lakse E, Gunduz B, Erhan B, Celik EC. The effect of local injections in 
hemiplegic shoulder pain: a prospective, randomized, controlled study. 
Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 2009;88:805–811; quiz 812-804, 851.
 
137. Snels IA, Beckerman H, Twisk JW, Dekker JH, De Koning P, Koppe 
PA, Lankhorst GJ, Bouter LM. Effect of triamcinolone acetonide injec-
tions on hemiplegic shoulder pain: a randomized clinical trial. Stroke. 
2000;31:2396–2401.
 
138. Rah UW, Yoon SH, Moon do J, Kwack KS, Hong JY, Lim YC, Joen B. 
Subacromial corticosteroid injection on poststroke hemiplegic shoulder 
pain: a randomized, triple-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil. 2012;93:949–956. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2012.02.002.
 
139. de Boer KS, Arwert HJ, de Groot JH, Meskers CG, Mishre AD, 
Arendzen JH. Shoulder pain and external rotation in spastic hemiplegia 
do not improve by injection of botulinum toxin A into the subscapular 
muscle. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2008;79:581–583. doi: 10.1136/
jnnp.2007.128371.
 
140. Yelnik AP, Colle FM, Bonan IV, Vicaut E. Treatment of shoulder pain in 
spastic hemiplegia by reducing spasticity of the subscapular muscle: a 
randomised, double blind, placebo controlled study of botulinum toxin 
A. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2007;78:845–848. doi: 10.1136/
jnnp.2006.103341.
 
141. Kong KH, Neo JJ, Chua KS. A randomized controlled study of 
botulinum toxin A in the treatment of hemiplegic shoulder pain 
associated with spasticity. Clin Rehabil. 2007;21:28–35. doi: 
10.1177/0269215506072082.
 
142. Marciniak CM, Harvey RL, Gagnon CM, Duraski SA, Denby FA, 
McCarty S, Bravi LA, Polo KM, Fierstein KM. Does botulinum toxin 
type A decrease pain and lessen disability in hemiplegic survivors of 
stroke with shoulder pain and spasticity? A randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 2012;91:1007–1019. 
doi: 10.1097/PHM.0b013e31826ecb02.
 
143. Marco E, Duarte E, Vila J, Tejero M, Guillen A, Boza R, Escalada 
F, Espadaler JM. Is botulinum toxin type A effective in the treat-
ment of spastic shoulder pain in patients after stroke? A double-blind 
randomized clinical trial. J Rehabil Med. 2007;39:440–447. doi: 
10.2340/16501977-0066.
 
144. Lim JY, Koh JH, Paik NJ. Intramuscular botulinum toxin-A reduces 
hemiplegic shoulder pain: a randomized, double-blind, comparative study 
versus intraarticular triamcinolone acetonide. Stroke. 2008;39:126–131. 
doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.484048.
 
145. Adey-Wakeling Z, Crotty M, Shanahan EM. Suprascapular nerve block 
for shoulder pain in the first year after stroke: a randomized controlled trial. 
Stroke. 2013;44:3136–3141. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.113.002471.
 
146. Allen ZA, Shanahan EM, Crotty M. Does suprascapular nerve block 
reduce shoulder pain following stroke: a double-blind randomised con-
trolled trial with masked outcome assessment. BMC Neurol. 2010;10:83. 
doi: 10.1186/1471-2377-10-83.
 
147. Yasar E, Vural D, Safaz I, Balaban B, Yilmaz B, Goktepe AS, Alaca 
R. Which treatment approach is better for hemiplegic shoulder pain in 
stroke patients: intra-articular steroid or suprascapular nerve block? 
A randomized controlled trial. Clin Rehabil. 2011;25:60–68. doi: 
10.1177/0269215510380827.
 
148. Namdari S, Alosh H, Baldwin K, Mehta S, Keenan MA. Shoulder tenot-
omies to improve passive motion and relieve pain in patients with spas-
tic hemiplegia after upper motor neuron injury. J Shoulder Elbow Surg. 
2011;20:802–806. doi: 10.1016/j.jse.2010.10.023.
 
149. Duncan PW, Zorowitz R, Bates B, Choi JY, Glasberg JJ, Graham GD, 
Katz RC, Lamberty K, Reker D. Management of adult stroke rehabilita-
tion care: a clinical practice guideline. Stroke. 2005;36:e100–e143. doi: 
10.1161/01.STR.0000180861.54180.FF.
 
150. Cassinari V, Pagni CA. Central Pain: A Neurological Survey. Cambridge, 
UK: Harvard University Press; 1969.
 
151. Klit H, Finnerup NB, Jensen TS. Central post-stroke pain: clinical 
characteristics, pathophysiology, and management. Lancet Neurol. 
2009;8:857–868. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(09)70176-0.
 
152. Andersen G, Vestergaard K, Ingeman-Nielsen M, Jensen TS. Incidence 
of central post-stroke pain. Pain. 1995;61:187–193.
 
153. Bowsher D. Pain after thalamic stroke: right diencephalic predominance 
and clinical features in 180 patients. Neurology. 1998;51:927; author 
reply 927–928.
 
154. Klit H, Finnerup NB, Andersen G, Jensen TS. Central poststroke pain: 
a population-based study. Pain. 2011;152:818–824. doi: 10.1016/j.
pain.2010.12.030.
 
155. Vestergaard K, Nielsen J, Andersen G, Ingeman-Nielsen M, Arendt-
Nielsen L, Jensen TS. Sensory abnormalities in consecutive, unselected 
patients with central post-stroke pain. Pain. 1995;61:177–186.
 
156. Pellicane A, Harvey RL. Central poststroke pain. In: Stein J, Harvey RL, 
Winstein CJ, Zorowitz RD, Wittenberg GF, eds. Stroke Recovery and 
Rehabilitation. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Demos Medical; 2014:249–266.
 
157. Jones RC 3rd, Backonja MM. Review of neuropathic pain screening and 
assessment tools. Curr Pain Headache Rep. 2013;17:363. doi: 10.1007/
s11916-013-0363-6.
 
158. Leijon G, Boivie J. Central post-stroke pain: a controlled trial of amitrip-
tyline and carbamazepine. Pain. 1989;36:27–36.
 
159. Vestergaard K, Andersen G, Gottrup H, Kristensen BT, Jensen TS. 
Lamotrigine for central poststroke pain: a randomized controlled trial. 
Neurology. 2001;56:184–190.
 
160. Kim JS, Bashford G, Murphy TK, Martin A, Dror V, Cheung R. Safety 
and efficacy of pregabalin in patients with central post-stroke pain. Pain. 
2011;152:1018–1023. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2010.12.023.
 
161. Vranken JH, Dijkgraaf MG, Kruis MR, van der Vegt MH, Hollmann 
MW, Heesen M. Pregabalin in patients with central neuropathic pain: 
a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of a flexible-dose 
regimen. Pain. 2008;136:150–157. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2007.06.033.
 
162. Holtom N. Gabapentin for treatment of thalamic pain syndrome. Palliat 
Med. 2000;14:167.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e150  Stroke  June 2016
 
163. Serpell MG; Neuropathic Pain Study Group. Gabapentin in neuropathic 
pain syndromes: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. 
Pain. 2002;99:557–566.
 
164. Agnew DC, Goldberg VD. A brief trial of phenytoin therapy for thalamic 
pain. Bull Los Angeles Neurol Soc. 1976;41:9–12.
 
165. Leijon G, Boivie J. Central post-stroke pain: the effect of high and low 
frequency TENS. Pain. 1989;38:187–191.
 
166. Katayama Y, Fukaya C, Yamamoto T. Poststroke pain control by 
chronic motor cortex stimulation: neurological characteristics predict-
ing a favorable response. J Neurosurg. 1998;89:585–591. doi: 10.3171/
jns.1998.89.4.0585.
 
167. Nguyen JP, Lefaucher JP, Le Guerinel C, Eizenbaum JF, Nakano N, 
Carpentier A, Brugières P, Pollin B, Rostaing S, Keravel Y. Motor cortex 
stimulation in the treatment of central and neuropathic pain. Arch Med 
Res. 2000;31:263–265.
 
168. Tsubokawa T, Katayama Y, Yamamoto T, Hirayama T, Koyama S. 
Chronic motor cortex stimulation for the treatment of central pain. Acta 
Neurochir Suppl (Wien). 1991;52:137–139.
 
169. Tsubokawa T, Katayama Y, Yamamoto T, Hirayama T, Koyama S. 
Chronic motor cortex stimulation in patients with thalamic pain. J 
Neurosurg. 1993;78:393–401. doi: 10.3171/jns.1993.78.3.0393.
 
170. Owen SL, Green AL, Stein JF, Aziz TZ. Deep brain stimulation for the 
alleviation of post-stroke neuropathic pain. Pain. 2006;120:202–206. 
doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2005.09.035.
 
171. Rasche D, Rinaldi PC, Young RF, Tronnier VM. Deep brain stimulation 
for the treatment of various chronic pain syndromes. Neurosurg Focus. 
2006;21:E8.
 
172. Gillespie LD, Robertson MC, Gillespie WJ, Sherrington C, Gates 
S, Clemson LM, Lamb SE. Interventions for preventing falls in 
older people living in the community. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2012;9:CD007146. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD007146.pub3. 
 
173. Ashburn A, Hyndman D, Pickering R, Yardley L, Harris S. Predicting 
people with stroke at risk of falls. Age Ageing. 2008;37:270–276. doi: 
10.1093/ageing/afn066.
 
174. Batchelor F, Hill K, Mackintosh S, Said C. What works in falls pre-
vention after stroke? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Stroke. 
2010;41:1715–1722. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.570390.
 
175. Tilson JK, Wu SS, Cen SY, Feng Q, Rose DR, Behrman AL, Azen 
SP, Duncan PW. Characterizing and identifying risk for falls in 
the LEAPS study: a randomized clinical trial of interventions to 
improve walking poststroke. Stroke. 2012;43:446–452. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.111.636258.
 
176. Truelsen 
T, 
Piechowski-Jóźwiak 
B, 
Bonita 
R, 
Mathers 
C, 
Bogousslavsky J, Boysen G. Stroke incidence and prevalence in 
Europe: a review of available data. Eur J Neurol. 2006;13:581–598. doi: 
10.1111/j.1468-1331.2006.01138.x.
 
177. Eng HS, Das S. Response to Commentary on Watt E, Murphy M, Pascoe 
E, Scanlon A & Gan S (2011) An evaluation of a structured learning 
programme as a component of the clinical practicum in final year bach-
elor of nursing programme: a pre-post test analysis. Journal of Clinical 
Nursing 20, 2286–2293. J Clin Nurs. 2012;21:297–298.
 
178. Andersson AG, Kamwendo K, Appelros P. Fear of falling in stroke 
patients: relationship with previous falls and functional char-
acteristics. Int J Rehabil Res. 2008;31:261–264. doi: 10.1097/
MRR.0b013e3282fba390.
 
179. Friedman SM, Munoz B, West SK, Rubin GS, Fried LP. Falls and fear 
of falling: which comes first? A longitudinal prediction model suggests 
strategies for primary and secondary prevention. J Am Geriatr Soc. 
2002;50:1329–1335.
 
180. Tinetti ME, Kumar C. The patient who falls: “It’s always a trade-off.” 
JAMA. 2010;303:258–266. doi: 10.1001/jama.2009.2024.
 
181. Tinetti ME, Speechley M, Ginter SF. Risk factors for falls among elderly 
persons living in the community. N Engl J Med. 1988;319:1701–1707. 
doi: 10.1056/NEJM198812293192604.
 
182. Weerdesteyn V, de Niet M, van Duijnhoven HJ, Geurts AC. Falls in indi-
viduals with stroke. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2008;45:1195–1213.
 
183. Hempel S, Newberry S, Wang Z, Booth M, Shanman R, Johnsen B, Shier 
V, Saliba D, Spector WD, Ganz DA. Hospital fall prevention: a system-
atic review of implementation, components, adherence, and effective-
ness. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2013;61:483–494. doi: 10.1111/jgs.12169.
 
184. Morse JM, Morse RM, Tylko SJ. Development of a scale to identify the 
fall-prone patient. Can J Aging. 1989;8:366–377.
 
185. Maeda N, Kato J, Shimada T. Predicting the probability for fall inci-
dence in stroke patients using the Berg Balance Scale. J Int Med Res. 
2009;37:697–704.
 
186. Batchelor FA, Hill KD, Mackintosh SF, Said CM, Whitehead CH. Effects 
of a multifactorial falls prevention program for people with stroke return-
ing home after rehabilitation: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Phys 
Med Rehabil. 2012;93:1648–1655. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2012.03.031.
 
187. Taylor-Piliae RE, Hoke TM, Hepworth JT, Latt LD, Najafi B, Coull BM. 
Effect of Tai Chi on physical function, fall rates and quality of life among 
older stroke survivors. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2014;95:816–824. doi: 
10.1016/j.apmr.2014.01.001.
 
188. Stuart M, Benvenuti F, Macko R, Taviani A, Segenni L, Mayer F, Sorkin 
JD, Stanhope SJ, Macellari V, Weinrich M. Community-based adaptive 
physical activity program for chronic stroke: feasibility, safety, and effi-
cacy of the Empoli model. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2009;23:726–
734. doi: 10.1177/1545968309332734.
 
189. Bladin CF, Alexandrov AV, Bellavance A, Bornstein N, Chambers B, 
Coté R, Lebrun L, Pirisi A, Norris JW. Seizures after stroke: a prospec-
tive multicenter study. Arch Neurol. 2000;57:1617–1622.
 
190. Richardson EP Jr, Dodge PR. Epilepsy in cerebral vascular disease; 
a study of the incidence and nature of seizures in 104 consecutive 
autopsy-proven cases of cerebral infarction and hemorrhage. Epilepsia. 
1954;3:49–74.
 
191. Awada A, Omojola MF, Obeid T. Late epileptic seizures after cerebral 
infarction. Acta Neurol Scand. 1999;99:265–268.
 
192. Adams HP Jr, del Zoppo G, Alberts MJ, Bhatt DL, Brass L, Furlan A, 
Grubb RL, Higashida RT, Jauch EC, Kidwell C, Lyden PD, Morgenstern 
LB, Qureshi AI, Rosenwasser RH, Scott PA, Wijdicks EF. Guidelines 
for the early management of adults with ischemic stroke: a guideline 
from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association 
Stroke Council, Clinical Cardiology Council, Cardiovascular Radiology 
and Intervention Council, and the Atherosclerotic Peripheral Vascular 
Disease and Quality of Care Outcomes in Research Interdisciplinary 
Working Groups [published corrections appear in Stroke. 2007;38:e38 
and Stroke. 2007;38:e96]. Stroke. 2007;38:1655–1711. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.107.181486.
 
193. Rumbach L, Sablot D, Berger E, Tatu L, Vuillier F, Moulin T. Status epi-
lepticus in stroke: report on a hospital-based stroke cohort. Neurology. 
2000;54:350–354.
 
194. McLean DE. Medical complications experienced by a cohort of stroke 
survivors during inpatient, tertiary-level stroke rehabilitation. Arch Phys 
Med Rehabil. 2004;85:466–469.
 
195. Cordonnier C, Hénon H, Derambure P, Pasquier F, Leys D. Influence 
of pre-existing dementia on the risk of post-stroke epileptic seizures. 
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2005;76:1649–1653. doi: 10.1136/
jnnp.2005.064535.
 
196. Fish DR, Miller DH, Roberts RC, Blackie JD, Gilliatt RW. The natural 
history of late-onset epilepsy secondary to vascular disease. Acta Neurol 
Scand. 1989;80:524–526.
 
197. Balami JS, Buchan AM. Complications of intracerebral haemorrhage. 
Lancet Neurol. 2012;11:101–118. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(11)70264-2.
 
198. Connolly ES Jr, Rabinstein AA, Carhuapoma JR, Derdeyn CP, Dion J, 
Higashida RT, Hoh BL, Kirkness CJ, Naidech AM, Ogilvy CS, Patel AB, 
Thompson BG, Vespa P; on behalf of the American Heart Association 
Stroke Council; Council on Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention; 
Council on Cardiovascular Nursing; Council on Cardiovascular Surgery 
and Anesthesia; Council on Clinical Cardiology. Guidelines for the 
management of aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage: a guideline 
for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/
American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2012;43:1711–1737. doi: 10.1161/
STR.0b013e3182587839.
 
199. Choi KS, Chun HJ, Yi HJ, Ko Y, Kim YS, Kim JM. Seizures and epi-
lepsy following aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage: incidence and 
risk factors. J Korean Neurosurg Soc. 2009;46:93–98. doi: 10.3340/
jkns.2009.46.2.93.
 
200. Naidech AM, Garg RK, Liebling S, Levasseur K, Macken MP, 
Schuele SU, Batjer HH. Anticonvulsant use and outcomes after intra-
cerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2009;40:3810–3815. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.109.559948.
 
201. Messé SR, Sansing LH, Cucchiara BL, Herman ST, Lyden PD, Kasner 
SE; CHANT Investigators. Prophylactic antiepileptic drug use is associ-
ated with poor outcome following ICH. Neurocrit Care. 2009;11:38–44. 
doi: 10.1007/s12028-009-9207-y.
 
202. Naidech AM, Kreiter KT, Janjua N, Ostapkovich N, Parra A, 
Commichau C, Connolly ES, Mayer SA, Fitzsimmons BF. Phenytoin 
exposure is associated with functional and cognitive disability after 
subarachnoid hemorrhage. Stroke. 2005;36:583–587. doi: 10.1161/01.
STR.0000141936.36596.1e.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e151
 
203. Goldstein LB. Common drugs may influence motor recovery after 
stroke: the Sygen In Acute Stroke Study Investigators. Neurology. 
1995;45:865–871.
 
204. Lazar RM, Fitzsimmons BF, Marshall RS, Mohr JP, Berman MF. 
Midazolam challenge reinduces neurological deficits after tran-
sient ischemic attack. Stroke. 2003;34:794–796. doi: 10.1161/01.
STR.0000056540.04159.F3.
 
205. Troisi E, Paolucci S, Silvestrini M, Matteis M, Vernieri F, Grasso 
MG, Caltagirone C. Prognostic factors in stroke rehabilitation: the 
possible role of pharmacological treatment. Acta Neurol Scand. 
2002;105:100–106.
 
206. Kernan WN, Ovbiagele B, Black HR, Bravata DM, Chimowitz MI, 
Ezekowitz MD, Fang MC, Fisher M, Furie KL, Heck DV, Johnston 
SC, Kasner SE, Kittner SJ, Mitchell PH, Rich MW, Richardson D, 
Schwamm LH, Wilson JA; on behalf of the American Heart Association 
Stroke Council, Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing, Council 
on Clinical Cardiology, and Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease. 
Guidelines for the prevention of stroke in patients with stroke and tran-
sient ischemic attack: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the 
American Heart Association/American Stroke Association [published 
correction appears in Stroke. 2015;46:e54]. Stroke. 2014;45:2160–2236. 
doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000024.
 
207. Wulsin L, Alwell K, Moomaw CJ, Lindsell CJ, Kleindorfer DO, 
Woo D, Flaherty ML, Khatri P, Adeoye O, Ferioli S, Broderick JP, 
Kissela BM. Comparison of two depression measures for predicting 
stroke outcomes. J Psychosom Res. 2012;72:175–179. doi: 10.1016/j.
jpsychores.2011.11.015.
 
208. Willey JZ, Disla N, Moon YP, Paik MC, Sacco RL, Boden-Albala 
B, Elkind MS, Wright CB. Early depressed mood after stroke 
predicts long-term disability: the Northern Manhattan Stroke 
Study (NOMASS). Stroke. 2010;41:1896–1900. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.110.583997.
 
209. Chen Y, Lu J, Wong KS, Mok VC, Ungvari GS, Tang WK. Health-related 
quality of life in the family caregivers of stroke survivors. Int J Rehabil 
Res. 2010;33:232–237. doi: 10.1097/MRR.0b013e328338b04b.
 
210. Hackett ML, Anderson CS. Predictors of depression after stroke: a sys-
tematic review of observational studies. Stroke. 2005;36:2296–2301. doi: 
10.1161/01.STR.0000183622.75135.a4.
 
211. Kim JH, Park EY. The factor structure of the Center for Epidemiologic 
Studies Depression Scale in stroke patients. Top Stroke Rehabil. 
2012;19:54–62. doi: 10.1310/tsr1901-54.
 
212. Lam SC, Lee LY, To KW. Depressive symptoms among community-
dwelling, post-stroke elders in Hong Kong. Int Nurs Rev. 2010;57:269–
273. doi: 10.1111/j.1466-7657.2009.00789.x.
 
213. Paolucci S. Epidemiology and treatment of post-stroke depression. 
Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2008;4:145–154.
 
214. Vickery CD, Evans CC, Sepehri A, Jabeen LN, Gayden M. Self-esteem 
stability and depressive symptoms in acute stroke rehabilitation: method-
ological and conceptual expansion. Rehabil Psychol. 2009;54:332–342. 
doi: 10.1037/a0016434.
 
215. Hackett ML, Pickles K. Part I: frequency of depression after stroke: an 
updated systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. 
Int J Stroke. 2014;9:1017–1025. doi: 10.1111/ijs.12357.
 
216. Paolucci S, Gandolfo C, Provinciali L, Torta R, Toso V; DESTRO 
Study Group. The Italian multicenter observational study on post-stroke 
depression (DESTRO). J Neurol. 2006;253:556–562. doi: 10.1007/
s00415-006-0058-6.
 
217. Hackett ML, Anderson CS, House AO. Management of depression 
after stroke: a systematic review of pharmacological therapies. Stroke. 
2005;36:1098–1103. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000162391.27991.9d.
 
218. Ried LD, Jia H, Cameon R, Feng H, Wang X, Tueth M. Does prestroke 
depression impact poststroke depression and treatment? Am J Geriatr 
Psychiatry. 2010;18:624–633. doi: 10.1097/JGP.0b013e3181ca822b.
 
219. Tenev VT, Robinson RG, Jorge RE. Is family history of depression a 
risk factor for poststroke depression? Meta-analysis. Am J Geriatr 
Psychiatry. 2009;17:276–280. doi: 10.1097/JGP.0b013e3181953b6e.
 
220. Snaphaan L, van der Werf S, Kanselaar K, de Leeuw FE. Post-stroke 
depressive symptoms are associated with post-stroke characteristics. 
Cerebrovasc Dis. 2009;28:551–557. doi: 10.1159/000247598.
 
221. Holloway RG, Arnold RM, Creutzfeldt CJ, Lewis EF, Lutz BJ, McCann 
RM, Rabinstein AA, Saposnik G, Sheth KN, Zahuranec DB, Zipfel 
GJ, Zorowitz RD; on behalf of the American Heart Association Stroke 
Council, Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing, and Council 
on Clinical Cardiology. Palliative and end-of-life care in stroke: a state-
ment for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/
American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2014;45:1887–1916. doi: 10.1161/
STR.0000000000000015.
 
222. Schmid AA, Kroenke K, Hendrie HC, Bakas T, Sutherland JM, Williams 
LS. Poststroke depression and treatment effects on functional outcomes. 
Neurology. 2011;76:1000–1005. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318210435e.
 
223. Chollet F, Acket B, Raposo N, Albucher JF, Loubinoux I, Pariente J. Use 
of antidepressant medications to improve outcomes after stroke. Curr 
Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2013;13:318. doi: 10.1007/s11910-012-0318-z.
 
224. Vuletić V, Sapina L, Lozert M, Lezaić Z, Morović S. Anxiety and 
depressive symptoms in acute ischemic stroke. Acta Clin Croat. 
2012;51:243–246.
 
225. Shimoda K, Robinson RG. Effects of anxiety disorder on impairment 
and recovery from stroke. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 1998;10:34–
40. doi: 10.1176/jnp.10.1.34.
 
226. Campbell Burton AC, Holmes J, Murray J, Gillespie D, Lightbody EC, 
Watkins CL, Knapp P. Interventions for treating anxiety after stroke. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011:CD008860. doi: 10.1002/14651858.
CD008860.pub2.
 
227. Hackett ML, Anderson CS, House A, Xia J. Interventions for treating 
depression after stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008:CD003437. 
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD003437.pub3.
 
228. de Man-van Ginkel JM, Gooskens F, Schuurmans MJ, Lindeman E, 
Hafsteinsdottir TB; Rehabilitation Guideline Stroke Working Group. 
A systematic review of therapeutic interventions for poststroke depres-
sion and the role of nurses. J Clin Nurs. 2010;19:3274–3290. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2702.2010.03402.x.
 
229. Gainotti G, Antonucci G, Marra C, Paolucci S. Relation between depres-
sion after stroke, antidepressant therapy, and functional recovery. J 
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2001;71:258–261.
 
230. Chemerinski E, Robinson RG, Kosier JT. Improved recovery in activi-
ties of daily living associated with remission of poststroke depression. 
Stroke. 2001;32:113–117.
 
231. Sigwalt AR, Budde H, Helmich I, Glaser V, Ghisoni K, Lanza S, Cadore EL, 
Lhullier FL, de Bem AF, Hohl A, de Matos FJ, de Oliveira PA, Prediger RD, 
Guglielmo LG, Latini A. Molecular aspects involved in swimming exercise 
training reducing anhedonia in a rat model of depression. Neuroscience. 
2011;192:661–674. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.05.075.
 
232. Kiecolt-Glaser JK, Glaser R. Depression and immune function: central 
pathways to morbidity and mortality. J Psychosom Res. 2002;53:873–876.
 
233. Woods JA, Lowder TW, Keylock KT. Can exercise training improve 
immune function in the aged? Ann N 
Y Acad Sci. 2002;959:117–127.
 
234. Mead GE, Morley W, Campbell P, Greig CA, McMurdo M, Lawlor DA. 
Exercise for depression. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009:CD004366. 
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD004366.pub4.
 
235. Sjösten N, Kivelä SL. The effects of physical exercise on depressive 
symptoms among the aged: a systematic review. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 
2006;21:410–418. doi: 10.1002/gps.1494.
 
236. Eng JJ, Reime B. Exercise for depressive symptoms in stroke patients: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Rehabil. 2014;28:731–739. 
doi: 10.1177/0269215514523631.
 
237. Saunders DH, Sanderson M, Brazzelli M, Greig CA, Mead GE. Physical 
fitness training for stroke patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2013;10:CD003316. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD003316.pub5.
 
238. Bergersen H, Frøslie KF, Stibrant Sunnerhagen K, Schanke AK. 
Anxiety, depression, and psychological well-being 2 to 5 years post-
stroke. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2010;19:364–369. doi: 10.1016/j.
jstrokecerebrovasdis.2009.06.005.
 
239. Karaiskos D, Tzavellas E, Spengos K, Vassilopoulou S, Paparrigopoulos 
T. Duloxetine versus citalopram and sertraline in the treatment of post-
stroke depression, anxiety, and fatigue. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 
2012;24:349–353. doi: 10.1176/appi.neuropsych.11110325.
 
240. Bhogal SK, Teasell R, Foley N, Speechley M. Heterocyclics and selec-
tive serotonin reuptake inhibitors in the treatment and prevention of 
poststroke depression. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2005;53:1051–1057. doi: 
10.1111/j.1532-5415.2005.53310.x.
 
241. Ried LD, Jia H, Feng H, Cameon R, Wang X, Tueth M, Wu SS. Selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitor treatment and depression are associated 
with poststroke mortality. Ann Pharmacother. 2011;45:888–897. doi: 
10.1345/aph.1P478.
 
242. Beaupre GS, Lew HL. Bone-density changes after stroke. Am J Phys Med 
Rehabil. 2006;85:464–472. doi: 10.1097/01.phm.0000214275.69286.7a.
 
243. Celik B, Ones K, Ince N. Body composition after stroke. Int J Rehabil 
Res. 2008;31:93–96. doi: 10.1097/MRR.0b013e3282f7521a.
 
244. Pluskiewicz W. Skeletal consequences in patients after stroke. 
Endokrynol Pol. 2011;62:48–50.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e152  Stroke  June 2016
 
245. Eng JJ, Pang MY, Ashe MC. Balance, falls, and bone health: role 
of exercise in reducing fracture risk after stroke. J Rehabil Res Dev. 
2008;45:297–313.
 
246. Jørgensen L, Jacobsen BK, Wilsgaard T, Magnus JH. Walking after 
stroke: does it matter? Changes in bone mineral density within the first 12 
months after stroke: a longitudinal study. Osteoporos Int. 2000;11:381–
387. doi: 10.1007/s001980070103.
 
247. Pang MY, Eng JJ, McKay HA, Dawson AS. Reduced hip bone mineral 
density is related to physical fitness and leg lean mass in ambulatory indi-
viduals with chronic stroke. Osteoporos Int. 2005;16:1769–1779. doi: 
10.1007/s00198-005-1925-1.
 
248. Pang MY, Eng JJ. Muscle strength is a determinant of bone mineral con-
tent in the hemiparetic upper extremity: implications for stroke rehabili-
tation. Bone. 2005;37:103–111. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2005.03.009.
 
249. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for osteoporosis: 
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. 
Ann Intern Med. 2011;154:356–364. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-154- 
5-201103010-00307.
 
250. Marzolini S, McIlroy W, Tang A, Corbett D, Craven BC, Oh PI, Brooks 
D. Predictors of low bone mineral density of the stroke-affected hip 
among ambulatory individuals with chronic stroke. Osteoporos Int. 
2014;25:2631–2638. doi: 10.1007/s00198-014-2793-3.
 
251. Lin HL, Lin HC, Tseng YF, Liao HH, Worly JA, Pan CY, Hsu CY. Hip 
fracture after first-ever stroke: a population-based study. Acta Neurol 
Scand. 2015;131:158–163. doi: 10.1111/ane.12301.
 
252. Drake MT, Murad MH, Mauck KF, Lane MA, Undavalli C, Elraiyah 
T, Stuart LM, Prasad C, Shahrour A, Mullan RJ, Hazem A, Erwin PJ, 
Montori VM. Clinical review: risk factors for low bone mass-related frac-
tures in men: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab. 2012;97:1861–1870. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-3058.
 
253. Borschmann K. Exercise protects bone after stroke, or does it? A narra-
tive review of the evidence. Stroke Res Treat. 2012;2012:103697. doi: 
10.1155/2012/103697.
 
254. Borschmann K, Pang MY, Bernhardt J, Iuliano-Burns S. Stepping 
towards prevention of bone loss after stroke: a systematic review of the 
skeletal effects of physical activity after stroke. Int J Stroke. 2012;7:330–
335. doi: 10.1111/j.1747-4949.2011.00645.x.
 
255. Ryan AS, Ivey FM, Prior S, Li G, Hafer-Macko C. Skeletal muscle 
hypertrophy and muscle myostatin reduction after resistive train-
ing in stroke survivors. Stroke. 2011;42:416–420. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.110.602441.
 
256. Pang MY, Ashe MC, Eng JJ, McKay HA, Dawson AS. A 19-week 
exercise program for people with chronic stroke enhances bone 
geometry at the tibia: a peripheral quantitative computed tomog-
raphy study. Osteoporos Int. 2006;17:1615–1625. doi: 10.1007/
s00198-006-0168-0.
 
257. Pang MY, Eng JJ, Dawson AS, McKay HA, Harris JE. A community-
based fitness and mobility exercise program for older adults with chronic 
stroke: a randomized, controlled trial. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2005;53:1667–
1674. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2005.53521.x.
 
258. Gresham G, Duncan P, Stason W, Adams H, Adelman A, Alexander D, 
Bishop D, Diller L, Donaldson N, Granger C, Holland A, Kelly-Hayes 
M, McDowell F, Myers L, Phipps M, Roth E, Siebens H, Tarvin G, 
Trombly C. Post-Stroke Rehabilitation. Rockville, MD: US Department 
of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Agency for 
Health Care Policy and Research; 1995.
 
259. Rathore SS, Hinn AR, Cooper LS, Tyroler HA, Rosamond WD. 
Characterization of incident stroke signs and symptoms: findings from the 
atherosclerosis risk in communities study. Stroke. 2002;33:2718–2721.
 
260. Langhorne P, Bernhardt J, Kwakkel G. Stroke rehabilitation. Lancet. 
2011;377:1693–1702. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(11)60325-5.
 
261. Teasell R, Foley N, Salter K, Bhogal S, Jutai J, Speechley M. Evidence-
based review of stroke rehabilitation: executive summary, 12th edition. 
Top Stroke Rehabil. 2009;16:463–488. doi: 10.1310/tsr1606-463.
 
262. Quinn TJ, Dawson J, Walters MR, Lees KR. Functional outcome mea-
sures in contemporary stroke trials. Int J Stroke. 2009;4:200–205. doi: 
10.1111/j.1747-4949.2009.00271.x.
 
263. Adams HP Jr, Davis PH, Leira EC, Chang KC, Bendixen BH, Clarke 
WR, Woolson RF, Hansen MD. Baseline NIH Stroke Scale score 
strongly predicts outcome after stroke: a report of the Trial of Org 10172 
in Acute Stroke Treatment (TOAST). Neurology. 1999;53:126–131.
 
264. Volpe BT, Huerta PT, Zipse JL, Rykman A, Edwards D, Dipietro L, 
Hogan N, Krebs HI. Robotic devices as therapeutic and diagnostic tools 
for stroke recovery. Arch Neurol. 2009;66:1086–1090. doi: 10.1001/
archneurol.2009.182.
 
265. Dukelow SP, Herter TM, Moore KD, Demers MJ, Glasgow JI, Bagg SD, 
Norman KE, Scott SH. Quantitative assessment of limb position sense 
following stroke. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2010;24:178–187. doi: 
10.1177/1545968309345267.
 
266. Brennan D, Tindall L, Theodoros D, Brown J, Campbell M, Christiana 
D, Smith D, Cason J, Lee A. A blueprint for telerehabilitation guidelines. 
Int J Telerehabil. 2010;2:31–34. doi: 10.5195/ijt.2010.6063.
 
267. World Health Organization. ICF: International Classification of 
Functioning, Disability and Health. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health 
Organization; 2008.
 
268. Goljar N, Burger H, Vidmar G, Leonardi M, Marincek C. Measuring pat-
terns of disability using the International Classification of Functioning, 
Disability and Health in the post-acute stroke rehabilitation setting.  
J Rehabil Med. 2011;43:590–601. doi: 10.2340/16501977-0832.
 
269. Schwamm LH, Pancioli A, Acker JE 3rd, Goldstein LB, Zorowitz 
RD, Shephard TJ, Moyer P, Gorman M, Johnston SC, Duncan PW, 
Gorelick P, Frank J, Stranne SK, Smith R, Federspiel W, Horton KB, 
Magnis E, Adams RJ; American Stroke Association’s Task Force on the 
Development of Stroke Systems. Recommendations for the establish-
ment of stroke systems of care: recommendations from the American 
Stroke Association’s Task Force on the Development of Stroke Systems. 
Stroke. 2005;36:690–703. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000158165.42884.4F.
 
270. Teasell RW, Foley NC, Bhogal SK, Speechley MR. An evidence-based 
review of stroke rehabilitation. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2003;10:29–58. doi: 
10.1310/8YNA-1YHK-YMHB-XTE1.
 
271. Stein J, Bettger JP, Sicklick A, Hedeman R, Magdon-Ismail Z, Schwamm 
LH. Use of a standardized assessment to predict rehabilitation care after 
acute stroke. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2015;96:210–217. doi: 10.1016/j.
apmr.2014.07.403.
 
272. Gillen R, Tennen H, McKee T. Unilateral spatial neglect: rela-
tion to rehabilitation outcomes in patients with right hemisphere 
stroke. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2005;86:763–767. doi: 10.1016/j.
apmr.2004.10.029.
 
273. Di Monaco M, Trucco M, Di Monaco R, Tappero R, Cavanna A. The 
relationship between initial trunk control or postural balance and inpa-
tient rehabilitation outcome after stroke: a prospective comparative study. 
Clin Rehabil. 2010;24:543–554. doi: 10.1177/0269215509353265.
 
274. O’Dell MW, Au J, Schwabe E, Batistick H, Christos PJ. A compari-
son of two balance measures to predict discharge performance from 
inpatient stroke rehabilitation. PM R. 2013;5:392–399. doi: 10.1016/j.
pmrj.2013.02.004.
 
275. Wee JY, Hopman WM. Stroke impairment predictors of discharge func-
tion, length of stay, and discharge destination in stroke rehabilitation. Am 
J Phys Med Rehabil. 2005;84:604–612.
 
276. Lang CE, Bland MD, Connor LT, Fucetola R, Whitson M, Edmiaston J, 
Karr C, Sturmoski A, Baty J, Corbetta M. The brain recovery core: build-
ing a system of organized stroke rehabilitation and outcomes assessment 
across the continuum of care. J Neurol Phys Ther. 2011;35:194–201. doi: 
10.1097/NPT.0b013e318235dc07.
 
277. Perry J, Garrett M, Gronley JK, Mulroy SJ. Classification of walking 
handicap in the stroke population. Stroke. 1995;26:982–989.
 
278. O’Brien SR, Xue Y. Predicting goal achievement during stroke rehabili-
tation for Medicare beneficiaries. Disabil Rehabil. 2014;36:1273–1278. 
doi: 10.3109/09638288.2013.845253.
 
279. Chumney D, Nollinger K, Shesko K, Skop K, Spencer M, Newton 
RA. Ability of Functional Independence Measure to accurately pre-
dict functional outcome of stroke-specific population: systematic 
review. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2010;47:17–29.
 
280. Nakao S, Takata S, Uemura H, Kashihara M, Osawa T, Komatsu K, 
Masuda Y, Okahisa T, Nishikawa K, Kondo S, Yamada M, Takahara 
R, Ogata Y, Nakamura Y, Nagahiro S, Kaji R, Yasui N. Relationship 
between Barthel Index scores during the acute phase of rehabilitation 
and subsequent ADL in stroke patients. J Med Invest. 2010;57:81–88.
 
281. Ng YS, Jung H, Tay SS, Bok CW, Chiong Y, Lim PA. Results from a pro-
spective acute inpatient rehabilitation database: clinical characteristics 
and functional outcomes using the Functional Independence Measure. 
Ann Acad Med Singapore. 2007;36:3–10.
 
282. Sandel ME, Jette AM, Appelman J, Terdiman J, TeSelle M, Delmonico 
RL, Wang H, Camicia M, Rasch EK, Brandt DE, Chan L. Designing 
and implementing a system for tracking functional status after stroke: a 
feasibility study. PM R. 2013;5:481–490; quiz 490.
 
283. Jette AM, Ni P, Rasch EK, Appelman J, Sandel ME, Terdiman J, 
Chan L. Evaluation of patient and proxy responses on the activity 
measure for postacute care. Stroke. 2012;43:824–829. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.111.619643.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e153
 284. Hsieh CL, Hoffmann T, Gustafsson L, Lee YC. The diverse constructs 
use of activities of daily living measures in stroke randomized con-
trolled trials in the years 2005–2009. J Rehabil Med. 2012;44:720–726.
 285. Wunderlich G. Improving the Measurement of Late-Life Disability in 
Population Surveys: Beyond ADLs and IADLs: Summary of a Workshop. 
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2009.
 286. Butler M, Kane R, Larson S, Jeffery M, Grove M. Quality Improvement 
Measurement of Outcomes for People With Disabilities: Closing 
the Quality Gap: Revisiting the State of the Science. Rockville, MD: 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2012. Evidence report/
technology assessment No. 208.
 287. Sumathipala K, Radcliffe E, Sadler E, Wolfe CD, McKevitt C. 
Identifying the long-term needs of stroke survivors using the 
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health. 
Chronic Illn. 2012;8:31–44. doi: 10.1177/1742395311423848.
 288. Kollen B, Kwakkel G, Lindeman E. Functional recovery after stroke: 
a review of current developments in stroke rehabilitation research. Rev 
Recent Clin Trials. 2006;1:75–80.
 289. Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. PL 111–148. 111th 
Congress (2010).
 290. Broderick JE, Schneider S, Junghaenel DU, Schwartz JE, Stone AA. 
Validity and reliability of patient-reported outcomes measurement 
information system instruments in osteoarthritis. Arthritis Care Res 
(Hoboken). 2013;65:1625–1633. doi: 10.1002/acr.22025.
 291. Gershon RC, Wagster MV, Hendrie HC, Fox NA, Cook KF, 
Nowinski CJ. NIH toolbox for assessment of neurological and behav-
ioral function. Neurology. 2013;80(suppl 3):S2–S6. doi: 10.1212/
WNL.0b013e3182872e5f.
 292. Teasell R. Challenges in the implementation of evidence in stroke reha-
bilitation. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2012;19:93–95. doi: 10.1310/tsr1902-93. 
 
292a.  
Canadian Partnership for Stroke Recovery. Evidence-Based Review 
of Stroke Rehabilitation. http://www.ebrsr.com/index.php. Accessed 
March 5, 2016.
 
292b.  
Canadian Partnership for Stroke Recovery. http://www.ebrsr.com/evidence-
review/21-outcome-measures. Evidence-based review of stroke rehabilita-
tion. http://www.EBRSR.com. Accessed March 5, 2016.
 293.  
Fitzpatrick R, Davey C, Buxton M, Jones D. Evaluating patient-
based outcome measures for use in clinical trials. Health Technology 
Assessment. 1998;2:i–iv, 1–74.
 294. Lang CE, Bland MD, Bailey RR, Schaefer SY, Birkenmeier RL. 
Assessment of upper extremity impairment, function, and activity 
after stroke: foundations for clinical decision making. J Hand Ther. 
2013;26:104–114; quiz 115. doi: 10.1016/j.jht.2012.06.005.
 295. Chen HM, Chen CC, Hsueh IP, Huang SL, Hsieh CL. Test-retest 
reproducibility and smallest real difference of 5 hand function tests in 
patients with stroke. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2009;23:435–440. 
doi: 10.1177/1545968308331146.
 296. Mathiowetz V, Kashman N, Volland G, Weber K, Dowe M, Rogers 
S. Grip and pinch strength: normative data for adults. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil. 1985;66:69–74.
 297. Mathiowetz V, Weber K, Volland G, Kashman N. Reliability and 
validity of grip and pinch strength evaluations. J Hand Surg Am. 
1984;9:222–226.
 298. Velstra IM, Ballert CS, Cieza A. A systematic literature review of out-
come measures for upper extremity function using the International 
Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health as reference. PM 
R. 2011;3:846–860. doi: 10.1016/j.pmrj.2011.03.014.
 299. Sivan M, O’Connor RJ, Makower S, Levesley M, Bhakta B. Systematic 
review of outcome measures used in the evaluation of robot-assisted 
upper limb exercise in stroke. J Rehabil Med. 2011;43:181–189. doi: 
10.2340/16501977-0674.
 300. Hsieh 
YW, Wu CY, Lin KC, Chang 
YF, Chen CL, Liu JS. Responsiveness 
and validity of three outcome measures of motor function after 
stroke rehabilitation. Stroke. 2009;40:1386–1391. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.108.530584.
 301. Hsueh IP, Hsu MJ, Sheu CF, Lee S, Hsieh CL, Lin JH. Psychometric 
comparisons of 2 versions of the Fugl-Meyer Motor Scale and 2 versions 
of the Stroke Rehabilitation Assessment of Movement. Neurorehabil 
Neural Repair. 2008;22:737–744. doi: 10.1177/1545968308315999.
 302. Lin JH, Hsu MJ, Sheu CF, Wu TS, Lin RT, Chen CH, Hsieh CL. 
Psychometric comparisons of 4 measures for assessing upper-extrem-
ity function in people with stroke. Phys Ther. 2009;89:840–850. doi: 
10.2522/ptj.20080285.
 
303. Beebe JA, Lang CE. Relationships and responsiveness of six upper extremity 
function tests during the first six months of recovery after stroke. J Neurol 
Phys Ther. 2009;33:96–103. doi: 10.1097/NPT.0b013e3181a33638.
 
304. Connell LA, Tyson SF. Clinical reality of measuring upper-limb ability 
in neurologic conditions: a systematic review. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
2012;93:221–228. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2011.09.015.
 
305. Lemmens RJ, Timmermans AA, Janssen-Potten YJ, Smeets RJ, Seelen 
HA. Valid and reliable instruments for arm-hand assessment at ICF activ-
ity level in persons with hemiplegia: a systematic review. BMC Neurol. 
2012;12:21. doi: 10.1186/1471-2377-12-21.
 
306. Rowland TJ, Gustafsson L. Assessments of upper limb ability following 
stroke: a review. Br J Occup Ther. 2008;71:427–437.
 
307. Sullivan JE, Crowner BE, Kluding PM, Nichols D, Rose DK, Yoshida 
R, Pinto Zipp G. Outcome measures for individuals with stroke: process 
and recommendations from the American Physical Therapy Association 
Neurology Section Task Force. Phys Ther. 2013;93:1383–1396. doi: 
10.2522/ptj.20120492.
 
308. Pollock C, Eng J, Garland S. Clinical measurement of walking balance in 
people post stroke: a systematic review. Clin Rehabil. 2011;25:693–708. 
doi: 10.1177/0269215510397394.
 
309. Tyson SF, Connell LA. How to measure balance in clinical practice: a 
systematic review of the psychometrics and clinical utility of measures of 
balance activity for neurological conditions. Clin Rehabil. 2009;23:824–
840. doi: 10.1177/0269215509335018.
 
310. Mao HF, Hsueh IP, Tang PF, Sheu CF, Hsieh CL. Analysis and compari-
son of the psychometric properties of three balance measures for stroke 
patients. Stroke. 2002;33:1022–1027.
 
311. Blum L, Korner-Bitensky N. Usefulness of the Berg Balance Scale in 
stroke rehabilitation: a systematic review. Phys Ther. 2008;88:559–566. 
doi: 10.2522/ptj.20070205.
 
312. Tyson S, Connell L. The psychometric properties and clinical util-
ity of measures of walking and mobility in neurological condi-
tions: a systematic review. Clin Rehabil. 2009;23:1018–1033. doi: 
10.1177/0269215509339004.
 
313. Kitsos G, Harris D, Pollack M, Hubbard IJ. Assessments in Australian 
stroke rehabilitation units: a systematic review of the post-stroke validity 
of the most frequently used. Disabil Rehabil. 2011;33:2620–2632. doi: 
10.3109/09638288.2011.575526.
 
314. Ferrarello F, Bianchi VA, Baccini M, Rubbieri G, Mossello E, Cavallini 
MC, Marchionni N, Di Bari M. Tools for observational gait analysis in 
patients with stroke: a systematic review. Phys Ther. 2013;93:1673–
1685. doi: 10.2522/ptj.20120344.
 
315. Ashford S, Slade M, Malaprade F, Turner-Stokes L. Evaluation 
of functional outcome measures for the hemiparetic upper limb: a 
systematic review. J Rehabil Med. 2008;40:787–795. doi: 10.2340/ 
16501977-0276.
 
316. Kim JH, Park EY. Balance self-efficacy in relation to balance and activi-
ties of daily living in community residents with stroke. Disabil Rehabil. 
2014;36:295–299. doi: 10.3109/09638288.2013.790488.
 
317. Salbach NM, Mayo NE, Robichaud-Ekstrand S, Hanley JA, Richards 
CL, Wood-Dauphinee S. Balance self-efficacy and its relevance to physi-
cal function and perceived health status after stroke. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil. 2006;87:364–370. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2005.11.017.
 
318. Salbach NM, Mayo NE, Hanley JA, Richards CL, Wood-Dauphinee S. 
Psychometric evaluation of the original and Canadian French version 
of the activities-specific balance confidence scale among people with 
stroke. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2006;87:1597–1604. doi: 10.1016/j.
apmr.2006.08.336.
 
319. Botner EM, Miller WC, Eng JJ. Measurement properties of the Activities-
specific Balance Confidence Scale among individuals with stroke. 
Disabil Rehabil. 2005;27:156–163. doi: 10.1080/09638280400008982.
 
320. Deleted in proof.
 
321. Rand D, Eng JJ. Disparity between functional recovery and daily 
use of the upper and lower extremities during subacute stroke 
rehabilitation. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2012;26:76–84. doi: 
10.1177/1545968311408918.
 
322. Rand D, Eng JJ, Tang PF, Jeng JS, Hung C. How active are people 
with stroke? Use of accelerometers to assess physical activity. Stroke. 
2009;40:163–168. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.523621.
 
323. Bailey RR, Lang CE. Upper-limb activity in adults: referent values using 
accelerometry. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2013;50:1213–1222. doi: 10.1682/
JRRD.2012.12.0222.
 
324. Dobkin BH, Dorsch A. The promise of mHealth: daily activity monitor-
ing and outcome assessments by wearable sensors. Neurorehabil Neural 
Repair. 2011;25:788–798. doi: 10.1177/1545968311425908.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e154  Stroke  June 2016
 
325. Dobkin BH, Xu X, Batalin M, Thomas S, Kaiser W. Reliability and 
validity of bilateral ankle accelerometer algorithms for activity recog-
nition and walking speed after stroke. Stroke. 2011;42:2246–2250. doi: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.611095.
 
326. Uswatte G, Foo WL, Olmstead H, Lopez K, Holand A, Simms LB. 
Ambulatory monitoring of arm movement using accelerometry: an 
objective measure of upper-extremity rehabilitation in persons with 
chronic stroke. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2005;86:1498–1501.
 
327. Carroll SL, Greig CA, Lewis SJ, McMurdo ME, Sniehotta FF, Johnston 
M, Johnston DW, Scopes J, Mead GE. The use of pedometers in stroke 
survivors: are they feasible and how well do they detect steps? Arch Phys 
Med Rehabil. 2012;93:466–470. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2011.08.047.
 
328. Roos MA, Rudolph KS, Reisman DS. The structure of walking activ-
ity in people after stroke compared with older adults without disability: 
a cross-sectional study. Phys Ther. 2012;92:1141–1147. doi: 10.2522/
ptj.20120034.
 
329. Hsueh IP, Chen JH, Wang CH, Hou WH, Hsieh CL. Development of 
a computerized adaptive test for assessing activities of daily living in 
outpatients with stroke. Phys Ther. 2013;93:681–693. doi: 10.2522/
ptj.20120173.
 
330. Mahoney FI, Barthel DW. Functional evaluation: the Barthel Index. Md 
State Med J. 1965;14:61–65.
 
331. Holbrook M, Skilbeck CE. An activities index for use with stroke 
patients. Age Ageing. 1983;12:166–170.
 
332. Chen HF, Wu CY, Lin KC, Chen CL, Huang PC, Hsieh CJ, Liu JS. Rasch 
validation of a combined measure of basic and extended daily life func-
tioning after stroke. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2013;27:125–132. doi: 
10.1177/1545968312457828.
 
333. Sathian K, Buxbaum LJ, Cohen LG, Krakauer JW, Lang CE, Corbetta 
M, Fitzpatrick SM. Neurological principles and rehabilitation of action 
disorders: common clinical deficits. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 
2011;25(suppl):21S–32S. doi: 10.1177/1545968311410941.
 
334. Pineiro R, Pendlebury ST, Smith S, Flitney D, Blamire AM, Styles 
P, Matthews PM. Relating MRI changes to motor deficit after isch-
emic stroke by segmentation of functional motor pathways. Stroke. 
2000;31:672–679.
 
335. Lindenberg R, Renga V, Zhu LL, Betzler F, Alsop D, Schlaug G. 
Structural integrity of corticospinal motor fibers predicts motor impair-
ment in chronic stroke. Neurology. 2010;74:280–287. doi: 10.1212/
WNL.0b013e3181ccc6d9.
 
336. Stinear CM, Barber PA, Smale PR, Coxon JP, Fleming MK, Byblow 
WD. Functional potential in chronic stroke patients depends on cortico-
spinal tract integrity. Brain. 2007;130(pt 1):170–180. doi: 10.1093/brain/
awl333.
 
337. Beebe JA, Lang CE. Active range of motion predicts upper extrem-
ity function 3 months after stroke. Stroke. 2009;40:1772–1779. doi: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.536763.
 
338. Kwakkel G, Kollen B, Lindeman E. Understanding the pattern of func-
tional recovery after stroke: facts and theories. Restor Neurol Neurosci. 
2004;22:281–299.
 
339. Nijland RH, van Wegen EE, Harmeling-van der Wel BC, Kwakkel G; 
EPOS Investigators. Presence of finger extension and shoulder abduc-
tion within 72 hours after stroke predicts functional recovery: Early 
Prediction of Functional Outcome After Stroke: the EPOS cohort study. 
Stroke. 2010;41:745–750. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.572065.
 
340. Bland MD, Sturmoski A, Whitson M, Connor LT, Fucetola R, Huskey 
T, Corbetta M, Lang CE. Prediction of discharge walking ability from 
initial assessment in a stroke inpatient rehabilitation facility popula-
tion. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2012;93:1441–1447. doi: 10.1016/j.
apmr.2012.02.029.
 
341. Harris JE, Eng JJ. Paretic upper-limb strength best explains arm activ-
ity in people with stroke. Phys Ther. 2007;87:88–97. doi: 10.2522/
ptj.20060065.
 
342. Baker K, Cano SJ, Playford ED. Outcome measurement in stroke: a 
scale selection strategy. Stroke. 2011;42:1787–1794. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.110.608505.
 
343. Barak S, Duncan PW. Issues in selecting outcome measures to assess 
functional recovery after stroke. NeuroRx. 2006;3:505–524. doi: 
10.1016/j.nurx.2006.07.009.
 
344. Duncan PW, Lai SM, Keighley J. Defining post-stroke recovery: impli-
cations for design and interpretation of drug trials. Neuropharmacology. 
2000;39:835–841.
 
345. Bland MD, Sturmoski A, Whitson M, Harris H, Connor LT, Fucetola R, 
Edmiaston J, Huskey T, Carter A, Kramper M, Corbetta M, Lang CE. 
Clinician adherence to a standardized assessment battery across settings 
and disciplines in a poststroke rehabilitation population. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil. 2013;94:1048–1053.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2013.02.004.
 
346. Brown RW. Why is quality assurance so difficult? A review of 
issues in quality assurance over the last decade. Intern Med J. 
2002;32:331–337.
 
347. Weinert CR, Mann HJ. The science of implementation: changing the 
practice of critical care. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2008;14:460–465. doi: 
10.1097/MCC.0b013e3283079eb5.
 
348. Burdick KE, Endick CJ, Goldberg JF. Assessing cognitive deficits in 
bipolar disorder: are self-reports valid? Psychiatry Res. 2005;136:43–50. 
doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2004.12.009.
 
349. Adams SA, Matthews CE, Ebbeling CB, Moore CG, Cunningham JE, 
Fulton J, Hebert JR. The effect of social desirability and social approval 
on self-reports of physical activity [published correction appears in Am 
J Epidemiol. 2005;161:899]. Am J Epidemiol. 2005;161:389–398. doi: 
10.1093/aje/kwi054.
 
350. Moore JL, Roth EJ, Killian C, Hornby TG. Locomotor training improves 
daily stepping activity and gait efficiency in individuals poststroke who 
have reached a “plateau” in recovery. Stroke. 2010;41:129–135. doi: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.563247.
 
351. National Institute of Deafness and Other Communication Disorders. 
Aphasia. http://www.nidcd.nih.gov/health/voice/aphasia.htm. Accessed 
March 5, 2016.
 
352. Hall N, Boisvert M, Steele R. Telepractice in the assessment and treat-
ment of individuals with aphasia: a systematic review. Int J Telerehabil. 
2013;5:27–38. doi: 10.5195/ijt.2013.6119.
 
353. Cherney LR, van Vuuren S. Telerehabilitation, virtual therapists, and 
acquired neurologic speech and language disorders. Semin Speech Lang. 
2012;33:243–257. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1320044.
 
354. Hill AJ, Theodoros DG, Russell TG, Ward EC. The redesign and re-
evaluation of an Internet-based telerehabilitation system for the assess-
ment of dysarthria in adults. Telemed J E Health. 2009;15:840–850. doi: 
10.1089/tmj.2009.0015.
 
355. McClure JA, Salter K, Foley N, Mahon H, Teasell R. Adherence to 
Canadian Best Practice Recommendations for Stroke Care: vascular cog-
nitive impairment screening and assessment practices in an Ontario inpa-
tient stroke rehabilitation facility. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2012;19:141–148. 
doi: 10.1310/tsr1902-141.
 
356. Patel MD, Coshall C, Rudd AG, Wolfe CD. Cognitive impairment after 
stroke: clinical determinants and its associations with long-term stroke 
outcomes. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2002;50:700–706.
 
357. Patel MD, Coshall C, Rudd AG, Wolfe CD. Natural history of cogni-
tive impairment after stroke and factors associated with its recovery. Clin 
Rehabil. 2003;17:158–166.
 
358. Tatemichi TK, Desmond DW, Stern Y, Palk M, Sano M, Bagiella 
E. Cognitive impairment after stroke: frequency, patterns and rela-
tionship to functional abilities. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 
1994;57:202–207.
 
359. Tatemichi TK, Paik M, Bagiella E, Desmond DW, Pirro M, Hanzawa 
LK. Dementia after stroke is a predictor of long-term survival. Stroke. 
1994;25:1915–1919.
 
360. Mysiw WJ, Beegan JG, Gatens PF. Prospective cognitive assessment 
of stroke patients before inpatient rehabilitation: the relationship of the 
Neurobehavioral Cognitive Status Examination to functional improve-
ment. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 1989;68:168–171.
 
361. Deleted in proof.
 
362. Klingner CM, Witte OW, Günther A. Sensory syndromes. Front Neurol 
Neurosci. 2012;30:4–8. doi: 10.1159/000333373.
 
363. Pambakian A, Currie J, Kennard C. Rehabilitation strategies for 
patients with homonymous visual field defects. J Neuroophthalmol. 
2005;25:136–142.
 
364. Rowe FJ, Wright D, Brand D, Jackson C, Harrison S, Maan T, Scott 
C, Vogwell L, Peel S, Akerman N, Dodridge C, Howard C, Shipman T, 
Sperring U, Macdiarmid S, Freeman C. A prospective profile of visual 
field loss following stroke: prevalence, type, rehabilitation, and outcome. 
Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:719096. doi: 10.1155/2013/719096.
 
365. Modha DS, Singh R. Network architecture of the long-distance pathways 
in the macaque brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010;107:13485–13490. 
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1008054107.
 
366. Mountcastle V. The Sensory Hand: Neural Mechanisms of Somatic 
Sensation. Boston, MA: Harvard University Press; 2005.
 
367. Tyson SF, Hanley M, Chillala J, Selley AB, Tallis RC. Sensory loss in 
hospital-admitted people with stroke: characteristics, associated fac-
tors, and relationship with function. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 
2008;22:166–172. doi: 10.1177/1545968307305523.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e155
 
368. Parker J, Mountain G, Hammerton J. A review of the evidence underpin-
ning the use of visual and auditory feedback for computer technology 
in post-stroke upper-limb rehabilitation. Disabil Rehabil Assist Technol. 
2011;6:465–472. doi: 10.3109/17483107.2011.556209.
 
369. Baram Y. Virtual sensory feedback for gait improvement in neurological 
patients. Front Neurol. 2013;4:138. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2013.00138.
 
370. Mousavi Hondori H, Khademi M, Dodakian L, Cramer SC, Lopes CV. 
A spatial augmented reality rehab system for post-stroke hand rehabilita-
tion. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2013;184:279–285.
 
371. Winward CE, Halligan PW, Wade DT. Somatosensory recovery: a longi-
tudinal study of the first 6 months after unilateral stroke. Disabil Rehabil. 
2007;29:293–299. doi: 10.1080/09638280600756489.
 
372. Ruch TC, Fulton JF, German WJ. Sensory discrimination in monkey, 
chimpanzee and man after lesions of the parietal lobe. Arch Neurol 
Psych. 1938;39:919–938.
 
373. Xerri C, Merzenich MM, Peterson BE, Jenkins W. Plasticity of primary 
somatosensory cortex paralleling sensorimotor skill recovery from 
stroke in adult monkeys. J Neurophysiol. 1998;79:2119–2148.
 
374. Harrison TC, Silasi G, Boyd JD, Murphy TH. Displacement 
of sensory maps and disorganization of motor cortex after tar-
geted stroke in mice. Stroke. 2013;44:2300–2306. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.113.001272.
 
375. Carey LM, Abbott DF, Puce A, Jackson GD, Syngeniotis A, Donnan GA. 
Reemergence of activation with poststroke somatosensory recovery: a 
serial fMRI case study. Neurology. 2002;59:749–752.
 
376. Schaechter JD, Moore CI, Connell BD, Rosen BR, Dijkhuizen RM. 
Structural and functional plasticity in the somatosensory cortex of 
chronic stroke patients. Brain. 2006;129(pt 10):2722–2733. doi: 
10.1093/brain/awl214.
 
377. Sullivan JE, Hedman LD. Sensory dysfunction following stroke: inci-
dence, significance, examination, and intervention. Top Stroke Rehabil. 
2008;15:200–217. doi: 10.1310/tsr1503-200.
 
378. Lin JH, Hsueh IP, Sheu CF, Hsieh CL. Psychometric properties of the 
sensory scale of the Fugl-Meyer Assessment in stroke patients. Clin 
Rehabil. 2004;18:391–397.
 
379. Benaim C, Froger J, Cazottes C, Gueben D, Porte M, Desnuelle 
C, Pelissier JY. Use of the Faces Pain Scale by left and right hemi-
spheric stroke patients. Pain. 2007;128:52–58. doi: 10.1016/j.
pain.2006.08.029.
 
380. Simo LS, Ghez C, Botzer L, Scheidt RA. A quantitative and standard-
ized robotic method for the evaluation of arm proprioception after 
stroke. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2011;2011:8227–8230. doi: 
10.1109/IEMBS.2011.6092029.
 
381. Semrau JA, Herter TM, Scott SH, Dukelow SP. Robotic identification 
of kinesthetic deficits after stroke. Stroke. 2013;44:3414–3421. doi: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.113.002058.
 
382. Pollock A, Hazelton C, Henderson CA, Angilley J, Dhillon B, Langhorne 
P, Livingstone K, Munro FA, Orr H, Rowe F, Shahani U. Interventions 
for visual field defects in patients with stroke. Stroke. 2012;43:e37–e38. 
doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.639815.
 
383. Kasten E, Poggel DA, Müller-Oehring E, Gothe J, Schulte T, Sabel BA. 
Restoration of vision II: residual functions and training-induced visual 
field enlargement in brain-damaged patients. Restor Neurol Neurosci. 
1999;15:273–287.
 
384. Gray CS, French JM, Bates D, Cartlidge NE, Venables GS, James OF. 
Recovery of visual fields in acute stroke: homonymous hemianopia asso-
ciated with adverse prognosis. Age Ageing. 1989;18:419–421.
 
385. Ali M, Hazelton C, Lyden P, Pollock A, Brady M; VISTA Collaboration. 
Recovery from poststroke visual impairment: evidence from a clinical 
trials resource. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2013;27:133–141. doi: 
10.1177/1545968312454683.
 
386. Yamasoba T, Kikuchi S, Higo R. Deafness associated with vertebrobasi-
lar insufficiency. J Neurol Sci. 2001;187:69–75.
 
387. Lee H. Recent advances in acute hearing loss due to posterior circula-
tion ischemic stroke. J Neurol Sci. 2014;338:23–29. doi: 10.1016/j.
jns.2013.12.048.
 
388. Lee H, Baloh RW. Sudden deafness in vertebrobasilar ischemia: clini-
cal features, vascular topographical patterns and long-term outcome.  
J Neurol Sci. 2005;228:99–104. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2004.10.016.
 
389. Hinchey JA, Shephard T, Furie K, Smith D, Wang D, Tonn S; Stroke 
Practice Improvement Network Investigators. Formal dysphagia screen-
ing protocols prevent pneumonia. Stroke. 2005;36:1972–1976. doi: 
10.1161/01.STR.0000177529.86868.8d.
 
390. Lakshminarayan K, Tsai AW, Tong X, Vazquez G, Peacock JM, George 
MG, Luepker RV, Anderson DC. Utility of dysphagia screening results 
in predicting poststroke pneumonia. Stroke. 2010;41:2849–2854. doi: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.597039.
 
391. Foley NC, Martin RE, Salter KL, Teasell RW. A review of the relation-
ship between dysphagia and malnutrition following stroke. J Rehabil 
Med. 2009;41:707–713. doi: 10.2340/16501977-0415.
 
392. Perry L, Hamilton S, Williams J, Jones S. Nursing interventions for 
improving nutritional status and outcomes of stroke patients: descrip-
tive reviews of processes and outcomes. Worldviews Evid Based Nurs. 
2013;10:17–40. doi: 10.1111/j.1741-6787.2012.00255.x.
 
393. Donovan NJ, Daniels SK, Edmiaston J, Weinhardt J, Summers D, 
Mitchell PH; on behalf of the American Heart Association Council on 
Cardiovascular Nursing and Stroke Council. Dysphagia screening: state 
of the art: invitational conference proceeding from the State-of-the-Art 
Nursing Symposium, International Stroke Conference 2012. Stroke. 
2013;44:e24–e31. doi: 10.1161/STR.0b013e3182877f57.
 
394. Jauch EC, Saver JL, Adams HP Jr, Bruno A, Connors JJ, Demaerschalk 
BM, Khatri P, McMullan PW Jr, Qureshi AI, Rosenfield K, Scott PA, 
Summers DR, Wang DZ, Wintermark M, Yonas H; on behalf of the 
American Heart Association Stroke Council; Council on Cardiovascular 
Nursing; Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease; Council on Clinical 
Cardiology. Guidelines for the early management of patients with 
acute ischemic stroke: a guideline for healthcare professionals from 
the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 
2013;44:870–947. doi: 10.1161/STR.0b013e318284056a.
 
395. Singh S, Hamdy S. Dysphagia in stroke patients. Postgrad Med J. 
2006;82:383–391. doi: 10.1136/pgmj.2005.043281.
 
396. McCullough GH, Rosenbek JC, Wertz RT, McCoy S, Mann G, 
McCullough K. Utility of clinical swallowing examination measures for 
detecting aspiration post-stroke. J Speech Lang Hear Res. 2005;48:1280–
1293. doi: 10.1044/1092-4388(2005/089).
 
397. Garon BR, Sierzant T, Ormiston C. Silent aspiration: results of 2,000 
video fluoroscopic evaluations. J Neurosci Nurs. 2009;41:178–185; quiz 
186-187.
 
398. Bingjie L, Tong Z, Xinting S, Jianmin X, Guijun J. Quantitative vid-
eofluoroscopic analysis of penetration-aspiration in post-stroke patients. 
Neurol India. 2010;58:42–47. doi: 10.4103/0028-3886.60395.
 
399. National Collaborating Centre for Chronic Conditions. Stroke: National 
Clinical Guideline for Diagnosis and Initial Management of Acute Stroke 
and Transient Ischemic Attack (TIA). London, UK: Royal College of 
Physicians, 2008.
 
400. Geeganage C, Beavan J, Ellender S, Bath PM. Interventions for dys-
phagia and nutritional support in acute and subacute stroke. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2012;10:CD000323.
 
401. Ashford J, McCabe D, Wheeler-Hegland K, Frymark T, Mullen R, 
Musson N, Schooling T, Hammond CS. Evidence-based systematic 
review: oropharyngeal dysphagia behavioral treatments, part III: impact 
of dysphagia treatments on populations with neurological disorders.  
J Rehabil Res Dev. 2009;46:195–204.
 
402. Robbins J, Butler SG, Daniels SK, Diez Gross R, Langmore S, 
Lazarus CL, Martin-Harris B, McCabe D, Musson N, Rosenbek J. 
Swallowing and dysphagia rehabilitation: translating principles of neu-
ral plasticity into clinically oriented evidence. J Speech Lang Hear Res. 
2008;51:S276–S300. doi: 10.1044/1092-4388(2008/021).
 
403. Xie Y, Wang L, He J, Wu T. Acupuncture for dysphagia in acute stroke. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008:CD006076. doi: 10.1002/14651858.
CD006076.pub2.
 
404. Sørensen RT, Rasmussen RS, Overgaard K, Lerche A, Johansen AM, 
Lindhardt T. Dysphagia screening and intensified oral hygiene reduce 
pneumonia after stroke. J Neurosci Nurs. 2013;45:139–146. doi: 
10.1097/JNN.0b013e31828a412c.
 
405. Langdon PC, Lee AH, Binns CW. High incidence of respiratory 
infections in “nil by mouth” tube-fed acute ischemic stroke patients. 
Neuroepidemiology. 2009;32:107–113. doi: 10.1159/000177036.
 
406. Dennis M, Lewis S, Cranswick G, Forbes J; FOOD Trial Collaboration. 
FOOD: a multicentre randomised trial evaluating feeding policies in 
patients admitted to hospital with a recent stroke. Health Technol Assess. 
2006;10:iii-iv, ix-x, 1–120.
 
407. Dennis MS, Lewis SC, Warlow C; FOOD Trial Collaboration. Effect 
of timing and method of enteral tube feeding for dysphagic stroke 
patients (FOOD): a multicentre randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 
2005;365:764–772. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)17983-5.
 
408. Dennis MS, Lewis SC, Warlow C; FOOD Trial Collaboration. Routine 
oral nutritional supplementation for stroke patients in hospital (FOOD): 
a multicentre randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2005;365:755–763. 
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)17982-3.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e156  Stroke  June 2016
 
409. Leys D, Hénon H, Mackowiak-Cordoliani MA, Pasquier F. 
Poststroke dementia. Lancet Neurol. 2005;4:752–759. doi: 10.1016/
S1474-4422(05)70221-0.
 
410. Cicerone KD, Dahlberg C, Kalmar K, Langenbahn DM, Malec JF, 
Bergquist TF, Felicetti T, Giacino JT, Harley JP, Harrington DE, Herzog 
J, Kneipp S, Laatsch L, Morse PA. Evidence-based cognitive rehabili-
tation: recommendations for clinical practice. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
2000;81:1596–1615. doi: 10.1053/apmr.2000.19240.
 
411. Zedlitz AM, Rietveld TC, Geurts AC, Fasotti L. Cognitive and graded 
activity training can alleviate persistent fatigue after stroke: a ran-
domized, controlled trial. Stroke. 2012;43:1046–1051. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.111.632117.
 
412. Toniolo S. Neuropsychological interventions in stroke survivors: impli-
cations for evidence based psychological practice. G Ital Med Lav Ergon. 
2011;33(suppl A):A29–A36.
 
413. Sofi F, Valecchi D, Bacci D, Abbate R, Gensini GF, Casini A, Macchi 
C. Physical activity and risk of cognitive decline: a meta-analy-
sis of prospective studies. J Intern Med. 2011;269:107–117. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2796.2010.02281.x.
 
414. Angevaren M, Aufdemkampe G, Verhaar HJ, Aleman A, Vanhees L. 
Physical activity and enhanced fitness to improve cognitive function in 
older people without known cognitive impairment. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2008:CD005381. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD005381.pub2.
 
415. Cumming TB, Tyedin K, Churilov L, Morris ME, Bernhardt J. The 
effect of physical activity on cognitive function after stroke: a sys-
tematic review. Int Psychogeriatr. 2012;24:557–567. doi: 10.1017/
S1041610211001980.
 
416. Janssen H, Bernhardt J, Collier JM, Sena ES, McElduff P, Attia J, 
Pollack M, Howells DW, Nilsson M, Calford MB, Spratt NJ. An 
enriched environment improves sensorimotor function post-isch-
emic stroke. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2010;24:802–813. doi: 
10.1177/1545968310372092.
 
417. Janssen H, Ada L, Bernhardt J, McElduff P, Pollack M, Nilsson M, 
Spratt NJ. An enriched environment increases activity in stroke patients 
undergoing rehabilitation in a mixed rehabilitation unit: a pilot non-
randomized controlled trial. Disabil Rehabil. 2014;36:255–262. doi: 
10.3109/09638288.2013.788218.
 
418. Cicerone KD, Langenbahn DM, Braden C, Malec JF, Kalmar K, Fraas 
M, Felicetti T, Laatsch L, Harley JP, Bergquist T, Azulay J, Cantor J, 
Ashman T. Evidence-based cognitive rehabilitation: updated review 
of the literature from 2003 through 2008. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
2011;92:519–530.
 
419. Bowen A, Hazelton C, Pollock A, Lincoln NB. Cognitive rehabilita-
tion for spatial neglect following stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2013;7:CD003586. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD003586.pub3.
 
420. Loetscher T, Lincoln NB. Cognitive rehabilitation for attention deficits 
following stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;5:CD002842. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD002842.pub2.
 
421. das Nair R, Lincoln N. Cognitive rehabilitation for memory deficits fol-
lowing stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007:CD002293.
 
422. Barker-Collo SL, Feigin VL, Lawes CM, Parag V, Senior H, Rodgers A. 
Reducing attention deficits after stroke using attention process training: 
a randomized controlled trial. Stroke. 2009;40:3293–3298. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.109.558239.
 
423. Winkens I, Van Heugten CM, Wade DT, Habets EJ, Fasotti L. Efficacy 
of time pressure management in stroke patients with slowed informa-
tion processing: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
2009;90:1672–1679. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2009.04.016.
 
424. Cappa S, Benke T, Clarke S, Rossi B, Stemmer B, van Heugten C; Task 
Force on Cognitive Rehabilitation; European Federation of Neurological 
Societies. EFNS guidelines on cognitive rehabilitation: report of an 
EFNS task force. Eur J Neurol. 2005;12:665–680.
 
425. Chung CS, Pollock A, Campbell T, Durward BR, Hagen S. Cognitive 
rehabilitation for executive dysfunction in adults with stroke or other 
adult non-progressive acquired brain damage. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2013;4:CD008391. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD008391.pub2.
 
426. Poulin V, Korner-Bitensky N, Dawson DR, Bherer L. Efficacy of execu-
tive function interventions after stroke: a systematic review. Top Stroke 
Rehabil. 2012;19:158–171. doi: 10.1310/tsr1902-158.
 
427. Salter K, Teasell R, Bitensky J, Foley N, Bhogal SK, Mahon H, McClure 
JA. Cognitive disorders and apraxia: evidence based review of stroke 
rehabilitation, version 15. 2012. http://www.ebrsr.com/evidence-
review/12-cognitive-disorders-and-apraxia. Accessed March 5, 2016.
 
428. Man DW, Soong WY, Tam SF, Hui-Chan CW. A randomized 
clinical trial study on the effectiveness of a tele-analogy-based 
problem-solving programme for people with acquired brain injury 
(ABI). NeuroRehabilitation. 2006;21:205–217.
 
429. Fish J, Manly T, Emslie H, Evans JJ, Wilson BA. Compensatory strate-
gies for acquired disorders of memory and planning: differential effects 
of a paging system for patients with brain injury of traumatic versus 
cerebrovascular aetiology. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2008;79:930–
935. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.2007.125203.
 
430. Chen P, Hartman AJ, Priscilla Galarza C, DeLuca J. Global processing 
training to improve visuospatial memory deficits after right-brain stroke. 
Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2012;27:891–905. doi: 10.1093/arclin/acs089.
 
431. Hildebrandt H, Bussmann-Mork B, Schwendemann G. Group therapy 
for memory impaired patients: a partial remediation is possible. J Neurol. 
2006;253:512–519. doi: 10.1007/s00415-006-0013-6.
 
432. Doornhein K, De Haan EHF. Cognitive training for memory defi-
cits in stroke patients. Neuropsychol Rehabil. 1998;8:393–400. doi: 
10.1080/713755579.
 
433. Aben L, Heijenbrok-Kal MH, van Loon EM, Groet E, Ponds RW, 
Busschbach JJ, Ribbers GM. Training memory self-efficacy in the 
chronic stage after stroke: a randomized controlled trial. Neurorehabil 
Neural Repair. 2013;27:110–117. doi: 10.1177/1545968312455222.
 
434. Westerberg H, Jacobaeus H, Hirvikoski T, Clevberger P, Ostensson 
ML, Bartfai A, Klingberg T. Computerized working memory train-
ing after stroke: a pilot study. Brain Inj. 2007;21:21–29. doi: 
10.1080/02699050601148726.
 
435. Lemoncello R, Sohlberg MM, Fickas S, Prideaux J. A randomised 
controlled crossover trial evaluating Television Assisted Prompting 
(TAP) for adults with acquired brain injury. Neuropsychol Rehabil. 
2011;21:825–846. doi: 10.1080/09602011.2011.618661.
 
436. Eghdam A, Scholl J, Bartfai A, Koch S. Information and communica-
tion technology to support self-management of patients with mild 
acquired cognitive impairments: systematic review. J Med Internet Res. 
2012;14:e159. doi: 10.2196/jmir.2275.
 
437. Hamilton RH, Chrysikou EG, Coslett B. Mechanisms of aphasia recov-
ery after stroke and the role of noninvasive brain stimulation. Brain 
Lang. 2011;118:40–50. doi: 10.1016/j.bandl.2011.02.005.
 
438. Monti A, Ferrucci R, Fumagalli M, Mameli F, Cogiamanian F, Ardolino 
G, Priori A. Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) and lan-
guage. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2013;84:832–842. doi: 10.1136/
jnnp-2012-302825.
 
439. Deleted in proof.
 
440. McDonnell MN, Smith AE, Mackintosh SF. Aerobic exercise to improve 
cognitive function in adults with neurological disorders: a systematic 
review. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2011;92:1044–1052. doi: 10.1016/j.
apmr.2011.01.021.
 
441. Devine JM, Zafonte RD. Physical exercise and cognitive recovery in 
acquired brain injury: a review of the literature. PM R. 2009;1:560–575. 
doi: 10.1016/j.pmrj.2009.03.015.
 
442. Särkämö T, Tervaniemi M, Laitinen S, Forsblom A, Soinila S, Mikkonen 
M, Autti T, Silvennoinen HM, Erkkilä J, Laine M, Peretz I, Hietanen 
M. Music listening enhances cognitive recovery and mood after middle 
cerebral artery stroke. Brain. 2008;131(pt 3):866–876. doi: 10.1093/
brain/awn013.
 
443. Kim BR, Chun MH, Kim LS, Park JY. Effect of virtual reality on cog-
nition in stroke patients. Ann Rehabil Med. 2011;35:450–459. doi: 
10.5535/arm.2011.35.4.450.
 
444. Gladstone DJ, Danells CJ, Armesto A, McIlroy WE, Staines 
WR, Graham SJ, Herrmann N, Szalai JP, Black SE; Subacute 
Therapy With Amphetamine and Rehabilitation for Stroke Study 
Investigators. Physiotherapy coupled with dextroamphetamine for 
rehabilitation after hemiparetic stroke: a randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Stroke. 2006;37:179–185. doi: 10.1161/01.
STR.0000195169.42447.78.
 
445. Tardy J, Pariente J, Leger A, Dechaumont-Palacin S, Gerdelat A, Guiraud 
V, Conchou F, Albucher JF, Marque P, Franceries X, Cognard C, Rascol 
O, Chollet F, Loubinoux I. Methylphenidate modulates cerebral post-
stroke reorganization. Neuroimage. 2006;33:913–922. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2006.07.014.
 
446. Berkowitz HL. Modafinil in poststroke depression. Psychosomatics. 
2005;46:93; author reply 93–94. doi: 10.1176/appi.psy.46.1.93.
 
447. Brioschi A, Gramigna S, Werth E, Staub F, Ruffieux C, Bassetti C, 
Schluep M, Annoni JM. Effect of modafinil on subjective fatigue in mul-
tiple sclerosis and stroke patients. Eur Neurol. 2009;62:243–249. doi: 
10.1159/000232927.
 
448. Chang WH, Park YH, Ohn SH, Park CH, Lee PK, Kim YH. Neural corre-
lates of donepezil-induced cognitive improvement in patients with right 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e157
hemisphere stroke: a pilot study. Neuropsychol Rehabil. 2011;21:502–
514. doi: 10.1080/09602011.2011.582708.
 
449. Narasimhalu K, Effendy S, Sim CH, Lee JM, Chen I, Hia SB, Xue HL, 
Corrales MP, Chang HM, Wong MC, Chen CP, Tan EK. A randomized 
controlled trial of rivastigmine in patients with cognitive impairment 
no dementia because of cerebrovascular disease. Acta Neurol Scand. 
2010;121:217–224. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2009.01263.x.
 
450. Narushima K, Paradiso S, Moser DJ, Jorge R, Robinson RG. Effect of 
antidepressant therapy on executive function after stroke. Br J Psychiatry. 
2007;190:260–265. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.106.025064.
 
451. Bauxbaum LJ, Haaland KY, Hallett M, Wheaton L, Heilman KM, 
Rodriguez A, Gonzalez Rothi LJ. Treatment of limb apraxia: moving 
forward to improved action [published correction appears in Am J Phys 
Med Rehabil. 2008;87:424]. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 2008;87:149–161. 
doi: 10.1097/PHM.0b013e31815e6727.
 
452. Zwinkels A, Geusgens C, van de Sande P, Van Heugten C. Assessment of 
apraxia: inter-rater reliability of a new apraxia test, association between 
apraxia and other cognitive deficits and prevalence of apraxia in a reha-
bilitation setting. Clin Rehabil. 2004;18:819–827.
 
453. De Renzi E, Motti F, Nichelli P. Imitating gestures: a quantitative 
approach to ideomotor apraxia. Arch Neurol. 1980;37:6–10.
 
454. Poeck K. The clinical examination for motor apraxia. Neuropsychologia. 
1986;24:129–134.
 
455. Feyereisen P, Barter D, Goossens M, Clerebaut N. Gestures and speech 
in referential communication by aphasic subjects: channel use and effi-
ciency. Aphasiology. 1988;2:21–32.
 
456. McDonald S, Tate RL, Rigby J. Error types in ideomotor apraxia: a 
qualitative analysis. Brain Cogn. 1994;25:250–270. doi: 10.1006/
brcg.1994.1035.
 
457. Blijlevens H, Hocking C, Paddy A. Rehabilitation of adults with dys-
praxia: health professionals learning from patients. Disabil Rehabil. 
2009;31:466–475. doi: 10.1080/09638280802131093.
 
458. West C, Bowen A, Hesketh A, Vail A. Interventions for motor apraxia 
following stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008:CD004132. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD004132.pub2.
 
459. Dovern A, Fink GR, Weiss PH. Diagnosis and treatment of upper 
limb 
apraxia. 
J 
Neurol. 
2012;259:1269–1283. 
doi: 
10.1007/
s00415-011-6336-y.
 
460. Cicerone KD, Dahlberg C, Malec JF, Langenbahn DM, Felicetti T, 
Kneipp S, Ellmo W, Kalmar K, Giacino JT, Harley JP, Laatsch L, Morse 
PA, Catanese J. Evidence-based cognitive rehabilitation: updated review 
of the literature from 1998 through 2002. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
2005;86:1681–1692.
 
461. Geusgens CA, Winkens I, van Heugten CM, Jolles J, van den Heuvel 
WJ. Occurrence and measurement of transfer in cognitive reha-
bilitation: a critical review. J Rehabil Med. 2007;39:425–439. doi: 
10.2340/16501977-0092.
 
462. Wu AJ, Radel J, Hanna-Pladdy B. Improved function after combined 
physical and mental practice after stroke: a case of hemiparesis and 
apraxia. Am J Occup Ther. 2011;65:161–168.
 
463. Corbetta M, Kincade MJ, Lewis C, Snyder AZ, Sapir A. Neural basis 
and recovery of spatial attention deficits in spatial neglect. Nat Neurosci. 
2005;8:1603–1610. doi: 10.1038/nn1574.
 
464. Kerkhoff G, Schenk T. Rehabilitation of neglect: an update. 
Neuropsychologia. 2012;50:1072–1079. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia. 
2012.01.024.
 
465. Barrett AM, Buxbaum LJ, Coslett HB, Edwards E, Heilman KM, Hillis AE, 
Milberg WP, Robertson IH. Cognitive rehabilitation interventions for neglect 
and related disorders: moving from bench to bedside in stroke patients.  
J Cogn Neurosci. 2006;18:1223–1236. doi: 10.1162/jocn.2006.18.7.1223.
 
466. Karnath HO, Rennig J, Johannsen L, Rorden C. The anatomy under-
lying acute versus chronic spatial neglect: a longitudinal study. Brain. 
2011;134(pt 3):903–912. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq355.
 
467. Rengachary J, He BJ, Shulman GL, Corbetta M. A behavioral analy-
sis of spatial neglect and its recovery after stroke. Front Hum Neurosci. 
2011;5:29. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2011.00029.
 
468. Bowen A, Lincoln N. Cognitive rehabilitation for spatial neglect follow-
ing stroke (review). In: The Cochrane Collaboration. Vol 4. New York, 
NY: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd; 2008.
 
469. Luauté J, Halligan P, Rode G, Rossetti Y, Boisson D. Visuo-spatial 
neglect: a systematic review of current interventions and their effec-
tiveness. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2006;30:961–982. doi: 10.1016/j.
neubiorev.2006.03.001.
 
470. Yang NY, Zhou D, Chung RC, Li-Tsang CW, Fong KN. Rehabilitation 
interventions for unilateral neglect after stroke: a systematic review from 
1997 through 2012. Fron Hum Neurosci. 2013;7:187. doi: 10.3389/
fnhum.2013.00187.
 
471. Cazzoli D, Müri RM, Schumacher R, von Arx S, Chaves S, Gutbrod K, 
Bohlhalter S, Bauer D, Vanbellingen T, Bertschi M, Kipfer S, Rosenthal 
CR, Kennard C, Bassetti CL, Nyffeler T. Theta burst stimulation reduces 
disability during the activities of daily living in spatial neglect. Brain. 
2012;135(pt 11):3426–3439. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws182.
 
472. Fong KN, Yang NY, Chan MK, Chan DY, Lau AF, Chan DY, Cheung JT, 
Cheung HK, Chung RC, Chan CC. Combined effects of sensory cue-
ing and limb activation on unilateral neglect in subacute left hemiple-
gic stroke patients: a randomized controlled pilot study. Clin Rehabil. 
2013;27:628–637. doi: 10.1177/0269215512471959.
 
473. Fortis P, Maravita A, Gallucci M, Ronchi R, Grassi E, Senna I, Olgiati 
E, Perucca L, Banco E, Posteraro L, Tesio L, Vallar G. Rehabilitating 
patients with left spatial neglect by prism exposure during a visuomotor 
activity. Neuropsychology. 2010;24:681–697. doi: 10.1037/a0019476.
 
474. Kerkhoff G, Keller I, Artinger F, Hildebrandt H, Marquardt C, Reinhart 
S, Ziegler W. Recovery from auditory and visual neglect after optoki-
netic stimulation with pursuit eye movements: transient modulation and 
enduring treatment effects. Neuropsychologia. 2012;50:1164–1177. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.09.032.
 
475. Kim BR, Chun MH, Kim DY, Lee SJ. Effect of high- and low-fre-
quency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation on visuospatial 
neglect in patients with acute stroke: a double-blind, sham-controlled 
trial. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2013;94:803–807. doi: 10.1016/j.
apmr.2012.12.016.
 
476. Lim JY, Kang EK, Paik NJ. Repetitive transcranial magnetic 
stimulation to hemispatial neglect in patients after stroke: an 
open-label pilot study. J Rehabil Med. 2010;42:447–452. doi: 
10.2340/16501977-0553.
 
477. Pizzamiglio L, Fasotti L, Jehkonen M, Antonucci G, Magnotti L, Boelen 
D, Asa S. The use of optokinetic stimulation in rehabilitation of the 
hemineglect disorder. Cortex. 2004;40:441–450.
 
478. Polanowska K, Seniów J, Paprot E, Leśniak M, Członkowska A. 
Left-hand somatosensory stimulation combined with visual scanning 
training in rehabilitation for post-stroke hemineglect: a randomised, 
double-blind study. Neuropsychol Rehabil. 2009;19:364–382. doi: 
10.1080/09602010802268856.
 
479. Saevarsson S, Kristjansson A, Halsband U. Strength in numbers: com-
bining neck vibration and prism adaptation produces additive therapeutic 
effects in unilateral neglect. Neuropsychol Rehabil. 2010;20:704–724. 
doi: 10.1080/09602011003737087.
 
480. Song W, Du B, Xu Q, Hu J, Wang M, Luo Y. Low-frequency transcranial 
magnetic stimulation for visual spatial neglect: a pilot study. J Rehabil 
Med. 2009;41:162–165. doi: 10.2340/16501977-0302.
 
481. Vangkilde S, Habekost T. Finding Wally: prism adaptation improves 
visual search in chronic neglect. Neuropsychologia. 2010;48:1994–2004. 
doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.03.020.
 
482. Welfringer A, Leifert-Fiebach G, Babinsky R, Brandt T. Visuomotor 
imagery as a new tool in the rehabilitation of neglect: a randomised con-
trolled study of feasibility and efficacy. Disabil Rehabil. 2011;33:2033–
2043. doi: 10.3109/09638288.2011.556208.
 
483. Wu CY, Wang TN, Chen YT, Lin KC, Chen YA, Li HT, Tsai PL. Effects 
of constraint-induced therapy combined with eye patching on functional 
outcomes and movement kinematics in poststroke neglect. Am J Occup 
Ther. 2013;67:236–245. doi: 10.5014/ajot.2013.006486.
 
484. Katz N, Ring H, Naveh Y, Kizony R, Feintuch U, Weiss PL. Interactive 
virtual environment training for safe street crossing of right hemi-
sphere stroke patients with unilateral spatial neglect. Disabil Rehabil. 
2005;27:1235–1243. doi: 10.1080/09638280500076079.
 
485. Kim YM, Chun MH, Yun GJ, Song YJ, Young HE. The effect of vir-
tual reality training on unilateral spatial neglect in stroke patients. Ann 
Rehabil Med. 2011;35:309–315. doi: 10.5535/arm.2011.35.3.309.
 
486. Saevarsson S, Kristjánsson A, Hildebrandt H, Halsband U. Prism adapta-
tion improves visual search in hemispatial neglect. Neuropsychologia. 
2009;47:717–725. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2008.11.026.
 
487. Tsang MH, Sze KH, Fong KN. Occupational therapy treatment with right 
half-field eye-patching for patients with subacute stroke and unilateral 
neglect: a randomised controlled trial. Disabil Rehabil. 2009;31:630–
637. doi: 10.1080/09638280802240621.
 
488. Fong KN, Chan MK, Ng PP, Tsang MH, Chow KK, Lau CW, Chan 
FS, Wong IP, Chan DY, Chan CC. The effect of voluntary trunk rota-
tion and half-field eye-patching for patients with unilateral neglect in 
stroke: a randomized controlled trial. Clin Rehabil. 2007;21:729–741. 
doi: 10.1177/0269215507076391.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e158  Stroke  June 2016
 
489. Wilson B, Cockburn J, Halligan P. Development of a behavioral test of 
visuospatial neglect. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 1987;68:98–102.
 
490. Tham K. The baking tray task: a test of spatial neglect. Neuropsychol 
Rehabil. 1996;6:19–26. doi: 10.1080/713755496.
 
491. Azouvi P, Olivier S, de Montety G, Samuel C, Louis-Dreyfus A, Tesio 
L. Behavioral assessment of unilateral neglect: study of the psychomet-
ric properties of the Catherine Bergego Scale. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
2003;84:51–57. doi: 10.1053/apmr.2003.50062.
 
492. Keith RA, Granger CV, Hamilton BB, Sherwin FS. The functional inde-
pendence measure: a new tool for rehabilitation. In: Eisenberg MG, 
Grzesiak RC, eds. Advances in Clinical Rehabilitation. Vol 2. New York: 
Springer; 2987:6–18.
 
493. Deleted in proof.
 
494. Tompkins CA. Rehabilitation for cognitive-communication disor-
ders in right hemisphere brain damage. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
2012;93(suppl):S61–S69. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2011.10.015.
 
495. Lehman Blake M, Frymark T, Venedictov R. An evidence-based sys-
tematic review on communication treatments for individuals with right 
hemisphere brain damage. Am J Speech Lang Pathol. 2013;22:146–160. 
doi: 10.1044/1058-0360(2012/12-0021).
 
496. Godecke E, Hird K, Lalor EE, Rai T, Phillips MR. Very early poststroke 
aphasia therapy: a pilot randomized controlled efficacy trial. Int J Stroke. 
2012;7:635–644. doi: 10.1111/j.1747-4949.2011.00631.x.
 
497. Allen L, Mehta S, McClure JA, Teasell R. Therapeutic interventions 
for aphasia initiated more than six months post stroke: a review of 
the evidence. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2012;19:523–535. doi: 10.1310/
tsr1906-523.
 
498. Moss A, Nicholas M. Language rehabilitation in chronic aphasia and 
time postonset: a review of single-subject data. Stroke. 2006;37:3043–
3051. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000249427.74970.15.
 
499. Brady MC, Kelly H, Godwin J, Enderby P. Speech and language 
therapy for aphasia following stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2012;5:CD000425. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000425.pub3.
 
500. Cherney LR, Patterson JP, Raymer A, Frymark T, Schooling T. 
Evidence-based systematic review: effects of intensity of treatment 
and constraint-induced language therapy for individuals with stroke-
induced aphasia. J Speech Lang Hear Res. 2008;51:1282–1299. doi: 
10.1044/1092-4388(2008/07-0206).
 
501. Cherney LR, Patterson JP, Raymer AM. Intensity of aphasia therapy: evi-
dence and efficacy. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2011;11:560–569. doi: 
10.1007/s11910-011-0227-6.
 
502. Sickert A, Anders LC, Münte TF, Sailer M. Constraint-induced aphasia 
therapy following sub-acute stroke: a single-blind, randomised clinical 
trial of a modified therapy schedule. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 
2014;85:51–55. doi: 10.1136/jnnp-2012-304297.
 
503. Bakheit AM, Shaw S, Barrett L, Wood J, Carrington S, Griffiths S, 
Searle K, Koutsi F. A prospective, randomized, parallel group, controlled 
study of the effect of intensity of speech and language therapy on early 
recovery from poststroke aphasia. Clin Rehabil. 2007;21:885–894. doi: 
10.1177/0269215507078486.
 
504. Cherney LR, Erickson RK, Small SL. Epidural cortical stimulation 
as adjunctive treatment for non-fluent aphasia: preliminary findings. 
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2010;81:1014–1021. doi: 10.1136/
jnnp.2009.184036.
 
505. Nobis-Bosch R, Springer L, Radermacher I, Huber W. Supervised 
home training of dialogue skills in chronic aphasia: a randomized par-
allel group study. J Speech Lang Hear Res. 2011;54:1118–1136. doi: 
10.1044/1092-4388(2010/09-0204).
 
506. Palmer R, Enderby P, Cooper C, Latimer N, Julious S, Paterson G, 
Dimairo M, Dixon S, Mortley J, Hilton R, Delaney A, Hughes H. 
Computer therapy compared with usual care for people with long-
standing aphasia poststroke: a pilot randomized controlled trial. Stroke. 
2012;43:1904–1911. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.112.650671.
 
507. Simmons-Mackie N, Raymer A, Armstrong E, Holland A, Cherney 
LR. Communication partner training in aphasia: a systematic review. 
Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2010;91:1814–1837. doi: 10.1016/j.
apmr.2010.08.026.
 
508. Lanyon LE, Rose ML, Worrall L. The efficacy of outpatient and 
community-based aphasia group interventions: a systematic review. 
Int J Speech Lang Pathol. 2013;15:359–374. doi: 10.3109/17549507. 
2012.752865.
 
509. Berthier ML, Green C, Higueras C, Fernández I, Hinojosa J, Martín 
MC. A randomized, placebo-controlled study of donepezil in post-
stroke aphasia. Neurology. 2006;67:1687–1689. doi: 10.1212/01.
wnl.0000242626.69666.e2.
 
510. Berthier ML, Green C, Lara JP, Higueras C, Barbancho MA, Dávila G, 
Pulvermüller F. Memantine and constraint-induced aphasia therapy in 
chronic poststroke aphasia. Ann Neurol. 2009;65:577–585. doi: 10.1002/
ana.21597.
 
511. Hong JM, Shin DH, Lim TS, Lee JS, Huh K. Galantamine adminis-
tration in chronic post-stroke aphasia. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 
2012;83:675–680. doi: 10.1136/jnnp-2012-302268.
 
512. Ashtary F, Janghorbani M, Chitsaz A, Reisi M, Bahrami A. A ran-
domized, double-blind trial of bromocriptine efficacy in nonfluent 
aphasia after stroke. Neurology. 2006;66:914–916. doi: 10.1212/01.
wnl.0000203119.91762.0c.
 
513. Güngör L, Terzi M, Onar MK. Does long term use of piracetam improve 
speech disturbances due to ischemic cerebrovascular diseases? Brain 
Lang. 2011;117:23–27. doi: 10.1016/j.bandl.2010.11.003.
 
514. Barwood CH, Murdoch BE, Whelan BM, Lloyd D, Riek S, O’Sullivan 
JD, Coulthard A, Wong A. Improved receptive and expressive lan-
guage abilities in nonfluent aphasic stroke patients after application of 
rTMS: an open protocol case series. Brain Stimul. 2012;5:274–286. doi: 
10.1016/j.brs.2011.03.005.
 
515. Barwood CH, Murdoch BE, Whelan BM, Lloyd D, Riek S, O’ 
Sullivan JD, Coulthard A, Wong A. Improved language perfor-
mance subsequent to low-frequency rTMS in patients with chronic 
non-fluent aphasia post-stroke. Eur J Neurol. 2011;18:935–943. doi: 
10.1111/j.1468-1331.2010.03284.x.
 
516. Holland R, Crinion J. Can tDCS enhance treatment of aphasia after 
stroke? Aphasiology. 2012;26:1169–1191. doi: 10.1080/02687038. 
2011.616925.
 
517. Seniów J, Waldowski K, Leśniak M, Iwański S, Czepiel W, Członkowska 
A. Transcranial magnetic stimulation combined with speech and lan-
guage training in early aphasia rehabilitation: a randomized double-
blind controlled pilot study. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2013;20:250–261. doi: 
10.1310/tsr2003-250.
 
518. Thiel A, Hartmann A, Rubi-Fessen I, Anglade C, Kracht L, Weiduschat 
N, Kessler J, Rommel T, Heiss WD. Effects of noninvasive brain stimu-
lation on language networks and recovery in early poststroke aphasia. 
Stroke. 2013;44:2240–2246. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.000574.
 
519. Warlow CP, Dennis MS, Van Gijn J, Hankey GJ, Sandercock PAG, 
Bamford JG, Wardlaw J, eds. Stroke: A Practical Guide to Management. 
Oxford, UK: Blackwell Scientific; 2000.
 
520. Mackenzie C. Dysarthria in stroke: a narrative review of its description 
and the outcome of intervention. Int J Speech Lang Pathol. 2011;13:125–
136. doi: 10.3109/17549507.2011.524940.
 
521. Mackenzie C, Lowit A. Behavioural intervention effects in dysarthria 
following stroke: communication effectiveness, intelligibility and dys-
arthria impact. Int J Lang Commun Disord. 2007;42:131–153. doi: 
10.1080/13682820600861776.
 
522. Wambaugh JL, Duffy JR, McNeil MR, Robin DA, Rogers MA. 
Treatment guidelines for acquired apraxia of speech: treatment descrip-
tions and recommendations: second of two reports. J Med Speech Lang 
Pathol. 2006b;14:xxxv–Ixvii.
 
523. Yorkston KM, Hakel M, Beukelman DR, Fager S. Evidence for effec-
tiveness of treatment of loudness, rate, or prosody in dysarthria: a sys-
tematic review. J Med Speech Lang Pathol. 2007;15:XI–XXXVI.
 
524. Sellars C, Hughes T, Langhorne P. Speech and language therapy for dys-
arthria due to non-progressive brain damage. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2005:CD002088.
 
525. West C, Hesketh A, Vail A, Bowen A. Interventions for apraxia of speech 
following stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005:CD004298.
 
526. Wenke RJ, Theodoros D, Cornwell P. The short- and long-term effective-
ness of the LSVT for dysarthria following TBI and stroke. Brain Inj. 
2008;22:339–352. doi: 10.1080/02699050801960987.
 
527. Wambaugh JL, Duffy JR, McNeil MR, Robin DA, Rogers MA. 
Treatment guidelines for acquired apraxia of speech: a synthe-
sis and evaluation of the evidence. J Med Speech Lang Pathol. 
2006;14:35–37.
 
528. Wenke RJ, Theodoros D, Cornwell P. A comparison of the effects of the 
Lee Silverman voice treatment and traditional therapy on intelligibility, 
perceptual speech features, and everyday communication in nonprogres-
sive dysarthria. J Med Speech Lang Pathol. 2011;19:1–24.
 
529. Palmer R, Enderby P, Hawley M. Addressing the needs of speakers 
with longstanding dysarthria: computerized and traditional therapy 
compared. Int J Lang Commun Disord. 2007;42(suppl 1):61–79. doi: 
10.1080/13682820601173296.
 
530. Frankoff DJ, Hatfield B. Augmentative and alternative communication 
in daily clinical practice: strategies and tools for management of severe 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e159
communication disorders. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2011;18:112–119. doi: 
10.1310/tsr1802-112.
 
531. Hanson E, Yorkston K, Beukelman D. Speech supplementation tech-
niques for dysarthria: a systematic review. J Med Speech Lang Pathol. 
2004;12:IX–XXIX.
 
532. Brady MC, Clark AM, Dickson S, Paton G, Barbour RS. The impact 
of stroke-related dysarthria on social participation and implica-
tions for rehabilitation. Disabil Rehabil. 2011;33:178–186. doi: 
10.3109/09638288.2010.517897.
 
533. Dickson S, Barbour RS, Brady M, Clark AM, Paton G. Patients’ 
experiences of disruptions associated with post-stroke dys-
arthria. Int J Lang Commun Disord. 2008;43:135–153. doi: 
10.1080/13682820701862228.
 
534. Mackenzie C, Paton G, Kelly S, Brady M, Muir M. The Living 
With Dysarthria Group: implementation and feasibility of a group 
intervention for people with dysarthria following stroke and fam-
ily members. Int J Lang Commun Disord. 2012;47:709–724. doi: 
10.1111/j.1460-6984.2012.00180.x.
 
535. Baylor C, Burns M, Eadie T, Britton D, Yorkston K. A qualitative study 
of interference with communicative participation across communication 
disorders in adults. Am J Speech Lang Pathol. 2011;20:269–287. doi: 
10.1044/1058-0360(2011/10-0084).
 
536. Dykstra AD, Hakel ME, Adams SG. Application of the ICF in reduced 
speech intelligibility in dysarthria. Semin Speech Lang. 2007;28:301–
311. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-986527.
 
537. Whitehill TL, Ma EPM, Tse FCM. Environmental barriers to commu-
nication for individuals with dysarthria. J Med Speech Lang Pathol. 
2010;18:141–144.
 
538. American Speech-Language Hearing Association. Speech-language 
pathologists providing clinical services via telepractice [position state-
ment]. 2005. http://www.asha.org/policy. Accessed August 4, 2014.
 
539. Doan QV, Brashear A, Gillard PJ, Varon SF, Vandenburgh AM, Turkel 
CC, Elovic EP. Relationship between disability and health-related qual-
ity of life and caregiver burden in patients with upper limb poststroke 
spasticity. PM R. 2012;4:4–10. doi: 10.1016/j.pmrj.2011.10.001.
 
540. Lundström E, Smits A, Borg J, Terént A. Four-fold increase in direct 
costs of stroke survivors with spasticity compared with stroke survivors 
without spasticity: the first year after the event. Stroke. 2010;41:319–
324. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.558619.
 
541. Shackley P, Shaw L, Price C, van Wijck F, Barnes M, Graham L, Ford 
GA, Steen N, Rodgers H. Cost-effectiveness of treating upper limb 
spasticity due to stroke with botulinum toxin type A: results from the 
Botulinum Toxin for the Upper Limb After Stroke (BoTULS) trial. 
Toxins (Basel). 2012;4:1415–1426.
 
542. Moura Rde C, Fukujima MM, Aguiar AS, Fontes SV, Dauar RF, Prado 
GF. Predictive factors for spasticity among ischemic stroke patients. Arq 
Neuropsiquiatr. 2009;67:1029–1036.
 
543. Urban PP, Wolf T, Uebele M, Marx JJ, Vogt T, Stoeter P, Bauermann T, 
Weibrich C, Vucurevic GD, Schneider A, Wissel J. Occurence and clini-
cal predictors of spasticity after ischemic stroke. Stroke. 2010;41:2016–
2020. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.581991.
 
544. Wissel J, Schelosky LD, Scott J, Christe W, Faiss JH, Mueller J. Early 
development of spasticity following stroke: a prospective, observational 
trial. J Neurol. 2010;257:1067–1072. doi: 10.1007/s00415-010-5463-1.
 
545. Lundström E, Smits A, Terént A, Borg J. Time-course and determinants 
of spasticity during the first six months following first-ever stroke. J 
Rehabil Med. 2010;42:296–301. doi: 10.2340/16501977-0509.
 
546. Ryu JS, Lee JW, Lee SI, Chun MH. Factors predictive of spasticity and 
their effects on motor recovery and functional outcomes in stroke patients. 
Top Stroke Rehabil. 2010;17:380–388. doi: 10.1310/tsr1705-380.
 
547. Kong KH, Lee J, Chua KS. Occurrence and temporal evolution of upper 
limb spasticity in stroke patients admitted to a rehabilitation unit. Arch 
Phys Med Rehabil. 2012;93:143–148. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2011.06.027.
 
548. Carda S, Invernizzi M, Baricich A, Cisari C. Casting, taping or stretching 
after botulinum toxin type A for spastic equinus foot: a single-blind ran-
domized trial on adult stroke patients. Clin Rehabil. 2011;25:1119–1127. 
doi: 10.1177/0269215511405080.
 
549. Karadag-Saygi E, Cubukcu-Aydoseli K, Kablan N, Ofluoglu D. The role 
of kinesiotaping combined with botulinum toxin to reduce plantar flex-
ors spasticity after stroke. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2010;17:318–322. doi: 
10.1310/tsr1704-318.
 
550. Sabut SK, Sikdar C, Kumar R, Mahadevappa M. Functional electri-
cal stimulation of dorsiflexor muscle: effects on dorsiflexor strength, 
plantarflexor spasticity, and motor recovery in stroke patients. 
NeuroRehabilitation. 2011;29:393–400. doi: 10.3233/NRE-2011-0717.
 
551. Caliandro P, Celletti C, Padua L, Minciotti I, Russo G, Granata G, La 
Torre G, Granieri E, Camerota F. Focal muscle vibration in the treatment 
of upper limb spasticity: a pilot randomized controlled trial in patients 
with chronic stroke. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2012;93:1656–1661. doi: 
10.1016/j.apmr.2012.04.002.
 
552. Noma T, Matsumoto S, Etoh S, Shimodozono M, Kawahira K. Anti-
spastic effects of the direct application of vibratory stimuli to the 
spastic muscles of hemiplegic limbs in post-stroke patients. Brain Inj. 
2009;23:623–631. doi: 10.1080/02699050902997896.
 
553. Noma T, Matsumoto S, Shimodozono M, Etoh S, Kawahira K. 
Anti-spastic effects of the direct application of vibratory stimuli 
to the spastic muscles of hemiplegic limbs in post-stroke patients: 
a proof-of-principle study. J Rehabil Med. 2012;44:325–330. doi: 
10.2340/16501977-0946.
 
554. Department of Veterans Affairs, Department of Defense, American Heart 
Association/American Stroke Association. VA/DoD Clinical Practice 
Guideline for the Management of Stroke Rehabilitation. Washington, 
DC: Veterans Affairs/Department of Defense; 2010.
 
555. Brainin M, Norrving B, Sunnerhagen KS, Goldstein LB, Cramer 
SC, Donnan GA, Duncan PW, Francisco G, Good D, Graham G, 
Kissela BM, Olver J, Ward A, Wissel J, Zorowitz R; International 
PSS Disability Study Group. Poststroke chronic disease manage-
ment: towards improved identification and interventions for poststroke 
spasticity-related complications. Int J Stroke. 2011;6:42–46. doi: 
10.1111/j.1747-4949.2010.00539.x.
 
556. Olvey EL, Armstrong EP, Grizzle AJ. Contemporary pharmacologic treat-
ments for spasticity of the upper limb after stroke: a systematic review. 
Clin Ther. 2010;32:2282–2303. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2011.01.005.
 
557. Teasell R, Foley N, Pereira S, Sequeira K, Miller T. Evidence to practice: 
botulinum toxin in the treatment of spasticity post stroke. Top Stroke 
Rehabil. 2012;19:115–121. doi: 10.1310/tsr1902-115.
 
558. Foley N, Pereira S, Salter K, Fernandez MM, Speechley M, Sequeira 
K, Miller T, Teasell R. Treatment with botulinum toxin improves 
upper-extremity function post stroke: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2013;94:977–989. doi: 10.1016/j.
apmr.2012.12.006.
 
559. Shaw LC, Price CI, van Wijck FM, Shackley P, Steen N, Barnes MP, 
Ford GA, Graham LA, Rodgers H; BoTULS Investigators. Botulinum 
Toxin for the Upper Limb after Stroke (BoTULS) Trial: effect on impair-
ment, activity limitation, and pain. Stroke. 2011;42:1371–1379. doi: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.582197.
 
560. Wolf SL, Milton SB, Reiss A, Easley KA, Shenvi NV, Clark PC. Further 
assessment to determine the additive effect of botulinum toxin type A on 
an upper extremity exercise program to enhance function among individ-
uals with chronic stroke but extensor capability. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
2012;93:578–587. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2011.10.026.
 
561. Doan QV, Gillard P, Brashear A, Halperin M, Hayward E, Varon S, Lu 
ZJ. Cost-effectiveness of onabotulinumtoxinA for the treatment of wrist 
and hand disability due to upper-limb post-stroke spasticity in Scotland. 
Eur J Neurol. 2013;20:773–780. doi: 10.1111/ene.12062.
 
562. Cousins E, Ward A, Roffe C, Rimington L, Pandyan A. Does low-
dose botulinum toxin help the recovery of arm function when 
given early after stroke? A phase II randomized controlled pilot 
study to estimate effect size. Clin Rehabil. 2010;24:501–513. doi: 
10.1177/0269215509358945.
 
563. Rosales RL, Kong KH, Goh KJ, Kumthornthip W, Mok VC, Delgado-De 
Los Santos MM, Chua KS, Abdullah SJ, Zakine B, Maisonobe P, 
Magis A, Wong KS. Botulinum toxin injection for hypertonicity of 
the upper extremity within 12 weeks after stroke: a randomized con-
trolled trial. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2012;26:812–821. doi: 
10.1177/1545968311430824.
 
564. Kaji R, Osako Y, Suyama K, Maeda T, Uechi Y, Iwasaki M; GSK1358820 
Spasticity Study Group. Botulinum toxin type A in post-stroke lower 
limb spasticity: a multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial 
[published correction appears in J Neurol. 2010;257:1416]. J Neurol. 
2010;257:1330–1337. doi: 10.1007/s00415-010-5526-3.
 
565. Santamato A, Micello MF, Panza F, Fortunato F, Pilotto A, Giustini A, 
Testa A, Fiore P, Ranieri M, Spidalieri R. Safety and efficacy of incobot-
ulinum toxin type A (NT 201-Xeomin) for the treatment of post-stroke 
lower limb spasticity: a prospective open-label study. Eur J Phys Rehabil 
Med. 2013;49:483–489.
 
566. Santamato A, Panza F, Ranieri M, Frisardi V, Micello MF, Filoni S, 
Fortunato F, Intiso D, Basciani M, Logroscino G, Fiore P. Efficacy 
and safety of higher doses of botulinum toxin type A NT 201 free 
from complexing proteins in the upper and lower limb spasticity after 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e160  Stroke  June 2016
stroke. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2013;120:469–476. doi: 10.1007/
s00702-012-0892-x.
 
567. Foley N, Murie-Fernandez M, Speechley M, Salter K, Sequeira K, 
Teasell R. Does the treatment of spastic equinovarus deformity fol-
lowing stroke with botulinum toxin increase gait velocity? A system-
atic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Neurol. 2010;17:1419–1427. doi: 
10.1111/j.1468-1331.2010.03084.x.
 
568. Tok F, Balaban B, Yaşar E, Alaca R, Tan AK. The effects of onabotu-
linum toxin A injection into rectus femoris muscle in hemiplegic 
stroke patients with stiff-knee gait: a placebo-controlled, nonrandom-
ized trial. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 2012;91:321–326. doi: 10.1097/
PHM.0b013e3182465feb.
 
569. Meythaler JM, Clayton W, Davis LK, Guin-Renfroe S, Brunner RC. 
Orally delivered baclofen to control spastic hypertonia in acquired brain 
injury. J Head Trauma Rehabil. 2004;19:101–108.
 
570. Meythaler JM, Guin-Renfroe S, Johnson A, Brunner RM. Prospective 
assessment of tizanidine for spasticity due to acquired brain injury. Arch 
Phys Med Rehabil. 2001;82:1155–1163. doi: 10.1053/apmr.2001.25141.
 
571. Chyatte SB, Birdsong JH, Bergman BA. The effects of dantrolene 
sodium on spasticity and motor performance in hemiplegia. South Med 
J. 1971;64:180–185.
 
572. Gelber DA, Good DC, Dromerick A, Sergay S, Richardson M. Open-
label dose-titration safety and efficacy study of tizanidine hydrochloride 
in the treatment of spasticity associated with chronic stroke. Stroke. 
2001;32:1841–1846.
 
573. Bes A, Eyssette M, Pierrot-Deseilligny E, Rohmer F, Warter JM. A 
multi-centre, double-blind trial of tizanidine, a new antispastic agent, in 
spasticity associated with hemiplegia. Curr Med Res Opin. 1988;10:709–
718. doi: 10.1185/03007998809111122.
 
574. Medici M, Pebet M, Ciblis D. A double-blind, long-term study of tizani-
dine (“Sirdalud”) in spasticity due to cerebrovascular lesions. Curr Med 
Res Opin. 1989;11:398–407. doi: 10.1185/03007998909110141.
 
575. Ketel WB, Kolb ME. Long-term treatment with dantrolene sodium of 
stroke patients with spasticity limiting the return of function. Curr Med 
Res Opin. 1984;9:161–169. doi: 10.1185/03007998409109576.
 
576. Katrak PH, Cole AM, Poulos CJ, McCauley JC. Objective assessment 
of spasticity, strength, and function with early exhibition of dantrolene 
sodium after cerebrovascular accident: a randomized double-blind study. 
Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 1992;73:4–9.
 
577. Medaer R, Hellbuyk H, Van Den Brande E, Saxena V, Thijs M, Kovacs 
L, Eerdekens M, Dehaen F. Treatment of spasticity due to stroke: a dou-
ble-blind, cross-over trial comparing baclofen with placebo. Acta Ther. 
1991;17:323–331.
 
578. Meythaler JM, DeVivo MJ, Hadley M. Prospective study on the use of 
bolus intrathecal baclofen for spastic hypertonia due to acquired brain 
injury. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 1996;77:461–466.
 
579. Francisco GE, Boake C. Improvement in walking speed in poststroke 
spastic hemiplegia after intrathecal baclofen therapy: a preliminary 
study. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2003;84:1194–1199.
 
580. Horn TS, Yablon SA, Stokic DS. Effect of intrathecal baclofen bolus 
injection on temporospatial gait characteristics in patients with acquired 
brain injury. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2005;86:1127–1133. doi: 
10.1016/j.apmr.2004.11.013.
 
581. Ivanhoe CB, Francisco GE, McGuire JR, Subramanian T, Grissom 
SP. Intrathecal baclofen management of poststroke spastic hypertonia: 
implications for function and quality of life. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
2006;87:1509–1515. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2006.08.323.
 
582. Rémy-Néris O, Tiffreau V, Bouilland S, Bussel B. Intrathecal baclofen 
in subjects with spastic hemiplegia: assessment of the antispastic effect 
during gait. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2003;84:643–650.
 
583. Francisco GE, Yablon SA, Schiess MC, Wiggs L, Cavalier S, Grissom S. 
Consensus panel guidelines for the use of intrathecal baclofen therapy in 
poststroke spastic hypertonia. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2006;13:74–85. doi: 
10.1310/tsr1304-74.
 
584. Davenport RJ, Dennis MS, Wellwood I, Warlow CP. Complications after 
acute stroke. Stroke. 1996;27:415–420.
 
585. Forster A, Young J. Incidence and consequences of falls due to stroke: a 
systematic inquiry. BMJ. 1995;311:83–86.
 
586. Pouwels S, Lalmohamed A, Leufkens B, de Boer A, Cooper C, van 
Staa T, de Vries F. Risk of hip/femur fracture after stroke: a population-
based case-control study. Stroke. 2009;40:3281–3285. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.109.554055.
 
587. Yiu J, Miller WC, Eng JJ, Liu Y. Longitudinal analysis of bal-
ance confidence in individuals with stroke using a multilevel model 
for change. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2012;26:999–1006. doi: 
10.1177/1545968312437941.
 
588. Bronstein AM, Pavlou M. Balance. In: Barnes MP, Good DC, eds. 
Handbook of Clinical Neurology, Neurological Rehabilitation. New 
York, NY: Elsevier; 2013;110:189–208.
 
589. Shumway-Cook A, Woolacott MH. Motor Control: Translating Research 
Into Clinical Practice. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins; 2007.
 
590. Deleted in proof.
 
591. Campbell GB, Matthews JT. An integrative review of factors associ-
ated with falls during post-stroke rehabilitation. J Nurs Scholarsh. 
2010;42:395–404. doi: 10.1111/j.1547-5069.2010.01369.x.
 
592. Lubetzky-Vilnai A, Kartin D. The effect of balance training on balance 
performance in individuals poststroke: a systematic review. J Neurol 
Phys Ther. 2010;34:127–137. doi: 10.1097/NPT.0b013e3181ef764d.
 
593. Mehrholz J, Kugler J, Pohl M. Water-based exercises for improving 
activities of daily living after stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2011:CD008186. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD008186.pub2.
 
594. Kim IC, Lee BH. Effects of augmented reality with functional electric 
stimulation on muscle strength, balance and gait of stroke patients. J 
Phys Ther Sci. 2012;24:755–762.
 
595. Kim BH, Lee SM, Bae YH, Yu JH, Kim TH. The effect of a task-oriented 
training on trunk control ability, balance and gait of stroke patients. J 
Phys Ther Sci. 2012;24:519–522.
 
596. Jung JC, Goo BO, Lee DH, Yu JH, Kim TH. Effects of 3D visual feed-
back exercise on the balance and walking abilities of hemiplegic patients. 
J Phys Ther Sci. 2011;23:859–862.
 
597. Byun SD, Jung TD, Kim CH, Lee YS. Effects of the sliding rehabilita-
tion machine on balance and gait in chronic stroke patients: a controlled 
clinical trial. Clin Rehabil. 2011;25:408–415.
 
598. Karthikbabu S, Nayak A, Vijayakumar K, Misri Z, Suresh B, Ganesan S, 
Joshua AM. Comparison of physio ball and plinth trunk exercises regi-
mens on trunk control and functional balance in patients with acute stroke: 
a pilot randomized controlled trial. Clin Rehabil. 2011;25:709–719.
 
599. Lau KW, Mak MK. Speed-dependent treadmill training is effective to 
improve gait and balance performance in patients with sub-acute stroke. 
J Rehabil Med. 2011;43:709–713.
 
600. Saeys W, Vereeck L, Truijen S, Lafosse C, Wuyts FP, Heyning PV. 
Randomized controlled trial of truncal exercises early after stroke 
to improve balance and mobility. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 
2012;26:231–238.
 
601. Schmid AA, Van Puymbroeck M, Altenburger PA, Schalk NL, Dierks 
TA, Miller KK, Damush TM, Bravata DM, Williams LS. Poststroke bal-
ance improves with yoga: a pilot study. Stroke. 2012;43:2402–2407. doi: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.112.658211.
 
602. Aruin AS, Rao N, Sharma A, Chaudhuri G. Compelled body weight shift 
approach in rehabilitation of individuals with chronic stroke. Top Stroke 
Rehabil. 2012;19:556–563.
 
603. Fisher S, Lucas L, Thrasher TA. Robot-assisted gait training 
for patients with hemiparesis due to stroke. Top Stroke Rehabil. 
2011;18:269–276.
 
604. Schuster C, Butler J, Andrews B, Kischka U, Ettlin T. Comparison of 
embedded and added motor imagery training in patients after stroke: 
results of a randomised controlled pilot trial. Trials. 2012;13:11.
 
605. Tyson SF, Kent RM. Effects of an ankle-foot orthosis on balance and 
walking after stroke: a systematic review and pooled meta-analy-
sis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2013;94:1377–1385. doi: 10.1016/j.
apmr.2012.12.025.
 
606. Stoykov ME, Stojakovich M, Stevens JA. Beneficial effects of postural 
intervention on prehensile action for an individual with ataxia resulting 
from brainstem stroke. NeuroRehabilitation. 2005;20:85–89.
 
607. Bastian AJ, Martin TA, Keating JG, Thach WT. Cerebellar ataxia: abnor-
mal control of interaction torques across multiple joints. J Neurophysiol. 
1996;76:492–509.
 
608. Chua KS, Kong KH. Functional outcome in brain stem stroke patients 
after rehabilitation. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 1996;77:194–197.
 
609. Teasell R, Foley N, Doherty T, Finestone H. Clinical characteristics of 
patients with brainstem strokes admitted to a rehabilitation unit. Arch 
Phys Med Rehabil. 2002;83:1013–1016.
 
610. Kelly PJ, Stein J, Shafqat S, Eskey C, Doherty D, Chang Y, Kurina A, 
Furie KL. Functional recovery after rehabilitation for cerebellar stroke. 
Stroke. 2001;32:530–534.
 
611. Hatakenaka M, Miyai I, Mihara M, Yagura H, Hattori N. Impaired 
motor learning by a pursuit rotor test reduces functional outcomes 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e161
during rehabilitation of poststroke ataxia. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 
2012;26:293–300. doi: 10.1177/1545968311412053.
 
612. Molinari M, Leggio MG, Solida A, Ciorra R, Misciagna S, Silveri MC, 
Petrosini L. Cerebellum and procedural learning: evidence from focal 
cerebellar lesions. Brain. 1997;120(pt 10):1753–1762.
 
613. Richards L, Senesac C, McGuirk T, Woodbury M, Howland D, Davis S, 
Patterson T. Response to intensive upper extremity therapy by individu-
als with ataxia from stroke. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2008;15:262–271. doi: 
10.1310/tsr1503-262.
 
614. van de Port IG, Wood-Dauphinee S, Lindeman E, Kwakkel G. Effects of 
exercise training programs on walking competency after stroke: a sys-
tematic review. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 2007;86:935–951.
 
615. Veerbeek JM, Koolstra M, Ket JC, van Wegen EE, Kwakkel G. Effects of 
augmented exercise therapy on outcome of gait and gait-related activities 
in the first 6 months after stroke: a meta-analysis. Stroke. 2011;42:3311–
3315. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.623819.
 
616. Langhorne P, Coupar F, Pollock A. Motor recovery after stroke: a 
systematic review. Lancet Neurol. 2009;8:741–754. doi: 10.1016/
S1474-4422(09)70150-4.
 
617. French B, Thomas LH, Leathley MJ, Sutton CJ, McAdam J, Forster A, 
Langhorne P, Price CI, Walker A, Watkins CL. Repetitive task training 
for improving functional ability after stroke. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2007:CD006073.
 
618. Eng JJ, Tang PF. Gait training strategies to optimize walking ability in 
people with stroke: a synthesis of the evidence. Expert Rev Neurother. 
2007;7:1417–1436. doi: 10.1586/14737175.7.10.1417.
 
619. Dobkin BH, Duncan PW. Should body weight-supported treadmill train-
ing and robotic-assistive steppers for locomotor training trot back to 
the starting gate? Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2012;26:308–317. doi: 
10.1177/1545968312439687.
 
620. Ada L, Dean CM, Lindley R. Randomized trial of treadmill train-
ing to improve walking in community-dwelling people after 
stroke: the AMBULATE trial. Int J Stroke. 2013;8:436–444. doi: 
10.1111/j.1747-4949.2012.00934.x.
 
621. Dickstein R. Rehabilitation of gait speed after stroke: a critical review 
of intervention approaches. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2008;22:649–
660. doi: 10.1177/15459683080220060201.
 
622. Dean CM, Rissel C, Sherrington C, Sharkey M, Cumming RG, Lord 
SR, RN, Kirkham C, O’Rourke S. Exercise to enhance mobility 
and prevent falls after stroke: the Community Stroke Club random-
ized trial. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2012;26:1046–1057. doi: 
10.1177/1545968312441711.
 
623. English C, Hillier S. Circuit class therapy for improving mobility after 
stroke: a systematic review. J Rehabil Med. 2011;43:565–571. doi: 
10.2340/16501977-0824.
 
624. Mudge S, Barber PA, Stott NS. Circuit-based rehabilitation improves 
gait endurance but not usual walking activity in chronic stroke: a ran-
domized controlled trial. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2009;90:1989–1996. 
doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2009.07.015.
 
625. Wevers L, van de Port I, Vermue M, Mead G, Kwakkel G. Effects 
of task-oriented circuit class training on walking competency after 
stroke: a systematic review. Stroke. 2009;40:2450–2459. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.108.541946.
 
626. Polese JC, Ada L, Dean CM, Nascimento LR, Teixeira-Salmela LF. 
Treadmill training is effective for ambulatory adults with stroke: 
a systematic review. J Physiother. 2013;59:73–80. doi: 10.1016/
S1836-9553(13)70159-0.
 
627. Høyer E, Jahnsen R, Stanghelle JK, Strand LI. Body weight supported 
treadmill training versus traditional training in patients dependent on 
walking assistance after stroke: a randomized controlled trial. Disabil 
Rehabil. 2012;34:210–219. doi: 10.3109/09638288.2011.593681.
 
628. Ada L, Dean CM, Vargas J, Ennis S. Mechanically assisted walking with 
body weight support results in more independent walking than assisted 
overground walking in non-ambulatory patients early after stroke: a sys-
tematic review. J Physiother. 2010;56:153–161.
 
629. Mehta S, Pereira S, Viana R, Mays R, McIntyre A, Janzen S, Teasell 
RW. Resistance training for gait speed and total distance walked dur-
ing the chronic stage of stroke: a meta-analysis. Top Stroke Rehabil. 
2012;19:471–478. doi: 10.1310/tsr1906-471.
 
630. Pak S, Patten C. Strengthening to promote functional recovery post-
stroke: an evidence-based review. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2008;15:177–199. 
doi: 10.1310/tsr1503-177.
 
631. Pereira S, Mehta S, McIntyre A, Lobo L, Teasell RW. Functional electri-
cal stimulation for improving gait in persons with chronic stroke. Top 
Stroke Rehabil. 2012;19:491–498. doi: 10.1310/tsr1906-491.
 
632. Robbins SM, Houghton PE, Woodbury MG, Brown JL. The therapeutic 
effect of functional and transcutaneous electric stimulation on improving 
gait speed in stroke patients: a meta-analysis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
2006;87:853–859. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2006.02.026.
 
633. Daly JJ, Roenigk K, Holcomb J, Rogers JM, Butler K, Gansen J, McCabe 
J, Fredrickson E, Marsolais EB, Ruff RL. A randomized controlled trial 
of functional neuromuscular stimulation in chronic stroke subjects. 
Stroke. 2006;37:172–178. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000195129.95220.77.
 
634. Ambrosini E, Ferrante S, Pedrocchi A, Ferrigno G, Molteni F. Cycling 
induced by electrical stimulation improves motor recovery in post-
acute hemiparetic patients: a randomized controlled trial. Stroke. 
2011;42:1068–1073. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.599068.
 
635. Sabut SK, Sikdar C, Mondal R, Kumar R, Mahadevappa M. Restoration 
of gait and motor recovery by functional electrical stimulation therapy 
in persons with stroke. Disabil Rehabil. 2010;32:1594–1603. doi: 
10.3109/09638281003599596.
 
636. Yamaguchi T, Tanabe S, Muraoka Y, Masakado Y, Kimura A, Tsuji T, 
Liu M. Immediate effects of electrical stimulation combined with pas-
sive locomotion-like movement on gait velocity and spasticity in persons 
with hemiparetic stroke: a randomized controlled study. Clin Rehabil. 
2012;26:619–628. doi: 10.1177/0269215511426803.
 
637. Yan T, Hui-Chan CW, Li LS. Functional electrical stimulation improves 
motor recovery of the lower extremity and walking ability of subjects 
with first acute stroke: a randomized placebo-controlled trial. Stroke. 
2005;36:80–85. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000149623.24906.63.
 
638. Everaert DG, Stein RB, Abrams GM, Dromerick AW, Francisco GE, 
Hafner BJ, Huskey TN, Munin MC, Nolan KJ, Kufta CV. Effect of a 
foot-drop stimulator and ankle-foot orthosis on walking performance 
after stroke: a multicenter randomized controlled trial. Neurorehabil 
Neural Repair. 2013;27:579–591. doi: 10.1177/1545968313481278.
 
639. Ottawa Panel, Khadilkar A, Phillips K, Jean N, Lamothe C, Milne S, 
Sarnecka J. Ottawa Panel evidence-based clinical practice guidelines for 
post-stroke rehabilitation. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2006;13:1–269.
 
640. Kluding PM, Dunning K, O’Dell MW, Wu SS, Ginosian J, Feld J, 
McBride K. Foot drop stimulation versus ankle foot orthosis after 
stroke: 30-week outcomes. Stroke. 2013;44:1660–1669. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.111.000334.
 
641. Kottink AI, Hermens HJ, Nene AV, Tenniglo MJ, Groothuis-Oudshoorn 
CG, IJzerman MJ. Therapeutic effect of an implantable peroneal 
nerve stimulator in subjects with chronic stroke and footdrop: a ran-
domized controlled trial. Phys Ther. 2008;88:437–448. doi: 10.2522/
ptj.20070035.
 
642. Sheffler LR, Taylor PN, Gunzler DD, Buurke JH, Ijzerman MJ, Chae J. 
Randomized controlled trial of surface peroneal nerve stimulation for 
motor relearning in lower limb hemiparesis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
2013;94:1007–1014. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2013.01.024.
 
643. Sheffler LR, Hennessey MT, Naples GG, Chae J. Peroneal nerve 
stimulation versus an ankle foot orthosis for correction of footdrop in 
stroke: impact on functional ambulation. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 
2006;20:355–360. doi: 10.1177/1545968306287925.
 
644. Chollet F, Tardy J, Albucher JF, Thalamas C, Berard E, Lamy C, 
Bejot Y, Deltour S, Jaillard A, Niclot P, Guillon B, Moulin T, Marque 
P, Pariente J, Arnaud C, Loubinoux I. Fluoxetine for motor recov-
ery after acute ischaemic stroke (FLAME): a randomised placebo-
controlled trial [published correction appears in Lancet Neurol. 
2011;10:205]. Lancet Neurol. 2011;10:123–130. doi: 10.1016/
S1474-4422(10)70314-8.
 
645. Dam M, Tonin P, De Boni A, Pizzolato G, Casson S, Ermani M, Freo U, 
Piron L, Battistin L. Effects of fluoxetine and maprotiline on functional 
recovery in poststroke hemiplegic patients undergoing rehabilitation 
therapy. Stroke. 1996;27:1211–1214.
 
646. Fruehwald S, Gatterbauer E, Rehak P, Baumhackl U. Early fluoxetine 
treatment of post-stroke depression–a three-month double-blind pla-
cebo-controlled study with an open-label long-term follow up. J Neurol. 
2003;250:347–351. doi: 10.1007/s00415-003-1014-3.
 
647. Pariente J, Loubinoux I, Carel C, Albucher JF, Leger A, Manelfe C, 
Rascol O, Chollet F. Fluoxetine modulates motor performance and 
cerebral activation of patients recovering from stroke. Ann Neurol. 
2001;50:718–729.
 
648. Miyai I, Reding R. Effects of antidepressants on functional recovery fol-
lowing stroke: a double blind study. J Neuro Rehab. 1998;12:5–13.
 
649. Mead GE, Hsieh CF, Lee R, Kutlubaev M, Claxton A, Hankey GJ, 
Hackett M. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors for stroke recovery: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Stroke. 2013;44:844–850. doi: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.112.673947.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e162  Stroke  June 2016
 
650. Martinsson L, Hardemark H, Eksborg S. Amphetamines for improving 
recovery after stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007:CD002090.
 
651. Scheidtmann K, Fries W, Müller F, Koenig E. Effect of levodopa in com-
bination with physiotherapy on functional motor recovery after stroke: 
a prospective, randomised, double-blind study. Lancet. 2001;358:787–
790. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(01)05966-9.
 
652. Shiflett SC. Does acupuncture work for stroke rehabilitation: what do 
recent clinical trials really show? Top Stroke Rehabil. 2007;14:40–58. 
doi: 10.1310/tsr1404-40.
 
653. Ng SS, Hui-Chan CW. Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation 
combined with task-related training improves lower limb functions in 
subjects with chronic stroke. Stroke. 2007;38:2953–2959. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.107.490318.
 
654. Ng SS, Hui-Chan CW. Does the use of TENS increase the effective-
ness of exercise for improving walking after stroke? A random-
ized controlled clinical trial. Clin Rehabil. 2009;23:1093–1103. doi: 
10.1177/0269215509342327.
 
655. Tyson SF, Sadeghi-Demneh E, Nester CJ. The effects of trans-
cutaneous electrical nerve stimulation on strength, propriocep-
tion, balance and mobility in people with stroke: a randomized 
controlled cross-over trial. Clin Rehabil. 2013;27:785–791. doi: 
10.1177/0269215513478227.
 
656. Wittwer JE, Webster KE, Hill K. Rhythmic auditory cueing to improve 
walking in patients with neurological conditions other than Parkinson’s 
disease: what is the evidence? Disabil Rehabil. 2013;35:164–176. doi: 
10.3109/09638288.2012.690495.
 
657. Doğan A, Mengüllüoğlu M, Özgirgin N. Evaluation of the effect 
of ankle-foot orthosis use on balance and mobility in hemipa-
retic stroke patients. Disabil Rehabil. 2011;33:1433–1439. doi: 
10.3109/09638288.2010.533243.
 
658. Tyson S, Sadeghi-Demneh E, Nester C. A systematic review and 
meta-analysis of the effect of an ankle-foot orthosis on gait biome-
chanics after stroke. Clin Rehabil. 2013;27:879–891. doi: 10.1177/ 
0269215513486497.
 
659. Tyson SF, Kent RM. Orthotic devices after stroke and other non-
progressive brain lesions [retracted in Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2009:CD003694] Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2009:CD003694. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD003694.pub3.
 
660. Thijssen DH, Paulus R, van Uden CJ, Kooloos JG, Hopman MT. 
Decreased energy cost and improved gait pattern using a new orthosis 
in persons with long-term stroke. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2007;88:181–
186. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2006.11.014.
 
661. Mehrholz J, Elsner B, Werner C, Kugler J, Pohl M. Electromechanical-
assisted training for walking after stroke: updated evidence. Stroke. 
2013;44:e127–e128. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.113.003061.
 
662. Hornby TG, Campbell DD, Kahn JH, Demott T, Moore JL, Roth 
HR. Enhanced gait-related improvements after therapist- versus 
robotic-assisted locomotor training in subjects with chronic stroke: 
a randomized controlled study [published correction appears in 
Stroke. 2008;39:e143]. Stroke. 2008;39:1786–1792. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.107.504779.
 
663. Swinnen E, Beckwée D, Meeusen R, Baeyens JP, Kerckhofs E. Does 
robot-assisted gait rehabilitation improve balance in stroke patients? A 
systematic review. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2014;21:87–100. doi: 10.1310/
tsr2102-87.
 
664. Stein J, Bishop L, Stein DJ, Wong CK. Gait training with a robotic leg 
brace after stroke: a randomized controlled pilot study. Am J Phys Med 
Rehabil. 2014;93:987–994. doi: 10.1097/PHM.0000000000000119.
 
665. Woodford H, Price C. EMG biofeedback for the recovery of motor func-
tion after stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007:CD004585.
 
666. Laver KE, George S, Thomas S, Deutsch JE, Crotty M. Virtual reality 
for stroke rehabilitation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011:CD008349. 
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD008349.pub2.
 
667. Moreira MC, de Amorim Lima AM, Ferraz KM, Benedetti Rodrigues 
MA. Use of virtual reality in gait recovery among post stroke patients: a 
systematic literature review. Disabil Rehabil Assist Technol. 2013;8:357–
362. doi: 10.3109/17483107.2012.749428.
 
668. Langhammer B, Stanghelle JK. Can physiotherapy after stroke based on 
the Bobath concept result in improved quality of movement compared 
to the motor relearning programme. Physiother Res Int. 2011;16:69–80. 
doi: 10.1002/pri.474.
 
669. Deleted in proof.
 
670. Nakayama H, Jørgensen HS, Raaschou HO, Olsen TS. Compensation 
in recovery of upper extremity function after stroke: the Copenhagen 
Stroke Study. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 1994;75:852–857.
 
671. Gresham GE, Duncan PW, Stason WB, Adams HP, Adelman AM, 
Alexander DN, Bishop DS, Diller L, Donaldson NE, Granger CV. Post-
stroke rehabilitation. Clinical Practice Guideline. Rockville, MD: US 
Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, 
Agency for Healthcare Policy and Research; 1995.
 
672. Lang CE, Beebe JA. Relating movement control at 9 upper extrem-
ity segments to loss of hand function in people with chronic hemi-
paresis. 
Neurorehabil 
Neural 
Repair. 
2007;21:279–291. 
doi: 
10.1177/1545968306296964.
 
673. Faria-Fortini I, Michaelsen SM, Cassiano JG, Teixeira-Salmela LF. 
Upper extremity function in stroke subjects: relationships between 
the International Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health 
domains. J Hand Ther. 2011;24:257–264; quiz 265.
 
674. Kwakkel G, Kollen BJ, van der Grond J, Prevo AJ. Probability of regain-
ing dexterity in the flaccid upper limb: impact of severity of paresis 
and time since onset in acute stroke. Stroke. 2003;34:2181–2186. doi: 
10.1161/01.STR.0000087172.16305.CD.
 
675. Bayona NA, Bitensky J, Salter K, Teasell R. The role of task-specific 
training in rehabilitation therapies. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2005;12:58–65. 
doi: 10.1310/BQM5-6YGB-MVJ5-WVCR.
 
676. Hubbard IJ, Parsons MW, Neilson C, Carey LM. Task-specific train-
ing: evidence for and translation to clinical practice. Occup Ther Int. 
2009;16:175–189. doi: 10.1002/oti.275.
 
677. Levin MF, Michaelsen SM, Cirstea CM, Roby-Brami A. Use of the 
trunk for reaching targets placed within and beyond the reach in 
adult hemiparesis. Exp Brain Res. 2002;143:171–180. doi: 10.1007/
s00221-001-0976-6.
 
678. Wu CY, Chen YA, Lin KC, Chao CP, Chen YT. Constraint-induced 
therapy with trunk restraint for improving functional outcomes and 
trunk-arm control after stroke: a randomized controlled trial. Phys Ther. 
2012;92:483–492. doi: 10.2522/ptj.20110213.
 
679. Corti M, McGuirk TE, Wu SS, Patten C. Differential effects of power 
training versus functional task practice on compensation and restoration 
of arm function after stroke. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2012;26:842–
854. doi: 10.1177/1545968311433426.
 
680. Harris JE, Eng JJ. Strength training improves upper-limb function in 
individuals with stroke: a meta-analysis. Stroke. 2010;41:136–140. doi: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.567438.
 
681. Bonaiuti D, Rebasti L, Sioli P. The constraint induced movement ther-
apy: a systematic review of randomised controlled trials on the adult 
stroke patients. Eura Medicophys. 2007;43:139–146.
 
682. Taub E, Miller NE, Novack TA, Cook EW 3rd, Fleming WC, 
Nepomuceno CS, Connell JS, Crago JE. Technique to improve chronic 
motor deficit after stroke. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 1993;74:347–354.
 
683. Taub E, Uswatte G, King DK, Morris D, Crago JE, Chatterjee A. A pla-
cebo-controlled trial of constraint-induced movement therapy for upper 
extremity after stroke. Stroke. 2006;37:1045–1049. doi: 10.1161/01.
STR.0000206463.66461.97.
 
684. Taub E, Uswatte G, Mark VW, Morris DM, Barman J, Bowman MH, 
Bryson C, Delgado A, Bishop-McKay S. Method for enhancing real-
world use of a more affected arm in chronic stroke: transfer package of 
constraint-induced movement therapy. Stroke. 2013;44:1383–1388. doi: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.000559.
 
685. Wolf SL, Thompson PA, Winstein CJ, Miller JP, Blanton SR, Nichols-
Larsen DS, Morris DM, Uswatte G, Taub E, Light KE, Sawaki L. 
The EXCITE stroke trial: comparing early and delayed constraint-
induced movement therapy. Stroke. 2010;41:2309–2315. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.110.588723.
 
686. Dromerick AW, Lang CE, Birkenmeier RL, Wagner JM, Miller JP, 
Videen TO, Powers WJ, Wolf SL, Edwards DF. Very Early Constraint-
Induced Movement during Stroke Rehabilitation (VECTORS): a 
single-center RCT. Neurology. 2009;73:195–201. doi: 10.1212/
WNL.0b013e3181ab2b27.
 
687. Boake C, Noser EA, Ro T, Baraniuk S, Gaber M, Johnson R, 
Salmeron ET, Tran TM, Lai JM, Taub E, Moye LA, Grotta JC, Levin 
HS. Constraint-induced movement therapy during early stroke 
rehabilitation. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2007;21:14–24. doi: 
10.1177/1545968306291858.
 
688. Page SJ, Levine P, Leonard A, Szaflarski JP, Kissela BM. Modified 
constraint-induced therapy in chronic stroke: results of a single-blinded 
randomized controlled trial. Phys Ther. 2008;88:333–340. doi: 10.2522/
ptj.20060029.
 
689. Page SJ, Levine P, Leonard AC. Modified constraint-induced therapy in 
acute stroke: a randomized controlled pilot study. Neurorehabil Neural 
Repair. 2005;19:27–32. doi: 10.1177/1545968304272701.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e163
 
690. Page SJ, Sisto S, Johnston MV, Levine P. Modified constraint-induced 
therapy after subacute stroke: a preliminary study. Neurorehabil Neural 
Repair. 2002;16:290–295.
 
691. Page SJ, Sisto S, Levine P, McGrath RE. Efficacy of modified constraint-
induced movement therapy in chronic stroke: a single-blinded random-
ized controlled trial. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2004;85:14–18.
 
692. Wang Q, Shao JL, Zhu QX, Li J, Meng PP. Comparison of conventional 
therapy, intensive therapy and modified constraint-induced movement 
therapy to improve upper extremity function after stroke. J Rehabil Med. 
2011;43:619–625. doi: 10.2340/16501977-0819.
 
693. Shi YX, Tian JH, Yang KH, Zhao Y. Modified constraint-induced 
movement therapy versus traditional rehabilitation in patients with 
upper-extremity dysfunction after stroke: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2011;92:972–982. doi: 10.1016/j.
apmr.2010.12.036.
 
694. Smania N, Gandolfi M, Paolucci S, Iosa M, Ianes P, Recchia S, 
Giovanzana C, Molteni F, Avesani R, Di Paolo P, Zaccala M, Agostini 
M, Tassorelli C, Fiaschi A, Primon D, Ceravolo MG, Farina S. Reduced-
intensity modified constraint-induced movement therapy versus con-
ventional therapy for upper extremity rehabilitation after stroke: a 
multicenter trial. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2012;26:1035–1045. doi: 
10.1177/1545968312446003.
 
695. Coupar F, Pollock A, van Wijck F, Morris J, Langhorne P. Simultaneous 
bilateral training for improving arm function after stroke. Cochrane 
Database 
Syst 
Rev. 
2010:CD006432. 
doi: 
10.1002/14651858.
CD006432.pub2.
 
696. Latimer CP, Keeling J, Lin B, Henderson M, Hale LA. The impact 
of bilateral therapy on upper limb function after chronic stroke: 
a systematic review. Disabil Rehabil. 2010;32:1221–1231. doi: 
10.3109/09638280903483877.
 
697. Cauraugh JH, Naik SK, Lodha N, Coombes SA, Summers JJ. Long-term 
rehabilitation for chronic stroke arm movements: a randomized con-
trolled trial. Clin Rehabil. 2011;25:1086–1096.
 
698. Morris JH, Van Wijck F. Responses of the less affected arm to bilateral 
upper limb task training in early rehabilitation after stroke: a randomized 
controlled trial. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2012;93:1129–1137.
 
699. Whitall J, Waller SM, Sorkin JD, Forrester LW, Macko RF, Hanley DF, 
Goldberg AP, Luft A. Bilateral and unilateral arm training improve motor 
function through differing neuroplastic mechanisms: a single-blinded 
randomized controlled trial. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2011;25:118–
129. doi: 10.1177/1545968310380685.
 
700. Wu CY, Chuang LL, Lin KC, Chen HC, Tsay PK. Randomized trial 
of distributed constraint-induced therapy versus bilateral arm train-
ing for the rehabilitation of upper-limb motor control and function 
after stroke. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2011;25:130–139. doi: 
10.1177/1545968310380686.
 
701. Hayner K, Gibson G, Giles GM. Comparison of constraint-induced 
movement therapy and bilateral treatment of equal intensity in people 
with chronic upper-extremity dysfunction after cerebrovascular accident. 
Am J Occup Ther. 2010;64:528–539.
 
702. Brunner IC, Skouen JS, Strand LI. Is modified constraint-induced move-
ment therapy more effective than bimanual training in improving arm 
motor function in the subacute phase post stroke? A randomized con-
trolled trial. Clin Rehabil. 2012;26:1078–1086.
 
703. Mehrholz J, Pohl M. Electromechanical-assisted gait training after stroke: 
a systematic review comparing end-effector and exoskeleton devices. J 
Rehabil Med. 2012;44:193–199. doi: 10.2340/16501977-0943.
 
704. Klamroth-Marganska V, Blanco J, Campen K, Curt A, Dietz V, Ettlin 
T, Felder M, Fellinghauer B, Guidali M, Kollmar A, Luft A, Nef T, 
Schuster-Amft C, Stahel W, Riener R. Three-dimensional, task-specific 
robot therapy of the arm after stroke: a multicentre, parallel-group 
randomised trial. Lancet Neurol. 2014;13:159–166. doi: 10.1016/
S1474-4422(13)70305-3.
 
705. Lo AC, Guarino PD, Richards LG, Haselkorn JK, Wittenberg GF, 
Federman DG, Ringer RJ, Wagner TH, Krebs HI, Volpe BT, Bever CT Jr, 
Bravata DM, Duncan PW, Corn BH, Maffucci AD, Nadeau SE, Conroy 
SS, Powell JM, Huang GD, Peduzzi P. Robot-assisted therapy for long-
term upper-limb impairment after stroke [published correction appears in 
N Engl Med. 2011;365:1749]. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1772–1783. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa0911341.
 
706. Lo AC, Guarino P, Krebs HI, Volpe BT, Bever CT, Duncan PW,  
Ringer RJ, Wagner TH, Richards LG, Bravata DM, Haselkorn JK, 
Wittenberg GF, Federman DG, Corn BH, Maffucci AD, Peduzzi 
P. Multicenter randomized trial of robot-assisted rehabilita-
tion for chronic stroke: methods and entry characteristics for VA 
ROBOTICS. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2009;23:775–783. doi: 
10.1177/1545968309338195.
 
707. Mehrholz J, Hadrich A, Platz T, Kugler J, Pohl M. Electromechanical 
and robot-assisted arm training for improving generic activities of daily 
living, arm function, and arm muscle strength after stroke. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2012;6:CD006876. doi: 10.1002/14651858.
CD006876.pub3.
 
708. Masiero S, Armani M, Rosati G. Upper-limb robot-assisted therapy in 
rehabilitation of acute stroke patients: focused review and results of new 
randomized controlled trial. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2011;48:355–366.
 
709. Kwakkel G, Kollen BJ, Krebs HI. Effects of robot-assisted therapy on 
upper limb recovery after stroke: a systematic review. Neurorehabil 
Neural Repair. 2008;22:111–121. doi: 10.1177/1545968307305457.
 
710. Kutner NG, Zhang R, Butler AJ, Wolf SL, Alberts JL. Quality-of-life 
change associated with robotic-assisted therapy to improve hand motor 
function in patients with subacute stroke: a randomized clinical trial. 
Phys Ther. 2010;90:493–504. doi: 10.2522/ptj.20090160.
 
711. Hsieh YW, Wu CY, Liao WW, Lin KC, Wu KY, Lee CY. Effects of 
treatment intensity in upper limb robot-assisted therapy for chronic 
stroke: a pilot randomized controlled trial. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 
2011;25:503–511. doi: 10.1177/1545968310394871.
 
712. Conroy SS, Whitall J, Dipietro L, Jones-Lush LM, Zhan M, Finley MA, 
Wittenberg GF, Krebs HI, Bever CT. Effect of gravity on robot-assisted 
motor training after chronic stroke: a randomized trial. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil. 2011;92:1754–1761. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2011.06.016.
 
713. Abdullah HA, Tarry C, Lambert C, Barreca S, Allen BO. Results 
of clinicians using a therapeutic robotic system in an inpatient 
stroke rehabilitation unit. J Neuroeng Rehabil. 2011;8:50. doi: 
10.1186/1743-0003-8-50.
 
714. Pomeroy VM, King LM, Pollock A, Baily-Hallam A, Langhorne P. 
Electrostimulation for promoting recovery of movement or functional 
ability after stroke: systematic review and meta-analysis. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2006;(2):CD003241.
 
715. Alon G, Levitt AF, McCarthy PA. Functional electrical stimulation (FES) 
may modify the poor prognosis of stroke survivors with severe motor 
loss of the upper extremity: a preliminary study. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 
2008;87:627–636. doi: 10.1097/PHM.0b013e31817fabc1.
 
716. Hara Y, Ogawa S, Tsujiuchi K, Muraoka Y. A home-based rehabilitation 
program for the hemiplegic upper extremity by power-assisted functional 
electrical stimulation. Disabil Rehabil. 2008;30:296–304.
 
717. Van Peppen RP, Kwakkel G, Wood-Dauphinee S, Hendriks HJ, Van der 
Wees PJ, Dekker J. The impact of physical therapy on functional out-
comes after stroke: what’s the evidence? Clin Rehabil. 2004;18:833–862.
 
718. Butler AJ, Page SJ. Mental practice with motor imagery: evidence for 
motor recovery and cortical reorganization after stroke. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil. 2006;87(suppl 2):S2–S11. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2006.08.326.
 
719. Page SJ, Levine P, Leonard A. Mental practice in chronic stroke: results 
of a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Stroke. 2007;38:1293–1297. 
doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000260205.67348.2b.
 
720. Page SJ, Levine P, Sisto SA, Johnston MV. Mental practice combined 
with physical practice for upper-limb motor deficit in subacute stroke. 
Phys Ther. 2001;81:1455–1462.
 
721. Liu KP, Chan CC, Lee TM, Hui-Chan CW. Mental imagery for promot-
ing relearning for people after stroke: a randomized controlled trial. Arch 
Phys Med Rehabil. 2004;85:1403–1408.
 
722. Liu KP, Chan CC, Wong RS, Kwan IW, Yau CS, Li LS, Lee TM. A ran-
domized controlled trial of mental imagery augment generalization of 
learning in acute poststroke patients. Stroke. 2009;40:2222–2225. doi: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.540997.
 
723. Bovend’Eerdt TJ, Dawes H, Sackley C, Izadi H, Wade DT. An integrated 
motor imagery program to improve functional task performance in neu-
rorehabilitation: a single-blind randomized controlled trial. Arch Phys 
Med Rehabil. 2010;91:939–946. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2010.03.008.
 
724. Page SJ, Dunning K, Hermann V, Leonard A, Levine P. Longer versus 
shorter mental practice sessions for affected upper extremity movement 
after stroke: a randomized controlled trial. Clin Rehabil. 2011;25:627–
637. doi: 10.1177/0269215510395793.
 
725. Kowalczewski J, Chong SL, Galea M, Prochazka A. In-home tele-
rehabilitation improves tetraplegic hand function. Neurorehabil Neural 
Repair. 2011;25:412–422. doi: 10.1177/1545968310394869.
 
726. Deleted in proof.
 
727. Clinical Trials.gov. Efficacy of Virtual Reality Exercises in STroke 
Rehabilitation: A Multicentre Study (EVREST Multicentre). https://
clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01406912?term=NCT01406912&r
ank=1. Accessed August 27, 2015.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e164  Stroke  June 2016
 
728. Kiper P, Piron L, Turolla A, Stozek J, Tonin P. The effectiveness of rein-
forced feedback in virtual environment in the first 12 months after stroke. 
Neurol Neurochir Pol. 2011;45:436–444.
 
729. da Silva Cameirao M, Bermudex I Badia S, Duarte E, Verschure PF. 
Virtual reality based rehabilitation speeds up functional recovery of the 
upper extremities after stroke: a randomized controlled pilot study in 
the acute phase of stroke using the rehabilitation gaming system. Restor 
Neurol Neurosci. 2011;29:287–298. doi: 10.3233/RNN-2011-0599.
 
730. Deleted in proof.
 
731. van Vliet PM, Wulf G. Extrinsic feedback for motor learning after 
stroke: what is the evidence? Disabil Rehabil. 2006;28:831–840. doi: 
10.1080/09638280500534937.
 
732. Subramanian SK, Massie CL, Malcolm MP, Levin MF. Does provision 
of extrinsic feedback result in improved motor learning in the upper limb 
poststroke? A systematic review of the evidence. Neurorehabil Neural 
Repair. 2010;24:113–124. doi: 10.1177/1545968309349941.
 
733. Molier BI, Van Asseldonk EH, Hermens HJ, Jannink MJ. Nature, 
timing, frequency and type of augmented feedback; does it influ-
ence motor relearning of the hemiparetic arm after stroke? A 
systematic review. Disabil Rehabil. 2010;32:1799–1809. doi: 
10.3109/09638281003734359.
 
734. Celnik P, Hummel F, Harris-Love M, Wolk R, Cohen LG. 
Somatosensory stimulation enhances the effects of training functional 
hand tasks in patients with chronic stroke. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
2007;88;1369–1376.
 
735. Hunter SM, Hammett L, Ball S, Smith N, Anderson C, Clark A, Tallis 
R, Rudd A, Pomeroy VM. Dose-response study of mobilisation and 
tactile stimulation therapy for the upper extremity early after stroke: 
a phase I trial. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2011;25:314–322. doi: 
10.1177/1545968310390223.
 
736. Klaiput A, Kitisomprayoonkul W. Increased pinch strength in acute 
and subacute stroke patients after simultaneous median and ulnar sen-
sory stimulation. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2009;23:351–356. doi: 
10.1177/1545968308324227.
 
737. Bowen A, Knapp P, Gillespie D, Nicolson DJ, Vail A. Non-pharmacological 
interventions for perceptual disorders following stroke and other adult-
acquired, non-progressive brain injury. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2011:CD007039. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD007039.pub2.
 
738. Sullivan JE, Hurley D, Hedman LD. Afferent stimulation provided by 
glove electrode during task-specific arm exercise following stroke. Clin 
Rehabil. 2012;26:1010–1020.
 
739. Pomeroy V, Aglioti SM, Mark VW, McFarland D, Stinear C, Wolf SL, 
Corbetta M, Fitzpatrick SM. Neurological principles and rehabilitation 
of action disorders: rehabilitation interventions. Neurorehabil Neural 
Repair. 2011;25(suppl):33S–43S. doi: 10.1177/1545968311410942.
 
740. Chang WH, Kim YH, Bang OY, Kim ST, Park YH, Lee PK. Long-term 
effects of rTMS on motor recovery in patients after subacute stroke. J 
Rehabil Med. 2010;42:758–764. doi: 10.2340/16501977-0590.
 
741. Kim DY, Lim JY, Kang EK, You DS, Oh MK, Oh BM, Paik NJ. Effect 
of transcranial direct current stimulation on motor recovery in patients 
with subacute stroke. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 2010;89:879–886. doi: 
10.1097/PHM.0b013e3181f70aa7.
 
742. Lindenberg R, Renga V, Zhu LL, Nair D, Schlaug G. Bihemispheric 
brain stimulation facilitates motor recovery in chronic stroke 
patients. Neurology. 2010;75:2176–2184. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013 
e318202013a.
 
743. Nair DG, Renga V, Lindenberg R, Zhu L, Schlaug G. Optimizing 
recovery potential through simultaneous occupational therapy and 
non-invasive brain-stimulation using tDCS. Restor Neurol Neurosci. 
2011;29:411–420. doi: 10.3233/RNN-2011-0612.
 
744. Hesse S, Waldner A, Mehrholz J, Tomelleri C, Pohl M, Werner C. 
Combined transcranial direct current stimulation and robot-assisted 
arm training in subacute stroke patients: an exploratory, randomized 
multicenter trial. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2011;25:838–846. doi: 
10.1177/1545968311413906.
 
745. Bolognini N, Vallar G, Casati C, Latif LA, El-Nazer R, Williams J, 
Banco E, Macea DD, Tesio L, Chessa C, Fregni F. Neurophysiological 
and behavioral effects of tDCS combined with constraint-induced 
movement therapy in poststroke patients. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 
2011;25:819–829. doi: 10.1177/1545968311411056.
 
746. Avenanti A, Coccia M, Ladavas E, Provinciali L, Ceravolo MG. Low-
frequency rTMS promotes use-dependent motor plasticity in chronic 
stroke: a randomized trial. Neurology. 2012;78:256–264. doi: 10.1212/
WNL.0b013e3182436558.
 
747. Deleted in proof.
 
748. Winter J, Hunter S, Sim J Crome, P. Hands-on therapy interventions for 
upper limb motor dysfunction following stroke. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2011:CD006609. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006609.pub2.
 
749. Coupar F, Pollock A, Legg LA, Sackley C, van Vliet P. Home-based 
therapy programmes for upper limb functional recovery follow-
ing stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;5:CD006755. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD006755.pub2.
 
750. Chaiyawat P, Kulkantrakorn K. Effectiveness of home rehabilitation pro-
gram for ischemic stroke upon disability and quality of life: a random-
ized controlled trial. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2012;114:866–870. doi: 
10.1016/j.clineuro.2012.01.018.
 
751. United Nations. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. 
http://www.un.org/disabilities/convention/facts.shtml. 2006. Accessed 
March 5, 2016.
 
752. Legg LA, Drummond AE, Langhorne P. Occupational therapy for 
patients with problems in activities of daily living after stroke. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2006:CD003585.
 
753. Jutai J, Coulson S, Teasell R, Bayley M, Garland J, Mayo N, Wood-
Dauphinee S. Mobility assistive device utilization in a prospective study 
of patients with first-ever stroke. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2007;88:1268–
1275. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2007.06.773.
 
754. Polese JC, Teixeira-Salmela LF, Nascimento LR, Faria CD, Kirkwood 
RN, Laurentino GC, Ada L. The effects of walking sticks on gait kine-
matics and kinetics with chronic stroke survivors. Clin Biomech (Bristol, 
Avon). 2012;27:131–137. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiomech.2011.08.003.
 
755. Tyson SF, Rogerson L. Assistive walking devices in nonambulant 
patients undergoing rehabilitation after stroke: the effects on functional 
mobility, walking impairments, and patients’ opinion. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil. 2009;90:475–479. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2008.09.563.
 
756. Laufer Y. Effects of one-point and four-point canes on balance 
and weight distribution in patients with hemiparesis. Clin Rehabil. 
2002;16:141–148.
 
757. Mountain AD, Kirby RL, MacLeod DA, Thompson K. Rates and predic-
tors of manual and powered wheelchair use for persons with stroke: a 
retrospective study in a Canadian rehabilitation center. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil. 2010;91:639–643. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2009.11.025.
 
758. Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Technology Society of North 
America. RESNA Wheelchair Service Provision Guide. 2011. http://
www.resna.org/dotAsset/22485.pdf. Accessed June 28, 2013.
 
759. Barrett JA, Watkins C, Plant R, Dickinson H, Clayton L, Sharma AK, 
Reston A, Gratton J, Fall S, Flynn A, Smith T, Leathley M, Smith S, Barer 
DH. The COSTAR wheelchair study: a two-centre pilot study of self-
propulsion in a wheelchair in early stroke rehabilitation: Collaborative 
Stroke Audit and Research. Clin Rehabil. 2001;15:32–41.
 
760. Mountain AD, Kirby RL, Eskes GA, Smith C, Duncan H, MacLeod DA, 
Thompson K. Ability of people with stroke to learn powered wheelchair 
skills: a pilot study. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2010;91:596–601. doi: 
10.1016/j.apmr.2009.12.011.
 
761. Barker DJ, Reid D, Cott C. The experience of senior stroke survivors: 
factors in community participation among wheelchair users. Can J 
Occup Ther. 2006;73:18–25.
 
762. Pettersson I, Ahlström G, Törnquist K. The value of an outdoor pow-
ered wheelchair with regard to the quality of life of persons with 
stroke: a follow-up study. Assist Technol. 2007;19:143–153. doi: 
10.1080/10400435.2007.10131871.
 
763. Erel S, Uygur F, Engin Simsek I, Yakut Y. The effects of dynamic 
ankle-foot orthoses in chronic stroke patients at three-month follow-
up: a randomized controlled trial. Clin Rehabil. 2011;25:515–523. doi: 
10.1177/0269215510390719.
 
764. de Sèze MP, Bonhomme C, Daviet JC, Burguete E, Machat H, 
Rousseaux M, Mazaux JM. Effect of early compensation of distal motor 
deficiency by the Chignon ankle-foot orthosis on gait in hemiplegic 
patients: a randomized pilot study. Clin Rehabil. 2011;25:989–998. doi: 
10.1177/0269215511410730.
 
765. Smith AC, Saunders DH, Mead G. Cardiorespiratory fitness after 
stroke: a systematic review. Int J Stroke. 2012;7:499–510. doi: 
10.1111/j.1747-4949.2012.00791.x.
 
766. Shephard RJ. Maximal oxygen intake and independence in old age. Br J 
Sports Med. 2009;43:342–346. doi: 10.1136/bjsm.2007.044800.
 
767. Touzé E, Varenne O, Chatellier G, Peyrard S, Rothwell PM, Mas JL. 
Risk of myocardial infarction and vascular death after transient ischemic 
attack and ischemic stroke: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Stroke. 
2005;36:2748–2755. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000190118.02275.33.
 
768. Burn J, Dennis M, Bamford J, Sandercock P, Wade D, Warlow C. Long-
term risk of recurrent stroke after a first-ever stroke: the Oxfordshire 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e165
Community Stroke Project [published correction appears in Stroke. 
1994;25:1887]. Stroke. 1994;25:333–337.
 
769. Dhamoon MS, Sciacca RR, Rundek T, Sacco RL, Elkind MS. Recurrent 
stroke and cardiac risks after first ischemic stroke: the Northern 
Manhattan Study. Neurology. 2006;66:641–646. doi: 10.1212/01.
wnl.0000201253.93811.f6.
 
770. Leoo T, Lindgren A, Petersson J, von Arbin M. Risk factors and treat-
ment at recurrent stroke onset: results from the Recurrent Stroke Quality 
and Epidemiology (RESQUE) Study. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2008;25:254–
260. doi: 10.1159/000113864.
 
771. Hartman-Maeir A, Soroker N, Ring H, Avni N, Katz N. Activities, 
participation and satisfaction one-year post stroke. Disabil Rehabil. 
2007;29:559–566. doi: 10.1080/09638280600924996.
 
772. Hildebrand M, Brewer M, Wolf T. The impact of mild stroke on partici-
pation in physical fitness activities. Stroke Res Treat. 2012;2012:548682. 
doi: 10.1155/2012/548682.
 
773. Wellwood I, Langhorne P, McKevitt C, Bernhardt J, Rudd AG, Wolfe 
CD. An observational study of acute stroke care in four countries: the 
European Registers of Stroke Study. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2009;28:171–176. 
doi: 10.1159/000226116.
 
774. MacKay-Lyons MJ, Makrides L. Cardiovascular stress during a contem-
porary stroke rehabilitation program: is the intensity adequate to induce 
a training effect? Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2002;83:1378–1383.
 
775. Kuys S, Brauer S, Ada L. Routine physiotherapy does not induce a car-
diorespiratory training effect post-stroke, regardless of walking ability. 
Physiother Res Int. 2006;11:219–227.
 
776. Kaur G, English C, Hillier S. How physically active are people with 
stroke in physiotherapy sessions aimed at improving motor func-
tion? A systematic review. Stroke Res Treat. 2012;2012:820673. doi: 
10.1155/2012/820673.
 
777. Manns PJ, Tomczak CR, Jelani A, Cress ME, Haennel R. Use of the 
Continuous Scale Physical Functional Performance Test in stroke sur-
vivors. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2009;90:488–493. doi: 10.1016/j.
apmr.2008.08.219.
 
778. Alzahrani MA, Ada L, Dean CM. Duration of physical activity is nor-
mal but frequency is reduced after stroke: an observational study.  
J Physiother. 2011;57:47–51. doi: 10.1016/S1836-9553(11)70007-8.
 
779. Ashe MC, Miller WC, Eng JJ, Noreau L; Physical Activity and 
Chronic Conditions Research Team. Older adults, chronic disease 
and leisure-time physical activity. Gerontology. 2009;55:64–72. doi: 
10.1159/000141518.
 
780. Resnick B, Michael K, Shaughnessy M, Nahm ES, Kobunek S, Sorkin J, 
Orwig D, Goldberg A, Macko RF. Inflated perceptions of physical activ-
ity after stroke: pairing self-report with physiologic measures. J Phys Act 
Health. 2008;5:308–318.
 
781. Dogra S, Stathokostas L. Sedentary behavior and physical activity are 
independent predictors of successful aging in middle-aged and older 
adults. J Aging Res. 2012;2012:190654. doi: 10.1155/2012/190654.
 
782. Healy GN, Dunstan DW, Salmon J, Cerin E, Shaw JE, Zimmet PZ, Owen 
N. Breaks in sedentary time: beneficial associations with metabolic risk. 
Diabetes Care. 2008;31:661–666. doi: 10.2337/dc07-2046.
 
783. Fletcher GF, Ades PA, Kligfield P, Arena R, Balady GJ, Bittner VA, 
Coke LA, Fleg JL, Forman DE, Gerber TC, Gulati M, Madan K, Rhodes 
J, Thompson PD, Williams MA; on behalf of the American Heart 
Association Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation, and Prevention Committee 
of the Council on Clinical Cardiology, Council on Nutrition, Physical 
Activity and Metabolism, Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke 
Nursing, and Council on Epidemiology and Prevention. Exercise stan-
dards for testing and training: a scientific statement from the American 
Heart Association. Circulation. 2013;128:873–934. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0b013e31829b5b44.
 
784. Stoller O, de Bruin ED, Knols RH, Hunt KJ. Effects of cardiovascular 
exercise early after stroke: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC 
Neurol. 2012;12:45. doi: 10.1186/1471-2377-12-45.
 
785. Pang MY, Eng JJ, Dawson AS, Gylfadóttir S. The use of aerobic exercise 
training in improving aerobic capacity in individuals with stroke: a meta-
analysis. Clin Rehabil. 2006;20:97–111.
 
786. Brazzelli M, Saunders DH, Greig CA, Mead GE. Physical fitness train-
ing for patients with stroke: updated review. Stroke. 2012;43:e39–e40. 
doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.647008.
 
787. Ainsworth BE, Haskell WL, Herrmann SD, Meckes N, Bassett DR Jr, 
Tudor-Locke C, Greer JL, Vezina J, Whitt-Glover MC, Leon AS. 2011 
Compendium of Physical Activities: a second update of codes and 
MET values. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2011;43:1575–1581. doi: 10.1249/
MSS.0b013e31821ece12.
 
788. Duncan P, Studenski S, Richards L, Gollub S, Lai SM, Reker D, Perera 
S, Yates J, Koch V, Rigler S, Johnson D. Randomized clinical trial of 
therapeutic exercise in subacute stroke. Stroke. 2003;34:2173–2180. doi: 
10.1161/01.STR.0000083699.95351.F2.
 
789. Mackay-Lyons M, McDonald A, Matheson J, Eskes G, Klus MA. 
Dual effects of body-weight supported treadmill training on cardio-
vascular fitness and walking ability early after stroke: a randomized 
controlled trial. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2013;27:644–653. doi: 
10.1177/1545968313484809.
 
790. Hambrecht R, Walther C, Möbius-Winkler S, Gielen S, Linke A, 
Conradi K, Erbs S, Kluge R, Kendziorra K, Sabri O, Sick P, Schuler 
G. Percutaneous coronary angioplasty compared with exercise 
training in patients with stable coronary artery disease: a random-
ized 
trial. 
Circulation. 
2004;109:1371–1378. 
doi: 
10.1161/01.
CIR.0000121360.31954.1F.
 
791. Myers J. Physical activity: the missing prescription. Eur J Cardiovasc 
Prev Rehabil. 2005;12:85–86.
 
792. Pang MY
, Lau RW. The effects of treadmill exercise training on hip bone den-
sity and tibial bone geometry in stroke survivors: a pilot study. Neurorehabil 
Neural Repair. 2010;24:368–376. doi: 10.1177/1545968309353326.
 
793. Deleted in proof.
 
794. Graven C, Brock K, Hill K, Joubert L. Are rehabilitation and/or care 
co-ordination interventions delivered in the community effective in 
reducing depression, facilitating participation and improving qual-
ity of life after stroke? Disabil Rehabil. 2011;33:1501–1520. doi: 
10.3109/09638288.2010.542874.
 
795. Lai SM, Studenski S, Richards L, Perera S, Reker D, Rigler 
S, Duncan PW. Therapeutic exercise and depressive symp-
toms after stroke. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2006;54:240–247. doi: 
10.1111/j.1532-5415.2006.00573.x.
 
796. Deleted in proof.
 
797. Mehta S, Pereira S, Janzen S, Mays R, Viana R, Lobo L, Teasell RW. 
Cardiovascular conditioning for comfortable gait speed and total dis-
tance walked during the chronic stage of stroke: a meta-analysis. Top 
Stroke Rehabil. 2012;19:463–470. doi: 10.1310/tsr1906-463.
 
798. Deleted in proof.
 
799. Schönberger M, Hansen NR, Pedersen DT, Zeeman P, Jørgensen JR. 
The relationship between physical fitness and work integration following 
stroke. Brain Impairment. 2010;11:262–269.
 
800. Chen MD, Rimmer JH. Effects of exercise on quality of life in stroke 
survivors: a meta-analysis. Stroke. 2011;42:832–837. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.110.607747.
 
801. Ivey FM, Ryan AS, Hafer-Macko CE, Goldberg AP, Macko RF. 
Treadmill aerobic training improves glucose tolerance and indices of 
insulin sensitivity in disabled stroke survivors: a preliminary report. 
Stroke. 2007;38:2752–2758. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.490391.
 
802. Takatori K, Matsumoto D, Okada Y, Nakamura J, Shomoto K. Effect 
of intensive rehabilitation on physical function and arterial function 
in community-dwelling chronic stroke survivors. Top Stroke Rehabil. 
2012;19:377–383. doi: 10.1310/tsr1905-377.
 
803. Rimmer JH, Rauworth AE, Wang EC, Nicola TL, Hill B. A prelimi-
nary study to examine the effects of aerobic and therapeutic (nonaero-
bic) exercise on cardiorespiratory fitness and coronary risk reduction 
in stroke survivors. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2009;90:407–412. doi: 
10.1016/j.apmr.2008.07.032.
 
804. Billinger SA, Mattlage AE, Ashenden AL, Lentz AA, Harter G, Rippee 
MA. Aerobic exercise in subacute stroke improves cardiovascular health 
and physical performance. J Neurol Phys Ther. 2012;36:159–165. doi: 
10.1097/NPT.0b013e318274d082.
 
805. Hackam DG, Spence JD. Combining multiple approaches for the 
secondary prevention of vascular events after stroke: a quantita-
tive modeling study. Stroke. 2007;38:1881–1885. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.106.475525.
 
806. Mackay-Lyons M, Thornton M, Ruggles T, Che M. Non-pharmacological 
interventions for preventing secondary vascular events after stroke or tran-
sient ischemic attack. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;3:CD008656.
 
807. Lennon O, Carey A, Gaffney N, Stephenson J, Blake C. A pilot random-
ized controlled trial to evaluate the benefit of the cardiac rehabilitation 
paradigm for the non-acute ischaemic stroke population. Clin Rehabil. 
2008;22:125–133. doi: 10.1177/0269215507081580.
 
808. Prior PL, Hachinski V, Unsworth K, Chan R, Mytka S, O’Callaghan 
C, Suskin N. Comprehensive cardiac rehabilitation for second-
ary prevention after transient ischemic attack or mild stroke, I: fea-
sibility and risk factors. Stroke. 2011;42:3207–3213. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.111.620187.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e166  Stroke  June 2016
 
809. Cumming TB, Thrift AG, Collier JM, Churilov L, Dewey HM, 
Donnan GA, Bernhardt J. Very early mobilization after stroke fast-
tracks return to walking: further results from the phase II AVERT 
randomized controlled trial. Stroke. 2011;42:153–158. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.110.594598.
 
810. Sundseth A, Thommessen B, Rønning OM. Outcome after mobilization 
within 24 hours of acute stroke: a randomized controlled trial. Stroke. 
2012;43:2389–2394. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.646687.
 
811. Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, Bittl JA, Byrne JG, Fletcher 
BJ, Fonarow GC, Lange RA, Levine GN, Maddox TM, Naidu SS, 
Ohman EM, Smith PK. 2014 ACC/AHA/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS 
focused update of the guideline for the diagnosis and management of 
patients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines, and the American Association for Thoracic 
Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of 
Thoracic Surgeons. Circulation. 2014;130:1749–1767. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000095.
 
812. Kwan G, Balady GJ. Cardiac rehabilitation 2012: advancing the field 
through emerging science. Circulation. 2012;125:e369–e373. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.093310.
 
813. Billinger SA, Arena R, Bernhardt J, Eng JJ, Franklin BA, Johnson CM, 
MacKay-Lyons M, Macko RF, Mead GE, Roth EJ, Shaughnessy M, 
Tang A; on behalf of the American Heart Association Stroke Council; 
Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing; Council on Lifestyle 
and Cardiometabolic Health; Council on Epidemiology and Prevention; 
Council on Clinical Cardiology. Physical activity and exercise recom-
mendations for stroke survivors: a statement for healthcare profession-
als from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. 
Stroke. 2014;45:2532–2553. doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000022.
 
814. Management of Stroke Rehabilitation Working Group. VA/DOD clinical 
practice guideline for the management of stroke rehabilitation. J Rehabil 
Res Dev. 2010;47:1–43.
 
815. Ivey FM, Hafer-Macko CE, Macko RF. Exercise training for cardiometa-
bolic adaptation after stroke. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 2008;28:2–11. 
doi: 10.1097/01.HCR.0000311501.57022.a8.
 
816. American College of Sports Medicine. ACSM’s Guidelines for Exercise 
Testing and Prescription. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams 
and Wilkins; 2013.
 
817. Deleted in proof.
 
818. Danielsson A, Willén C, Sunnerhagen KS. Measurement of energy cost 
by the physiological cost index in walking after stroke. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil. 2007;88:1298–1303. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2007.06.760.
 
819. Eng JJ, Dawson AS, Chu KS. Submaximal exercise in persons with 
stroke: test-retest reliability and concurrent validity with maximal oxy-
gen consumption. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2004;85:113–118.
 
820. Hurkmans HL, Ribbers GM, Streur-Kranenburg MF, Stam HJ, van 
den Berg-Emons RJ. Energy expenditure in chronic stroke patients 
playing Wii Sports: a pilot study. J Neuroeng Rehabil. 2011;8:38. doi: 
10.1186/1743-0003-8-38.
 
821. Chang WH, Kim MS, Huh JP, Lee PK, Kim YH. Effects of robot-
assisted gait training on cardiopulmonary fitness in subacute stroke 
patients: a randomized controlled study. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 
2012;26:318–324. doi: 10.1177/1545968311408916.
 
822. Stewart KJ, Bacher AC, Turner KL, Fleg JL, Hees PS, Shapiro EP, 
Tayback M, Ouyang P. Effect of exercise on blood pressure in older per-
sons: a randomized controlled trial [published correction appears in Arch 
Intern Med. 2006;166:1813]. Arch Intern Med. 2005;165:756–762. doi: 
10.1001/archinte.165.7.756.
 
823. Stewart KJ, Bacher AC, Turner K, Lim JG, Hees PS, Shapiro EP, Tayback 
M, Ouyang P. Exercise and risk factors associated with metabolic syn-
drome in older adults. Am J Prev Med. 2005;28:9–18. doi: 10.1016/j.
amepre.2004.09.006.
 
824. Deleted in proof.
 
825. Hill TR, Gjellesvik TI, Moen PM, Tørhaug T, Fimland MS, Helgerud 
J, Hoff J. Maximal strength training enhances strength and functional 
performance in chronic stroke survivors. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 
2012;91:393–400. doi: 10.1097/PHM.0b013e31824ad5b8.
 
826. Durstine JL. ACSM’s Exercise Management for Persons With Chronic 
Diseases and Disabilities. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics; 2009.
 
827. Gordon NF, Gulanick M, Costa F, Fletcher G, Franklin BA, Roth EJ, 
Shephard T. Physical activity and exercise recommendations for stroke 
survivors: an American Heart Association scientific statement from the 
Council on Clinical Cardiology, Subcommittee on Exercise, Cardiac 
Rehabilitation, and Prevention; the Council on Cardiovascular Nursing; 
the Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism; and the 
Stroke Council. Circulation. 2004;109:2031–2041. doi: 10.1161/01.
CIR.0000126280.65777.A4.
 
828. Swain DP, Franklin BA. VO(2) reserve and the minimal inten-
sity for improving cardiorespiratory fitness. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 
2002;34:152–157.
 
829. Globas C, Becker C, Cerny J, Lam JM, Lindemann U, Forrester LW, 
Macko RF, Luft AR. Chronic stroke survivors benefit from high-inten-
sity aerobic treadmill exercise: a randomized control trial. Neurorehabil 
Neural Repair. 2012;26:85–95. doi: 10.1177/1545968311418675.
 
830. Gjellesvik TI, Brurok B, Hoff J, Tørhaug T, Helgerud J. Effect of high 
aerobic intensity interval treadmill walking in people with chronic stroke: 
a pilot study with one year follow-up. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2012;19:353–
360. doi: 10.1310/tsr1904-353.
 
831. Bruce RA, Kusumi F, Hosmer D. Maximal oxygen intake and nomo-
graphic assessment of functional aerobic impairment in cardiovascular 
disease. Am Heart J. 1973;85:546–562.
 
832. Rimmer JH, Wang E, Smith D. Barriers associated with exercise and 
community access for individuals with stroke. J Rehabil Res Dev. 
2008;45:315–322.
 
833. Nicholson S, Sniehotta F, Van Wijck F, Greig CA, Johnston M, McMurdo 
MET, Dennis M, Mead GE. A systematic review of perceived barriers 
and motivators to physical activity after stroke. Int J Stroke. 2013;8:357–
364. doi: 10.1111/j.1747-4949.2012.00880.x.
 
834. Morris J, Oliver T, Kroll T, MacGillivray S. The importance of psy-
chological and social factors in influencing the uptake and main-
tenance of physical activity after stroke: a structured review of the 
empirical literature. Stroke Res Treatment. 2012;2012:195249. doi: 
10.1155/2012/195249.
 
835. Holman H, Lorig K. Patient self-management: a key to effectiveness and 
efficiency in care of chronic disease. Public Health Rep. 2004;119:239–
243. doi: 10.1016/j.phr.2004.04.002.
 
836. van Veenendaal H, Grinspun DR, Adriaanse HP. Educational needs of 
stroke survivors and their family members, as perceived by themselves 
and by health professionals. Patient Educ Couns. 1996;28:265–276.
 
837. Simpson LA, Eng JJ, Tawashy AE. Exercise perceptions among people 
with stroke: barriers and facilitators to participation. Int J Ther Rehabil. 
2011;18:520–530.
 
838. Damush TM, Plue L, Bakas T, Schmid A, Williams LS. Barriers 
and facilitators to exercise among stroke survivors. Rehabil Nurs. 
2007;32:253–260, 262.
 
839. Banks G, Bernhardt J, Churilov L, Cumming TB. Exercise preferences 
are different after stroke. Stroke Res Treat. 2012;2012:890946. doi: 
10.1155/2012/890946.
 
840. van der Ploeg HP, Streppel KR, van der Beek AJ, van der Woude LH, 
Vollenbroek-Hutten MM, van Harten WH, van Mechelen W. Successfully 
improving physical activity behavior after rehabilitation. Am J Health 
Promot. 2007;21:153–159.
 
841. Boysen G, Krarup LH, Zeng X, Oskedra A, Kõrv J, Andersen G, Gluud 
C, Pedersen A, Lindahl M, Hansen L, Winkel P, Truelsen T; ExStroke 
Pilot Trial Group. ExStroke Pilot Trial of the effect of repeated instruc-
tions to improve physical activity after ischaemic stroke: a multinational 
randomised controlled clinical trial. BMJ. 2009;339:b2810.
 
842. Jones F, Mandy A, Partridge C. Changing self-efficacy in individu-
als following a first time stroke: preliminary study of a novel self-
management intervention. Clin Rehabil. 2009;23:522–533. doi: 
10.1177/0269215508101749.
 
843. Joubert J, Reid C, Barton D, Cumming T, McLean A, Joubert L, Barlow 
J, Ames D, Davis S. Integrated care improves risk-factor modification 
after stroke: initial results of the Integrated Care for the Reduction of 
Secondary Stroke model. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2009;80:279–
284. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.2008.148122.
 
844. Barrett BT. A critical evaluation of the evidence supporting the practice 
of behavioural vision therapy. Ophthalmic Physiol Opt. 2009;29:4–25.
 
845. Deleted in proof.
 
846. Pollock A, Hazelton C, Henderson CA, Angilley J, Dhillon B, 
Langhorne P, Livingstone K, Munro FA, Orr H, Rowe FJ, Shahani U. 
Interventions for disorders of eye movement in patients with stroke. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011:CD008389. doi: 10.1002/14651858.
CD008389.pub2.
 
847. Riggs RV, Andrews K, Roberts P, Gilewski M. Visual defi-
cit interventions in adult stroke and brain injury: a systematic 
review. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 2007;86:853–860. doi: 10.1097/
PHM.0b013e318151f907.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e167
 
848. Keller I, Lefin-Rank G. Improvement of visual search after audiovi-
sual exploration training in hemianopic patients. Neurorehabil Neural 
Repair. 2010;24:666–673. doi: 10.1177/1545968310372774.
 
849. Kihoon J, Jaeho Y, Jinhwa J. Effects of virtual reality-based rehabilita-
tion on upper extremity function and visual perception in stroke patients: 
a randomized control trial. J Phys Ther Sci. 2012;24:1205–1208.
 
850. Mödden C, Behrens M, Damke I, Eilers N, Kastrup A, Hildebrandt 
H. A randomized controlled trial comparing 2 interventions for visual 
field loss with standard occupational therapy during inpatient stroke 
rehabilitation. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2012;26:463–469. doi: 
10.1177/1545968311425927.
 
851. O’Halloran R, Worrall LE, Hickson L. The number of patients 
with communication related impairments in acute hospital 
stroke units. Int J Speech Lang Pathol. 2009;11:438–449. doi: 
10.3109/17549500902741363.
 
852. Edwards DF, Hahn MG, Baum CM, Perlmutter MS, Sheedy C, 
Dromerick AW. Screening patients with stroke for rehabilitation needs: 
validation of the post-stroke rehabilitation guidelines. Neurorehabil 
Neural Repair. 2006;20:42–48. doi: 10.1177/1545968305283038.
 
853. Allison R, Shelling L, Dennett R, Ayers T, Evans PH, Campbell JL. The 
effectiveness of various models of primary care-based follow-up after 
stroke: a systematic review. Prim Health Care Res Dev. 2011;12:214–
222. doi: 10.1017/S146342361100003X.
 
854. Prvu Bettger J, Alexander KP, Dolor RJ, Olson DM, Kendrick AS, 
Wing L, Coeytaux RR, Graffagnino C, Duncan PW. Transitional 
care after hospitalization for acute stroke or myocardial infarc-
tion: a systematic review. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157:407–416. doi: 
10.7326/0003-4819-157-6-201209180-00004.
 
855. Shepperd S, Lannin NA, Clemson LM, McCluskey A, Cameron ID, 
Barras SL. Discharge planning from hospital to home. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2013;1:CD000313. doi: 10.1002/14651858.
CD000313.pub4.
 
856. Lutz BJ, Chumbler NR, Lyles T, Hoffman N, Kobb R. Testing a 
home-telehealth programme for US veterans recovering from stroke 
and their family caregivers. Disabil Rehabil. 2009;31:402–409. doi: 
10.1080/09638280802069558.
 
857. Oupra R, Griffiths R, Pryor J, Mott S. Effectiveness of Supportive 
Educative Learning programme on the level of strain experienced by 
caregivers of stroke patients in Thailand. Health Soc Care Community. 
2010;18:10–20. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2524.2009.00865.x.
 
858. Choi-Kwon S, Mitchell PH, Veith R, Teri L, Buzaitis A, Cain KC, Becker 
KJ, Tirschwell D, Fruin M, Choi J, Kim JS. Comparing perceived bur-
den for Korean and American informal caregivers of stroke survivors. 
Rehabil Nurs. 2009;34:141–150.
 
859. Smith SD, Gignac MA, Richardson D, Cameron JI. Differences in the 
experiences and support needs of family caregivers to stroke survivors: 
does age matter? Top Stroke Rehabil. 2008;15:593–601. doi: 10.1310/
tsr1506-593.
 
860. Perrin PB, Johnston A, Vogel B, Heesacker M, Vega-Trujillo M, 
Anderson J, Rittman M. A culturally sensitive Transition Assistance 
Program for stroke caregivers: examining caregiver mental health and 
stroke rehabilitation. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2010;47:605–617.
 
861. Levine C, Albert SM, Hokenstad A, Halper DE, Hart AY, Gould DA. 
“This case is closed”: family caregivers and the termination of home 
health care services for stroke patients. Milbank Q. 2006;84:305–331. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1468-0009.2006.00449.x.
 
862. Salter K, Foley N, Teasell R. Social support interventions and mood 
status post stroke: a review. Int J Nurs Stud. 2010;47:616–625. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2009.12.002.
 
863. Lurbe-Puerto K, Leandro ME, Baumann M. Experiences of caregiving, 
satisfaction of life, and social repercussions among family caregivers, 
two years post-stroke. Soc Work Health Care. 2012;51:725–742. doi: 
10.1080/00981389.2012.692351.
 
864. Steiner V, Pierce L, Drahuschak S, Nofziger E, Buchman D, Szirony T. 
Emotional support, physical help, and health of caregivers of stroke sur-
vivors. J Neurosci Nurs. 2008;40:48–54.
 
865. Campos de Oliveira B, Garanhani ML, Garanhani MR. Caregivers of 
people with stroke: needs, feeling and guidelines provided. Acta Paulista 
de Enfermagem. 2011;24:43–49.
 
866. Thomas M, Greenop K. Caregiver experiences and perceptions of stroke. 
Health SA Gesondheid. 2008;13:29–40.
 
867. Visser-Meily A, van Heugten C, Post M, Schepers V, Lindeman 
E. Intervention studies for caregivers of stroke survivors: a criti-
cal review. Patient Educ Couns. 2005;56:257–267. doi: 10.1016/j.
pec.2004.02.013.
 
868. White JH, Alston MK, Marquez JL, Sweetapple AL, Pollack MR, Attia J, 
Levi CR, Sturm J, Whyte S. Community-dwelling stroke survivors: func-
tion is not the whole story with quality of life. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
2007;88:1140–1146. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2007.06.003.
 
869. White CL, Korner-Bitensky N, Rodrigue N, Rosmus C, Sourial R, 
Lambert S, Wood-Dauphinee S. Barriers and facilitators to caring for 
individuals with stroke in the community: the family’s experience. Can J 
Neurosci Nurs. 2007;29:5–12.
 
870. Philp I, Brainin M, Walker MF, Ward AB, Gillard P, Shields AL, 
Norrving B; Global Stroke Community Advisory Panel. Development 
of a poststroke checklist to standardize follow-up care for stroke sur-
vivors. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2013;22:e173–e180. doi: 10.1016/j.
jstrokecerebrovasdis.2012.10.016.
 
871. Forster A, Brown L, Smith J, House A, Knapp P, Wright JJ, Young J. 
Information provision for stroke patients and their caregivers. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2012;11:CD001919. doi: 10.1002/14651858.
CD001919.pub3.
 
872. Teasell R, Mehta S, Pereira S, McIntyre A, Janzen S, Allen L, Lobo 
L, Viana R. Time to rethink long-term rehabilitation management of 
stroke patients. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2012;19:457–462. doi: 10.1310/
tsr1906-457.
 
873. Ferrarello F, Baccini M, Rinaldi LA, Cavallini MC, Mossello E, Masotti 
G, Marchionni N, Di Bari M. Efficacy of physiotherapy interventions 
late after stroke: a meta-analysis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 
2011;82:136–143. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.2009.196428.
 
874. Lennon O, Galvin R, Smith K, Doody C, Blake C. Lifestyle interven-
tions for secondary disease prevention in stroke and transient ischaemic 
attack: a systematic review. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2014;21:1026–1039. 
doi: 10.1177/2047487313481756.
 
875. Pavey TG, Taylor AH, Fox KR, Hillsdon M, Anokye N, Campbell JL, 
Foster C, Green C, Moxham T, Mutrie N, Searle J, Trueman P, Taylor 
RS. Effect of exercise referral schemes in primary care on physical activ-
ity and improving health outcomes: systematic review and meta-analy-
sis. BMJ. 2011;343:d6462.
 
876. Sharma H, Bulley C, van Wijck FM. Experiences of an exercise refer-
ral scheme from the perspective of people with chronic stroke: a 
qualitative study. Physiotherapy. 2012;98:336–343. doi: 10.1016/j.
physio.2011.05.004.
 
877. Ryan T, Enderby P, Rigby AS. A randomized controlled trial to evaluate 
intensity of community-based rehabilitation provision following stroke 
or hip fracture in old age. Clin Rehabil. 2006;20:123–131.
 
878. Battersby M, Hoffmann S, Cadilhac D, Osborne R, Lalor E, Lindley R. 
“Getting your life back on track after stroke”: a phase II multi-centered, 
single-blind, randomized, controlled trial of the Stroke Self-Management 
Program vs. the Stanford Chronic Condition Self-Management Program 
or standard care in stroke survivors. Int J Stroke. 2009;4:137–144. doi: 
10.1111/j.1747-4949.2009.00261.x.
 
879. Harrington R, Taylor G, Hollinghurst S, Reed M, Kay H, Wood VA. A 
community-based exercise and education scheme for stroke survivors: 
a randomized controlled trial and economic evaluation. Clin Rehabil. 
2010;24:3–15. doi: 10.1177/0269215509347437.
 
880. Thorsén AM, Holmqvist LW, de Pedro-Cuesta J, von Koch L. A 
randomized controlled trial of early supported discharge and con-
tinued rehabilitation at home after stroke: five-year follow-up 
of patient outcome. Stroke. 2005;36:297–303. doi: 10.1161/01.
STR.0000152288.42701.a6.
 
881. Hillier S, Inglis-Jassiem G. Rehabilitation for community-dwelling peo-
ple with stroke: home or centre based? A systematic review. Int J Stroke. 
2010;5:178–186. doi: 10.1111/j.1747-4949.2010.00427.x.
 
882. Lee HS, Ann CS, Kim MC, Choi JH, Yuk GC. Patient preference for 
community-based rehabilitation programs after stroke. J Phys Ther Sci. 
2011;23:137–140.
 
883. Bakas T, Clark PC, Kelly-Hayes M, King RB, Lutz BJ, Miller EL; on 
behalf of the American Heart Association Council on Cardiovascular 
and Stroke Nursing and the Stroke Council. Evidence for stroke 
family caregiver and dyad interventions: a statement for healthcare 
professionals from the American Heart Association and American 
Stroke Association. Stroke. 2014;45:2836–2852. doi: 10.1161/
STR.0000000000000033.
 
884. Hartley S, Finkenflugel H, Kuipers P, Thomas M. Community-based 
rehabilitation: opportunity and challenge. Lancet. 2009;374:1803–1804. 
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)62036-5.
 
885. Barker LN, Ziino C. Community rehabilitation: “home versus centre” 
guidelines for choosing the optimal treatment location. Int J Rehabil Res. 
2010;33:115–123. doi: 10.1097/MRR.0b013e32832e6c73.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e168  Stroke  June 2016
 
886. Reed MC, Wood V, Harrington R, Paterson J. Developing stroke rehabili-
tation and community services: a meta-synthesis of qualitative literature. 
Disabil Rehabil. 2012;34:553–563. doi: 10.3109/09638288.2011.613511.
 
887. Aziz NA, Leonardi-Bee J, Phillips M, Gladman JR, Legg L, Walker MF. 
Therapy-based rehabilitation services for patients living at home more 
than one year after stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008:CD005952. 
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD005952.pub2.
 
888. Legg LA, Quinn TJ, Mahmood F, Weir CJ, Tierney J, Stott DJ, Smith 
LN, Langhorne P. Non-pharmacological interventions for caregivers of 
stroke survivors. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011:CD008179. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD008179.pub2.
 
889. Schmitz MA, Finkelstein M. Perspectives on poststroke sexual issues 
and rehabilitation needs. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2010;17:204–213. doi: 
10.1310/tsr1703-204.
 
890. Passier PE, Visser-Meily JM, Rinkel GJ, Lindeman E, Post MW. Life 
satisfaction and return to work after aneurysmal subarachnoid hem-
orrhage [published correction appears in J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 
2011;20:487]. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2011;20:324–329. doi: 
10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2010.02.001.
 
891. Stein J, Hillinger M, Clancy C, Bishop L. Sexuality after stroke: patient 
counseling preferences. Disabil Rehabil. 2013;35:1842–1847. doi: 
10.3109/09638288.2012.754953.
 
892. Gianotten WL, Bender JL, Post MW. Training in sexology for medi-
cal and paramedical professionals: a model for the rehabilitation 
setting. Sex Relationship Ther. 2006; 21:303–317. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1080/14681990600754559. Accessed December 29, 2014.
 
893. Primack BA, Carroll MV, McNamara M, Klem ML, King B, Rich M, 
Chan CW, Nayak S. Role of video games in improving health-related 
outcomes: a systematic review. Am J Prev Med. 2012;42:630–638. doi: 
10.1016/j.amepre.2012.02.023.
 
894. Taylor AH, Cable NT, Faulkner G, Hillsdon M, Narici M, Van Der Bij 
AK. Physical activity and older adults: a review of health benefits and 
the effectiveness of interventions. J Sports Sci. 2004;22:703–725. doi: 
10.1080/02640410410001712421.
 
895. Aoyagi Y, Shephard RJ. Habitual physical activity and health in the 
elderly: the Nakanojo Study. Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2010;10(suppl 
1):S236–S243. doi: 10.1111/j.1447-0594.2010.00589.x.
 
896. Schwarzenegger A, Chrisman M, Coleman R. The Health and Social 
Benefits of Recreation. Sacramento, CA: California State Parks; 2005.
 
897. Thompson Coon J, Boddy K, Stein K, Whear R, Barton J, Depledge 
MH. Does participating in physical activity in outdoor natural envi-
ronments have a greater effect on physical and mental wellbeing than 
physical activity indoors? A systematic review. Environ Sci Technol. 
2011;45:1761–1772. doi: 10.1021/es102947t.
 
898. O’Sullivan C, Chard G. An exploration of participation in leisure 
activities post-stroke. Aust Occup Ther J. 2010;57:159–166. doi: 
10.1111/j.1440-1630.2009.00833.x.
 
899. McKenna K, Liddle J, Brown A, Lee K, Gustafsson L. Comparison of 
time use, role participation and life satisfaction of older people after 
stroke with a sample without stroke. Aust Occup Ther J. 2009;56:177–
188. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1630.2007.00728.x.
 
900. Eriksson G, Aasnes M, Tistad M, Guidetti S, von Koch L. Occupational 
gaps in everyday life one year after stroke and the association with life 
satisfaction and impact of stroke. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2012;19:244–255. 
doi: 10.1310/tsr1903-244.
 
901. Deleted in proof.
 
902. Richards LG, Latham NK, Jette DU, Rosenberg L, Smout RJ, DeJong 
G. Characterizing occupational therapy practice in stroke rehabilitation. 
Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2005;86(suppl 2):S51–S60. doi: 10.1016/j.
apmr.2005.08.127.
 
903. Desrosiers J, Noreau L, Rochette A, Carbonneau H, Fontaine L, 
Viscogliosi C, Bravo G. Effect of a home leisure education program 
after stroke: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
2007;88:1095–1100. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2007.06.017.
 
904. Walker MF, Leonardi-Bee J, Bath P, Langhorne P, Dewey M, 
Corr S, Drummond A, Gilbertson L, Gladman JR, Jongbloed L, 
Logan P, Parker C. Individual patient data meta-analysis of ran-
domized controlled trials of community occupational therapy 
for stroke patients. Stroke. 2004;35:2226–2232. doi: 10.1161/01.
STR.0000137766.17092.fb.
 
905. Deleted in proof.
 
906. Barker DJ, Reid D, Cott C. The experience of senior stroke survivors: 
factors in community participation among wheelchair users. Can J 
Occup Ther. 2006;73:18–25.
 
907. Deleted in proof.
 
908. van der Ploeg HP, Streppel KR, van der Beek AJ, van der Woude LH, 
Vollenbroek-Hutten MM, van Harten WH, van Mechelen W. Counselling 
increases physical activity behaviour nine weeks after rehabilitation. Br J 
Sports Med. 2006;40:223–229. doi: 10.1136/bjsm.2005.021139.
 
909. van der Ploeg HP, Streppel KR, van der Beek AJ, van der Woude LH, 
Vollenbroek-Hutten MM, van Harten WH, van Mechelen W. Successfully 
improving physical activity behavior after rehabilitation. Am J Health 
Promot. 2007;21:153–159.
 
910. Treger I, Shames J, Giaquinto S, Ring H. Return to work in stroke 
patients. Disabil Rehabil. 2007;29:1397–1403. doi: 10.1080/09638280 
701314923.
 
911. Vestling M, Tufvesson B, Iwarsson S. Indicators for return to work after 
stroke and the importance of work for subjective well-being and life sat-
isfaction. J Rehabil Med. 2003;35:127–131.
 
912. Brown DL, Boden-Albala B, Langa KM, Lisabeth LD, Fair M, Smith 
MA, Sacco RL, Morgenstern LB. Projected costs of ischemic stroke 
in the United States. Neurology. 2006;67:1390–1395. doi: 10.1212/01.
wnl.0000237024.16438.20.
 
913. Hofgren C, Björkdahl A, Esbjörnsson E, Sunnerhagen KS, Stibrant-
Sunnerhagen K. Recovery after stroke: cognition, ADL function 
and return to work [published correction appears in Acta Neurol 
Scand. 2007;115:210]. Acta Neurol Scand. 2007;115:73–80. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-0404.2006.00768.x.
 
914. Hommel M, Trabucco-Miguel S, Joray S, Naegele B, Gonnet N, Jaillard 
A. Social dysfunctioning after mild to moderate first-ever stroke at 
vocational age. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2009;80:371–375. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2008.157875.
 
915. Doucet T, Muller F, Verdun-Esquer C, Debelleix X, Brochard P. 
Returning to work after a stroke: a retrospective study at the Physical and 
Rehabilitation Medicine Center La Tour de Gassies. Ann Phys Rehabil 
Med. 2012;55:112–127. doi: 10.1016/j.rehab.2012.01.007.
 
916. Kauranen T, Turunen K, Laari S, Mustanoja S, Baumann P, Poutiainen E. 
The severity of cognitive deficits predicts return to work after a first-ever 
ischaemic stroke. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2013;84:316–321. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2012-302629.
 
917. Andersen G, Christensen D, Kirkevold M, Johnsen SP. Post-stroke 
fatigue and return to work: a 2-year follow-up. Acta Neurol Scand. 
2012;125:248–253. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2011.01557.x.
 
918. Hannerz H, Holbaek Pedersen B, Poulsen OM, Humle F, Andersen LL. 
A nationwide prospective cohort study on return to gainful occupation 
after stroke in Denmark 1996–2006. BMJ Open. 2011;1:e000180.
 
919. Busch MA, Coshall C, Heuschmann PU, McKevitt C, Wolfe CD. 
Sociodemographic differences in return to work after stroke: the South 
London Stroke Register (SLSR). J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 
2009;80:888–893. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.2008.163295.
 
920. Saeki S, Toyonaga T. Determinants of early return to work after first 
stroke in Japan. J Rehabil Med. 2010;42:254–258. doi: 10.2340/ 
16501977-0503.
 
921. Hackett ML, Glozier N, Jan S, Lindley R. Returning to paid employment 
after stroke: the Psychosocial Outcomes In StrokE (POISE) cohort study. 
PLoS One. 2012;7:e41795. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041795.
 
922. Baldwin C, Brusco NK. The effect of vocational rehabilitation on return-
to-work rates post stroke: a systematic review. Top Stroke Rehabil. 
2011;18:562–572. doi: 10.1310/tsr1805-562.
 
923. Morris R. The psychology of stroke in young adults: the roles of service 
provision and return to work. Stroke Res Treat. 2011;2011:534812. doi: 
10.4061/2011/534812.
 
924. Lasker J, LaPointe L, Kodras J. Helping a professor with apha-
sia resume teaching through multimodal approaches. Aphasiology. 
2005;19:399–410.
 
925. Chan ML. Description of a return-to-work occupational therapy programme 
for stroke rehabilitation in Singapore. Occup Ther Int. 2008;15:87–99.
 
926. Lister R. Loss of ability to drive following a stroke: the early experiences 
of three elderly people on discharge from hospital. Br J Occup Ther. 
1999;62:514–520.
 
927. Perrier MJ, Korner-Bitensky N, Mayo NE. Patient factors associated with 
return to driving poststroke: findings from a multicenter cohort study. Arch 
Phys Med Rehabil. 2010;91:868–873. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2010.03.009.
 
928. Fisk GD, Owsley C, Pulley LV. Driving after stroke: driving exposure, 
advice, and evaluations. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 1997;78:1338–1345.
 
929. Anstey KJ, Wood J, Lord S, Walker JG. Cognitive, sensory and physi-
cal factors enabling driving safety in older adults. Clin Psychol Rev. 
2005;25:45–65. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2004.07.008.
 
930. Yale SH, Hansotia P, Knapp D, Ehrfurth J. Neurologic conditions: 
assessing medical fitness to drive. Clin Med Res. 2003;1:177–188. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Winstein et al  Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery  e169
 
930a.  
American Stroke Association. Driving after stroke. http://www.stroke 
association.org/STROKEORG/LifeAfterStroke/RegainingIndependence/
Driving/Driving-After-Stroke_UCM_311016_Article.jsp#.Vtu80BjiTY8. 
Accessed March 5, 2016.
 931. Logan PA, Dyas J, Gladman JR. Using an interview study of transport 
use by people who have had a stroke to inform rehabilitation. Clin 
Rehabil. 2004;18:703–708.
 932. Akinwuntan AE, Feys H, De Weerdt W, Baten G, Arno P, Kiekens C. 
Prediction of driving after stroke: a prospective study. Neurorehabil 
Neural Repair. 2006;20:417–423. doi: 10.1177/1545968306287157.
 933. McKay C, Rapport LJ, Bryer RC, Casey J. Self-evaluation of driving 
simulator performance after stroke. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2011;18:549–
561. doi: 10.1310/tsr1805-549.
 934. Petzold A, Korner-Bitensky N, Rochette A, Teasell R, Marshall S, 
Perrier MJ. Driving poststroke: problem identification, assessment use, 
and interventions offered by Canadian occupational therapists. Top 
Stroke Rehabil. 2010;17:371–379. doi: 10.1310/tsr1705-371.
 935. Deleted in proof.
 936. Marshall SC, Molnar F, Man-Son-Hing M, Blair R, Brosseau L, 
Finestone HM, Lamothe C, Korner-Bitensky N, Wilson KG. Predictors 
of driving ability following stroke: a systematic review. Top Stroke 
Rehabil. 2007;14:98–114. doi: 10.1310/tsr1401-98.
 937. Devos H, Akinwuntan AE, Nieuwboer A, Truijen S, Tant M, De 
Weerdt W. Screening for fitness to drive after stroke: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Neurology. 2011;76:747–756. doi: 10.1212/
WNL.0b013e31820d6300.
 
938. Akinwuntan AE, De Weerdt W, Feys H, Pauwels J, Baten G, Arno P, 
Kiekens C. Effect of simulator training on driving after stroke: a ran-
domized controlled trial. Neurology. 2005;65:843–850. doi: 10.1212/01.
wnl.0000171749.71919.fa.
 
939. Lundqvist A, Gerdle B, Rönnberg J. Neuropsychological aspects of driv-
ing after stroke: in the simulator and on the road. Appl Cogn Psychol. 
2000;14:135–150.
 
940. Devos H, Akinwuntan AE, Nieuwboer A, Ringoot I, Van Berghen 
K, Tant M, Kiekens C, De Weerdt W. Effect of simulator training on 
fitness-to-drive after stroke: a 5-year follow-up of a randomized con-
trolled trial. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2010;24:843–850. doi: 
10.1177/1545968310368687.
 
941. Devos H, Akinwuntan AE, Nieuwboer A, Tant M, Truijen S, De Wit 
L, Kiekens C, De Weerdt W. Comparison of the effect of two driving 
retraining programs on on-road performance after stroke. Neurorehabil 
Neural Repair. 2009;23:699–705. doi: 10.1177/1545968309334208.
 
942. Söderström ST, Pettersson RP, Leppert J. Prediction of driving ability 
after stroke and the effect of behind-the-wheel training. Scand J Psychol. 
2006;47:419–429. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9450.2006.00550.x.
 
943. Crotty M, George S. Retraining visual processing skills to improve driv-
ing ability after stroke. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2009;90:2096–2102. 
doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2009.08.143.
 
944. Bergsma DP, Leenders MJ, Verster JC, van der Wildt GJ, van den Berg 
AV. Oculomotor behavior of hemianopic chronic stroke patients in a driv-
ing simulator is modulated by vision training. Restor Neurol Neurosci. 
2011;29:347–359. doi: 10.3233/RNN-2011-604.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
