 Copyright © 2018 International Anesthesia Research Society. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
XXX 2018 • Volume XXX • Number XXX 
www.anesthesia-analgesia.org 
1
DOI: 10.1213/ANE.0000000000002743
P
erioperative malnutrition has proven to be challenging 
to define, diagnose, and treat. Despite these challenges, 
it is well known that suboptimal nutritional status is 
a strong independent predictor of poor postoperative out-
comes.1 Malnourished surgical patients have significantly 
higher postoperative mortality, morbidity, length of stay 
(LOS), readmission rates, and increased hospital costs.2–4 It is 
estimated that 24%–65% of patients undergoing surgery are 
at nutrition risk.3,5–7 Additionally, recent prospective observa-
tional data indicate that undernourished patients or patients 
at risk of malnutrition are twice as likely to be readmitted 
within 30 days after elective colorectal surgery.8 As defined by 
the National Surgical Quality Improvement Program, malnu-
trition is among the few modifiable preoperative risk factors 
associated with poor surgical outcomes, including mortality, 
in surgical patients.9,10 This risk of malnutrition is often most 
Perioperative malnutrition has proven to be challenging to define, diagnose, and treat. Despite 
these challenges, it is well known that suboptimal nutritional status is a strong independent pre-
dictor of poor postoperative outcomes. Although perioperative caregivers consistently express 
recognition of the importance of nutrition screening and optimization in the perioperative period, 
implementation of evidence-based perioperative nutrition guidelines and pathways in the United 
States has been quite limited and needs to be addressed in surgery-focused recommendations. 
The second Perioperative Quality Initiative brought together a group of international experts with 
the objective of providing consensus recommendations on this important topic with the goal 
of (1) developing guidelines for screening of nutritional status to identify patients at risk for 
adverse outcomes due to malnutrition; (2) address optimal methods of providing nutritional sup-
port and optimizing nutrition status preoperatively; and (3) identifying when and how to optimize 
nutrition delivery in the postoperative period. Discussion led to strong recommendations for 
implementation of routine preoperative nutrition screening to identify patients in need of preop-
erative nutrition optimization. Postoperatively, nutrition delivery should be restarted immediately 
after surgery. The key role of oral nutrition supplements, enteral nutrition, and parenteral nutri-
tion (implemented in that order) in most perioperative patients was advocated for with protein 
delivery being more important than total calorie delivery. Finally, the role of often-inadequate 
nutrition intake in the posthospital setting was discussed, and the role of postdischarge oral 
nutrition supplements was emphasized.  (Anesth Analg 2018;XXX:00–00)
American Society for Enhanced Recovery and 
Perioperative Quality Initiative Joint Consensus 
Statement on Nutrition Screening and Therapy Within 
a Surgical Enhanced Recovery Pathway
Paul E. Wischmeyer, MD, EDIC,* Franco Carli, MD, MPhil,† David C. Evans, MD, FACS,‡  
Sarah Guilbert, RD, LDN, CNSC,§ Rosemary Kozar, MD, PhD,∥ Aurora Pryor, MD, FACS,¶  
Robert H. Thiele, MD,# Sotiria Everett, EdD, RD,**  
Mike Grocott, BSc, MBBS, MD, FRCA, FRCP
, FFICM,††‡‡§§∥∥ Tong J. Gan, MD, MHS, FRCA,¶¶  
Andrew D. Shaw, MB, FRCA, FCCM, FFICM,##*** Julie K. M. Thacker, MD,†††  
and Timothy E. Miller, MB, ChB, FRCA,‡‡‡ for the Perioperative Quality Initiative (POQI) 2 Workgroup
From the *Department of Anesthesiology, Duke University School of 
Medicine, Durham, North Carolina; †McGill University, Montreal, 
Québec, Canada; ‡Department of Surgery, Division of Trauma, Critical 
Care, and Burn, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio; §Duke University 
Hospital, Durham, North Carolina; ∥University of Maryland School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; ¶Department of Surgery, Stony Brook 
Medicine, Stony Brook, New York; #Departments of Anesthesiology 
and Biomedical Engineering, Divisions of Cardiac, Thoracic, and 
Critical Care Anesthesiology, University of Virginia School of Medicine, 
Charlottesville, Virginia; **Nutrition Division, Department of Family, 
Population, Preventive Medicine, Stony Brook Medicine, Stony Brook, 
New York; ††Respiratory and Critical Care Research Area, National 
Institute of Health Research Biomedical Research Centre, University 
Hospital Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom; ‡‡Southampton 
National Health Service Foundation Trust, Integrative Physiology and 
Critical Illness Group, Southampton, United Kingdom; §§Clinical and 
Experimental Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, 
Southampton, United Kingdom; ∥∥Morpheus Collaboration, Department 
of Anesthesiology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, 
North 
Carolina; 
¶¶Department 
of Anesthesiology, 
Stony 
Brook 
E NARRATIVE REVIEW ARTICLE
University School of Medicine, Stony Brook, New York; ##Vanderbilt 
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee; ***Department 
of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee; and †††Department of Surgery, Division of Advanced 
Oncologic and Gastrointestinal Surgery and ‡‡‡Division of General, 
Vascular and Transplant Anesthesia, Duke University Medical Center, 
Durham, North Carolina.
Accepted for publication October 27, 2017.
Funding: The Perioperative Quality Initiative (POQI) meeting received finan-
cial assistance from the American Society for Enhanced Recovery (ASER).
Conflicts of Interest: See Disclosures at the end of the article.
Supplemental digital content is available for this article. Direct URL citations 
appear in the printed text and are provided in the HTML and PDF versions 
of this article on the journal’s website (www.anesthesia-analgesia.org).
For the Perioperative Quality Initiative (POQI) 2 Workgroup, see Supplemental 
Digital Content, Appendix 1, http://links.lww.com/AA/C160.
Reprints will not be available from the authors.
Address correspondence to Timothy E. Miller, MB, ChB, FRCA, Division of 
General, Vascular and Transplant Anesthesia, Duke University Medical Center, 
Box 3094, Durham, NC 27710. Address e-mail to timothy.miller2@duke.edu.
Copyright © 2017 International Anesthesia Research Society
 Copyright © 2018 International Anesthesia Research Society. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
2   www.anesthesia-analgesia.org 
ANESTHESIA & ANALGESIA
 
 
E NARRATIVE REVIEW ARTICLE
significant after major gastrointestinal (GI) and oncologic 
surgery, groups commonly focused on in enhanced recov-
ery pathways (ERPs).2–4 Further, appropriate perioperative 
nutritional therapy has been shown to specifically improve 
perioperative outcomes in GI/oncologic surgery, where the 
greatest risk of baseline malnutrition risk (~65%) occurs.3,6,11 
In surgical patients overall, perioperative nutrition interven-
tions can improve surgical outcomes and reduce infectious 
morbidity and mortality.12 There is a long history of random-
ized controlled trials (RCTs) and meta-analyses demonstrating 
preoperative nutrition (regardless of route of administration) 
in malnourished patients before GI surgery reduces postop-
erative morbidity by 20%.13 Postoperative nutritional support 
is vital in maintaining nutritional status during the catabolic 
postoperative period and underscored by evidence for early 
and sustained feeding after surgery as part of ERP proto-
cols.14–16 In fact, the advancement of oral intake has been iden-
tified as an independent determinant of early recovery after 
colorectal surgery.17 Some of the most striking recent data on 
the role of nutrition delivery in the perioperative period have 
demonstrated in patients undergoing oncologic surgery in an 
ERP, delivery of nutrition on the first postoperative day is an 
independent predictor of postoperative survival at 5 years.18
Unfortunately, recent evidence reveals that significant 
deficiencies in nutritional screening and intervention in US 
colorectal and oncologic surgical patients with only ~1 in 
5 hospitals currently utilizing a formal nutrition screening 
process.19 This is surprising as 83% of US surgeons believe 
that existing data support preoperative nutrition optimiza-
tion to reduce perioperative complications.19 However, only 
~20% of US GI/oncologic surgery patients receive any nutri-
tional supplements in the preoperative or postoperative set-
ting.19 Overall US surgeons recognized both the importance 
of proper perioperative surgical nutritional support and the 
potential value to patient outcomes. Despite these beliefs, 
these data confirm poor implementation of evidence-based 
nutrition practices in major surgery.19
A summary of the current challenges and known ben-
efits of perioperative nutrition interventions are shown in 
Figure 1. The urgency of improving perioperative nutri-
tion practices is underscored by strong recommendations 
from international nutrition society guidelines endorsing 
perioperative nutrition optimization.21–24 However, lim-
ited surgical/perioperative society guidelines exist on 
how to optimally screen surgical patients for malnutri-
tion and optimize nutritional status in the perioperative 
period, particularly within an ERP. Thus, we sought to 
define and answer important questions related to periop-
erative nutrition in patients undergoing surgery within 
the context of an ERP.
METHODS/DESIGN
This consensus process utilized a modified Delphi method as 
described previously25 and processes detailed by the National 
Institute for Health and Care Excellence.26 The Perioperative 
Quality Initiative (POQI) is a previously described collabora-
tive of diverse international experts in anesthesia, nursing, 
nutrition, and surgery tasked to develop consensus-based 
recommendations in ERP.25,27 The format for grading of rec-
ommendations is included in Table 1. The participants in the 
POQI consensus meeting were recruited based on their exper-
tise in the principles of enhanced recovery after surgery/ERP 
and met in Stony Brook, New York, on December 2–3, 2016.
RESULTS
 
- The 
formal 
consensus 
recommendations 
are 
described in Table 2.
 
- Key perioperative nutrition questions addressed 
in this consensus statement are summarized in 
Supplemental Digital Content, Appendix 1, http://
links.lww.com/AA/C160.
 
- A summary of key “take-away” recommendations is 
summarized in Figure 2.
Figure 1. Facts and data for perioperative nutrition screening and therapy. Data drawn from Awad and Lobo6, Williams and Wischmeyer19, and 
Philipson et al.20 R.I.P
. indicates rest in peace.
 Copyright © 2018 International Anesthesia Research Society. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Perioperative Nutrition Optimization Within an Enhanced Recovery Pathway
XXX 2018 • Volume XXX • Number XXX 
www.anesthesia-analgesia.org 
3
Preoperative Screening
Screening for malnutrition before major surgery is essen-
tial as it can identify patients at risk of malnutrition who 
may benefit from a nutritional intervention preoperatively. 
Numerous screening tools have been validated for use in 
already hospitalized patients, yet there is no consensus 
related to the optimal screening tool in the preoperative 
patient. After literature review, we developed and proposed 
the perioperative nutrition screen (PONS).
As shown in Figure 3, the PONS is a modified version 
of the malnutrition universal screening tool28 that has been 
altered for use perioperatively. The PONS determines the 
presence of nutrition risk based on a patient’s body mass 
index (BMI), recent changes in weight, reported recent 
decrease in dietary intake, and preoperative albumin level. 
In addition, the PONS includes evaluation of preoperative 
albumin level, as this is a predictor of postoperative compli-
cations, including morbidity/mortality.28–32
BMI assessment and recent unplanned weight loss are 
criteria used in several malnutrition screening tools.33,34 
A BMI level indicative of underweight (<18.5 kg/m2 for 
adults <65 years old) has been shown to increase postop-
erative complications in a variety of surgical patients.33–37 
The PONS uses a higher number (<20 kg/m2) for adults 
>65 years old because research indicates that the risk for all-
cause mortality increases starting at a BMI of 24 kg/m2 for 
this age population and doubles when BMI is <22 kg/m2 
for men and <20 kg/m2 for women.38 While this research 
was not related to surgical risk, it suggests that higher BMI 
threshold should be used when evaluating weight status of 
older adults. Regardless of BMI, unintentional weight loss 
has been associated with morbidity, functional decline, and 
negative postoperative outcomes.39,40 Reduced oral intake 
is determined by asking patients if they have been eating 
<50% of their normal diet in the preceding week. Similar 
questions related to reduced oral intake have been used in 
short nutrition screens with high sensitivity and specificity 
in validation studies.41,42
The PONS includes the use of albumin because it is inex-
pensive, commonly obtained in perioperative testing, and a 
strong predictor of surgical risk/mortality.10,32 While it has 
long utilized as an indicator of malnutrition, studies have 
shown that albumin is neither specific nor sensitive enough 
to be the optimal malnutrition marker in most patient popu-
lations.43 Until a better marker is available, we recommend 
its use as a component of the preoperative nutrition screen.
The PONS can be easily administered and incorporated 
into an electronic medical record for efficient communi-
cation. The intent is that the PONS can be administered 
quickly (<5 minutes) by nursing staff in surgical/preopera-
tive clinics and results will be instantly uploaded into elec-
tronic medical record, automatically triggering a nutrition 
intervention if 1 or more positive responses on the PONS 
score are recorded. Patients who are identified as being 
at high nutrition risk on screening should be referred to a 
Registered Dietitian Nutritionist for a complete nutrition 
assessment and intervention. In situations where referrals 
to Registered Dietitian Nutritionists are not possible, oral 
nutritional supplements (ONSs) are recommended and will 
be discussed in the following preoperative intervention 
section.
Please see Supplemental Digital Content, Appendix 2, 
http://links.lww.com/AA/C160, for discussion of future 
preoperative assessment techniques for sarcopenia and role 
of vitamin D in surgery. Please see Supplemental Digital 
Content, Appendix 3, http://links.lww.com/AA/C160, for 
discussion of obese patient considerations.
Preoperative Intervention
What Is the Role of Achieving Protein Delivery Goals in the 
Perioperative Period?. Protein requirements are elevated in 
states of stress, such as surgery, to account for the added 
demands of hepatic acute phase proteins synthesis, the 
synthesis of proteins involved in immune function, and 
wound healing.44 Although optimal protein intakes for 
surgery are currently not clearly defined, nonsurgical 
nutrition guidelines suggest that stressed patients should 
consume at least 1.2–2.0 g of protein/kg/d.22
Whey protein and casein are among the best quality pro-
teins overall for muscle synthesis45 and to stimulate anabo-
lism in patients with advanced cancer.46 Several studies have 
identified that consuming 25–35 g of protein in a single meal 
maximally stimulates muscle protein synthesis.47 Based on 
the evidence of this ceiling effect, an equal distribution of 
daily dietary protein across meals has been proposed. The 
idea being that the anabolic response to a single dose of 
amino acids can be compounded when repeated multiple 
times per day.48 Given the emerging findings to support an 
even distribution of daily protein intake in healthy popula-
tions and the evidence that substantive high-quality amino 
acids are required to stimulate a typical anabolic response 
in cancer patients, it seems reasonable to suggest that daily 
protein requirements for cancer patients be met through 
moderate protein (~25–35 g) consumption at every meal.
When Should High-Protein ONSs, Enteral Nutrition, and 
Parenteral Nutrition Be Initiated Preoperatively?. We 
recommend that patients who are screened as being at 
nutritional risk before major surgery receive preoperative 
ONSs for a period of at least 7 days. This may be achieved 
with either of the following: immunonutrition (IMN, 
containing arginine/fish oil) or high-protein ONSs (2–3× a 
day, minimum of 18 g protein/dose). When oral nutrition 
Table 1.  
Format of Recommendations in POQI 
Guidelines (From NICE Guidelines)
Strength of Recommendationsa
Strength
Definition
Strongly recommend
Committee believes that the evidence is 
strong, supported by numerous high-quality 
prospective randomized trials.
Recommend
Evidence supporting the practice is not as 
strong, based on high-quality prospective and 
retrospective studies. Committee feels that 
benefits of the intervention outweigh the risk 
for the majority of patients.
Consider
There is a lack of quality research to make a 
recommendation. Committee feels that the 
practice is safe and likely to be effective 
based on expert opinion.
Abbreviations: NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence; POQI, 
Perioperative Quality Initiative.
aBased on NICE guidelines for strength of recommendations.
 Copyright © 2018 International Anesthesia Research Society. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
4   www.anesthesia-analgesia.org 
ANESTHESIA & ANALGESIA
 
 
E NARRATIVE REVIEW ARTICLE
supplementation via oral nutritional supplement (ONS) is 
not possible, a dietician should be consulted and an enteral 
feeding tube be placed and home enteral nutrition (EN) 
initiated for a period of at least 7 days. If neither oral nutrition 
supplementation via ONS nor EN is possible or when 
protein/kcal requirement (>50% of recommended intake) 
cannot be adequately met by ONS/EN, we recommend 
preoperative parenteral nutrition (PN) to improve outcomes.
These recommendations are consistent with existing 
nutrition societal guidelines from the European Society 
for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition guidelines indicat-
ing severely malnourished patients be supplemented via 
nutritional therapy before elective surgery.1 The duration 
of preoperative support needed varies in published guide-
lines from 7 to 14 days.1,21 However, even 5–7 days of pre-
operative nutrition therapy can lead to a 50% reduction in 
postoperative morbidity in malnourished patients.49 The 
optimal amount of time preoperative nutrition needed 
for malnourished patients and an objective measure of 
nutritional optimization need further study. Intriguingly, 
recent consensus recommendations from the recent North 
American Surgical Nutrition Summit suggested that “pre-
ventive” preoperative nutrition therapy and optimization 
involving “metabolic preparation” occur in all patients at 
risk of undernutrition, rather than simply just correcting 
deficiencies in severely undernourished patients.50 This 
recommendation is based on the concept that preoperative 
nutritional care should be introduced early for malnour-
ished and nonmalnourished patients to maintain opti-
mal nutritional status throughout the entire perioperative 
period.50 Further, Kuppinger et al51 showed that for patients 
undergoing abdominal surgery, lower food intake before 
hospital admission was an independent risk factor for post-
operative complications. It is possible in patients found to 
be malnourished as judged by PONS score components, 
such as >10% weight loss in past 3 months or reduced oral 
intake (<50%) in past 7 days, that surgery should consider 
being delayed until a reasonable period of compliance with 
Table 2.  
Consensus Statements and Recommendations
Before Surgery
 1.  
We recommend screening of nutritional status before major surgery using a simple screening tool (via electronic medical record where 
possible) (see suggested/example tools in manuscript).
 2.  
We propose the PONS questions for clinic-based perioperative nutrition screening
   - Does the patient have a low BMI <18.5 kg/m2 (<20 in >65 y of age)?
   - Has the patient experienced a weight loss >10% in past 6 mo?
   - Has the patient had a reduced oral intake by >50% in the past week? (and/or)
   - Does the patient have a preoperative serum albumin <3.0 g/dL?
 3.  
We recommend that if any screening questions in PONS score are positive for nutritional risk, that intervention and/or referral for formal 
nutrition assessment take place (see recommendation 6).
 4.  
We suggest evaluation of lean body mass via CT scan, when available, to assist with nutritional risk prediction before surgery.
 5.  
We recommend reaching an overall protein intake goal is more important than achieving a total calorie intake in the preoperative period with a 
recommended protein goal >1.2 g/kg/d.
 6.  
We recommend that patients who are screened as being at nutritional risk before major surgery receive preoperative ONSs for a period of at 
least 7 d. This may be achieved with either of the following:
   - IMN formulas (containing arginine and fish oil)
   - High-protein ONS (2–3× a day, minimum of 18 g protein/dose)
 7.  
We recommend that for patients who are screened as being at nutritional risk before major surgery, where oral nutrition supplementation via 
ONS is not possible, that a dietician be consulted and an enteral feeding tube be placed and home EN initiated for a period of at least 7 d.
 8.  
If neither oral nutrition supplementation via ONS nor EN is possible, or when protein/kcal requirement (>50% of recommended intake) cannot 
be adequately met by ONS/EN, we recommend preoperative PN to improve outcomes
 9. Preoperative IMN should be considered for all patients undergoing elective major abdominal surgery.
10.  
We recommend preoperative fasting from midnight be abandoned.
11.  
In patients undergoing surgery who are considered to have minimal specific risk of aspiration, we encourage unrestricted access to solids for 
up to 8 h before anesthesia and clear fluids for oral intake up to 2 h before the induction of anesthesia.
12.  
We recommend a preoperative carbohydrate drink containing at least 45 g of carbohydrate to improve insulin sensitivity (except in type I 
diabetics due to their insulin deficiency state). We suggest that complex carbohydrate (eg, maltodextrin) be used when available.
After Surgery
1.  
We recommend that a high-protein diet (via diet or high-protein ONS) be initiated on the day of surgery in most cases, with exception of patients 
without bowel in continuity, with bowel ischemia, or persistent bowel obstruction. Traditional “clear liquid” and “full liquid” diets should not be 
routinely used.
2.  
We recommend reaching an overall protein intake goal is more important than total calorie intake in the postoperative period.
3.  
We recommend standardized protocols for postoperative nutrition support be instituted.
4.  
IMN should be considered in all postoperative major abdominal surgical patients for at least 7 d.
5.  
In patients who meet criteria for malnutrition, who are not anticipated to meet nutritional goals (>50% of protein/kcal) through oral intake, 
we recommend early EN or tube feeding within 24 h. Where goals are not met through EN, we recommend early PN, in combination with EN if 
possible.
6.  
We recommend when using gastric residual volume’s as a marker of feeding tolerance, a cutoff of >500 mL should be used before tube feeds 
being suspended or tube feed/EN rate reduced.
7.  
In patients started on EN and/or PN, we recommend continuation of EN or PN support for patients who are not able to take in at least 60% of 
their protein/kcal requirements via the oral route.
8.  
We recommend posthospital high-protein ONS in all patients after major surgery to meet both calorie and protein needs, especially in the 
previously malnourished, elderly and sarcopenic patient.
Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; CT
, computed tomography; EN, enteral nutrition; IMN, immunonutrition; ONS, oral nutritional supplement; PONS, 
perioperative nutrition screen; PN, parenteral nutrition.
 Copyright © 2018 International Anesthesia Research Society. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Perioperative Nutrition Optimization Within an Enhanced Recovery Pathway
XXX 2018 • Volume XXX • Number XXX 
www.anesthesia-analgesia.org 
5
preoperative nutrition therapy can be achieved. Although 
the optimal time period for preoperative optimization is 
yet to be determined, it is likely that at least 2 weeks (and 
perhaps 4 weeks or more) may be a reasonable timeframe 
as discussed in the high-risk nutrition pathway below. The 
risk of delaying surgery versus operating on a patient with 
known malnutrition must be carefully considered.
Nutrition Pathway in Low Nutrition Risk Perioperative Patients 
(ie, PONS <1 and Albumin [ALB] >3.0). Patients should be 
encouraged to take in healthy high-protein (with high-qual-
ity protein sources, such as eggs, fish, and lean meats/dairy) 
complex carbohydrate-rich diets preoperatively (Figure 4A). 
However, many patients will not be able to meet optimal 
suggested perioperative energy goals of 25 kcal/kg/d and 
1.5–2 g/kg/d of protein (~1 g/pound of ideal/adjusted 
body weight) from routine food intake.1,52 Thus, we encour-
age patients to take high-protein ONSs or IMN during the 
perioperative period unrelated to nutritional status.
Nutrition Pathway in Patients Found to Be at Nutrition Risk (ie, 
PONS >1 or ALB <3.0). In patients found to be at nutrition risk, 
we recommend high-protein ONS or IMN be given before sur-
gery (Figure 4B). This should have a goal of delivering at least 
1.2 g/kg/d total of protein. It is the consensus of the group 
that high-protein ONS should contain >18 g/protein/serving 
in a balanced formula. A reasonable goal for most patients is 
3 high-protein ONS servings per day. Previous data utiliz-
ing preoperative ONS demonstrated benefits on reduction 
of surgical-site infections in selected weight-losing patients.53 
Again, because many patients do not meet their energy needs 
from normal food, especially malnourished patients, it is the 
consensus of this consensus group to encourage the use of 
high-protein ONS or IMN. As patient compliance with ONS 
intake (2–3× a day) is essential for benefit, it is vital to empha-
size the key role of ONS in preoperative therapy.54 Further, 
cost-effectiveness of ONS in hospitalized patients has been 
shown in a recent large systematic review.55
When oral nutrition is unable to meet the protein and 
calorie requirements in malnourished patients, enteral 
supplementation should be preferred over PN whenever 
possible. In 800 patients with gastric cancer undergoing 
gastrectomy and with severe nutritional risk according 
to European Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition 
definitions, the incidence of surgical-site infections was 
significantly lower in the group receiving adequate energy 
support via oral, EN, and/or PN for at least 10 days than in 
the group with inadequate/no support for <10 days (17.0% 
vs 45.4%; P = .00069). In multivariate analysis, nutritional 
therapy was an independent factor associated with fewer 
surgical-site infections (odds ratio, 0.14; 95% confidence 
interval [CI], 0.05–0.37; P = .0002).56 Preoperative PN should 
only be utilized in patients with malnutrition or nutritional 
risk where energy requirement cannot be adequately met 
by EN. A period of 7–14 days of PN is recommended. If PN 
is required to meet energy needs, it should be combined 
whenever possible with EN or ONS. For surgical patients, 
the benefits of nutritional therapy have been consistently 
shown in cases of severe undernutrition57–59 and confirmed 
by meta-analyses and expert consensus review.60,61 PN was 
found to reduce the rate of postoperative complications in 
malnourished patients.57–60 Patients in these studies were 
fed preoperatively for at least 7–10 days. The results of the 
meta-analysis by Braunschweig et al62 also favor PN for 
malnourished patients. A significantly lower mortality with 
a tendency toward lower rates of infection was also found in 
malnourished patients receiving PN in the meta-analysis by 
Heyland et al.61 In a later systematic review, which focused 
on patients undergoing GI surgery, preoperative PN statisti-
cally significantly reduced the risk for major complications 
from 45% to 28%.63
With regard to the timing of preoperative PN use, the 
benefits of preoperative PN for 7–15 days are most clearly 
shown in patients with documented malnutrition before 
major GI surgery.57,58 When PN is given for the 10 days pre-
operatively and continued for 9 days postoperatively, the 
complication rate is 30% lower versus no PN control group 
and there is a reduction in mortality.58 It is the opinion of 
the consensus group that in patients with significant nutri-
tional risk, the potential for increased benefit will justify the 
preoperative extension of preoperative hospitalization or 
outpatient PN delivery length to 10–14 days of PN deliv-
ery. To avoid refeeding syndrome in severely malnourished 
patients, PN calorie delivery should be increased in a step-
wise fashion (with dietician/pharmacist guidance) and 
laboratory and cardiac monitoring should be initiated with 
adequate precautions to replace potassium, magnesium, 
phosphate, and thiamine.64
Minimizing Preoperative Fasting and Role of 
Preoperative Oral Carbohydrate Loading
Perioperative fasting can exacerbate surgical stress response, 
aggravate insulin resistance, exaggerate protein losses, and 
impair GI function. Additionally, preoperative fasting is 
associated with a number of patient-centered consequences 
including thirst, hunger, headaches, and anxiety. It is now 
known that preoperative overnight fasting is unnecessary 
in most cases; clear fluids taken up until 2 hours before 
induction do not increase gastric volumes, therefore they 
Figure 2. Summary of key recommendations for perioperative nutri-
tion care. POQI indicates Perioperative Quality Initiative.
 Copyright © 2018 International Anesthesia Research Society. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
6   www.anesthesia-analgesia.org 
ANESTHESIA & ANALGESIA
 
 
E NARRATIVE REVIEW ARTICLE
pose no risk for aspiration, and in fact have been found to 
stimulate gastric emptying.50,65
Delivery of sufficient exogenous carbohydrate is con-
sidered the best method to induce a metabolically fed state 
preoperatively. Carbohydrate loading is accomplished with 
the consumption of 50 g carbohydrates as a clear liquid 2–3 
hours preoperatively and in some studies/centers 100 g the 
evening before. The use of preoperative carbohydrate-load-
ing strategies has been associated with a statistically signifi-
cant reduced LOS, especially in major abdominal surgery 
(mean difference, −1.66 days; 95% CI, −2.97 to −0.34).66 For 
best results, the dose 2–3 hours before surgery should be 
consumed within 5–10 minutes (not sipped over time) to 
enhance insulin secretion. The carbohydrate product most 
often studied contains maltodextrin as source of carbohy-
drate, and its low osmolality induces faster gastric empty-
ing. Direct comparisons with more simple sugar containing 
solutions (glucose) are not yet studied. However, there are 
significant data suggesting the negative impact of high 
versus low glycemic index meal on response of glucose, 
insulin, and glucagon.67 Overall, based on the low risk of 
harm, potentially improved nitrogen balance, better insulin 
sensitivity, and signal of reduced LOS in major abdominal 
surgery, we recommend the oral intake of carbohydrate-
containing solutions preoperatively and suggest solutions 
containing complex carbohydrates be used when available.
Role of Perioperative IMN
IMN has been proposed as a risk-reduction strategy in sur-
gical patients for over 25 years. Arginine, omega-3 fatty 
acid, and antioxidants are delivered in combination at high 
levels in various EN and ONS formulas. Conditionally 
essential arginine is rapidly depleted after surgical stress 
but can be supplemented with IMN.68 Arginine is important 
for activation of T lymphocytes, promotion of T-helper cells, 
phagocytosis, and respiratory burst generation.69 Arginine 
serves as a precursor to nitric oxide and proline; both are 
important to anastomotic and wound healing—nitric oxide 
promotes vasodilation and tissue oxygenation while pro-
line contributes to collagen deposition during healing. The 
omega-3 fatty acids docosahexaenoic acid and eicosapen-
taenoic acid play a wide range of anti-inflammatory roles, 
reducing oxidative injury, down-regulating arachidonic 
acid, and generating resolvins.70
IMN ingredients, timing, dose, and duration vary from 
study to study. The clinical effect targeted to the aforemen-
tioned pathways appears most profound when the nutri-
ents are used in combination. Most surgical IMN studies 
have applied either 5 days of preoperative supplementation 
and/or 7 days of supplementation postoperatively. Studies 
of single immunonutrients (ie, arginine alone) have not 
demonstrated the same level of benefit, suggesting syner-
gism of different components and complete nutrition deliv-
ery is crucial to IMN efficacy.70
Early studies strongly demonstrate that preoperative 
IMN reduced complications and LOS.71 A Cochrane Library 
analysis reported decreased total and infectious complica-
tions with the use of preoperative IMN.63 Evidence suggests 
that patients undergoing high-risk GI surgery were the 
most likely to benefit, possibly due to the higher periop-
erative risk of complication.72 Due to the large number of 
small to medium size trials, many conclusions have been 
drawn from meta-analyses. In their landmark meta-analy-
sis in 2011, Drover et al73 demonstrated a 40% reduction in 
perioperative infectious complications with IMN. The effect 
observed in this analysis was similar whether the IMN was 
given preoperatively only, pre- and postoperatively, or post-
operatively alone. Much has been written on the value of 
pre- versus postoperative IMN and there may be value to 
administration both before and after surgery. However, a 
recent meta-analysis suggested that preoperative only IMN 
did not improve outcomes when compared to preoperative 
isonitrogenous ONS.70 Additional meta-analyses have dem-
onstrated that postoperative IMN reduces infectious compli-
cations,72,74–77 including the recent analysis from Ljungqvist 
et al.72,74–77 One meta-analysis of early enteral postoperative 
Figure 3. PONS assessment tool. BMI indicates 
body mass index; PONS, preoperative nutrition 
score.
 Copyright © 2018 International Anesthesia Research Society. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Perioperative Nutrition Optimization Within an Enhanced Recovery Pathway
XXX 2018 • Volume XXX • Number XXX 
www.anesthesia-analgesia.org 
7
IMN also demonstrated a reduction in anastomotic leaks.78 
Limitations of these data include many early IMN studies 
informing that these meta-analyses were not balanced with 
an isocaloric, isonitrogenous controls. Further, some later 
small randomized trials of IMN did not show benefit com-
pared to isonitrogenous formulas.79–81
Two studies of perioperative IMN have occurred in the 
context of ERP and have suggested benefit. The larger was a 
RCT of 264 patients that demonstrated a reduction in infec-
tious complications (23.8% vs 10.7%; P = .0007), particularly 
wound infections (16.4% vs 5.7%; P = .0008) with the use of 
IMN when compared to standard high-calorie supplements.82 
In a separate study of IMN compared to dietary advice with-
out supplementation by the same authors, wound infection 
rates in laparoscopic colectomy were significantly reduced 
with the use of IMN (11.5% vs 0%; P = .006).83
A major real-world quality improvement effort using 
preoperative IMN in 3375 patients in Washington state dem-
onstrated a reduction of 23% in the number of patients with 
a prolonged LOS (P = .05) in a covariate-matched analysis.84
The POQI-2 group was divided regarding the strength of 
their recommendation for IMN. Expert opinions based on 
interpretation of the evidence ranged from “recommend” 
to “suggest” and the finally agreed-upon consensus state-
ment to “consider” IMN. Overall there were many concerns 
about the quality of the overall evidence, including the age 
of many seminal IMN studies published in the early 2000s. 
There was also concern that older studies were not con-
trolled with isocaloric, isonitrogenous formulas.85 Overall, 
IMN study sample sizes are smaller, although a number of 
medium size trials (n = ~200–300) are published. Concerns 
were raised regarding the level of industry sponsorship 
Figure 4. Example of preoperative 
nutritional care pathways. A, Nutrition 
pathway for low nutrition risk patients. 
B, Nutrition pathway for high nutri-
tion risk patients, as defined by any 
positive response on the PONS score 
(currently utilized by Duke University 
Peri-Operative 
Optimization 
Team 
[POET] Nutrition Clinic). Alb indicates 
Albumin; IMN, immunonutrition; PAT, 
pre-anesthesia testing clinic; POET
, 
perioperative 
enhancement 
team; 
PONS, preoperative nutrition score.
 Copyright © 2018 International Anesthesia Research Society. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
8   www.anesthesia-analgesia.org 
ANESTHESIA & ANALGESIA
 
 
E NARRATIVE REVIEW ARTICLE
in the literature and the potential biases these can carry. 
Without question, additional definitive clinical trials com-
paring IMN to high-protein ONS in the preoperative setting 
and preoperative IMN alone versus pre- and postoperative 
IMN versus postoperative IMN alone are needed.
Postoperative Nutrition
Early resumption of oral intake after surgery is now clearly 
realized to be safe86 and vital for optimizing postoperative 
outcomes. Early oral feeding immediately after major sur-
gery, including GI surgery, is associated with a decrease 
in postoperative complications, LOS, and costs.87,88 In fact, 
multiple meta-analyses now report that feeding within 24 
hours after GI surgery decreases mortality as well as major 
morbidities.15,16,89 Specifically, a systematic review and 
meta-analysis of the effects of early enteral feeding within 
24 hours of intestinal surgery (versus no feeding within 24 
hours) demonstrated a significant reduction in mortality 
(relative risk [RR], 0.42 [95% CI, 0.18–0.96]) and no benefit 
or harm related to anastomotic dehiscence (RR, 0.62 [95% 
CI, 0.3–1.28]) in the early fed group.89 Overall, early post-
operative feeding versus traditional withholding of feeding 
until return of bowel function was not found to contribute 
to anastomotic breakdown or increase risk of nausea after 
surgery.
As earlier stated, anabolism cannot be achieved in the 
postoperative period when glucose is administered alone 
without adequate protein delivery.90 Unfortunately, to this 
point, provision of calories alone has continued to be focused 
on in surgical nutrition messages.90 It is well known that 
inadequate protein intake is associated with loss of lean body 
mass, which impairs functional recovery and physical quality 
of life. Provision of protein, independent of whether energy 
or total calorie requirements are met, can maintain lean 
muscle mass and reduce the risk of subsequent frailty in the 
elderly.91,92 Finally, a key high-impact recent trial conducted 
in colorectal surgery patients within an enhanced recovery 
after surgery/ERP pathway demonstrated in patients receiv-
ing high-protein ONS postoperatively that consumption of 
>60% of protein needs over the first 3 postoperative days was 
associated with a 4.4-day reduction in LOS (P < .001).93
Thus, the group was in full consensus recommend-
ing that a high-protein diet (via diet or high-protein ONS) 
be initiated on the day of surgery in most cases, with the 
exception of patients with bowel not in continuity, bowel 
ischemia, or persistent bowel obstruction. Traditional “clear 
liquid” and “full liquid” diets should not be routinely used 
as they typically do not provide adequate nutrition or pro-
tein delivery. Further, the group emphasized that reaching 
the overall protein intake goal is more important than total 
calorie intake in the postoperative period.
Role of High-Protein ONS, EN, and PN in the Postoperative 
Period. The type of nutrition support delivered in the 
postoperative setting is primarily determined by the 
patient’s ability to achieve calorie (25–30 kcal/kg/d) 
and protein (1.5–2 g/kg/d) goals and tolerance of oral 
intake.1,21,22,90 A practical approach derived from recent 
publications1,21,22,90,94 indicates that patients tolerating 50%–
100% of nutrition goals should receive high-protein ONS 
(2–3× a day) to meet protein needs. In patients consuming 
<50% via the oral route, EN via tube feeds should be given. 
PN should be utilized if >50% of protein/calories needs are 
not met via oral/EN for >7 days, even in well-nourished 
patients.
When oral nutrition is not tolerated or feasible, EN 
under guidance of a dietician should be initiated. Early EN 
within 24 hours of surgery versus later feeding has been 
clearly shown to reduce morbidity and mortality in 2 meta-
analyses (1 Cochrane systematic review).86,89 Another meta-
analysis comparing EN within 24 hours of GI surgery with 
traditional postoperative management demonstrated a 45% 
decrease in risk of overall postoperative complications. No 
differences in the incidence of anastomotic dehiscence were 
observed.15 Thus, in patients who meet criteria for malnutri-
tion and who are not anticipated to meet nutritional goals 
(>50% of protein/kcal) through oral intake, we recom-
mend early EN or tube feeding within 24 hours. Further, in 
patients started on EN and/or PN, we recommend continu-
ation of EN or PN support for patients who are not able to 
take in at least 60% of their protein/kcal requirements via 
the oral route. Finally, based on recent randomized clinical 
trial data and new clinical guidelines,22 we recommend that 
when using gastric residual volumes as a marker of feeding 
tolerance, a cutoff of >500 mL should be used before tube 
feeds are suspended or tube feed/EN rate reduced. Ideally, 
postoperative nutrition should continue for a minimum 
period of 4 weeks in malnourished patients (and perhaps 
longer depending on size of surgery and extent of malnu-
trition at presentation) and perhaps longer as described in 
the Role of Nutrition in Optimizing Recovery From Surgery 
Posthospital Discharge section below.
Role of PN in the Postoperative Period. In patients at risk for 
malnutrition (PONS >1 or ALB <3.0) where nutrition goals 
are not met via EN, we recommend early PN, in combina-
tion with EN if possible. This is based on data from meta-
analysis incorporating 27 studies in a meta-analysis of PN 
in surgical patients. These data showed a lower complica-
tion rate in patients receiving PN, especially in patients 
found at risk for malnutrition.61 An influence of PN on the 
mortality of surgical patients was not shown. Further, a 
meta-analysis by Braunschweig et al62 showed that in mal-
nourished patients, PN use resulted in a significantly lower 
mortality with a tendency toward lower rates of infection. 
Traditionally, concerns for infection risk have limited the 
use of PN to achieve optimal nutrition delivery. However, 
3 recent large randomized trials of PN in critical illness95–97 
(including a recent New England Journal of Medicine publica-
tion96) have clearly demonstrated that PN administration is 
no longer associated with any increased risk of infection.
Further, one of the recent large-scale multicenter studies 
investigated whether PN should be supplemented “early” 
(within 4 days) or “late” (after 7 days) in the event of impaired 
enteral tolerance.97 Late infections (postday 9) were reduced 
in the PN group versus EN alone. The results provide argu-
ments to initiate PN in malnourished patients and the acutely 
ill on day 4 at the latest.98 Overall, as stated recently by Awad 
and Lobo,6 “there is grade A evidence for use of PN in under-
nourished patients in whom EN is not feasible nor tolerated, 
and in patients with postoperative complications impairing 
 Copyright © 2018 International Anesthesia Research Society. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Perioperative Nutrition Optimization Within an Enhanced Recovery Pathway
XXX 2018 • Volume XXX • Number XXX 
www.anesthesia-analgesia.org 
9
GI function.”1 This contributed to our recommendation to 
initiate early PN in patients at risk for malnutrition when 
goals are not met early via EN. Further, we recommend con-
tinuation of PN support for patients not able to take in at least 
60% of their protein/kcal requirements via the oral route. 
Finally, given the new availability of fish oil containing lipid 
formulations in the United States, there are data supporting 
a benefit of utilizing fish oil containing balanced lipid formu-
lations versus soy lipid alone in patients requiring postop-
erative total parenteral nutrition. These data from a recent 
systematic analysis in 23 RCTs, including 1502 surgical and 
intensive care unit (ICU) patients, demonstrated that fish oil 
containing lipids reduced LOS and infectious complications 
versus traditional soy-only lipids.99
Role of Nutrition in Optimizing Recovery From 
Surgery Posthospital Discharge
Even with initiation of preoperative nutritional support, 
patients who develop postoperative complications will con-
tinue to lose weight and are at risk for serious further deteri-
oration of nutritional status as was recently shown by Grass 
et al.100 These patients identified via preoperative nutritional 
screening clearly require continuing nutritional follow-up 
postdischarge. Further in a considerable number of patients 
after major GI surgery, oral calorie intake will be inadequate 
for a prolonged period with a significant risk for postop-
erative malnutrition, especially after discharge. In patients 
after ICU discharge, an observational study demonstrated 
an average spontaneous calorie intake of 700 kcal/d. This is 
far insufficient in the anabolic phase of rehabilitation when 
a caloric intake of 1.2–1.5× resting energy expenditure is 
recommended and thought to be required.101 It also empha-
sizes the importance of closely observing food intake in 
postoperative patients. In patients who have lost significant 
weight after surgery/illness, a considerable period of sig-
nificant increases in calorie and protein delivery is required 
for recovery.102 As stated by Ansel Keys, principal investiga-
tor of the legendary Minnesota Starvation Experiment after 
World War II,
Enough food must be supplied to allow tissues destroyed 
during starvation to be rebuilt . . . our experiments show in 
an adult no appreciable rehabilitation can take place on diet 
of 2000 calories/day. The proper level is more like 4000 kcal 
daily for some months.103
In this study of healthy, young men who sustained weight 
loss due to inadequate food intake (without the catabolic/
hypermetabolic effects of a surgical insult), recovery to a 
normal weight took an average of 4000 kcal/d for an aver-
age of 6 months to 2 years. Hence, the posthospital dis-
charge period after major surgery is an essential period 
where nutrition support is required to optimize outcomes.
Thus, we must ask ourselves if our postoperative patients 
will be able to consume adequate protein and calories to opti-
mally recover. As stated, data and experience have taught 
us in most cases the answer is no. Recovering postopera-
tive patients, especially elderly individuals, are challenged 
by decreased appetites, persistent nausea, constipation from 
opiates, and lack of education about how to optimize their 
diet.104 To address this, a large body of data demonstrates 
that high-protein ONS should be a fundamental part of our 
postoperative discharge care plan. Meta-analysis data in a 
range of hospitalized patients, including surgery patients, 
demonstrate that ONS reduces mortality, reduces hospital 
complications, reduces hospital readmissions, shortens LOS, 
and reduces hospital costs.55,105–107 A large hospital database 
analysis of ONS use in 724,000 patients matched with con-
trols not receiving ONS showed a 21% reduction in hospital 
LOS and for every $1 (United States) spent on ONS, $52.63 
was saved in hospital costs.20 Finally, a very recent large ran-
domized trial of 652 patients in 78 centers studied the effect 
of high-protein ONS with β-hydroxy β-methylbutyrate ver-
sus placebo ONS in elderly hospitalized patients at risk for 
malnutrition.108 Results demonstrated that high-protein ONS 
with β-hydroxy β-methylbutyrate reduced 90-day mortality 
by ~50% relative to placebo (4.8% vs 9.7%; RR, 0.49; 95% CI, 
0.27–0.90; P = .018).108 As such, we suggest 4–8 weeks mini-
mum of postoperative HP-ONS in all patients having major 
surgery, and as long as 3–6 months postoperatively in more 
severely malnourished patients or those with prolonged 
postoperative or ICU stays. Further research focused on high-
risk postoperative patients is needed in this critical period of 
recovery.
For future research questions, please see Supplemental 
Digital Content, Appendix 4, http://links.lww.com/AA/
C160, for a full discussion. E
APPENDIX
The members of the Perioperative Quality Initiative (POQI) 2 workgroup 
and POQI chairs are as follows: Tong Joo Gan, MD, MHS, FRCA, Professor 
and Chairman, Department of Anesthesiology, Stony Brook University 
School of Medicine; Andrew D. Shaw, MB, FRCA, FCCM, FFICM, Professor 
of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Executive 
Vice Chair, Department of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center; Julie K. M. Thacker, MD, Assistant Professor of Surgery, 
Medical Director, Enhanced Recovery Program, Department of Surgery, 
Division of Advanced Oncologic and Gastrointestinal Surgery, Duke 
University Medical Center; Timothy E. Miller, MB ChB, FRCA, Associate 
Professor of Anesthesiology, Chief, Division of General, Vascular and 
Transplant Anesthesia, Duke University Medical Center; Postoperative 
Gastrointestinal Dysfunction (POGD) group: Traci L. Hedrick, MD, 
MS, Assistant Professor of Surgery, Co-Director Enhanced Recovery 
Program, Department of Surgery, University of Virginia Health System; 
Matthew D. McEvoy, MD, Associate Professor of Anesthesiology, 
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Vice Chair for Educational 
Affairs, Department of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center, Michael (Monty) G. Mythen, MBBS, MD, FRCA, FFICM, FCAI 
(Hon), Smiths Medical Professor of Anesthesia, University College 
London/University College London Hospital National Institute of Health 
Research Biomedical Research Centre, London, United Kingdom; 
Roberto Bergamaschi, MD, PhD, Professor of Surgery, Division of Colon 
and Rectal Surgery, State University of New York, Stony Brook, NY; Ruchir 
Gupta, MD, Assistant Professor of Anesthesiology, Stony Brook School 
of Medicine, Health Science Center, Stony Brook, NY; Stefan D. Holubar, 
MD, MS, Director, Dartmouth Enhanced Recovery Program, Dartmouth-
Hitchcock Medical Center, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, 
The Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy and Clinical Practice; Anthony 
J. Senagore, MD, MS, MBA, Professor and Vice Chair for Clinical 
Operations, Chief, Gastrointestinal and Oncologic Surgery, Co-Director 
Department of Surgery Clinical Outcomes Research Program, University 
of Texas Medical Branch. Nutrition Group: Paul E. Wischmeyer, MD, 
EDIC, Professor of Anesthesiology and Surgery, Director of Perioperative 
Research, Duke Clinical Research Institute, Director, Nutrition Support 
Service, Duke University Hospital, Duke University School of Medicine, 
Durham, NC; Franco Carli, MD, MPhil, Professor of Anesthesia, McGill 
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; David C. Evans, MD, FACS, 
Associate Professor of Surgery, Medical Director, Level 1 Trauma Center 
and Nutrition Support Service, Department of Surgery, Division of 
Trauma, Critical Care, and Burn, Columbus, OH; Sarah Guilbert, RD, LDN, 
 Copyright © 2018 International Anesthesia Research Society. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
10   www.anesthesia-analgesia.org 
ANESTHESIA & ANALGESIA
 
 
E NARRATIVE REVIEW ARTICLE
CNSC, Clinical Dietitian Duke Nutrition Support Team/Perioperative 
Nutrition (POET) Clinic, Duke University Hospital, Durham, NC; Rosemary 
Kozar, MD, PhD, Director of Research, Shock Trauma, Associate Director 
of Shock Trauma Anesthesia Research Center, Professor of Surgery, 
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD; Aurora Pryor, 
MD, FACS, Professor of Surgery, Chief Bariatric, Foregut and Advanced 
Gastrointestinal Surgery, Department of Surgery, Stony Brook Medicine, 
Stony Brook, NY; Robert H. Thiele, MD, Assistant Professor, Departments 
of Anesthesiology and Biomedical Engineering, Divisions of Cardiac, 
Thoracic, and Critical Care Anesthesiology, Co-Director, University 
of Virginia Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Program, University of 
Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, VA; Sotiria Everett, EdD, 
RD, Clinical Assistant Professor, Nutrition Division, Department of 
Family, Population, Preventive Medicine, Stony Brook Medicine, Stony 
Brook, NY; Mike Grocott, Respiratory and Critical Care Research Area, 
National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre, 
University Hospital Southampton, National Health Service Foundation 
Trust, Southampton, UK and Integrative Physiology and Critical Illness 
Group, Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. PRO Group: 
Ramon E. Abola, MD, Department of Anesthesiology, Stony Brook 
Medicine, Stony Brook, NY; Elliott Bennett-Guerrero, MD, Department 
of Anesthesiology, Stony Brook Medicine, Stony Brook, NY; Michael L. 
Kent, MD, Department of Anesthesiology, Walter Reed National Military 
Medical Center, Bethesda, MD; Liane S. Feldman, MD, Department of 
Surgery, Steinberg-Bernstein Centre for Minimally Invasive Surgery and 
Innovation, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; 
Julio F. Fiore Jr, PhD, Department of Surgery, Steinberg-Bernstein Centre 
for Minimally Invasive Surgery and Innovation, McGill University Health 
Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Jonathon Cook and the Duke Clinical 
Research Institute Communications group for assistance 
with graphic design of figures in this article.
DISCLOSURES
Name: Paul E. Wischmeyer, MD, EDIC.
Contribution: This author helped with primary drafting and writ-
ing of the manuscript, creation of figures, manuscript editing, and 
revisions at all stages of preparation and submission.
Conflicts of Interest: P. E. Wischmeyer was the associate editor of 
Clinical Nutrition (Elsevier) and was the chair of the Perioperative 
Quality Initiative (POQI) nutrition group. He received grant 
funding related to Improving Nutrition Delivery in Acute Illness 
from the National Institute of Health National Heart, Lung, and 
Blood Institute R34 HL109369, Canadian Institutes of Health 
Research, Baxter, Fresenius, Lyric Pharmaceuticals, Isomark Inc, 
and Medtronics. He served as a consultant on Improving Nutrition 
Care in Intensive Care Unit (ICU) and Perioperative Medicine to 
Nestle, Abbott, Fresenius, Baxter, Medtronics, Nutricia, and Lyric 
Pharmaceuticals, and Takeda for research related to this work. He 
received honoraria or travel expenses for lectures on improving 
nutrition care in illness from Abbott, Fresenius, and Medtronics.
Name: Franco Carli, MD, MPhil.
Contribution: This author helped write, review, and edit the 
manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: F. Carli was a member of the POQI nutrition 
group.
Name: David C. Evans, MD, FACS.
Contribution: This author helped write, review, and edit the 
manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: D. C. Evans was a member of the POQI nutri-
tion group.
Name: Sarah Guilbert, RD, LDN, CNSC.
Contribution: This author helped write, review, and edit the 
manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: S. Guilbert was a member of the POQI nutri-
tion group.
Name: Rosemary Kozar, MD, PhD.
Contribution: This author helped write, review, and edit the 
manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: R. Kozar was a member of the POQI nutrition 
group.
Name: Aurora Pryor, MD, FACS.
Contribution: This author helped write, review, and edit the 
manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: A. Pryor was a member of the POQI nutrition 
group.
Name: Robert H. Thiele, MD.
Contribution: This author helped write, review, and edit the 
manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: R. H. Thiele was a member of the POQI nutri-
tion group.
Name: Sotiria Everett, EdD, RD.
Contribution: This author helped write, review, and edit the 
manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: S. Everett was a member of the POQI nutri-
tion group.
Name: Mike Grocott, BSc, MBBS, MD, FRCA, FRCP, FFICM.
Contribution: This author helped write, review, and edit the 
manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: M. Grocott was a member of the POQI nutri-
tion group.
Name: Tong J. Gan, MD, MHS, FRCA.
Contribution: This author helped write, review, edit, and revise the 
manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: T. J. Gan served as a POQI Conference 
Organizer and received honoraria from Edwards, Mallinckrodt, 
Merck, Medtronic, and Pacira.
Name: Andrew D. Shaw, MB, FRCA, FCCM, FFICM.
Contribution: This author helped write, review, edit, and revise the 
manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: A. D. Shaw was a consultant for Astute 
Medical, FAST BioMedical, and Edwards Lifesciences, and was the 
Data Safety Monitoring Board chair for the STOP-AKI clinical trial. 
He served as a POQI Conference Organizer.
Name: Julie K. M. Thacker, MD.
Contribution: This author helped write, review, edit, and revise the 
manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: J. K. M. Thacker was on the Speaker’s Bureau 
and received consulting fees from Pacira, Edwards, Covidien, 
Medtronic, and Merck. She served as a POQI Conference Organizer.
Name: Timothy E. Miller, MB, ChB, FRCA.
Contribution: This author helped write, review, edit, submit, and 
revise the manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: T. E. Miller served as a POQI Conference 
Organizer and received honoraria from Edwards Lifesciences and 
Cheetah Medical.
This manuscript was handled by: Thomas R. Vetter, MD, MPH.
REFERENCES
 1. Braga M, Ljungqvist O, Soeters P, Fearon K, Weimann A, 
Bozzetti F; ESPEN. ESPEN guidelines on parenteral nutrition: 
surgery. Clin Nutr. 2009;28:378–386.
 2. Correia MI, Waitzberg DL. The impact of malnutrition on 
morbidity, mortality, length of hospital stay and costs evalu-
ated through a multivariate model analysis. Clin Nutr. 
2003;22:235–239.
 3. Bozzetti F, Gianotti L, Braga M, Di Carlo V, Mariani L. 
Postoperative complications in gastrointestinal cancer patients: 
the joint role of the nutritional status and the nutritional sup-
port. Clin Nutr. 2007;26:698–709.
 4. Kassin MT, Owen RM, Perez SD, et al. Risk factors for 30-day 
hospital readmission among general surgery patients. J Am Coll 
Surg. 2012;215:322–330.
 5. Thomas MN, Kufeldt J, Kisser U, et al. Effects of malnutrition 
on complication rates, length of hospital stay, and revenue 
in elective surgical patients in the G-DRG-system. Nutrition. 
2016;32:249–254.
 6. Awad S, Lobo DN. What’s new in perioperative nutritional 
support? Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2011;24:339–348.
 7. Geurden B, Franck E, Weyler J, Ysebaert D. The risk of malnu-
trition in community-living elderly on admission to hospital for 
major surgery. Acta Chir Belg. 2015;115:341–347.
 Copyright © 2018 International Anesthesia Research Society. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Perioperative Nutrition Optimization Within an Enhanced Recovery Pathway
XXX 2018 • Volume XXX • Number XXX 
www.anesthesia-analgesia.org 
11
 8. Gillis C, Nguyen TH, Liberman AS, Carli F. Nutrition adequacy 
in enhanced recovery after surgery: a single academic center 
experience. Nutr Clin Pract. 2015;30:414–419.
 9. Malietzis G, Currie AC, Athanasiou T, et al. Influence of body 
composition profile on outcomes following colorectal cancer 
surgery. Br J Surg. 2016;103:572–580.
 
10. Vaid S, Bell T, Grim R, Ahuja V. Predicting risk of death in 
general surgery patients on the basis of preoperative variables 
using American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality 
Improvement Program data. Perm J. 2012;16:10–17.
 
11. Drover JW, Cahill NE, Kutsogiannis J, et al. Nutrition therapy 
for the critically ill surgical patient: we need to do better! JPEN 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2010;34:644–652.
 
12. Stratton RJ, Elia M. Who benefits from nutritional support: what 
is the evidence? Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2007;19:353–358.
 
13. Benoist S, Brouquet A. Nutritional assessment and screening 
for malnutrition. J Visc Surg. 2015;152(suppl 1):S3–S7.
 
14. El Nakeeb A, Fikry A, El Metwally T, et al. Early oral feeding 
in patients undergoing elective colonic anastomosis. Int J Surg. 
2009;7:206–209.
 
15. Osland E, Yunus RM, Khan S, Memon MA. Early versus tra-
ditional postoperative feeding in patients undergoing resec-
tional gastrointestinal surgery: a meta-analysis. JPEN J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr. 2011;35:473–487.
 
16. Lewis SJ, Egger M, Sylvester PA, Thomas S. Early enteral 
feeding versus “nil by mouth” after gastrointestinal surgery: 
systematic review and meta-analysis of controlled trials. BMJ 
(Clinical Research Ed). 2001;323:773–776.
 
17. Vlug MS, Bartels SA, Wind J, Ubbink DT, Hollmann MW, 
Bemelman WA; Collaborative LAFA Study Group. Which fast 
track elements predict early recovery after colon cancer sur-
gery? Colorectal Dis. 2012;14:1001–1008.
 
18. Gustafsson UO, Oppelstrup H, Thorell A, Nygren J, Ljungqvist 
O. Adherence to the ERAS protocol is associated with 5-year 
survival after colorectal cancer surgery: a retrospective cohort 
study. World J Surg. 2016;40:1741–1747.
 
19. Williams JD, Wischmeyer PE. Assessment of periopera-
tive nutrition practices and attitudes—A national survey of 
colorectal and GI surgical oncology programs. Am J Surg. 
2017;213:1010–1018.
 
20. Philipson TJ, Snider JT, Lakdawalla DN, Stryckman B, Goldman 
DP. Impact of oral nutritional supplementation on hospital out-
comes. Am J Manag Care. 2013;19:121–128.
 
21. Weimann A, Braga M, Harsanyi L, et al; DGEM (German 
Society for Nutritional Medicine); ESPEN (European Society 
for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition). ESPEN guidelines on 
enteral nutrition: surgery including organ transplantation. Clin 
Nutr. 2006;25:224–244.
 
22. McClave SA, Taylor BE, Martindale RG, et al; Society of Critical 
Care Medicine; American Society for Parenteral and Enteral 
Nutrition. Guidelines for the provision and assessment of nutri-
tion support therapy in the adult critically ill patient: Society 
of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM) and American Society for 
Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (A.S.P.E.N.). JPEN J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr. 2016;40:159–211.
 
23. Arends J, Bachmann P, Baracos V, et al. ESPEN guidelines on 
nutrition in cancer patients. Clin Nutr. 2017;36:11–48.
 
24. Weimann A, Braga M, Carli F, et al. ESPEN guideline: clinical 
nutrition in surgery. Clin Nutr. 2017;36:623–650.
 
25. Miller TE, Shaw AD, Mythen MG, Gan TJ. Perioperative quality 
initiative IW. Evidence-based perioperative medicine comes of 
age: the perioperative quality initiative (POQI): the 1st consen-
sus conference of the perioperative quality initiative (POQI). 
Perioper Med (Lond). 2016;5:26.
 
26. Millan IS, Hill J, Wischmeyer P. Measurement of skel-
etal muscle glycogen status in critically ill patients: a new 
approach in critical care monitoring. Crit Care. 2015;19(suppl 
1):P400–P400.
 
27. Thiele RH, Raghunathan K, Brudney CS, et al; Perioperative 
Quality Initiative (POQI) I Workgroup. American Society 
for Enhanced Recovery (ASER) and Perioperative Quality 
Initiative (POQI) joint consensus statement on perioperative 
fluid management within an enhanced recovery pathway for 
colorectal surgery. Perioper Med (Lond). 2016;5:24.
 
28. Elia M. The MUST Report: Nutritional Screening for Adults: A 
Multidisciplinary Responsibility. Maidenhead, Berks, United 
Kingdom: BAPEN; 2003.
 
29. Bohl 
DD, 
Shen 
MR, 
Kayupov 
E, 
Della 
Valle 
CJ. 
Hypoalbuminemia independently predicts surgical site infec-
tion, pneumonia, length of stay, and readmission after total 
joint arthroplasty. J Arthroplasty. 2016;31:15–21.
 
30. Jiang N, Deng JY, Ding XW, et al. Prognostic nutritional index 
predicts postoperative complications and long-term outcomes 
of gastric cancer. World J Gastroenterol. 2014;20:10537–10544.
 
31. Baker JP, Detsky AS, Wesson DE, et al. Nutritional assessment: 
a comparison of clinical judgement and objective measure-
ments. N Engl J Med. 1982;306:969–972.
 
32. Kruizenga HM, Seidell JC, de Vet HC, Wierdsma NJ, van 
Bokhorst-de van der Schueren MA. Development and vali-
dation of a hospital screening tool for malnutrition: the short 
nutritional assessment questionnaire (SNAQ). Clin Nutr. 
2005;24:75–82.
 
33. van Venrooij LMW, de Vos R, Borgmeijer-Hoelen AMMJ, 
Kruizenga HM, Jonkers-Schuitema CF, de Mol BAMJ. Quick-
and-easy nutritional screening tools to detect disease-related 
undernutrition in hospital in- and outpatient settings: A system-
atic review of sensitivity and specificity. e-SPEN. 2007;2:21–37.
 
34. Foss NB, Jensen PS, Kehlet H. Risk factors for insufficient peri-
operative oral nutrition after hip fracture surgery within a multi-
modal rehabilitation programme. Age Ageing. 2007;36:538–543.
 
35. Mullen JT, Davenport DL, Hutter MM, et al. Impact of body 
mass index on perioperative outcomes in patients undergo-
ing major intra-abdominal cancer surgery. Ann Surg Oncol. 
2008;15:2164–2172.
 
36. Kim JM, Park JH, Jeong SH, et al. Relationship between low 
body mass index and morbidity after gastrectomy for gastric 
cancer. Ann Surg Treat Res. 2016;90:207–212.
 
37. Hollander FM, van Pierre DD, de Roos NM, van de Graaf EA, 
Iestra JA. Effects of nutritional status and dietetic interventions 
on survival in cystic fibrosis patients before and after lung 
transplantation. J Cyst Fibros. 2014;13:212–218.
 
38. Sergi G, Perissinotto E, Pisent C, et al; ILSA Working Group. 
An adequate threshold for body mass index to detect under-
weight condition in elderly persons: the Italian Longitudinal 
Study on Aging (ILSA). J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 
2005;60:866–871.
 
39. Truong A, Hanna MH, Moghadamyeghaneh Z, Stamos MJ. 
Implications of preoperative hypoalbuminemia in colorectal 
surgery. World J Gastrointest Surg. 2016;8:353–362.
 
40. Kudsk KA, Tolley EA, DeWitt RC, et al. Preoperative albumin 
and surgical site identify surgical risk for major postoperative 
complications. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2003;27:1–9.
 
41. Ferguson M, Capra S, Bauer J, Banks M. Development of a valid 
and reliable malnutrition screening tool for adult acute hospital 
patients. Nutrition. 1999;15:458–464.
 
42. Kondrup J, Rasmussen HH, Hamberg O, Stanga Z; Ad Hoc 
ESPEN Working Group. Nutritional risk screening (NRS 2002): 
a new method based on an analysis of controlled clinical trials. 
Clin Nutr. 2003;22:321–336.
 
43. Nelson CL, Elkassabany NM, Kamath AF, Liu J. Low albumin 
levels, more than morbid obesity, are associated with complica-
tions after TKA. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2015;473:3163–3172.
 
44. Wolfe RR. The underappreciated role of muscle in health and 
disease. Am J Clin Nutr. 2006;84:475–482.
 
45. Wolfe RR. Update on protein intake: importance of milk pro-
teins for health status of the elderly. Nutr Rev. 2015;73(suppl 
1):41–47.
 
46. Deutz NE, Safar A, Schutzler S, et al. Muscle protein synthesis 
in cancer patients can be stimulated with a specially formulated 
medical food. Clin Nutr. 2011;30:759–768.
 
47. Symons TB, Sheffield-Moore M, Wolfe RR, Paddon-Jones D. A 
moderate serving of high-quality protein maximally stimulates 
skeletal muscle protein synthesis in young and elderly subjects. 
J Am Diet Assoc. 2009;109:1582–1586.
 
48. Paddon-Jones D, Campbell WW, Jacques PF, et al. Protein and 
healthy aging. Am J Clin Nutr. 2015;101:1339S–1345S.
 
49. Jie B, Jiang ZM, Nolan MT, Zhu SN, Yu K, Kondrup J. Impact 
of preoperative nutritional support on clinical outcome in 
 Copyright © 2018 International Anesthesia Research Society. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
12   www.anesthesia-analgesia.org 
ANESTHESIA & ANALGESIA
 
 
E NARRATIVE REVIEW ARTICLE
abdominal surgical patients at nutritional risk. Nutrition. 
2012;28:1022–1027.
 
50. McClave SA, Kozar R, Martindale RG, et al. Summary points 
and consensus recommendations from the North American 
Surgical Nutrition Summit. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 
2013;37:99S–105S.
 
51. Kuppinger D, Hartl WH, Bertok M, et al. Nutritional screening 
for risk prediction in patients scheduled for abdominal opera-
tions. Br J Surg. 2012;99:728–737.
 
52. Miller KR, Wischmeyer PE, Taylor B, McClave SA. An evi-
dence-based approach to perioperative nutrition support 
in the elective surgery patient. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 
2013;37:39S–50S.
 
53. Burden ST, Hill J, Shaffer JL, Campbell M, Todd C. An unblinded 
randomised controlled trial of preoperative oral supplements 
in colorectal cancer patients. J Hum Nutr Diet. 2011;24:441–448.
 
54. Grass F, Bertrand PC, Schäfer M, et al. Compliance with preop-
erative oral nutritional supplements in patients at nutritional 
risk—only a question of will? Eur J Clin Nutr. 2015;69:525–529.
 
55. Elia M, Normand C, Norman K, Laviano A. A systematic review 
of the cost and cost effectiveness of using standard oral nutritional 
supplements in the hospital setting. Clin Nutr. 2016;35:370–380.
 
56. Fukuda Y, Yamamoto K, Hirao M, et al. Prevalence of malnutri-
tion among gastric cancer patients undergoing gastrectomy and 
optimal preoperative nutritional support for preventing surgi-
cal site infections. Ann Surg Oncol. 2015;22(suppl 3):S778–S785.
 
57. The Veterans Affairs Total Parenteral Nutrition Cooperative 
Study Group. Perioperative total parenteral nutrition in surgi-
cal patients. N Engl J Med. 1991;325:525–532.
 
58. Bozzetti F, Gavazzi C, Miceli R, et al. Perioperative total par-
enteral nutrition in malnourished, gastrointestinal cancer 
patients: a randomized, clinical trial. JPEN J Parenter Enteral 
Nutr. 2000;24:7–14.
 
59. Von Meyenfeldt MF, Meijerink WJ, Rouflart MM, Builmaassen 
MT, Soeters PB. Perioperative nutritional support: a ran-
domised clinical trial. Clin Nutr. 1992;11:180–186.
 
60. Klein S, Kinney J, Jeejeebhoy K, et al. Nutrition support in clini-
cal practice: review of published data and recommendations 
for future research directions. Clin Nutr. 1997;16:193–218.
 
61. Heyland DK, Montalvo M, MacDonald S, Keefe L, Su XY, 
Drover JW. Total parenteral nutrition in the surgical patient: a 
meta-analysis. Can J Surg. 2001;44:102–111.
 
62. Braunschweig CL, Levy P, Sheean PM, Wang X. Enteral com-
pared with parenteral nutrition: a meta-analysis. Am J Clin 
Nutr. 2001;74:534–542.
 
63. Burden S, Todd C, Hill J, Lal S. Pre-operative nutrition sup-
port in patients undergoing gastrointestinal surgery. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2012;11:CD008879.
 
64. Stanga Z, Brunner A, Leuenberger M, et al. Nutrition in clini-
cal practice—the refeeding syndrome: illustrative cases and 
guidelines for prevention and treatment. Eur J Clin Nutr. 
2008;62:687–694.
 
65. Ljungqvist O. Modulating postoperative insulin resistance 
by preoperative carbohydrate loading. Best Pract Res Clin 
Anaesthesiol. 2009;23:401–409.
 
66. Smith MD, McCall J, Plank L, Herbison GP, Soop M, Nygren 
J. 
Preoperative 
carbohydrate 
treatment 
for 
enhancing 
recovery after elective surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2014:CD009161.
 
67. Harbis A, Perdreau S, Vincent-Baudry S, et al. Glycemic and 
insulinemic meal responses modulate postprandial hepatic and 
intestinal lipoprotein accumulation in obese, insulin-resistant 
subjects. Am J Clin Nutr. 2004;80:896–902.
 
68. Makarenkova VP, Bansal V, Matta BM, Perez LA, Ochoa JB. 
CD11b+/Gr-1+ myeloid suppressor cells cause T cell dysfunc-
tion after traumatic stress. J Immunol. 2006;176:2085–2094.
 
69. Kemen M, Senkal M, Homann HH, et al. Early postopera-
tive enteral nutrition with arginine-omega-3 fatty acids and 
ribonucleic acid-supplemented diet versus placebo in cancer 
patients: an immunologic evaluation of impact. Crit Care Med. 
1995;23:652–659.
 
70. Evans DC, Hegazi RA. Immunonutrition in critically ill 
patients: does one size fit all? JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 
2015;39:500–501.
 
71. Braga M, Gianotti L, Nespoli L, Radaelli G, Di Carlo V. 
Nutritional approach in malnourished surgical patients: a pro-
spective randomized study. Arch Surg. 2002;137:174–180.
 
72. Marimuthu K, Varadhan KK, Ljungqvist O, Lobo DN. A meta-
analysis of the effect of combinations of immune modulating 
nutrients on outcome in patients undergoing major open gas-
trointestinal surgery. Ann Surg. 2012;255:1060–1068.
 
73. Drover JW, Dhaliwal R, Weitzel L, Wischmeyer PE, Ochoa 
JB, Heyland DK. Perioperative use of arginine-supplemented 
diets: a systematic review of the evidence. J Am Coll Surg. 
2011;212:385–399, 399.e1.
 
74. Heyland DK, Novak F, Drover JW, Jain M, Su X, Suchner 
U. Should immunonutrition become routine in critically 
ill patients? A systematic review of the evidence. JAMA. 
2001;286:944–953.
 
75. Beale RJ, Bryg DJ, Bihari DJ. Immunonutrition in the criti-
cally ill: a systematic review of clinical outcome. Crit Care Med. 
1999;27:2799–2805.
 
76. Marik PE, Zaloga GP. Immunonutrition in high-risk surgical 
patients: a systematic review and analysis of the literature. 
JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2010;34:378–386.
 
77. Heys SD, Walker LG, Smith I, Eremin O. Enteral nutritional 
supplementation with key nutrients in patients with critical 
illness and cancer: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled 
clinical trials. Ann Surg. 1999;229:467–477.
 
78. Waitzberg DL, Saito H, Plank LD, et al. Postsurgical infections 
are reduced with specialized nutrition support. World J Surg. 
2006;30:1592–1604.
 
79. Giger-Pabst U, Lange J, Maurer C, et al. Short-term preop-
erative supplementation of an immunoenriched diet does not 
improve clinical outcome in well-nourished patients undergo-
ing abdominal cancer surgery. Nutrition. 2013;29:724–729.
 
80. Barker LA, Gray C, Wilson L, Thomson BN, Shedda S, Crowe 
TC. Preoperative immunonutrition and its effect on postopera-
tive outcomes in well-nourished and malnourished gastroin-
testinal surgery patients: a randomised controlled trial. Eur J 
Clin Nutr. 2013;67:802–807.
 
81. Fujitani K, Tsujinaka T, Fujita J, et al; Osaka Gastrointestinal 
Cancer Chemotherapy Study Group. Prospective randomized 
trial of preoperative enteral immunonutrition followed by elec-
tive total gastrectomy for gastric cancer. Br J Surg. 2012;99:621–629.
 
82. Moya P, Soriano-Irigaray L, Ramirez JM, et al. Perioperative 
standard oral nutrition supplements versus immunonutrition 
in patients undergoing colorectal resection in an enhanced 
recovery (ERAS) protocol: a multicenter randomized clinical 
trial (SONVI Study). Medicine (Baltimore). 2016;95:e3704.
 
83. Moya P, Miranda E, Soriano-Irigaray L, et al. Perioperative 
immunonutrition in normo-nourished patients undergoing lap-
aroscopic colorectal resection. Surg Endosc. 2016;30:4946–4953.
 
84. Thornblade LW, Varghese TK Jr, Shi X, et al. Preoperative 
immunonutrition and elective colorectal resection outcomes. 
Dis Colon Rectum. 2017;60:68–75.
 
85. Hegazi RA, Hustead DS, Evans DC. Preoperative standard 
oral nutrition supplements vs immunonutrition: results 
of a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Coll Surg. 
2014;219:1078–1087.
 
86. Andersen HK, Lewis SJ, Thomas S. Early enteral nutrition 
within 24h of colorectal surgery versus later commencement of 
feeding for postoperative complications. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2006:CD004080.
 
87. Beier-Holgersen R, Boesby S. Influence of postoperative enteral 
nutrition on postsurgical infections. Gut. 1996;39:833–835.
 
88. Warren J, Bhalla V, Cresci G. Postoperative diet advancement: 
surgical dogma vs evidence-based medicine. Nutr Clin Pract. 
2011;26:115–125.
 
89. Lewis SJ, Andersen HK, Thomas S. Early enteral nutrition 
within 24 h of intestinal surgery versus later commencement 
of feeding: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Gastrointest 
Surg. 2009;13:569–575.
 
90. Gillis C, Carli F. Promoting perioperative metabolic and nutri-
tional care. Anesthesiology. 2015;123:1455–1472.
 
91. Ferrando AA, Paddon-Jones D, Hays NP, et al. EAA supple-
mentation to increase nitrogen intake improves muscle func-
tion during bed rest in the elderly. Clin Nutr. 2010;29:18–23.
 Copyright © 2018 International Anesthesia Research Society. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Perioperative Nutrition Optimization Within an Enhanced Recovery Pathway
XXX 2018 • Volume XXX • Number XXX 
www.anesthesia-analgesia.org 
13
 
92. Beasley JM, LaCroix AZ, Neuhouser ML, et al. Protein intake 
and incident frailty in the Women’s Health Initiative observa-
tional study. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2010;58:1063–1071.
 
93. Yeung SE, Hilkewich L, Gillis C, Heine JA, Fenton TR. Protein 
intakes are associated with reduced length of stay: a compari-
son between enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) and con-
ventional care after elective colorectal surgery. Am J Clin Nutr. 
2017;106:44–51.
 
94. Mariette C, De Botton ML, Piessen G. Surgery in esopha-
geal and gastric cancer patients: what is the role for nutri-
tion support in your daily practice? Ann Surg Oncol. 
2012;19:2128–2134.
 
95. Doig GS, Simpson F, Sweetman EA, et al; Early PN Investigators 
of the ANZICS Clinical Trials Group. Early parenteral nutrition 
in critically ill patients with short-term relative contraindica-
tions to early enteral nutrition: a randomized controlled trial. 
JAMA. 2013;309:2130–2138.
 
96. Harvey SE, Parrott F, Harrison DA, et al; CALORIES Trial 
Investigators. Trial of the route of early nutritional support in 
critically ill adults. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:1673–1684.
 
97. Heidegger CP, Berger MM, Graf S, et al. Optimisation of energy 
provision with supplemental parenteral nutrition in criti-
cally ill patients: a randomised controlled clinical trial. Lancet. 
2013;381:385–393.
 
98. Weimann A, Singer P. Avoiding underfeeding in severely ill 
patients. Lancet. 2013;381:1811.
 99. Pradelli L, Mayer K, Muscaritoli M, Heller AR. n-3 fatty acid-
enriched parenteral nutrition regimens in elective surgical 
and ICU patients: a meta-analysis. Crit Care. 2012;16:R184.
 100. Grass F, Benoit M, Coti Bertrand P, et al. Nutritional status 
deteriorates postoperatively despite preoperative nutritional 
support. Ann Nutr Metab. 2016;68:291–297.
 101. Peterson SJ, Tsai AA, Scala CM, Sowa DC, Sheean PM, 
Braunschweig CL. 
Adequacy of oral intake in critically ill patients 
1 week after extubation. J Am Diet Assoc. 2010;110:427–433.
 102. Puthucheary ZA, Wischmeyer P. Predicting critical illness 
mortality and personalizing therapy: moving to multi-dimen-
sional data. Crit Care. 2017;21:20.
 103. Kalm LM, Semba RD: They starved so that others be better 
fed: remembering Ancel Keys and the Minnesota experiment. 
J Nutr. 2005;135:1347–1352.
 104. Wischmeyer PE. Are we creating survivors…or victims in crit-
ical care? Delivering targeted nutrition to improve outcomes. 
Curr Opin Crit Care. 2016;22:279–284.
 105. Cawood AL, Elia M, Stratton RJ. Systematic review and meta-
analysis of the effects of high protein oral nutritional supple-
ments. Ageing Res Rev. 2012;11:278–296.
 106. Stratton RJ, Hébuterne X, Elia M. A systematic review and 
meta-analysis of the impact of oral nutritional supplements 
on hospital readmissions. Ageing Res Rev. 2013;12:884–897.
 107. Stratton R, Green C, Elia M. Disease-Related Malnutrition: An 
Evidence-Based Approach to Treatment. Wallingford, UK: CABI 
Publishing; 2003.
 108. Deutz NE, Matheson EM, Matarese LE, et al; NOURISH 
Study Group. Readmission and mortality in malnourished, 
older, hospitalized adults treated with a specialized oral 
nutritional supplement: a randomized clinical trial. Clin Nutr. 
2016;35:18–26.
