 SURGICAL SYMPOSIUM CONTRIBUTION
Strategies for Intravenous Fluid Resuscitation in Trauma Patients
Robert Wise1,2,3 • Michael Faurie4 • Manu L. N. G. Malbrain5 • Eric Hodgson3,6
Published online: 5 January 2017
� The Author(s) 2017. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract Intravenous fluid management of trauma patients is fraught with complex decisions that are often com-
plicated by coagulopathy and blood loss. This review discusses the fluid management in trauma patients from the
perspective of the developing world. In addition, the article describes an approach to specific circumstances in trauma
fluid decision-making and provides recommendations for the resource-limited environment.
Initial resuscitation fluid management
Background
Fluid resuscitation of trauma patients has been an ongoing
challenge, constantly reviewed and debated, resulting in
recommendations changing for the use of crystalloids/col-
loids/packed red blood cells/warm fresh whole blood and
clotting factors. Other challenges, such as limited resour-
ces, impact the practitioners’ choice of fluid—the best fluid
available does not always equate to the best fluid for the
patient, especially where long transfers and no blood
availability are concerned. These decisions and manage-
ment strategies appear relevant for further discussion and
research, as this fluid resuscitation attempts to provide
adequate organ perfusion and oxygen delivery in a system
compromised by the physiological consequences of injury.
Several questions have arisen from this topic: Which fluid
is best, how much should be given, and do specific inju-
ries call for different strategies (for example, penetrating
vs. blunt trauma)? Achieving balance in the resuscitation
period is challenging, particularly the volume adminis-
tered. More fluid is not always better, in fact, quite the
contrary [1–3]. Much of the literature on fluid resuscita-
tion focuses on critically ill patients with sepsis, or elec-
tive perioperative patients [4–7]. Small cohorts of trauma
patients can be found in the larger studies, but it should be
remembered that most of these data include patients from
the ICU setting [4, 5]. Extrapolation of data to the initial
resuscitation phase of the trauma patient is not possible
[8, 9]. This article emphasizes different types of fluid
available, when they should be used, and recommenda-
tions on how to tailor fluid resuscitation through moni-
toring techniques. The goals of improving physiology,
restoring or maintaining normothermia and minimizing
coagulopathy should be considered paramount throughout
the discussion.
& Robert Wise
Robert.Wise@kznhealth.gov.za
1
Pietermaritzburg Metropolitan Department of Anaesthetics,
Critical Care and Pain Management, Pietermaritzburg,
South Africa
2
Head Clinical Unit, Critical Care, Edendale Hospital,
Pietermaritzburg, South Africa
3
Discipline of Anaesthesia and Critical Care, School of
Clinical Medicine, College of Health Sciences, Nelson R
Mandela School of Medicine, University of KwaZulu-Natal,
Durban, South Africa
4
Trauma and Critical Care Fellow, Inkosi Albert Luthuli
Central Hospital, Durban, South Africa
5
Ziekenhuis Netwerk Antwerpen, ZNA Stuivenberg, Lange
Beeldekensstraat 267, 2060 Antwerpen 6, Belgium
6
Inkosi Albert Luthuli Central Hospital, Durban, South Africa
123
World J Surg (2017) 41:1170–1183
DOI 10.1007/s00268-016-3865-7
 Penetrating versus blunt injury versus head injuries
There are three distinct groups of trauma patients, but often
there is an overlap. Most commonly encountered is the
combination of blunt trauma and head injury associated
with motor vehicle collisions. While the general Advanced
Trauma Life Support (ATLS) management approach to the
three groups remains similar, fluid therapy strategies differ.
The literature suggests patients with penetrating injuries,
particularly to the thoracoabdominal region, have better
outcomes with restrictive clear fluid resuscitation policies,
permitting a systolic blood pressure (BP) between 60 and
70 mmHg until the patient can be taken to the operating
theater [10]. Once hemorrhage has been controlled in
theater and blood products are available, higher blood
pressure values may be targeted. There have been no large
trials comparing restrictive and liberal fluid strategies in the
context of blunt injury. However, a restrictive policy is
acceptable with slower infusions favored over rapid bolu-
ses [10]. A slightly higher systolic blood pressure of
80–90 mmHg is permitted, again, until control in theater is
achieved and blood products are available. This restrictive
policy is thought to minimize intra-abdominal bleeding
while maintaining adequate organ perfusion and reducing
the risk of intra-abdominal hypertension and complications
mentioned previously. It should be remembered, however,
that clinical scenarios are often complicated, and blood
pressure goals should be individualized according to
patient physiology, comorbidities and physiological com-
pensation to shock during the time of resuscitation.
The exception to the guidelines above is the polytrauma
patient (blunt or penetrating) with traumatic brain injury
(TBI). In order to preserve adequate cerebral perfusion
pressure and prevent secondary brain injury, one needs to
target a mean arterial pressure (MAP) of greater than
80 mmHg (a cerebral perfusion pressure of approximately
60 mmHg) [10].
Clear fluid resuscitation
The ongoing debate as to which group of fluid (synthetic
colloid or crystalloid solutions [3]) is best to use in the
resuscitation phase of trauma patients remains unanswered
with large studies showing little, if any benefit of hydrox-
yethyl starch 130/0.4 [11] over the traditionally used
crystalloids. The CRISTAL trial did identify a potential
mortality benefit in a heterogeneous hypovolemic patient
cohort resuscitated with a variety of colloid solutions
compared to crystalloid solutions. However, several limi-
tations identified by the authors limits applicability: the
lack of renal injury and potential 90-day outcome benefit,
deserve further research [7]. When reviewing the available
literature,
in
several
trials
recruitment
and
consent
requirements resulted in the comparison of fluids com-
mencing after the initial resuscitation phase, resulting in
interpretation difficulties of outcome benefit in trauma
patients [4, 5, 7, 12]. These studies do, however, demon-
strate a trend toward less synthetic colloid fluid required to
achieve hemodynamic goals compared to crystalloids with
a ratio (volume of colloid to crystalloid that results in
similar physiological effects) varying between 1:1.1 and
1:1.6 (colloids:crystalloids) [4, 5, 7, 12]. This ratio is
smaller than previously thought (ATLS teaches a ratio of
1:3), and significance in subgroups of patients is yet to be
determined. Concerns still exist about the adverse effects of
hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4 on renal function and coagu-
lopathy although crystalloid fluids are not without com-
plications [7]. Further studies need to be done comparing
these crystalloids and colloids in the initial resuscitation
phase of trauma patients. A further concern is the chloride
load administered in these fluids and the potential contri-
bution toward acidosis and renal injury [13]. The resultant
hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis may have negative
consequences. The meta-analysis by Krajewski et al. [13]
showed a significant association between high chloride
content fluids and acute kidney injury, blood transfusion
volume and mechanical ventilation time. Mortality was
unaffected in this population of perioperative patients.
Despite this, 0.9% saline remains widely used as a resus-
citation fluid and remains the fluid of choice for patients
with brain injury, hyponatremia and metabolic alkalosis.
Balanced salt solutions (solutions with a physiological pH
and isotonic electrolyte concentration), being more physi-
ological in nature, are being used more frequently, showing
a trend toward less harm than 0.9% sodium chloride—
whether in isolation or as a medium carrying a colloid [14].
Balanced salt solutions closely resemble human plasma
and thus have a lower sodium and chloride content than
0.9% saline with the addition of a buffer such as acetate or
lactate. These fluids (e.g., Ringer’s lactate, Hartmann’s
solution) have minimal effects on pH but are hypotonic, so
can exacerbate edema, particularly cerebral edema in the
injured brain. In addition, when using Ringer’s lactate
solution, consideration should be given to the potential
interaction between citrate found in stored blood and
bicarbonate, explaining why 0.9% saline is still a com-
monly used resuscitation fluid in trauma patients, despite
the high chloride load [15]. The concerns regarding the
inflammatory
effects
from
Ringers
lactate
infusions,
demonstrated in animal models, have not been demon-
strated to influence outcomes in human studies. Of greater
concern are the negative consequences of hyperchloremic
metabolic acidosis. There are no large randomized control
trials demonstrating a mortality benefit for 0.9% saline over
balanced solutions. Currently, saline is preferred in brain-
injured patients and balanced solutions are preferred in
World J Surg (2017) 41:1170–1183
1171
123
 patients who are already acidotic. Although only in an
porcine model, resuscitation after severe hemorrhage with
0.9%
saline
was
inferior
to
ringers
lactate
due
to
vasodilatory effect, and risks of metabolic acidosis and
hyperkalemia [16]. In elective neurosurgical patients, lac-
tated ringers also proved better than 0.9% saline in terms of
electrolyte management (particularly sodium and chloride)
and acid–base balance [17].
In the resource-limited environment, the use of cheaper
crystalloid solutions is still recommended due to lack of
data showing significant outcome benefits of more expen-
sive synthetic colloids. A selection of different crystalloid
solutions is often not available in resource-limited settings,
making the available solution the only and best choice. In a
Cochrane review, the use of hypertonic saline for the
resuscitation of trauma victims has failed to show any
benefit over isotonic or near-isotonic crystalloids and two
adequately powered trials investigating mortality as an
endpoint were halted early due to futility. Controversy,
however, still continues fueled by animal studies demon-
strating benefits that have not been reflected as outcome
benefits in human studies [18]. Heterogeneous populations
and methodological differences between studies make the
interpretation of evidence difficult. Hypertonic saline may
have a role when used in the head-injured patient as a
bridge to neurosurgery [19].
Several trials show either no benefit, or in some cases
worse outcomes, with albumin thus making this solution
not recommended in the resuscitation of trauma patients
[20–22].
The physiological impact of the volume of fluid infused
may be as, or even more important than the type selected
[2, 23–26]. Excessive fluid results in a dilutional coagu-
lopathy and diffuse tissue edema. This negatively impacts
organ function at both a macroscopic and cellular level by
increasing the distance over which electrolytes, elements
and oxygen have to move [3]. The consequence is wors-
ening renal, hepatic and cardiac function as well as
increasing volume of extra vascular lung water that wors-
ens ventilation–perfusion mismatch. Abdominal hyperten-
sion/compartment
syndrome
may
progress
to
a
polycompartment syndrome [23, 26].
Therefore, until such time as blood and blood products
are available, clear fluid resuscitation should be limited to
only that which is necessary to maintain adequate organ
perfusion. Several factors influence decisions at this point
of the resuscitation. Trauma units with easy access to on-
site blood and blood products should commence resusci-
tation of patients with massive blood loss with these
products from the start. In environments where blood
products are limited, the authors suggest judicious use of
clear fluids to sustain organ perfusion while avoiding the
negative
effects
of
excess
fluid.
Response
to
fluid
administration and determining the need for further fluid
administration is discussed in the next section.
As defined by the Advanced Trauma Life Support
course, classification of patients into those that respond to
initial fluid resuscitation versus those that only transiently
respond or do not respond at all is important. The
response to intravenous fluid resuscitation is assessed
using physiological markers of improvement such as
blood pressure, heart rate, decreasing lactate and nor-
malizing base deficit with adequate control of bleeding.
Responders are considered those that demonstrate these
physiological improvements, whereas transient responders
show an initial improvement followed by further physio-
logical deterioration. Non-responders are those that show
continued physiological deterioration despite initial fluid
resuscitation.
The
distinction
requires
vigilance
and
repeated clinical assessments to identify those patients
with re-bleeding, or ongoing bleeding, and initiation of
blood product resuscitation together with surgical inter-
vention. What may be regarded as acceptable physiologi-
cal parameters will vary depending on many factors
including the age, underlying medication and comorbidi-
ties of the patient.
See Fig. 1 for a guide to initial fluid management in
trauma patients.
Blood and blood products
The goal of resuscitation is to achieve adequate tissue
perfusion and oxygenation while correcting any coagu-
lopathy. Packed red blood cells, and to some extent
hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers (HBOCs), help to
achieve the former while component therapy attempts to
deal with the coagulopathy. Whole blood may achieve both
objectives [27]. Currently, there is no consensus definition
for a massive blood transfusion [28]; however, recom-
mendations for the concept of massive transfusions suggest
plasma:platelets:red blood cells in a ratio of 1:1:1 or 1:1:2
[29]. This objective is seldom achieved due to limited
access and supply of blood products in developing coun-
tries, where a 1:1:2 ratio is more easily achieved. An
alternative to the use of this ratio is the use of warm fresh
whole blood that has a higher hematocrit, more platelets
and higher percentage of functional clotting factors per unit
volume when compared to component therapy [27]. The
concerns about its use, however, include a slightly higher
sepsis rate, possible increased risk of acute kidney injury,
as well as the risk of transfusion-related immunomodula-
tion (TRIM), although this is minimized by the use of
leukodepletion filters [27]. Several trials exist comparing
the use of component therapy [30] to warm fresh whole
blood, but many did not make this direct comparison, but
rather a combination of warm fresh whole blood with
1172
World J Surg (2017) 41:1170–1183
123
 packed red blood cells and plasma, making the comparison
difficult. Both 24-h and 30-day survival were higher in the
warm fresh whole blood/red blood cell/plasma group
compared with the component therapy only group, but
further trials comparing these groups are necessary [27].
Whole blood also causes less dilutional effect and offers a
higher concentration of fibrinogen than component therapy.
The current preference for massive transfusion is trending
toward the use of whole blood; however, if this is not
readily available, as in the resource constrained environ-
ments, component therapy with a 1:1:1 ratio should be
utilized [27–29, 31, 32].
Hemoglobin solutions
Modified hemoglobin solutions are not substitutes for
blood as they do not possess the metabolic functions of
erythrocytes. They act purely as oxygen carriers [33].
Large-scale investigation and experimentation in this field
has occurred, with uses not only limited to trauma patients
but also general surgical patients, oncology patients and
Jehovah’s Witnesses suffering from severe anemia result-
ing from various reasons [33]. The only product that was
registered for use, in South Africa and later Russia, was
Hemopure(R) (HbO2 Therapeutics LLC, South Africa),
used in isolation as well as in combination with blood
products, or as a bridge to blood transfusion [34, 35].
Hemoglobin solutions do not only help oxygen trans-
portation, but also enhance the release of oxygen from
native hemoglobin at tissue level with some of them having
a positive inotropic effect that may be useful in shocked
trauma patients. This positive inotropy is related to the rate
of administration and if given slowly is negligible [33, 34].
Serious adverse events (SAEs) were rare with the most
serious being fluid overload. A recent review of the liter-
ature highlights several flaws in Natanson’s previous meta-
analysis suggesting that although a small minority of
HBOCs have had serious adverse events (myocardial
ischemia,
cerebrovascular
accidents),
this
cannot
be
extrapolated as a class effect due to the vast differences
among HBOCs with respect to their structure, hemoglobin
concentration and nitric oxide scavenging effects. In light
of this, there is renewed interest in the use of HBOCs,
especially the Hemopure(R) (HbO2 Therapeutics LLC,
South Africa) compound, which to date has had the most
success with fewest serious adverse events [36]. Further
studies are required before these therapies become widely
used.
Fig. 1 Flow diagram of initial fluid resuscitation of trauma patients
World J Surg (2017) 41:1170–1183
1173
123
 Monitoring coagulopathy
Trauma-induced coagulopathy [37] is a relatively new
concept, and the pathophysiology is still not completely
understood. Traditionally, tests such as prothrombin/inter-
national normalized ratio [38] and partial thromboplastin
time (PTT) were previously used to make this diagnosis.
While these tests form the mainstay of trauma-induced
coagulopathy testing in many centers, they only focus on
the initial part of clot formation and not on the evolution of
the clot or clot lysis. D-dimer and fibrinogen levels are
used as surrogate markers of fibrinolysis and clotting factor
consumption, respectively, but again these are non-specific
when assessing coagulation in the injured patient [71].
Diagnosis of trauma-induced coagulopathy using these
older
assays
is
defined
as:
PT [ 18 s,
INR [ 1.5,
PTT [ 60 s or any of these values at a threshold of 1.5
times their reference value.
Monitoring coagulation in trauma-induced coagulopathy
has been made easier with the use of point-of-care testing,
namely viscoelastic assays. Recent evidence shows that it
improves survival in patients requiring massive blood
transfusions compared to those monitored by more tradi-
tional assays as described above [39]. While challenges
may
exist
in
introducing
point-of-care
testing
into
resource-limited settings, these systems would be ideal as
they reduce dependency on traditional laboratory testing
and allow for real-time feedback and goal-directed blood
product
use.
Viscoelastic
assays
guide
component
replacement instead of resuscitating without reproducible
biological guidance [40]. By initially assessing patients’
thrombotic deficiencies and continuously re-assessing them
following resuscitation with component therapy/whole
blood,
thromboelastometry
guides
resuscitation
and
potentially minimizes the use of allogeneic blood products
resulting in reduced risk of transfusion-related side effects
and minimizing costs [41]. Table 1 offers a guide to
thromboelastometry interpretation and appropriate actions,
but a more detailed description and management based on
viscoelastic assays is beyond the scope of this review
(Fig. 2).
Recommendations for current best practices:
1.
Try and identify risk factors and priorities in trauma
patients early (i.e., traumatic brain injury, penetrating
injury,
ongoing
blood
losses,
compartment
syndromes).
2.
Consider early administration of blood products in a
ratio of 1:1:1 or 1:1:2 if available.
3.
In the absence of blood products, use clear fluid
resuscitation. Preferably, a balanced salt solution
should be used (such as Ringer’s lactate or Plas-
maLyte); however, care should be taken not to mix this
fluid with blood transfusions.
4.
When using clear fluids in resuscitation, vigilance is
required to provide only that fluid which is necessary
to maintain perfusion. Excessive clear fluid adminis-
tration has negative consequences such as dilution of
Fig. 2 Thromboelastometry—differences in measurement between
ROTEM and thromboelastography [42]
Table 1 Thromboelastometry interpretation and action guide
Laboratory value
Interpretation
Blood product transfusion
R time \
4 min
Enzymatic hypercoagulability
Do not treat if bleeding
R time [
11 min
Low clotting factors
FDP/FFP’s and RBC’s
Alpha angle [
45 degrees
Low fibrinogen levels
Cryoprecipitate/fibrinogen/platelets
MA \
54 mm
Low platelet function
Platelets/cryoprecipitate/fibrinogen
MA [
73 mm
Platelet hypercoagulability
Do not treat if bleeding
LY30 [
3%
Primary fibrinolysis
Tranexamic acid 1 g IV over 10 min then 1 g/250 ml NS over 8 h
CI \
1.0
FDP freeze-dried plasma, FFP fresh-frozen plasma, RBC red blood cell
1174
World J Surg (2017) 41:1170–1183
123
 coagulation factors, tissue edema, hyperchloremic
metabolic acidosis and organ dysfunction.
5.
Point-of-care testing should be used whenever possible
to guide component therapy replacement to correct
coagulopathy.
6.
In rural LMIC or long-distance transfer situations with
no access to blood, a synthetic colloid may be of
benefit in reducing subsequent edema and bowel
anastomotic breakdown.
Post-resuscitation fluid management
Background
The consequences of under- or over-resuscitation with
intravenous fluids are both detrimental [43, 44]. Hypov-
olemia resulting in adrenergic stimulated vasoconstriction,
hypervolemia and fluid overload, massive intravenous fluid
administration causing large sodium loads, dilution of
coagulation factors, and rapid administration of cold fluids
all result in damage to the endothelial layer and glycocalyx,
impairment of microcirculatory function and inappropriate
fluid shifts. The decision when to transition from an initial
resuscitation phase to a post-resuscitation period is critical
to a successful outcome.
Following the initial resuscitation phase, physiological
targets may change despite the overall objective of ade-
quate tissue perfusion remaining the primary goal. The
post-resuscitation period may be considered after:
•
Hemostasis and correction of coagulopathy (ongoing
blood product replacement no longer required) [45].
•
Evidence of improving microcirculatory flow (for
example, improving lactate and blood gas parameters)
[45].
•
Hemodynamic
stability
(systolic
blood
pressure
[
100 mmHg with a mean arterial blood pressure of
[
65 mmHg in most cases; no longer need for inotropic
or vasopressor support; an improving pulse rate in the
presence of appropriate analgesia).
At this stage, most patients will no longer be responsive
to rapid fluid administration, with normalization of markers
for volume status (barometric or volumetric preload indi-
cators) and markers for fluid responsiveness (pulse pressure
variation (PPV), stroke volume variation (SVV), passive
leg raise (PLR) test) [46].
Importantly, in certain circumstances where patients
remain fluid responsive, curtailment of ongoing fluid
resuscitation may be necessary if the tolerance to further
intravenous fluid is deemed detrimental to physiological
processes (for example, abrupt increase in extravascular
lung
water;
worsening
intra-abdominal
pressure
or
abdominal compartment syndrome; difficult ventilation)
[44]. Alternative strategies should be considered including
inotropic support guided by cardiac output monitoring,
alternative fluid strategies, and planning for hemodialysis
with net ultrafiltration.
The clinician should be aware of the different phases
within fluid management according to the ROSE concept.
After the initial resuscitation (R) phase comes organ sup-
port (O) and stabilization (S), and finally evacuation (E) of
excess fluids may be needed in some patients (Table 2)
[47].
These are broad guidelines, and exceptions do exist.
Urine output has not been included in our recommenda-
tions due to the many influencing factors, although it may
be one of the only parameters to measure, particularly in
resource-limited settings. The renal response to hypov-
olemia is multifactorial and depends on a combination of
renal blood flow, renal perfusion pressure and plasma
oncotic pressure. The type of resuscitation fluid is impor-
tant as it may influence oncotic pressure. In addition, the
neurohormonal control of renal function may cloud the
clinical picture and appropriate retention of water may be
interpreted as renal dysfunction when this may be an
appropriate physiological fluid conservation mechanism.
As outlined by Peeters et al., previous studies have not
found a correlation between urine output and invasively
derived physiological variables. Also, several studies have
pointed to the inaccuracy of using urine output as a
resuscitation target and its limitation in identifying fluid
responders. This situation is complicated further in trauma
patients in the presence of increased intra-abdominal
pressure. The limitations of using urine output should be
understood by attending physicians.
Fluids should be treated as drugs: Not only the type of
fluid is important, but also the dose, the administration
speed, the duration and de-escalation [48]. There are only
three indications for giving fluids: resuscitation, replace-
ment or maintenance [49].
Maintenance fluid
In providing maintenance fluids, care should be taken to
avoid causing tissue edema. This requires limitation of
crystalloid administration, which can only really be
achieved in the post-resuscitation period. Crystalloid fluid
administration is not without hazards. Excessive crystalloid
administration is associated with edema of skin, abdominal
organs (leading to abdominal compartment syndrome),
kidneys (leading to renal compartment syndrome, con-
tributing to acute renal failure) and heart (leading to
myocardial dysfunction) [44]. The ideal concept would be
to use a strategy where the fluid stays intravascular and
World J Surg (2017) 41:1170–1183
1175
123
 expands this compartment for longer. However, the design
of the recent large studies involving HES showed that
ongoing use of these fluids in critically ill patients, beyond
initial resuscitation (even in the trauma subgroup analysis),
was without benefit and may increase the need for renal
replacement therapy [47].
During the post-resuscitation phase, crystalloids are not
only required for fluid supplementation, but also as vehi-
cles for administration of medication, including antibiotics,
sedation and inotropes/vasopressors. The fluid required for
the administration of these solutions together with those
required for nutrition should as a guide not exceed 2 ml/kg/
h. 0.9% ‘‘normal’’ saline has often been the fluid of choice
for this purpose; however, concerns about both the sodium
and chloride load may favor other ‘‘balanced’’ fluids
[13, 50, 51]. This fluid can again be substituted for the one
designed specifically for maintenance of daily fluid and
electrolyte requirements once certainty regarding fluid
requirements and responsiveness has been reached. During
this period, the solutions infused as medications may also
be made more concentrated to limit volume requirements.
It must be remembered that intravenous fluids are drugs
providing both electrolytes and water. While calculating
these requirements, the patient’s medication and feed also
need to be incorporated to avoid excessive volumes of
each.
Assessing volume status
Fluid responsiveness
Only half of the ICU patients with hemodynamic instability
are able to ‘‘respond’’ to fluid loading, which is explained
by the shape of the Frank–Starling curve [52]. On the
initial and steep limb of the curve, the stroke volume is
highly dependent on preload: Administering fluid will
actually result in a significant increase in stroke volume. In
contrast, if the heart is working on the terminal and flat
portion of the Frank–Starling curve, it cannot utilize any
preload reserve and fluid administration will not signifi-
cantly increase stroke volume. Accordingly, predictors of
volume
responsiveness
are
mandatory
to
distinguish
between patients who can benefit from fluid and those in
whom fluid is useless and hence deleterious.
1.
Static markers of cardiac preload
Considering
the
Frank–Starling
relationship,
the
response to volume infusion is more likely to occur when
Table 2 ROSE concept (adapted from Malbrain et al. with permission) [40]
Resuscitation phase (R)
Salvage or rescue treatment with fluids administered quickly as a bolus (4 mL/kg over 10–15 min)
The goal is early adequate goal-directed fluid management (EAFM), fluid balance must be positive, and the suggested resuscitation targets
are: MAP [ 65 mm Hg, CI [ 2.5 L/min/m2, PPV \ 12%, LVEDAI [ 8 cm/m2
Optimization phase (O)
Occurs within hours
Ischemia and reperfusion
Degree of positive fluid balance may be a marker of severity in this phase
Risk of polycompartment syndrome
Unstable, compensated shock state requiring titrating of fluids to cardiac output
Targets: MAP [ 65 mm Hg, CI [ 2.5 L/min/m2, PPV \ 14%, LVEDAI 8-12 cm/m2, IAP (
\
15 mm Hg) are monitored, and APP
(
[
55 mm Hg) is calculated. Preload optimized with GEDVI 640—800 mL/m2
Stabilization phase (S)
Evolves over days
Fluid therapy only for normal maintenance and replacement
Absence of shock or threat of shock
Monitor daily body weight, fluid balance and organ function
Targets: neutral or negative fluid balance; EVLWI \ 10-12 mL/kg PBW, PVPI \ 2.5, IAP \ 15 mm Hg, APP [ 55 mm Hg,
COP [ 16-18 mm Hg and CLI \ 60
Evacuation phase (E)
Patients who do not transition from the ‘‘ebb’’ phase of shock to the ‘‘flow’’ phase after the ‘‘second hit’’ develop global increased
permeability syndrome (GIPS)
Fluid overload causes end-organ dysfunction
Requires late goal-directed fluid removal (‘‘de-resuscitation’’) to achieve negative fluid balance
Need to avoid over-enthusiastic fluid removal resulting in hypovolemia
1176
World J Surg (2017) 41:1170–1183
123
 the ventricular preload is low, rather than when it is high.
Unfortunately, none of the measures of cardiac preload
enables to accurately predict fluid responsiveness: Neither
the central venous pressure (CVP), the pulmonary artery
occlusion pressure (PAOP), nor the left ventricular end-
diastolic area (LVEDA) can discriminate between respon-
ders and non-responders to fluid therapy [24, 53, 54]. Only
the right ventricular and the global end-diastolic volume
have been proven to be of some benefit compared to
barometric preload indicators especially in patients with
increased
intra-thoracic
or
intra-abdominal
pressures
[23, 55].
2.
Dynamic markers of volume responsiveness
The alternative method for predicting volume respon-
siveness is simply to induce a change in cardiac preload
and to observe the resulting effects on stroke volume or
cardiac output or any available surrogate, i.e., to perform a
‘‘functional assessment’’ of the cardiac function [24]. This
is achieved with intravenous fluid boluses [56]. This
method can be criticized because repeated infusions of
such amounts could eventually exert adverse effects if
there is no preload reserve, especially if pulmonary per-
meability was increased.
The respiratory variation of hemodynamic signals
Observing the respiratory variation of hemodynamic sig-
nals has emerged as an alternative for assessing volume
responsiveness without administering fluid. The concept is
based on the assumption that the cyclic changes in right
ventricular preload induced by mechanical ventilation
should result in greater cyclic changes in left ventricular
stroke volume when both ventricles operate on the steep
rather than on the flat portion of the Frank–Starling curve,
i.e., in case of biventricular preload preserve.
Numerous studies have consistently demonstrated that
the magnitude of respiratory variation of surrogates of
stroke volume allows predicting fluid responsiveness with
accuracy [24]. Pulse pressure variation (PPV) is the most
popular index, since it needs only an arterial catheter to be
obtained and numerous bedside monitors calculate and
display its value in real time. Reliability of PPV to predict
fluid responsiveness has been demonstrated in ICU patients
when it is calculated from a simple arterial catheter [4] or
automatically calculated by simple bedside monitors such
as the IntelliVue (Philips, USA) [5], the PiCCO (PULSION
Medical Systems SE, Germany) [6] and the LiDCOplus
(LiDCO Group PLC, UK) [7] monitors [57–61]. PPV can
also be automatically obtained with the LiDCOrapid
(LiDCO Group PLC, UK), Mostcare (Vytech, Italy) and
Pulsioflex (MAQUET, Germany) uncalibrated monitors
[62]. Noninvasive finger pressure monitors such as the
CNAP
(CNSystems
Medizintechnik
AG,
Austria)
or
ClearSight (Edwards Lifesciences Corporation, USA) also
allow calculation of noninvasive PPV [63, 64]. It must be
noted that this modality is difficult to use in several cases of
trauma resuscitation as it requires controlled ventilation
(i.e., no spontaneous ventilatory efforts), regular sinus
rhythm and tidal volumes of [
7 ml/kg.
Other markers
The following other surrogates of stroke volume respira-
tory variation can be used at the bedside:
•
Respiratory variation of the pulse contour-derived
stroke volume measured by the PiCCO or by the
FloTrac/Vigileo (Edwards Lifesciences Corporation,
USA) or by the LiDCOplus [58, 65, 66].
•
Respiratory variation of the subaortic flow assessed by
echocardiography and respiratory variation of the
descending aortic blood flow assessed by esophageal
Doppler [30, 67, 68].
•
Other heart–lung interaction indices like respiratory
variation of inferior or superior vena cava diameter
(echocardiography),
although
limitations
exist
[24, 68–70].
•
The passive leg raise (PLR) test carries an excellent
ability to serve as a test of preload responsiveness,
demonstrated in patients with acute circulatory failure
[71, 72]. A 10–12% increase in cardiac output or stroke
volume during PLR enables prediction of fluid respon-
siveness, even patients with cardiac arrhythmias and/or
spontaneous ventilator triggering [73]. However, in
conditions of increased IAP and pain, the PLR may
result in a false negative [55, 74].
•
The end-expiratory occlusion test. The end-expiratory
occlusion test can be used in patients with low lung
compliance [64, 75].
•
Ultrasonography: This bedside modality has advantages
of repeatability, being noninvasive, with the ability to
assess dynamic changes in the inferior vena cava (IVC)
diameter, left ventricular outflow tract stroke volume
variation, and estimate cardiac ejection fraction [76].
This provides the ability for real-time guidance of fluid
resuscitation [77]. The most widely used method for
assessing fluid responsiveness using IVC parameters is
the caval index [78]. This measurement is most useful
at extremes of volume status and is influenced by
increases in ventilation parameters (tidal volume and
positive end-expiratory pressure) and intra-abdominal
pressure. As a result, despite positive findings in early
studies, research has demonstrated a limited ability to
detect those patients that would respond to further fluid
resuscitation due to changes in these ventilatory
World J Surg (2017) 41:1170–1183
1177
123
 parameters, and other patient factors such as obesity
[79, 80]. Other measurements using ultrasonography
are possible such as SVV using pulse-wave Doppler,
and aortic blood flow velocity using trans-esophageal
echocardiography, but require more experience and
may prove challenging in the emergency setting
[81–83]. The combination of using ultrasonography to
measure aortic velocity–time integral and combining
this with a PLR test may be the best technique in skilled
hands [84, 85].
Recommendations for current best practices:
1.
If ultrasonography is available, then we advise using
dynamic changes in IVC together with other clinical
parameters. Preferably, if the skills are available,
combining aortic velocity–time integral with dynamic
changes from a PLR test should be performed.
2.
In the absence of ultrasonography, dynamic markers of
volume resuscitation should be attempted such as a
PLR test, although this may have limited utility in the
emergency setting due to patient injuries and pain.
3.
If it is unable to utilize ultrasonography or PLR testing,
other dynamic markers of fluid responsiveness can be
attempted although these may be impractical in the
emergency setting. Repeated ‘‘mini-boluses’’ of intra-
venous fluid (100–250 ml) can be used, provided that
vigilance regarding excessive or inappropriate clear
fluid administration is maintained.
Special groups
Pediatrics
Infants and children suffer from trauma, particularly vehic-
ular trauma, with an increasing incidence in the developing
world [86]. Children differ from adults in having a larger
circulating blood volume (80 ml/kg in a term neonate) that
decreases with age to the adult level of 70 ml/kg [87]. While
the relative blood volume is larger, the absolute volumes
required are small and should ideally be delivered through
flow control devices (infusion pumps/syringe drivers) [88].
A cheap precaution is to deliver all clear fluids through a
60-drop-per-minute administration set rather than the 10-/
15-drop-per-minute sets used for adults.
Restoration of circulating volume is a priority with the
establishment of vascular access via a peripheral line,
central (commonly femoral) line or intra-osseous line. The
access should not be established distal to a site of injury
(e.g., femoral line with blunt abdominal trauma) as the
resuscitation fluid will extravasate into the injured area
[89].
The principles of goal-directed therapy apply equally
well to children as to adults. Initial resuscitation should be
with 20 ml/kg of balanced crystalloid [90]. There is limited
information on the efficacy and safety of synthetic colloids
(e.g., HES) in children, with some evidence that hemody-
namic goals are achieved more quickly and with smaller
volumes but at increased cost and with no evidence of
outcome benefit [91].
The role of all clear fluids is limited in trauma resusci-
tation due to their adverse effects of dilutional coagu-
lopathy and anemia and generation of edema that hinders
tissue perfusion and promotes organ dysfunction (including
ileus, abdominal compartment syndrome and ARDS). The
volume of clear fluid should not exceed 40 ml/kg [90].
Administration of blood and blood products (platelets and
plasma) should be considered depending on the response to
the initial 20 ml/kg crystalloid bolus and the severity of
injury. Due to the small volumes required, many pediatri-
cians use human colloids such as plasma or albumin for
intravascular volume replacement in preference to syn-
thetic clear fluids [92].
During the maintenance phase of resuscitation, children
appear to be at risk of hyponatremia. This seems to be due
to administration of excessive volumes of hypotonic solu-
tions such as � strength Darrow’s solution (Na-61, K-12,
Cl-52, Lactate-27 mmol/l) with 5% dextrose resulting in
hyponatremia and potentially fatal cerebral edema [93]. A
clear distinction is required between resuscitation fluids,
that must be isotonic and preferably balanced, and main-
tenance fluids, that may be hypotonic and should only be
given in limited volumes (maximum 2 ml/kg/h) via a flow
controller to prevent rapid administration [94].
Elderly
The World Health Organization defines ‘‘elderly’’ as a
chronological age of 65 years or more. Age is only one
criterion in the assessment of overall health leading to the
concept of biological age based on organ dysfunction and/
or chronic disease [95]. Despite advances in trauma care,
the elderly, either chronologically or biologically, are at
increased risk of morbidity, particularly limitation of
mobility and self-care ability, and mortality after trauma
[96].
Cardiovascular changes of aging include stiffening of
the arterial circulation and loss of compliance of the left
ventricle. The elderly thus tolerate hypo- and hypervolemia
poorly. Volume loss reduces preload resulting in ventric-
ular under-filling and a disproportionate drop in cardiac
output. Over-hydration is as dangerous due to the lack of
ventricular compliance predisposing to the development of
edema, particularly pulmonary edema [97]. Assessment of
fluid
requirements
in
the
elderly
is
best
done
by
1178
World J Surg (2017) 41:1170–1183
123
 echocardiography as noninvasive measurements based on
pressure or pulse contour analysis are subject to variation
due to the changes in the cardiovascular system from aging
[98].
Clear fluid administration should initially be limited to
20 ml/kg with early consideration given to the adminis-
tration of blood and blood products. Careful re-evaluation
and vigilant monitoring should to performed to determine
if further fluid administration is required; particularly if
underlying heart disease is suspected. Due to the likelihood
of underlying coronary and cerebral artery disease in the
elderly, consideration should be given to maintaining
hemoglobin levels above 9 g/dl and mean arterial pressure
above 70 mmHg, particularly if the patients comorbidities
are unknown [97].
Burns
Appropriate and effective initial resuscitation of victims of
burns is vital for survival and reduction of morbidity and
mortality [99]. The deeper and more extensive the burn, the
greater the fluid requirements, but excessive fluid admin-
istration will also increase morbidity by generation of
edema [100]. The formulas used for calculating volume
requirements (e.g., Brooke & Parkland) use only body
surface area (BSA) and do not compensate for depth. In
clinical practice, the fluid requirement is approximately
5 ml/kg/ %BSA during the first 24 h [101].
The rate of fluid administration will initially be rapid
with up to half the daily requirement given in the first 6 h.
The use of colloid solutions is controversial. Hyperoncotic
colloids worsen outcome, but the role of albumin or syn-
thetic colloids (e.g., HES) is less clear [102–104]. Colloid
solutions shorten the time to achieve hemodynamic goals,
but increase expense without a concomitant improvement
in outcome.
Enteral resuscitation is effective if commenced within
6 h. Placement of a feeding tube should be part of the
resuscitation protocol for burns. Delay of feeding for more
than 6 h will result in an increasing feeding failure due to
gastroparesis and ileus. Maintenance of enteral feeding
maintains the gut associated lymphoid tissue that partici-
pates in maintenance of immunity at all epithelial surfaces
including the skin. A standard formula may be used starting
at 2 ml/kg/h and increasing incrementally every 3 h until
the goal rate calculated for each patient is reached [105].
Two simple investigations should be used to monitor the
effectiveness of resuscitation from burns. The first is the
hematocrit, which may be as high as 70% on admission
after extensive burns. Failure to reduce the hematocrit
below 40% within the first 6 h is an accurate indicator of
poor prognosis. The second is urine output, which should
be maintained at around 1 ml/kg/h. Development of acute
renal failure carries a very poor prognosis with extensive
burns [106]. A more detailed review of fluids in burn
resuscitation is beyond the scope of this paper; however,
further references are provided [107, 108].
Crush injury/syndrome
Crush injury is seen in victims of motor vehicle collisions
who are entrapped and have limbs compressed, resulting in
direct muscle trauma followed by a reperfusion injury
when freed. Similar injury is seen in prolonged immobi-
lization (after a fall or drug overdose) and entrapment in
collapsed buildings after natural disasters [109]. South
Africa has an unfortunate history of interpersonal violence.
With the breakdown in the rule of law in many commu-
nities, alleged criminals may be assaulted by community
members using traditional whips (sjamboks). This results
in extensive muscle injury; however, muscle perfusion is
maintained so reperfusion does not occur [110]. Muscle
injury releases myoglobin that is detrimental to kidneys. A
surrogate marker for myoglobin is creatine kinase (CK)
used as follows (Table 3).
With diffuse injury, such as community sjambok
assaults, the surface area of the body injured should be
quantified as for burns. A surface area of [
18% carries
increased risk of renal dysfunction [110]. Aggressive fluid
loading (20–40 ml/kg initial bolus followed by 10–20 ml/
kg/h) should begin as soon as the patient makes contact
with the healthcare system. In the pre-hospital environ-
ment, fluid loading should ideally occur prior to release of
crushed limb/s [111].
Traditionally, 0.9% saline is used for fluid loading.
Alternatives, to limit the occurrence of hypernatremia and
hyperchloremic acidosis, include 0.45% saline and alter-
nating 0.9% saline and 5% dextrose. Balanced solutions
such as modified Ringer’s lactate are not recommended due
to concerns regarding hyperkalemia, but this risk may be
offset by the hyperchloremic acidosis seen with large-
volume saline administration [109].
Should presentation be delayed, creatinine and potas-
sium should be measured while initial fluid loading occurs,
as the kidneys may have been damaged beyond immediate
recovery. Failure to produce urine after initial fluid loading
associated with an elevated urea, creatinine and potassium
Table 3 Representation of how to use creatine kinase as a surrogate
marker for myoglobin
CK U/l
Risk of renal failure
Admission
\
500
Low
Unlikely
500–5000
Intermediate
At least overnight
[
5000U/l
High
Admission to ICU/high care
World J Surg (2017) 41:1170–1183
1179
123
 indicates the need for urgent renal replacement therapy.
Further fluid loading should not be administered, as the
absolute volume overload that arises in the absence of urine
output will result in pulmonary edema with hypoxia
requiring intubation and ventilation. There is no role for
loop or osmotic diuretics, and the use of sodium bicar-
bonate to induce alkaline diuresis is also not supported by
evidence [110].
Pregnancy
Trauma, particularly vehicular, or due to intimate partner
violence is a common cause for maternal and fetal mor-
bidity and mortality. In the developing world, neonatal
intensive-care facilities are limited so maternal considera-
tions take precedence in resuscitation until fetal viability is
likely [112].
Pregnancy duration of more than 20 weeks makes aor-
tocaval compression a realistic cause of hypotension during
resuscitation, emphasizing the need for maintaining a 20�
left lateral tilt [113]. Fluid administration follows accepted
principles of resuscitation [112].
Should delivery occur during resuscitation, significant
blood loss may occur due to post-partum hemorrhage.
Oxytocin availability may be limited due to expense and
requirement for refrigeration. Misoprostol is an accepted
alternative, but is only available in an oral form that may
need to be administered rectally during resuscitation [114].
It should be remembered that the physiological compen-
sation for blood loss might be better tolerated in pregnancy
due to the physiological changes that predominantly take
place in the second and third trimesters and include an
increased circulating blood volume and cardiac output.
Awareness of this should be maintained to avoid under-
estimation of blood loss and underlying injuries.
Conclusion
Fluids are drugs and should be managed as such. Appro-
priate early fluid resuscitation in trauma patients is a
challenging task. Care should be taken in selecting both the
type and volume to promote appropriate perfusion and
oxygen delivery, avoiding the adverse effects seen when
giving too little or too much. Ongoing fluid strategies
following resuscitation should incorporate dynamic mark-
ers of volume status whenever possible. All aspects of fluid
administration should be incorporated into daily fluid
plans, including feeding and infusions of medications. A
sound knowledge of the differences and physiological
consequences of specific trauma groups is essential for all
practitioners delivering care for trauma patients [7].
Acknowledgements The costs covering the open access publication
(USD3000) of this review article were covered by an unrestricted
educational grant from the International Fluid Academy (IFA). The
IFA is integrated within the not-for-profit charitable organization
iMERiT (International Medical Education and Research Initiative)
under Belgian Law. The IFA website (http://www.fluidacademy.org)
is now an official SMACC (Social Media and Critical Care) affiliated
site and its content is based on the philosophy of FOAM (Free Open
Access Medical Education - #FOAMed).
Compliance with ethical standards
Competing interest Robert Wise and Michael Faurie declare that
they have no competing interests. Manu LNG Malbrain is member of
the executive committee of the International Fluid Academy (IFA).
Eric Hodgson is a paid speaker and advisory board member for
Fresenius-Kabi.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://crea
tivecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were
made.
References
1. Strunden M, Heckel K, Goetz A et al (2011) Perioperative fluid
and volume management: physiological basis, tools and strate-
gies. Ann Intensive Care 1:1–8
2. Marik P (2014) Iatrogenic salt water drowning and the hazards
of a high central venous pressure. Ann Intensive Care 4:1–9
3. Chappell D, Jacob M, Hofmann-Kiefer K et al (2008) A rational
approach to perioperative fluid management. Anesthesiology
109:723–740
4. Myburgh J, Finfer S, Bellomo R et al (2012) Hyrdoxyethyl
starch or saline for fluid resuscitation in intensive care. N Engl J
Med 367:1901–1911
5. Perner A, Nicolai H, Guttormson A et al (2012) Hydroxyethyl
starch 130/0.42 versus Ringer’s acetate in severe sepsis. N Engl
J Med 367:124–134
6. Raiman M, Mitchell C, Biccard B et al (2016) Comparison of
hydroxyethyl starch colloids with crystalloids for surgical
patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Anaes-
thesiol 33(42–4):8
7. Annane D, Siami S, Jaber S et al (2013) Effects of fluid resus-
citation with colloids vs crystalloids on mortality in critically ill
patients presenting with hypovolaemic shock. The CRISTAL
randomized trial. JAMA 310(1809–181):7
8. Chappell D, Jacob M (2013) Hydroxyethyl starch—the impor-
tance of being earnest. Scand J Trauma Resusc Emerg Med
21:1–4
9. Chappell D, Jacob M (2013) Twisting and ignoring facts on
hydroxyethyl starch is not very helpful. Scand J Trauma Resusc
Emerg Med 21:1–3
10. Coppola S, Froio S, Chiumello D (2014) Fluid resuscitation in
trauma patients: what should we know? Curr Opin Crit Care
20:444–450
11. Doig G, Heighes P, Simpson F et al (2011) Early enteral
nutrition reduces mortality in trauma patients requiring intensive
care: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Injury
42(50–5):6
1180
World J Surg (2017) 41:1170–1183
123
 12. Guidet B, Martinet O, Boulain T et al (2012) Assessment of
hemodynamic efficacy and safety of 6% hydroxyethylstarch
130/0.4 vs 0.9% NaCl fluid replacement in patients with severe
sepsis: the CRYSTMAS study. Crit Care 16(3):R94
13. Krajewski M, Raghunathan K, Paluszkiewicz S et al (2015)
Meta-analysis of high- versus low-chloride content in periop-
erative and critical care fluid resuscitation. Br J Surg 102:24–36
14. Ince C, Groeneveld A (2014) The case for 0.9% NaCl: is the
undefendable, defensible? Kidney Int 86:1087–1095
15. Lira A, Pinsky M (2014) Choices in fluid type and volume
during resuscitation: impact on patient outcomes. Ann Intensive
Care 4:38
16. Martini W, Cortez D, Dubick M (2013) Comparisons of normal
saline and lactated Ringer’s resuscitation on hemodynamics,
metabolic responses, and coagulation in pigs after severe hem-
orrhagic shock. Scand J Trauma Resusc Emerg Med 21:86
17. Hafizah M, Liu C, Ooi J (2015) Normal saline versus balanced-
salt solution as intravenous fluid therapy during neurosurgery:
effects on acid-base balance and electrolytes. J Neurosurg
Sci. [Epub ahead of print]
18. Galvagno S, Mackenzie C (2013) New and future resuscitation
fluids for trauma patients using hemoglobin and hypertonic
saline. Anaesthesiol Clin 31:1–19
19. Patanwala A, Amini A, Erstad B (2010) Use of hypertonic saline
injection in trauma. Am J Health Syst Pharm 67:1920–1928
20. Finfer S, Bellomo R, Boyce N et al (2004) A comparison of
albumin and saline for fluid resuscitation in the intensive care
unit. N Engl J Med 350:2247–2256
21. Myburgh J, Cooper D, Finfer S et al (2007) Saline or albumin
for fluid resuscitation in patients with traumatic brain injury.
N Engl J Med 357:874–884
22. Brackney C, Diaz L, Milbrandt E et al (2010) Is albumin use
SAFE in patients with traumatic brain injury? Crit Care 14:307
23. Malbrain M, Roberts D, Sugrue M et al (2014) The poly-
compartment
syndrome:
a concise
state-of-the-art
review.
Anaesthesiol Intensive Ther 46:433–450
24. Marik P, Monnet X, Teboul J (2011) Hemodynamic parameters
to guide fluid therapy. Ann Intensive Care 1:1–9
25. Hahn R, Bergek C, Geback T et al (2013) Interactions between
the volume effects of hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4 and Ringer’s
acetate. Crit Care 17:R104
26. Strunden M, Heckel K, Goetz A et al (2011) Perioperative fluid
and volume management: physiological basis, tools and strate-
gies. Ann Intensive Care 1(1):2
27. Spinella P, Perkin J, Grathwohl K et al (2009) Warm fresh
whole blood is independently associated with improved survival
for patients with combat-related traumatic injuries. J Trauma
66:S69–S76
28. Raymer J, Flynn L, Martin R (2012) Massive transfusion of
blood in the surgical patient. Surg Clin N Am 92:221–234
29. Holcomb J, Tilley B, Baraniuk S et al (2015) Transfusion of
plasma, platelets and red blood cells in a 1:1:1 vs a 1:1:2 ratio
and mortality in patients with severe trauma: the PROPPR
randomised controlled trial. JAMA 313:471–482
30. Monnet X, Rienzo M, Osman D et al (2005) Esophageal Dop-
pler monitoring predicts fluid responsiveness in critically ill
ventilated patients. Intensive Care Med 31:1195–1201
31. Holcomb J (2010) Optimal use of blood products in severely
injured trauma patients haematology. Am Soc Hematol Educ
Progr 1:465–469
32. Miller T (2013) New evidence in trauma resuscitation—is 1:1:1
the answer? Perioper Med 2(1):13
33. Network for the advancement of patient blood management,
haemostasis, and thrombosis - Haemoglobin based solutions
(2016). www.nataonline.com/np/421/hemoglobin-based-solutions
34. Levien L (2006)
South
Africa:
clinical experience
with
hemopure. ISBT Sci Ser 1:167–173
35. MacKenzie C, Pitman A, Hodgson R et al (2015) Are hemo-
globin-based oxygen carriers being withheld because of regu-
latory requirement for equivalence to packed red blood cells?
Am J Ther 22:e115–e121
36. Natanson C, Kern S, Lurie P et al (2008) Cell-free hemoglobin-
based blood substitutes and risk of myocardial infarction and
death: a meta-analysis. JAMA 299:2304–2312
37. Africa SS (2015) Mid-year population estimates 2015. Statisti-
cal release P0302; Pretoria, South Africa. http://www.statssa.
gov.za/?page_id=1854&PPN=P0302&SCH=6334
38. van Ramshorst GH, Salih M, Hop WC et al (2011) Noninvasive
assessment of intra-abdominal pressure by measurement of
abdominal wall tension. J Surg Res 171:240–244
39. Gonzalez E, Moore E, Moore H et al (2016) Goal-directed
hemostatic resuscitation of trauma-induced coagulopathy: a
Pragmatic randomized clinical trial comparing a viscoelastic
assay
to
conventional
coagulation
assays.
Ann
Surg
263:1051–1059
40. Tapia N, Chang A, Norman M (2012) TEG-guided resuscita-
tions superior to standardized MTP resuscitation massively
transfused penetrating trauma patients. J Acute Care Surg
74:378–386
41. Haas T, Gorlinger K, Grassetto A et al (2014) Thromboelas-
tometry for guiding bleeding management of the critically ill
patient: a systematic review of the literature. Min Anestesiol
80:1320–1335
42. Adhikary S, Pruett A, Thiruvenkatarajan V (2014) Coagulation
testing in the perioperative period. Indian J Anaesth 58:565–572
43. Bellamy M (2006) Wet, dry or something else? Br J Anaesth
97:755–757
44. Malbrain M, Marik P, Witters I et al (2014) Fluid overload, de-
resuscitation, and outcomes in critically ill or injured patients: a
systematic
review
with
suggestions
for
clinical
practice.
Anaesthesiol Intensive Ther 46:361–380
45. Shere-Wolfe R, Galvagno SJ, Grissom T (2012) Critical care
considerations in the management of the trauma patient fol-
lowing initial resuscitation. Scand J Trauma Resusc Emerg Med
20:1–15
46. Teboul J, Monnet X (2009) Detecting volume responsiveness
and unresponsiveness in intensive care unit patients: two dif-
ferent problems, only one solution. Crit Care 13:R111
47. Malbrain M, Van Regenmortel N, Owczuk R (2014) The debate
on fluid management and haemodynamic monitoring continues:
between Scylla and Charybdis, or faith and evidence. Anaes-
thesiol Intensive Ther 46:313–318
48. Malbrain ML, Van Regenmortel N, Owczuk R (2015) It is time
to consider the four D’s of fluid management. Anaesthesiol
Intensive Ther 47:1–5
49. Van Regenmortel N, Jorens PG, Malbrain ML (2014) Fluid
management before, during and after elective surgery. Curr
Opin Crit Care 20:390–396
50. Langer T, Santini A, Scotti E et al (2015) Intravenous balanced
solutions: from physiology to clinical evidence. Anaesthesiol
Intensive Ther 47:s78–s88
51. Finfer S, Liu B, Taylor C et al (2010) Resuscitation fluid use in
critically ill adults: an international cross-sectional study in 391
intensive care units. Crit Care 14:R185
52. Michard F, Teboul J (2002) Predicting fluid responsiveness in
ICU patients: a critical analysis of the evidence. Chest
121:2000–2008
53. Marik P, Baram M, Vahid B (2008) Does the central venous
pressure predict fluid responsiveness? A systematic review of
the literature and the tale of seven mares. Chest 134:172–178
World J Surg (2017) 41:1170–1183
1181
123
 54. Marik P, Cavallazzi R (2013) Does the central venous pressure
predict fluid responsiveness? An updated meta-analysis and a
plea for some common sense. Crit Care Med 41:1774–1781
55. Malbrain M, De Waele J, De Keulenaer B (2015) What every
ICU clinician needs to know about the cardiovascular effects
caused by abdominal hypertension. Anaesthesiol Intensive Ther
47:388–399
56. Vincent J, Weil M (2006) Fluid challenge revisited. Crit Care
Med 34:1333–1337
57. Cannesson M, Slieker J, Desebbe O et al (2008) The ability of a
novel algorithm for automatic estimation of the respiratory
variations in arterial pulse pressure to monitor fluid respon-
siveness in the operating room. Anesth Analg 106:1195–1200
58. Cecconi M, Monti G, Hamilton M et al (2012) Efficacy of
functional hemodynamic parameters in predicting fluid respon-
siveness with pulse power analysis in surgical patients. Min
Anestesiol 78:527–533
59. Hofer C, Mu
¨ller S, Furrer L et al (2005) Stroke volume and
pulse pressure variation for prediction of fluid responsiveness in
patients undergoing off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting.
Chest 128:848–854
60. Michard F, Boussat S, Chemla D et al (2000) Relation between
respiratory changes in arterial pulse pressure and fluid respon-
siveness in septic patients with acute circulatory failure. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 162:134–138
61. Peeters Y, Bernards J, Mekeirele M et al (2015) Hemodynamic
monitoring: to calibrate or not to calibrate? Part 1—calibrated
techniques. Anaesthesiol Intensive Ther 47:487–500
62. Bernards J, Mekeirele M, Hoffmann B et al (2015) Hemo-
dynamic monitoring: to calibrate or not to calibrate? Part 2—
non-calibrated techniques. Anaesthesiol Intensive Ther 47:
501–516
63. Ameloot K, Palmers P, Malbrain M (2015) The accuracy of
noninvasive cardiac output and pressure measurements with
finger cuff: a concise review. Curr Opin Crit Care 21:232–239
64. Monnet X, Dres M, Ferre
´ A et al (2012) Prediction of fluid
responsiveness by a continuous non-invasive assessment of
arterial pressure in critically ill patients: comparison with four
other dynamic indices. Br J Anaesth 109:330–338
65. Berkenstadt H, Margalit N, Hadani M et al (2001) Stroke vol-
ume variation as a predictor of fluid responsiveness in patients
undergoing brain surgery. Anesth Analg 92:984–989
66. Biais M, Nouette-Gaulain K, Cottenceau V et al (2008)
Uncalibrated pulse contour-derived stroke volume variation
predicts fluid responsiveness in mechanically ventilated patients
undergoing liver transplantation. Br J Anaesth 101:761–768
67. Feissel M, Michard F, Mangin I et al (2001) Respiratory changes
in aortic blood velocity as an indicator of fluid responsiveness in
ventilated patients with septic shock. Chest 119:867–873
68. Vermeiren G, Malbrain M, Walpot J (2015) Cardiac ultra-
sonography in the critical care setting: a practical approach to
asses cardiac function and preload for the ‘‘non-cardiologist’’.
Anaesthesiol Intensive Ther 47:89–104
69. Feissel M, Michard F, Faller J et al (2004) The respiratory
variation in inferior vena cava diameter as a guide to fluid
therapy. Intensive Care Med 30:1834–1837
70. Vieillard-Baron A, Chergui K, Rabiller A et al (2004) Superior
vena caval collapsibility as a gauge of volume status in venti-
lated septic patients. Intensive Care Med 30:1734–1739
71. Cavallaro F, Sandroni C, Marano C et al (2010) Diagnostic
accuracy of passive leg raising for prediction of fluid respon-
siveness in adults: systematic review and meta-analysis of
clinical studies. Intensive Care Med 36:1475–1483
72. Monnet X, Teboul J (2008) Passive leg raising. Intensive Care
Med 34:659–663
73. Monnet X, Rienzo M, Osman D et al (2006) Passive leg raising
predicts fluid responsiveness in the critically ill. Crit Care Med
34:1402–1407
74. Malbrain M (2010) Reuter D Assessing fluid responsiveness
with the passive leg raising maneuver in patients with increased
intra-abdominal pressure: be aware that not all blood returns!
Crit Care Med 38:1912–1915
75. Monnet X, Osman D, Ridel C et al (2009) Predicting volume
responsiveness
by
using
the
end-expiratory
occlusion
in
mechanically ventilated intensive care unit patients. Crit Care
Med 37:951–956
76. Farcy D, Jain A, Dalley M et al (2016) Pitfalls in using central
venous pressure as a marker of fluid responsiveness. Emerg Med
48(1):18–28
77. Zhang Z, Xu X, Ye S et al (2014) Ultrasonographic measure-
ment of the respiratory variation in the inferior vena cava
diameter is predictive of fluid responsiveness in critically ill
patients: systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Med
Biol 40:845–853
78. Nagdev A, Merchant R, Tirado-Gonzalez A et al (2010)
Emergency department bedside ultrasonographic measurement
of the caval index for noninvasive determination of low central
venous pressure. Ann Emerg Med 55:290–295
79. Corl K, Napoli A, Gardiner F (2012) Bedside sonographic
measurement of the inferior vena cava caval index is a poor
predictor of fluid responsiveness in emergency department
patients. Emerg Med Aust 24:534–539
80. Muller L, Bobbia X, Toumi M et al (2012) Respiratory varia-
tions of inferior vena cava diameter to predict fluid respon-
siveness
in
spontaneously
breathing
patients
with
acute
circulatory failure: need for a cautious use. Crit Care 16(5):R188
81. Chin J, Jun I, Lee J et al (2014) Can stroke volume variation be
an alternative to central venous pressure in patients undergoing
kidney transplantation? Transplant Proc 46:3363–3366
82. Zhang Z, Lu B, Sheng X et al (2011) Accuracy of stroke volume
variation in predicting fluid responsiveness: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. J Anesth 25:904–916
83. Feissel M, Michard F, Mangin I et al (2001) Respiratory changes
in aortic blood velocity as an indicator of fluid responsiveness in
ventilated patients with septic shock. Chest 119:867–873
84. Lamia B, Ochagavia A, Monnet X et al (2007) Echocardio-
graphic prediction of volume responsiveness in critically ill
patients with spontaneously breathing activity. Intensive Care
Med 33:1125–1132
85. Maizel J, Airapetian N, Lorne E et al (2007) Diagnosis of central
hypovolemia by using passive leg raising. Intensive Care Med
33(7):1133–1138
86. Mo
¨ller H, Falster K, Ivers R et al (2015) Inequalities in unin-
tentional injuries between indigenous and non-indigenous chil-
dren: a systematic review. Inj Prev 21:e144–e152
87. Lacroix J, Demaret P, Tucci M (2012) Red blood cell transfu-
sion: decision making in pediatric intensive care units. Semin
Perinatol 36:225–231
88. Murat I, Dubois M (2008) Perioperative fluid therapy in pae-
diatrics. Ped Anesth 18:363–370
89. de Caen A, Reis A, Bhutta A (2008) Vascular access and drug
therapy in pediatric resuscitation. Pediatr Clin N Am 55:909–927
90. Hussmann B, Lefering R, Kauther M et al (2012) Influence of
prehospital volume replacement on outcome in polytraumatized
children. Crit Care 16:R201
91. St
‹ mpelmann R, Kretz F-J, Luntzer R et al (2012) Hydroxyethyl
starch 130/0.42/6:1 for perioperative plasma volume replace-
ment in 1130 children: results of an European prospective
multicenter
observational
postauthorization
safety
study
(PASS). Ped Anesth 22:371–378
1182
World J Surg (2017) 41:1170–1183
123
 92. Dzik W, Kyeyune D, Otekat G et al (2015) Transfusion medi-
cine in Sub-Saharan Africa: conference summary. Transfus Med
Rev 29:195–204
93. Terris M, Crean P (2011) Fluid and electrolyte balance in
children. Anaesth Intens Care Med 13:15–19
94. Au A (2010) Bell M Prevention of hospital-acquired hypona-
tremia in children: are hypotonic solutions safe? Pediatr Crit
Care Med 11:528–529
95. Maguire S, Slater B (2010) Physiology of ageing. Anaesth
Intensive Care Med 11:290–292
96. Stevens C, Torke A (2016) Geriatric trauma: a clinical and
ethical review. J Trauma Nurs 23:36–41
97. Corcoran T, Hillyard S (2011) Cardiopulmonary aspects of
anaesthesia for the elderly. Best Prac Res Clin Anaesthesiol
25:329–354
98. Marik P (2006) Management of the critically ill geriatric patient.
Crit Care Med 34:S176–S182
99. Alvarado R, Chung K, Cancio L et al (2009) Burn resuscitation.
Burns 35:4–14
100. Bishop S, Maguire S (2012) Anaesthesia and intensive care for
major burns. Cont Ed Anaesth Crit Care Pain 12:118–122
101. Greenhalgh D (2010) Burn resuscitation: the results of the ISBI/
ABA survey. Burns 36:176–182
102. Be
´chir M, Puhan M, Neff S et al (2010) Early fluid resuscitation
with hyperoncotic hydroxyethyl starch 200/0.5 (10%) in severe
burn injury. Crit Care 14:R123
103. Cochran A, Morris S, Edelman L et al (2007) Burn patient
characteristics and outcomes following resuscitation with albu-
min. Burns 33:25–30
104. Vlachou E, Gosling P, Moiemen N (2010) Hydroxyethylstarch
supplementation in burn resuscitation—a prospective ran-
domised controlled trial. Burns 36:984–991
105. Khorasani E, Mansouri F (2010) Effect of early enteral nutrition
on morbidity and mortality in children with burns. Burns
36:1067–1071
106. Legrand M, Guttormsen A, Berger M (2015) Ten tips for
managing critically ill burn patients: follow the RASTAFARI!
Intensive Care Med 41:1107–1109
107. Peeters Y, Vandervelden S, Wise R et al (2015) An overview on
fluid resuscitation and resuscitation endpoints in burns: past, pre-
sent and future. Part 1—historical background, resuscitation fluid
and adjunctive treatment. Anaesthesiol Intensive Ther 47:s6–s14
108. Peeters Y, Lebeer M, Wise R et al (2015) An overview on fluid
resuscitation and resuscitation endpoints in burns: past, present
and future. Part 2—avoiding complications by using the right
endpoints with a new personalized protocolized approach.
Anaesthesiol Intensive Ther 47:s15–s26
109. Jagodzinski N, Weerasingheand C, Porter K (2010) Crush
injuries and crush syndrome—a review. Part 1: the systemic
injury. Trauma 12:69–88
110. Hardcastle T, Smith W (2011) A crushing experience: the
spectrum and outcome of soft tissue injury and myonephropathic
syndrome at an Urban South African University Hospital. Af J
Emerg Med 1:17–24
111. Wood D (2011) Rosedale K Crush Syndrome in the rural setting.
Emerg Med J 28:817
112. Moon T, Sappenfield J (2016) Anesthetic management and
challenges in the pregnant patient. Curr Anesthesiol Rep 6:89–94
113. Jeejeebhoy F, Morrison L (2013) Maternal cardiac arrest: a
practical
and
comprehensive
review.
Emerg
Med
Int
2013:274814. doi:10.1155/2013/274814
114. Tunc
¸alp O
¨ , Souza J, Gu
¨lmezoglu M (2013) New WHO rec-
ommendations on prevention and treatment of post-partum
haemorrhage. Int J Gynecol Obstet 123:254–256
World J Surg (2017) 41:1170–1183
1183
123
