 February 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 11 | 1
NEUROSCIENCE
Published: 07 March 2018
doi:10.3389/frym.2018.00011
kids.frontiersin.org
 
 
RevIewed bY:
FANNY
AGE: 15
WHY WE CAN’T REPLACE OUR BRAINS WITH 
THE INTERNET
Audrey Wittrup and Daniel T. Willingham*
Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, United States
The Internet can provide any information imaginable, leading some people 
to wonder why they should bother learning or memorizing things. You 
still need your brain, because it can do things with information that the 
Internet cannot. Your brain puts information into a larger context; this not 
only helps you see how concepts are connected, it actually helps you to 
understand things differently. Your brain is also better at picking the right 
information from memory for the mental job at hand and at giving you access 
to that information quickly. The Internet can’t replace your brain, but it can 
complement it if you understand what each does best.
INTRODUCTION
You’ve probably caught yourself in school wondering, “Why do I need to memo-
rize this?” The Internet makes knowing something nearly as easy as lifting a 
finger. Why memorize the capitals of all 50 states when you can Google them 
in seconds? And were you to look up the capital of, say, Arizona, you’d have 
access not only to its name (Phoenix) but other facts about it, for example 
that it was originally named “Pumpkinville.” (Oddly, there weren’t even any 
pumpkins growing there, just melons that sort of looked like pumpkins). So 
 February 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 11 | 2
kids.frontiersin.org
Wittrup and Willingham
Your Brain and the Internet
what’s the point of memorization? Have our computers and smart phones 
replaced the need for memory?
You still need your brain. You can think of your brain like a tool box and 
the Internet like a hardware store. The Internet can provide any infor-
mation imaginable, but your brain is much better at picking the right 
information from memory for the mental job you are trying to do. The 
hardware store is full of specialty items you wouldn’t use on a regular 
basis. Your tool box should contain practical tools you know how to use 
well. And, although Internet searches are fast, your brain gives you access 
to that information even faster. Think of Googling something as driving 
to a hardware store every time you need to use a tool! While the Internet 
can’t replace your brain, it can complement it, if you understand what 
each does best.
PICKING THE RIGHT INFORMATION
What happens when you’re reading and come across a word you don’t 
know? You don’t always need to look it up. This is because your brain uses 
the context of what you are reading to figure out the unfamiliar word. 
That is, your brain uses the other words you do know in the sentence and 
paragraph to help you understand the meaning of the new word. Consider 
the following sentence:
 
◦ Paul went to the haberdashery to buy a new suit. Audrey waited in the car, 
because she doesn’t like stores that don’t sell women’s clothing.
Even if you don’t know the word haberdashery, the surrounding words in 
the first sentence tell you that Paul will buy a suit, so you would (reason-
ably) guess that a haberdashery is a clothing store, or at least, a place that 
sells clothing along with other items. The second sentence tells you that a 
haberdashery doesn’t sell women’s clothing, so you can (again, reasonably) 
guess that it sells men’s clothing. Your brain pieces together the meaning of 
the word, like a puzzle.
More surprising, context is important even when you already know the 
definition of a word. Take the example of Amelia Bedelia, a fictional 
housekeeper who gets into funny situations because she takes instructions 
too literally. In the stories, Amelia Bedelia does exactly what her bosses 
ask. When instructed to dust the furniture, she proceeds to cover 
the furniture in dust (noting to herself, “At my house, we undust the 
furniture.”) Whether she is “drawing” the curtains with a pen and paper, 
or “stamping” letters into the floor with her feet, she provides a lot of good 
examples of the way words can mean more than one thing, depending on 
 
the context.
 February 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 11 | 3
kids.frontiersin.org
Wittrup and Willingham
Your Brain and the Internet
Amelia Bedelia is not all wrong. Does “dusting” mean to add dust or to 
take it away? It depends whether you’re a detective dusting the furniture for 
fingerprints or a housekeeper cleaning it. You could have guessed Amelia was 
meant to clean the furniture, because your brain uses the context in which 
the word appears. You know a housekeeper’s job is to clean, not to investigate 
a crime scene.
So far, we’ve seen that your brain can use context to figure out a completely 
unfamiliar word (“haberdashery”) or to tell you which of two different 
meanings for a word is appropriate (“dust”). But, even if a word has a single 
meaning, you need to use context to determine the feature of meaning that 
you’re supposed to pay attention to. For example, take a look at these sentences 
using the word “car.”
 
◦ We thought about riding our bikes, but it was really far to the pool, so we 
took the car.
 
◦ My mom is working an extra job because we need to buy a new car.
 
◦ The company is trying to reduce pollution in the city, so it’s encouraging 
people to share rides to work in their cars.
Unlike our examples using the word “dust,” the word “car” has the same 
meaning in each of these examples. To fully understand the point of the 
sentence, however, you need to pay attention to the important feature of 
the meaning.
Cars have many characteristics. They are fast, expensive, and pollution-
causing. Cars come in different colors and sizes, are made by humans, 
require a license to operate, and so on. Usually, just one of these charac-
teristics is important for understanding a situation. Note that as you read 
the sentence:
 
◦ We thought about riding our bikes, but it was really far to the pool, so we 
took the car.
 February 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 11 | 4
kids.frontiersin.org
Wittrup and Willingham
Your Brain and the Internet
you think of just one characteristic of cars: “right, they took the car because 
it’s faster.” You don’t think “they took the car because its faster...but you know, 
cars are also expensive and pollute the air.” Your brain is terrific at pulling 
from your memory the exact feature of meaning that fits the context. When 
you read:
 
◦ Dan decided to join us, so we had to take two cars.
you immediately think about the fact that cars have a limited seating 
capacity. Suppose you didn’t know that fact. The sentence would be con-
fusing. Perhaps you’d Google the word “car” to try to puzzle out why Dan 
joining the trip meant that two cars were necessary. Google returns over 
5 million results for the search term “cars!” How long would it take to 
review these sites before you figure out that cars carry a limited number 
of passengers?
So, that’s one way that your brain is superior to Google—words change their 
meaning with context, and the brain is better at meeting that challenge. But 
what about the other obvious advantage of the Internet—isn’t it fast and 
convenient to look things up?
SPEED
Looking something up on the Internet may be faster than looking the 
same thing up in a book, but both methods are much slower than finding 
that information in your memory. This makes a difference because speed 
is important to reading. If you slow down too much, you can’t connect 
sentences and clauses; as you’re reading one sentence you forget the 
one you just finished. You might remember experiencing this when you 
were first learning to read, and had to slowly sound out each word. The 
same thing can still happen, but for a different reason. Now, instead of 
letters, it’s words you don’t know that slow you down. Consider these 
three sentences:
 
◦ I saw the panjandrum in the government office.
 
◦ I was very respectful when I met with the panjandrum in her government 
office to ask for her help in changing the city law.
 
◦ I was very respectful when I met with the powerful official in her govern-
ment office to ask for her help in changing the city law.
These sentences illustrate the importance of memory to reading.
 February 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 11 | 5
kids.frontiersin.org
Wittrup and Willingham
Your Brain and the Internet
For the last sentence, all of the words are in your memory, and reading pro-
ceeds smoothly. The second sentence contains one unknown word, but plenty 
of context to give you a good idea of what that word means. You can figure 
out that the panjandrum must be someone who can help you change laws 
that has a government office. Reading the second sentence is still not quite 
as smooth as the third. An unknown word such as “panjandrum” is like a 
speed bump—it slows you down, but you are able to get through it. In the first 
sentence, however, there’s no context to help. “Panjandrum” is not a speed 
bump, it’s a flat tire. To proceed, you would need to look the word up, and 
that’s like putting your car in park, getting out, and calling for help. There’s 
no doubt that it’s faster to look up a word definition with Google than by 
using a paper dictionary, but it’s still much slower and more disruptive than 
either retrieving the meaning of the word from memory, or using the context 
to puzzle out the meaning.
CONCLUSION
Think back to the analogy of your brain as a tool box and the Internet as a 
hardware store. The first section of this article explains why the context pro-
vided by a sentence is important for understanding the meaning of a word. 
Similarly, knowing the different ways you can use your tools helps you get 
the most out of them. Just like the word “dust” has two meanings (which are 
actually opposites), a hammer can be used to both add and remove nails. To 
make sense of information, you need to know how concepts are connected, 
often in ways that would be difficult to look up on the Internet. You would be 
unlikely to find a hammer labeled as a “nail remover” in a hardware store, just 
as you would be unlikely to see a car advertised as an “environment polluter” 
at a car dealership.
The second section of this article points out the importance of speed in putting 
together information from what you read. Similarly, practice in finding and 
using your tools helps you get a job done more quickly. While a hardware 
 February 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 11 | 6
kids.frontiersin.org
Wittrup and Willingham
Your Brain and the Internet
store has a much larger selection, you can find the tools in your own toolbox 
more quickly and use them more effectively. That’s an obvious advantage, but 
the hardware store does have your personal toolbox beat in one way: they’ve 
got everything. Likewise, the Internet has all the information you might need, 
but your brain doesn’t.
Given that your brain’s storage space is limited, what should you pick to learn? 
You need to use some mental tools frequently, for example letters and numbers. 
These are the hammer and nails of your toolbox. You’ll want to memorize 
the things that come up most frequently in your daily life. Luckily, school is 
designed around helping you learn things you will encounter again and again. 
Learning can also happen outside of school. When you read, you develop 
contextual knowledge in a way that’s impossible from memorizing definitions 
alone. Reading books that you enjoy is a great way to do this. Video games, 
comic books, and magazines all provide opportunities to practice reading as 
well.
People and computers have complementary skills. This means that computers 
are very good at some tasks that humans are bad at, and humans are good at 
certain kinds of tasks that computers cannot perform well. Your brain is good 
at pulling up the right information for you quickly, and at putting things into 
context. The Internet has more information on it than a single human being 
could ever memorize. While you can’t replace your brain with Google, you 
can use the Internet wisely if you remember what both your brain and the 
Internet do best.
SUbmItted: 17 October 2017; ACCEPTED: 15 February 2018;  
PUBLISHED ONLINE: 07 March 2018.
EDITED BY: Sabine Kastner, Princeton University, United States
CITATION: Wittrup A and Willingham DT (2018) Why We Can’t Replace Our Brains with the 
Internet. Front. Young Minds 6:11. doi:10.3389/frym.2018.00011
conflIct of Interest STATEMENT: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
CopYrIght © 2018 Wittrup and Willingham. This is an open-access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution 
or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s)  and the 
copyright owner are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in 
accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is 
permitted which does not comply with these terms.
 February 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 11 | 7
kids.frontiersin.org
Wittrup and Willingham
Your Brain and the Internet
REVIEWED BY
FANNY
, AGE: 15
Be the change you wish to see in the world. Have fun, and always be true to yourself. I love 
ballet, music, and having fun! I believe that learning is the most powerful tool in the world, so 
I will make sure to use it!
AUTHORS
AUDREY WITTRUP
I am a graduate student in Clinical Psychology at the University of Virginia. I went to college 
at the University of Michigan, and graduated with a degree in Psychology and English in 
2014. My research is on the ways supportive adults can help kids and teens succeed. I am 
also training to be a counselor to help people understand feelings, take care of problems, 
and cope with difficult situations. In my spare time, I like to read and play with my pet dog.
DANIEL T
. WILLINGHAM
I am a professor of Psychology at the University of Virginia. I started my career investigating 
how memory works, especially focusing on the idea that different types of memory are 
supported by different parts of the brain. About 10 years ago, I shifted my research to 
education, and today I study how a scientific understanding of thinking can be used by 
teachers to improve education. In my spare time, I like to read about history. 
*willingham@virginia.edu
