 Clinical Infectious Diseases
338 • CID 2019:68 (15 January) • CLINICAL PRACTICE
Osteomyelitis Complicating Sacral Pressure Ulcers: 
Whether or Not to Treat With Antibiotic Therapy
Darren Wong,1 Paul Holtom,1,2 and Brad Spellberg1,2
1Division of Infectious Diseases, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California (USC), and 2Los Angeles County + USC Medical Center, California
The treatment of osteomyelitis in patients with stage IV sacral pressure ulcers is controversial. We conducted a systematic literature 
review and did not find evidence of benefit of antibacterial therapy in this setting without concomitant surgical debridement and 
wound coverage. Furthermore, many patients with chronically exposed bone do not have evidence of osteomyelitis when biopsied, 
and magnetic resonance imaging may not accurately distinguish osteomyelitis from bone remodeling. The goal of therapy should be 
local wound care and assessment for the potential of wound closure. If the wound can be closed and osteomyelitis is present on bone 
biopsy, appropriate antibiotic therapy is reasonable. We find no data to support antibiotic durations of >6 weeks in this setting, and 
some authors recommend 2 weeks of therapy if the osteomyelitis is limited to cortical bone. If the wound will not be closed, we find 
no clear evidence supporting a role for antibiotic therapy.
Keywords. osteomyelitis; sacral pressure ulcer; antibiotic; debridement; wound flap.
A 79-year-old man with a history of spinal cord injury was 
referred for further evaluation of a sacral pressure ulcer. 
The ulcer developed several years earlier from local trauma 
related to a motorized wheelchair. Over the subsequent 
months, the ulcer progressed and tunneled to the level of the 
sacrum.
The patient was referred for infectious disease consulta-
tion due to an increase in wound discharge over the preceding 
month. Outpatient magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indi-
cated an increased size of the ulcer over the right ischial tuber-
osity with increased granulation tissue, reactive myositis, and 
mild marrow edema. The MRI did not reveal a drainable fluid 
collection or abscess.
The patient had normal vital signs. He appeared comforta-
ble and had a deep penetrating ischial ulcer of approximately 
6 cm × 3 cm, without significant purulence or erythema of the 
surrounding soft tissue. White blood cell count, creatinine, and 
a liver panel were unremarkable.
METHODS
Clinicians often struggle with the appropriate diagnostic and 
therapeutic management of patients who have chronic, sacral 
pressure ulcers. Establishing the diagnosis of osteomyelitis in 
this setting is challenging, and if present, whether it can be 
successfully treated without covering the wound is unclear. We 
hypothesized that eradication of osteomyelitis in the setting of 
exposed bone cannot be achieved without debridement and soft 
tissue coverage of the wound, and thus antibiotics to attempt 
to treat osteomyelitis are not indicated in this setting. We con-
ducted a systematic review of the literature to determine if data 
are available to support or refute this hypothesis.
We searched for the keywords “pelvic osteomyelitis” or 
“decubitus AND osteomyelitis” or “sacral osteomyelitis” from 
1975 to the present using PubMed, Google Scholar, and Web 
of Science search engines. We reviewed abstracts from all iden-
tified, peer-reviewed, published articles to determine if they 
included information on clinical outcomes or diagnostic accu-
racy, in which case we reviewed the full manuscripts. We also 
reviewed references from identified articles to identify other 
relevant studies.
RESULTS
We found a total of 30 manuscripts that met our search parame-
ters. Of these, we excluded 5 as they did not specifically address 
pelvic/sacral osteomyelitis or focused on chronic osteomyelitis 
as a general entity. We excluded an additional 5 manuscripts 
that described the role of hemicorpectomy and hemipelvec-
tomy for intractable pressure ulcers. The majority of published 
papers were case series or retrospective analyses. There were no 
available randomized controlled studies.
Histopathology of Exposed Bone in Sacral Pressure Ulcers
Contrary to the perception that exposed bone by definition 
must contain osteomyelitis, several case series in which bone 
biopsies were conducted described histological evidence of 
I N V I T E D  A R T I C L E
© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society 
of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.
DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciy559
Received 16 March 2018; editorial decision 22 June 2018; accepted 6 July 2018; published 
online July 7, 2018.
Correspondence: B. Spellberg, 2051 Marengo St, C2K122, LAC+USC Medical Center, Los 
Angeles, CA 90033 (brad.spellberg@usc.edu).
Clinical Infectious Diseases®  2019;68(2):338–42
CLINICAL PRACTICE: Ellie J.C. Goldstein, Section Editor
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/68/2/338/5050260 by guest on 03 June 2019
 CLINICAL PRACTICE • CID 2019:68 (15 January) • 339
osteomyelitis (defined as leukocytic inflammatory influx into 
bone [1, 2]) in a minority of such patients. For example, Türk 
et al examined histologic autopsy specimens of 28 patients with 
advanced-grade pressure ulcers, specifically those with visi-
ble bone [3]. Based on the histopathologic findings, 4 distinct 
groups were identified. Group 1 (n = 7) had full thickness soft 
tissue disease but no inflammation of the bone, with the corti-
cal layer of the sacrum intact. Group 2 (n = 7) had bone cor-
tex involvement with increased osteoclast activity and reactive 
new bone formation. Group 3 (n = 1) had fibrotic/remodelling 
bony involvement without osteomyelitis changes, in the pres-
ence of suppurative soft tissue disease. Group 4 (n = 13) was 
subdivided into 6 patients with chronic osteomyelitis restricted 
to the superficial and subcortical aspects of the sacrum without 
involvement of the medullary cavity of bone, and 7 patients who 
had mild small confined foci of acute superimposed on chronic 
osteomyelitis changes without suppurative inflammation or 
wide destruction of bone. The highlight of these findings was 
that in more than half of cases (groups 1–3) osteomyelitis was 
not detectable histologically, whereas in cases with osteomyeli-
tis, disease was generally more focal and superficial [3].
These results are consistent with studies by Darouiche et al 
[4] and Sugarman et al [5], who also found that on bone biopsy 
only 6 of 36 (17%) and 6 of 14 (43%) of patients with stage IV 
sacral pressure ulcers (meaning extension of ulcer to exposed 
bone) had histological evidence of osteomyelitis. Furthermore, 
in the latter study the investigators found no correlation 
between duration of ulcer and findings of osteomyelitis by his-
topathology; even ulcers that had been present for months to 
years were found to have no evidence of osteomyelitis in bone. 
However, pressure-induced reactive fibrosis, medullary edema, 
and reactive bone formation occurred in all cases, even those 
with intact cortical bone. Thus, histopathology was necessary 
to distinguish noninfectious fibrotic/inflammatory changes in 
bone from inflammation consistent with osteomyelitis. When 
osteomyelitis was present it was generally restricted to the 
superficial layers of cortical bone.
Other investigators evaluating patients with deep pressure 
ulcers due to spinal cord injury also found no correlation 
between histologic findings of osteomyelitis on bone biopsy 
and the presence of fever, leukocytosis, or increased erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate [6]. The authors postulated that the extent 
of soft tissue infection was more likely the cause of systemic 
symptoms.
In summary, available retrospective data indicate that osteo-
myelitis is not an inevitable—and may even be a rare—compli-
cation of a chronic sacral pressure ulcer.
Microbiology of Osteomyelitis in Sacral Pressure Ulcers
Multiple case series have described microbial flora iden-
tified from various culture and sampling methodologies. 
Anaerobic cultures were not always utilized, likely causing 
underrepresentation of anaerobic pathogens in published stud-
ies. Furthermore, antibiotic therapy administered prior to bone 
biopsy may have affected culture results, and it is difficult to 
discern this effect from published studies.
Bodavula et al conducted a retrospective cohort study of 270 
patients with stage IV pressure ulcers and a concurrent clini-
cal diagnosis of pelvic osteomyelitis [7]. One hundred thirteen 
(51%) patients had microbiologic cultures taken, of which 20% 
were bone biopsies, 23% deep tissue cultures, and the remain-
ing 57% drainage swab cultures. The most frequent organisms 
encountered included Staphylococcus (18%) and Streptococcus 
(8%) species. In 30% of patients, multiple organisms were iden-
tified. In some specimens, mixed flora was also described but 
not identified further.
In a retrospective analysis of 179 patients with surgically 
treated sacral pressure ulcers, Larson et al described the results 
of operative bone cultures in 67% of patients, and of these only 
52% grew pathogens [8]. They found no association between 
culture positivity from bone biopsy and 2-year ulcer recurrence. 
Of note, the patients who did not undergo a bone biopsy had a 
2.78-fold higher odds ratio of complications (including wound 
dehiscence, wound infection, or flap failure) at 1 year of fol-
low-up compared to patients with a negative bone culture.
In 4 other case series totaling 150 patients, the majority of 
cultures grew multiple organisms, with Staphylococcus aureus as 
the predominant pathogen, and Enterobacteriaceae commonly 
encountered, followed by Peptostreptococcus and Bacteroides 
species [5, 9–11]. Unusual organisms including Nocardia or 
Fusobacterium were also occasionally encountered [12, 13].
Diagnostic Testing
Larson et al compared the results of bone biopsy to imaging 
results for 44 patients with stage IV sacral pressure ulcers who 
underwent surgical debridement [14]. Using bone biopsy as 
the reference standard, they found a sensitivity and specificity 
of only 61% and 69%, respectively, for a combination of radio-
graphs and computed tomographic (CT) scans to identify his-
tologically confirmed osteomyelitis [14]. In another study, CT 
scans performed even worse, achieving a sensitivity of only 11% 
for detecting osteomyelitis compared to histopathology in 61 
patients with spinal cord injury and sacral pressure ulcers [15]. 
Additionally, due to the variable extent of bone involvement 
in chronic pressure ulcers, radionucleotide indium scan has 
been reported to have variable sensitivity and low specificities 
 
[14, 16], so these tests are not of apparent utility either.
The role of MRI in diagnosing sacral osteomyelitis is unset-
tled. One study reported better sensitivity (98%) and specificity 
(89%) of MRI for diagnosis of osteomyelitis when compared to 
clinical diagnostic criteria [17]. However, as mentioned above, 
clinical diagnostic criteria cannot distinguish histopathologi-
cal evidence of bone remodeling/fibrosis from osteomyelitis. 
Thus, when Brunel et al compared MRI to bone histology as 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/68/2/338/5050260 by guest on 03 June 2019
 340 • CID 2019:68 (15 January) • CLINICAL PRACTICE
the reference standard, the sensitivity of MRI was high (94%), 
but the specificity was very poor (22%) [10]. This poor spec-
ificity is consistent with the fact that histology often demon-
strates fibrotic inflammatory changes that are noninfectious, 
but likely appear consistent with typical infectious marrow 
edema on MRI.
In summary, the role of imaging to diagnose osteomyelitis 
related to sacral pressure ulcers is poorly defined and is limited 
by variable specificity. Some authors have suggested that MRI 
may have better utility in assessment for the depth of associ-
ated soft tissue changes and guidance of surgical management 
[17, 18]. Furthermore, diagnostic imaging can only be helpful 
if therapeutic intervention is planned based on the diagnostic 
results. If antibiotic therapy is not clinically effective (discussed 
further below), identifying the osteomyelitis to treat with anti-
biotics would not be a rational strategy, and MRI imaging would 
be irrational even if accurate.
Therapeutic Management
Data regarding therapeutic management for osteomyelitis in 
sacral pressure ulcers are limited to case series. Acknowledging 
the limitations of the data, multiple authors have indicated 
superior long-term cure rates with a combined medical and sur-
gical approach, in particular with wound coverage [9, 19, 20]. 
 
For example, investigators conducted a retrospective analy-
sis of 157 patients with sacral pressure ulcers [20]. They used 
deep bone shavings to ensure adequacy of debridement (ie, 
negative histopathology), enabling closure of the wound with 
muscle or myocutaneous flaps. Patients with acute, neutrophil-
ic-predominant osteomyelitis on histology were treated with a 
full 6-week antibiotic course. In contrast, patients with chronic 
inflammatory infiltrate into bone or histological findings nega-
tive for osteomyelitis were treated with 5–7 days of intravenous 
antibiotics. For patients treated with shorter antibiotic courses, 
there was no difference in duration of postoperative hospital-
ization, rate of ulcer recurrence, or rate of subsequent wound 
breakdown when comparing the patients with chronic osteo-
myelitis and the negative osteomyelitis group [20]. However, the 
acute osteomyelitis group that had received the 6-week antibi-
otic treatment had a longer hospitalization duration and higher 
complication rate (ie, wound breakdown and ulcer recurrence) 
[20]. Of note, as the authors did not match patients for disease 
severity or comorbidities, the higher complication rate may 
have been driven by patients with more severe illness being 
treated with the longer course of therapy.
Bodavula et al described a large cohort study of patients with 
sacral osteomyelitis, 105 (39%) of whom received antibiotic 
therapy alone, 55 (25%) of whom received both antibiotics and 
surgical debridement, and 7 (13%) of whom received a myocu-
taneous flap [7]. Patients treated with a combined medical and 
surgical approach were significantly less likely to be rehospital-
ized in the successive 12 months.
Similarly, Jugun et al reported on 70 episodes of infected 
sacral pressure ulcers that occurred in 31 patients [11]. All 
of the patients underwent surgical debridement and received 
antibiotic therapy, and 54 of the episodes were found to have 
active osteomyelitis based on bone biopsy. The only factor 
associated with clinical recurrence of the infection (biopsy 
proven by histopathology and culture) was age; by both 
bivariate and multivariate analyses, inflammatory mark-
ers, proportion of patients that received >6 or <6 weeks of 
antibiotics, proportion of patients receiving at least 2 weeks 
of intravenous antibiotics, and the presence or absence of 
osteomyelitis did not predict recurrence. Furthermore, eval-
uating the duration of antibiotic therapy as a continuous 
variable failed to define any correlation with antibiotic dura-
tion and risk of recurrence, and failed to identify any specific 
threshold of minimum days of antibiotics that diminished 
recurrence.
Firriolo et al described 24 patients with 30 sacral pressure 
ulcers (5 stage III, 25 stage IV), all of whom underwent flap 
coverage [21]. Fifteen of the ulcers had bone biopsy–proven 
osteomyelitis, 6 had radiographic features suggesting osteo-
myelitis on MRI, and 9 did not have evidence of osteomyeli-
tis. Half of the patients experienced recurrence of the ulcer 
after flap coverage. Ulcer recurrence was associated with 
failure to comply with nonoperative management (eg, pres-
sure off-loading), but was not associated with the presence or 
absence of osteomyelitis. Similarly, the presence of osteomy-
elitis was not associated with ulcer recurrence in 48 patients 
with spinal cord injury and sacral pressure ulcers described 
by Goodman et al [22].
Finally, Sugarman et al found no relationship between antibi-
otic therapy and permanent healing of stage IV sacral pressure 
ulcers [5]. Four of 6 patients without osteomyelitis treated with 
only local wound care and no antibiotics had complete healing, 
and the remaining 2 had partial healing. Five of the 8 patients 
with osteomyelitis experienced complete healing of the wound 
with surgery and antibiotics, but 3 of the 5 required “amputa-
tion” to affect healing.
In summary, numerous case series conducted by a variety of 
investigators across a variety of patient populations have failed 
to identify a relationship between healing of stage IV sacral 
pressure ulcers and whether antibiotics were administered or 
not, whether antibiotics were administered intravenously or 
orally, or the duration of antibiotic administration.
Thus, data are not available demonstrating that prolonged 
courses (ie, >6 weeks) of antibiotics are more effective to treat 
sacral osteomyelitis. Nor do data to support a duration of anti-
biotic therapy beyond 4–6 weeks for chronic osteomyelitis in 
general [23, 24]. Furthermore, for osteomyelitis limited to cor-
tical bone, some authors have advocated for a 2-week course of 
antibiotic therapy [25, 26]. Longer antibiotic courses may lead 
to more complications without evidence of benefit.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/68/2/338/5050260 by guest on 03 June 2019
 CLINICAL PRACTICE • CID 2019:68 (15 January) • 341
DISCUSSION
Our review of available literature suggests that osteomyelitis 
may be relatively uncommon in patients with stage IV sacral 
pressure ulcers, even if the ulcers are chronic. Unfortunately, 
no diagnostic study (whether inflammatory marker or radio-
graphic study) other than bone biopsy appears to be accurate 
to rule in osteomyelitis. Furthermore, the available data do not 
support the concept that osteomyelitis affects the risk of recur-
rence after wound coverage. Nor are data available supporting 
the practice of administrating antibiotics to treat osteomyelitis 
for >6 weeks, or to support intravenous rather than oral antibi-
otic administration [24, 27].
At first blush, the absence of reliable diagnostic testing, 
absence of compelling evidence for nonsurgical therapeutic 
options, and relatively high recurrence rates even with a mul-
timodal medical–surgical approach, combined with a paucity 
of data and a total absence of controlled investigations, can 
leave the clinician in a frustrating quandary. However, patients 
affected by this syndrome have complex psychosocial issues 
aside from medical comorbidities. The focus diagnostically 
and therapeutically may be better targeted toward the under-
lying factors that created the conditions of the stage IV sacral 
pressure ulcer in the first place. Achieving complete healing is 
unlikely absent mitigation of these underlying drivers no matter 
what other medical or surgical interventions are applied.
From this perspective, whether or not to administer antibi-
otics, and for how long and by what route, are actually periph-
eral considerations, the answers of which do not appear to drive 
outcome. They are tempting to focus on because physicians 
have historically viewed antibiotic administration as a defini-
tive, curative intervention. But for this disease they appear to 
be neither, and focusing on these considerations distracts from 
far more meaningful psychosocial and clinical interventions. 
When it comes to antibiotics for treating sacral osteomyelitis, 
less may be more.
In summary, given the cumulative nature of the suboptimal 
data, we draw several conclusions:
1. Clinicians should not assume osteomyelitis is present in 
a chronic sacral pressure ulcer; biopsy after debridement 
appears to be necessary to establish the diagnosis.
2. When osteomyelitis is present, we do not find data support-
ing antibiotic therapy in the absence of a plan to cover the 
wound. Lacking wound coverage, antibiotic therapy may 
offer only a transient response.
3. Short-term (eg, ≤1 week) antibiotics may be administered to 
treat an acute soft tissue infection extending from the ulcer 
(eg, in the presence of rubor, tumor, calor, and dolor in soft 
tissues, with purulent drainage). Longer courses of therapy 
should be avoided for this purpose as there is no evidence of 
benefit, and harm will accrue due to side effects, superinfec-
tions, and selection for resistant pathogens.
4. If assessment of the patient’s medical and psychosocial fac-
tors results in a belief that debridement and wound coverage 
can be feasibly completed, the plan should include to obtain a 
bone biopsy (not a surface swab) after debriding away surface 
contaminated material to guide antibiotic therapy. Empiric 
antibiotics should be held, if possible (eg, the patient does 
not have sepsis or another indication for urgent empiric ther-
apy), until the bone biopsy is completed. Once the biopsy is 
completed, a rational empiric regimen may be started that 
covers gram-positive and gram-negative aerobic and anaer-
obic pathogens. Initial empiric therapy should be modified 
based on findings from the culture of biopsied bone.
5. The duration of antibiotic therapy may be chosen to be 2 
weeks for osteomyelitis found to be restricted to superficial 
bony cortex (the majority of cases based on literature), or 4–6 
weeks if medullary bone is affected—it is not rational or evi-
dence-based to extend antibiotic therapy beyond 6 weeks.
6. Antibiotic therapy may be administered orally or 
intravenously.
7. Randomized controlled trials are critically needed in this 
space to improve evidence-based decision making, including 
around the impact of biopsy on diagnosis and treatment deci-
sions, and the breadth and duration of antimicrobial therapy.
8. While the above recommendations are supported by the lim-
ited available literature, clinically we must be prepared to adjust 
our approach as new data become available in the future.
Applying these principles to the initial case, our patient had 
minimal signs of soft tissue disease and no systemic symp-
toms. After discussion with family members, the decision was 
to defer any invasive surgical procedure. Therefore, the patient 
continued local wound care measures as well as regular pressure 
offloading, and no antibiotics were administered. At 1 year of 
follow-up, he continued to have minimal intermittent drainage, 
but otherwise, he remained afebrile without significant decline 
in clinical status.
Note
Potential conflicts of interest. In the last 12 months, B. S. has received 
consulting fees from Bayer, Forge, Shionogi, Alexion, Synthetic Biologics, 
Paratek, and Ovagene, and owned equity in Motif, BioAIM, Synthetic 
Biologics, Mycomed, and ExBaq. All other authors report no potential 
conflicts. All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of 
Potential Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to 
the content of the manuscript have been disclosed.
References
1. Lew DP, Waldvogel FA. Osteomyelitis. Lancet 2004; 364:369–79.
2. Rennert R, Golinko M, Yan A, Flattau A, Tomic-Canic M, Brem H. Developing 
and evaluating outcomes of an evidence-based protocol for the treatment of 
osteomyelitis in stage IV pressure ulcers: a literature and wound electronic medi-
cal record database review. Ostomy Wound Manage 2009; 55:42–53.
3. Türk EE, Tsokos M, Delling G. Autopsy-based assessment of extent and type of 
osteomyelitis in advanced-grade sacral decubitus ulcers: a histopathologic study. 
Arch Pathol Lab Med 2003; 127:1599–602.
4. Darouiche RO, Landon GC, Klima M, Musher DM, Markowski J. Osteomyelitis 
associated with pressure sores. Arch Intern Med 1994; 154:753–8.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/68/2/338/5050260 by guest on 03 June 2019
 342 • CID 2019:68 (15 January) • CLINICAL PRACTICE
5. Sugarman B, Hawes S, Musher DM, Klima M, Young EJ, Pircher F. Osteomyelitis 
beneath pressure sores. Arch Intern Med 1983; 143:683–8.
6. Thornhill-Joynes M, Gonzales F, Stewart CA, et al. Osteomyelitis associated with 
pressure ulcers. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1986; 67:314–8.
7. Bodavula P, Liang SY, Wu J, VanTassell P, Marschall J. Pressure ulcer-related pelvic 
osteomyelitis: a neglected disease? Open Forum Infect Dis 2015; 2:ofv112.
8. Larson DL, Hudak KA, Waring WP, Orr MR, Simonelic K. Protocol manage-
ment of late-stage pressure ulcers: a 5-year retrospective study of 101 consecutive 
patients with 179 ulcers. Plast Reconstr Surg 2012; 129:897–904.
9. Dudareva M, Ferguson J, Riley N, Stubbs D, Atkins B, McNally M. Osteomyelitis 
of the pelvic bones: a multidisciplinary approach to treatment. J Bone Jt Infect 
2017; 2:184–93.
10. Brunel AS, Lamy B, Cyteval C, et al. Diagnosing pelvic osteomyelitis beneath 
pressure ulcers in spinal cord injured patients: a prospective study. Clin Microbiol 
Infect 2016; 22:267.e1–8.
11. Jugun K, Richard JC, Lipsky BA, et al. Factors associated with treatment failure of 
infected pressure sores. Ann Surg 2016; 264:399–403.
12. Guiral J, Refolio C, Carrero P, Carbajosa S. Sacral osteomyelitis due to Nocardia 
asteroides. A case report. Acta Orthop Scand 1991; 62:389–90.
13. Luey C, Tooley D, Briggs S. Emphysematous osteomyelitis: a case report and 
review of the literature. Int J Infect Dis 2012; 16:e216–20.
14. Larson DL, Gilstrap J, Simonelic K, Carrera GF. Is there a simple, definitive, and 
cost-effective way to diagnose osteomyelitis in the pressure ulcer patient? Plast 
Reconstr Surg 2011; 127:670–6.
15. Lewis VL Jr, Bailey MH, Pulawski G, Kind G, Bashioum RW
, Hendrix RW
. The diagno-
sis of osteomyelitis in patients with pressure sores. Plast Reconstr Surg 1988; 81:229–32.
16. Merine D, Fishman EK, Magid D. CT detection of sacral osteomyelitis associated 
with pelvic abscesses. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1988; 12:118–21.
17. Huang AB, Schweitzer ME, Hume E, Batte WG. Osteomyelitis of the pelvis/hips in 
paralyzed patients: accuracy and clinical utility of MRI. J Comput Assist Tomogr 
1998; 22:437–43.
18. Hencey JY, Vermess M, van Geertruyden HH, Binard JE, Manchepalli S. Magnetic 
resonance imaging examinations of gluteal decubitus ulcers in spinal cord injury 
patients. J Spinal Cord Med 1996; 19:5–8.
19. Cunha BA. Osteomyelitis in elderly patients. Clin Infect Dis 2002; 35:287–93.
20. Marriott R, Rubayi S. Successful truncated osteomyelitis treatment for chronic 
osteomyelitis secondary to pressure ulcers in spinal cord injury patients. Ann 
Plast Surg 2008; 61:425–9.
21. Firriolo JM, Ganske IM, Pike CM, et al. Long-term outcomes after flap recon-
struction in pediatric pressure ulcers. Ann Plast Surg 2018; 80:159–63.
22. Goodman CM, Cohen V, Armenta A, Thornby J, Netscher DT. Evaluation of 
results and treatment variables for pressure ulcers in 48 veteran spinal cord-in-
jured patients. Ann Plast Surg 1999; 42:665–72.
23. Bernard L, Dinh A, Ghout I, et al; Duration of Treatment for Spondylodiscitis 
(DTS) Study Group. Antibiotic treatment for 6 weeks versus 12 weeks in patients 
with pyogenic vertebral osteomyelitis: an open-label, non-inferiority, randomised, 
controlled trial. Lancet 2015; 385:875–82.
24. Spellberg B, Lipsky BA. Systemic antibiotic therapy for chronic osteomyelitis in 
adults. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 54:393–407.
25. Parsons B, Strauss E. Surgical management of chronic osteomyelitis. Am J Surg 
2004; 188:57–66.
26. Mader JT, Cripps MW, Calhoun JH. Adult posttraumatic osteomyelitis of the 
tibia. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1999:14–21.
27. Scarborough M, Li HK, Rombach I, et al. Oral versus intravenous antibiotics for 
the treatment of bone and joint infection (OVIVA): a multicentre randomised 
controlled trial. Orthopaedic Proceedings 2018; ePub.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/68/2/338/5050260 by guest on 03 June 2019
