 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Timing of Initiation of Maintenance Dialysis
A Qualitative Analysis of the Electronic Medical Records
of a National Cohort of Patients From the Department
of Veterans Affairs
Susan P. Y. Wong, MD; Elizabeth K. Vig, MD, MPH; Janelle S. Taylor, PhD; Nilka R. Burrows, MPH;
Chuan-Fen Liu, PhD; Desmond E. Williams, MD, PhD; Paul L. Hebert, PhD; Ann M. O’
Hare, MD, MA
IMPORTANCE There is often considerable uncertainty about the optimal time to initiate
maintenance dialysis in individual patients and little medical evidence to guide this decision.
OBJECTIVE To gain a better understanding of the factors influencing the timing of initiation of
dialysis in clinical practice.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS A qualitative analysis was conducted using the
electronic medical records from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) of a national random
sample of 1691 patients for whom the decision to initiate maintenance dialysis occurred in the
VA between January 1, 2000, and December 31, 2009. Data analysis took place from June 1
to November 30, 2014.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES Central themes related to the timing of initiation of dialysis
as documented in patients’electronic medical records.
RESULTS Of the 1691 patients, 1264 (74.7%) initiated dialysis as inpatients and 1228 (72.6%)
initiated dialysis with a hemodialysis catheter. Cohort members met with a nephrologist
during an outpatient clinic visit a median of 3 times (interquartile range, 0-6) in the year prior
to initiation of dialysis. The mean (SD) estimated glomerular filtration rate at the time of
initiation for cohort members was 10.4 (5.7) mL/min/1.73 m2. The timing of initiation of
dialysis reflected the complex interplay of at least 3 interrelated and dynamic processes.
The first was physician practices, which ranged from practices intended to prepare patients
for dialysis to those intended to forestall the need for dialysis by managing the signs and
symptoms of uremia with medical interventions. The second process was sources of
momentum. Initiation of dialysis was often precipitated by clinical events involving acute
illness or medical procedures. In these settings, the imperative to treat often seemed to
override patient choice. The third process was patient-physician dynamics. Interactions
between patients and physicians were sometimes adversarial, and physician
recommendations to initiate dialysis sometimes seemed to conflict with patient priorities.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE The initiation of maintenance dialysis reflects the care
practices of individual physicians, sources of momentum for initiation of dialysis, interactions
between patients and physicians, and the complex interplay of these dynamic processes over
time. Our findings suggest opportunities to improve communication between patients and
physicians and to better align these processes with patients’values, goals, and preferences.
JAMA Intern Med. 2016;176(2):228-235. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2015.7412
Published online January 25, 2016.
Invited Commentary page 236
Author Audio Interview at
jamainternalmedicine.com
Author Affiliations: Author
affiliations are listed at the end of this
article.
Corresponding Author: Susan P. Y.
Wong, MD, Department of Medicine,
University of Washington, 1959 NE
Pacific St, PO Box 356521, Seattle,
WA 98195 (spywong@uw.edu).
Research
Original Investigation
228
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
I
n recent decades, maintenance dialysis has been initiated
progressively earlier in the course of chronic kidney dis-
ease (CKD).1-5 The reasons for this trend are not well un-
derstood. Although there are recognized indications for dialy-
sis, such as life-threatening electrolyte abnormalities and signs
and symptoms of uremia, in practice, there is often consider-
able uncertainty about the optimal time to initiate dialysis in
individual patients and little evidence to guide this decision.6
Observational studies examining the association between
thetimingofinitiationofdialysisandsubsequentoutcomeshave
contradictoryfindings.Moststudieshavereportedhighermor-
tality when dialysis is started earlier in the course of CKD or at
ahigherestimatedglomerularfiltrationrate.7-14Thisfindingmay
be partially explained by the older age14 and higher prevalence
ofcomplexcomorbidconditionsandsignsofmalnutrition8,9,11,14
among patients who initiate dialysis at a higher estimated glo-
merular filtration rate, but higher mortality also has been vari-
ously attributed to myocardial stunning, accelerated loss of na-
tivekidneyfunction,andasystemicinflammatorystateassoci-
ated with dialysis.11 Other studies, however, have reported no
difference15orimprovedsurvival16-18whendialysisisstartedear-
lier in the course of CKD. The putative benefits of dialysis, such
asbettercontrolofvolumestatus,increasedclearanceofuremic
toxins,andavoidanceofsevereuremiccomplications,alsohave
beencitedasarationaleforearlyinitiation.19,20TheInitiatingDi-
alysis Early and Late (IDEAL) trial, in which patients were ran-
domizedtostartdialysisateitherahigher(10-15mL/min/1.73m2)
orlower(5-7mL/min/1.73m2)targeted,estimatedglomerularfil-
trationrate,foundnodifferenceinsurvivalorotherclinicalout-
comes between the 2 study arms,21 but patients randomized to
start early spent more of their remaining lifetime receiving di-
alysis and incurred higher total health care costs.22
Prior work has focused primarily on associations between
estimated glomerular filtration rate at initiation of dialysis and
measured patient characteristics and outcomes.7-18,21,22 These
studiesdonotaddresswithsufficientgranularityhowdecisions
aboutwhentostartdialysisaremadeinclinicalpractice.Anear-
lierstudyusedthemedicalrecordsofanationalcohortofpatients
receivingcarewithintheDepartmentofVeteransAffairs(VA)to
examine patients’clinical presentation around the time main-
tenancedialysiswasinitiated.5 Amongmembersofthiscohort,
a trend toward earlier initiation of dialysis from 2000 to 2009
wasnotexplainedbychangesinclinicalindications,suchassigns
and symptoms consistent with advanced CKD or presentation
with acute illness around the time of initiation of dialysis dur-
ing the same 10-year period. To better understand the driving
forces behind decisions about timing of dialysis, we performed
an in-depth qualitative analysis of the medical records of the
members of this same cohort.
Methods
Study Design
We conducted a post hoc qualitative analysis of the elec-
tronic medical records of a national random sample of 1691 pa-
tients receiving care within the VA who initiated mainte-
nance dialysis from January 1, 2000, to December 31, 2009.
We identified members of the cohort using a combination of
administrative data and information from the medical record
collected within the year prior to initiation of dialysis, as de-
scribed previously.5 Patients were included in this cohort only
if the decision to initiate dialysis occurred within the VA and
if there was sufficient documentation in their medical record
to understand the clinical context in which dialysis was initi-
ated. The VA Puget Sound Healthcare System Institutional Re-
view Board approved this study and waived the requirement
to obtain informed consent from patients.
Data Collection
The VA maintains a comprehensive, nationwide, electronic
medical record system for all patients who receive care at any
of its facilities; the records include progress notes for all inpa-
tient and outpatient clinical encounters. One of us (A.M.O., a
nephrologist with >15 years of clinical experience) reviewed
the medical record of each patient around the time of initia-
tion of dialysis and abstracted passages from progress notes
containing information relevant to the decision to initiate di-
alysis, as previously described.5 To assess the completeness
of medical record abstraction for ascertaining information rel-
evant to decisions about dialysis, a second investigator
(S.P.Y.W., a senior nephrology fellow) independently ab-
stracted passages from the medical records of a randomly se-
lected sample of 50 patients. Side-by-side comparison indi-
cated that passages independently abstracted by both
investigators were largely similar (identical passages were re-
trieved for 42 of the 50 patients).
Qualitative Analysis
Using inductive content analysis (an unstructured method of
inquirythatfacilitatesdiscoveryofpreviouslyunidentifiedfac-
tors pertaining to a phenomenon),23 the 2 investigators then
independently reviewed abstracted passages from all pa-
tients, coding for factors that seemed relevant to decisions
about the timing of initiation of dialysis in individual pa-
tients. Together, the investigators reviewed all codes and their
corresponding passages for discrepancies in interpretation of
the passages, and assignment of codes was deliberated until
consensus was reached. The investigators then iteratively ex-
amined codes for patterns and trends and combined related
codes into larger thematic categories. A third investigator
(E.K.V., a geriatrician, palliative care physician, and ethicist)
independently reviewed thematic categories for consistency
and whether they were well grounded in their constituent
codes and passages.24 All 3 investigators then collectively re-
fined the final thematic schema. We used Atlas.ti qualitative
analysis software, version 7 (GmbH), to facilitate organiza-
tion of codes and passages. Data analysis took place from June
1 to November 30, 2014.
Results
Most of the 1691 patients initiated dialysis as inpatients (1264
[74.7%]) and with a hemodialysis catheter (1228 [72.6%])
(Table 1).5 In qualitative analysis, we identified 3 dominant,
Timing of Dialysis Initiation
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
February 2016
Volume 176, Number 2
229
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
overlapping themes relevant to understanding the timing of
initiation of dialysis: physician practices, sources of momen-
tum, and patient-physician dynamics. To illustrate each of
these themes, Tables 2, 3, and 4 provide, respectively, exem-
plary quotes abstracted from the medical records of indi-
vidual patients.
Physician Practices
Timing of initiation of dialysis reflected differing physician
practices, ranging from those directed at preparing patients for
dialysis to those focused on forestalling the need for dialysis
byusingmoreconservativemedicaltherapiestoreverseorhalt
the loss of renal function and manage the signs and symp-
toms of advanced CKD (Table 2).
Preparing for Dialysis
The decision to pursue dialysis usually involved a series of in-
terdependentstepstopreparepatientsfordialysis.Examplesin-
clude steps to help patients select a dialysis modality (hemodi-
alysis or peritoneal dialysis) and secure permanent dialysis ac-
cess (eg, arteriovenous fistula or graft or peritoneal catheter).
Aligning the timing of preparation with patients’trajec-
tories of illness was a common challenge (Table 2). Although
some patients were able to smoothly transition to dialysis af-
ter completing key preparatory steps (quote 1a), most were
faced with the decision to initiate dialysis earlier than antici-
pated (quote 1b). Where patients were in the course of prepa-
ration sometimes influenced the timing of initiation. In some
instances, initiation of dialysis was deferred until permanent
access was ready (quote 1c). In other patients, the presence of
functional access for dialysis seemed to have an almost dis-
inhibitory effect, tipping the balance in favor of initiation of
dialysis in situations in which there did not seem to be press-
ing clinical indications (quote 1d).
Forestalling Dialysis
Often,dialysiswasinitiatedafterphysicianshadattemptedase-
riesofmedicalinterventionsintendedtoreverseorhalttheloss
of kidney function and/or treat the signs and symptoms of ad-
vanced CKD. Dietary changes and titration of diuretics, ion-
bindingresins,andalkalitherapywerefrequentlyprescribedwith
theintenttomanagesignsandsymptomsuntildialysiscouldbe
arranged or to postpone the need for dialysis.
A plan for when dialysis would be initiated was often made
basedonhowpatientsrespondedtotheseinterventions(quote
1e) (Table 2). The time frame for evaluating the effect of medi-
cal interventions seemed to vary depending on clinical con-
text. In the outpatient setting, patients’response was usually
reassessed during clinic visits over the course of weeks to
months.Intheinpatientsetting,thetimeframewasoftencom-
pressed to hours or days before a determination was made re-
garding whether to start dialysis.
Physicians seemed to vary in their willingness to offer al-
ternatives to dialysis. Some physicians tried to accommodate
patients’preference to continue with medical therapies rather
than to start dialysis (quote 1f) (Table 2). One physician spoke
of trade-offs between using medical therapies vs starting di-
alysis (quote 1g). Other physicians seemed to view the signs
and symptoms of advanced CKD more as “indications” sig-
naling the “need” for dialysis rather than as treatment targets
in their own right (quote 1h).
Sources of Momentum
Although known triggers for initiation of dialysis, such as elec-
trolyte abnormalities and signs and symptoms consistent with
Table 1. Characteristics of 1691 Patients at Time of Initiation of Dialysisa
Characteristic
Valueb
Age, mean (SD), y
62.7 (11.3)
Sex
Male
1663 (98.3)
Female
28 (1.7)
Race
White
777 (45.9)
Black
740 (43.8)
Latino
128 (7.6)
Other
46 (2.7)
eGFR, mean (SD), mL/min/1.73 m2
10.4 (5.7)
Comorbidities
Diabetes mellitus types 1 and 2
1042 (61.6)
Hypertension
1494 (88.4)
Coronary artery disease
520 (30.8)
Congestive heart failure
528 (31.2)
Peripheral arterial disease
103 (6.1)
Stroke
81 (4.8)
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
265 (15.7)
Dialysis modality
Peritoneal dialysis
81 (4.8)
Hemodialysis
1610 (95.2)
Hemodialysis access
Arteriovenous fistula or graft
382 (22.6)
Catheter
1228 (72.6)
Outpatient nephrology visits in the prior year,
median (IQR), No.
3 (0-6)
Clinical Presentation
Clinical setting
Outpatient
427 (25.3)
Inpatient
1264 (74.7)
Elective admission
850 (50.3)
Signs and symptoms
Any
1611 (95.3)
Gastrointestinal
860 (50.9)
Cardiopulmonary
823 (48.7)
Fatigue or weakness
640 (37.8)
Electrolyte abnormalities
307 (18.2)
Neurologic
281 (16.6)
Other
357 (21.1)
Abbreviations: eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate;
IQR, interquartile range.
a Further description on the cohort and how variables were ascertained have
been previously reported.5
bData are presented as number (percentage) of patients unless otherwise
indicated.
Research Original Investigation
Timing of Dialysis Initiation
230
JAMA Internal Medicine
February 2016
Volume 176, Number 2
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Table 3. Theme 2: Sources of Momentuma
Subtheme
Exemplary Quotes
Clinical Service
and Setting
Time Before Dialysis
Initiation, d
Acute illness
2a. “Patient seen as an emergency at the request of [another physician]…She is
now end-stage with creatinine >11 mg/dL, potassium 6.1 mEq/L, and
hematocrit 24%. She has some nausea but no other uremic symptoms…She
prefers peritoneal dialysis but will need a course of hemodialysis first until she
has a functional peritoneal catheter placed.”
Renal clinic
5
2b. “…Near ESRD, refusing hemodialysis initiation in [the] past, presents with
epistaxis and bright red blood per rectum…Although no urgent indication for
initiation, it would be best to take this admission as an opportunity to establish
hemodialysis access…I will contact vascular surgery about placing [dialysis]
access, then will initiate hemodialysis.”
Renal inpatient
3
Medical optimization
2c. “Patient was admitted with chest pain, and cardiology plans a cardiac
catheterization…Will dialyze patient tomorrow and Wednesday; after 2 dialysis
treatments [he] will be in [an] optimal state for repeat cardiac catheterization.”
Renal inpatient
1
2d. “‘
I really feel pretty good, do I have to start dialysis?’ Denied nausea,
vomiting, anorexia, insomnia, dyspnea, orthopnea, chest pain, headache,
numbness/tingling, mental status changes…advised dialysis is needed at this
time and surgery for carotid stenosis will be considered after he is adequately
dialyzed.”
Renal clinic
1
2e. “Two weeks ago, he had a peritoneal dialysis [catheter] placed in his lower
left abdomen. The following day, patient developed red, hot, swollen bilateral
knees consistent with previous gout flares…Patient also presents for treatment
today to receive dialysis. Since [catheter] placement, he reports additional
symptoms of diarrhea 4-5 times per day, anorexia, a bitter taste in his mouth,
muscle weakness with minimal activity, pedal edema, and vomiting with all oral
intake…Hemodialysis in the morning.”
Medicine inpatient
0
Abbreviation: ESRD, end-stage renal disease.
SI conversion factors: To convert creatinine to micromoles per liter, multiply by 88.4; to convert potassium to millimoles per liter, multiply by 1.0; and to convert
hematocrit to proportion of 1.0, multiply by 0.01.
a Triggers that appeared to hasten initiation of dialysis.
Table 2. Theme 1: Physician Practicesa
Subtheme
Exemplary Quotes
Clinical Service
and Setting
Time Before Dialysis
Initiation, d
Preparing for dialysis
1a. “Patient appears uremic with nausea and vomiting. He has a good fistula and
ready to be used. Plan is to initiate dialysis today. Risks (bleeding, hypotension,
stroke, myocardial infarction, seizure, air emboli, death) and benefits of dialysis
were explained to [patient] and his wife, and both agreed to start dialysis.”
Renal inpatient
2
1b. “[Dialysis] access in place; however, not ready for use…we need another 6-8
weeks for access to be ready for use. Patient experiencing uremic symptoms and
states she cannot hold on any longer…Plan to arrange [hemodialysis catheter]
placement and initiate dialysis this week.”
Renal clinic
2
1c. “Evidence of mild uremic symptoms. Electrolytes stable. Will await until
placement of [dialysis] fistula to start hemodialysis unless worsening of uremic
symptoms or electrolytes.”
Renal inpatient
25
1d. “No overt signs and symptoms of uremia; however, would benefit from
initiation of renal replacement therapy chronically given mature access and
current GFR and diminished appetite.”
Renal clinic
8
Forestalling dialysis
1e. “If nausea does not improve over the next 2 days (would try a histamine
receptor-2 blocker), hemodialysis treatment would be the next logical step.”
Renal inpatient
2
1f. “He had about 1680 cc urine output today with current diuretic
regimen…Patient does not want to go on hemodialysis if [he] does not absolutely
have to. I still think we can still delay any hemodialysis with close follow-up for a
few more weeks, months, even though volume status could be easily controlled
via hemodialysis.”
Renal inpatient
10
1g. “Patient has lost approximately 15 pounds, 206 to 191, since addition of
metolazone. During same period he fainted twice…It is difficult [to] balance the
treatment of all pressing issues in this case. If the patient is too wet, some of the
extracellular volume accumulates in the chest, and the patient has dyspnea. If he
is too dry, as he is at present, lungs and legs are in good shape, but orthostatic
hypotension and probably renal perfusion are unacceptable…we agreed to
proceed to dialysis…I think that the need for extracellular fluid volume control
warrants an early start.”
Renal clinic
16
1h. “Patient's blood chemistries are consistent with ESRD, and his need to start
dialysis is clear. Although he is not overtly uremic, any further delay on his part
to initiate dialysis will most surely compromise his health at a minimum and his
life expectancy at a maximum. I have arranged for him to have a [dialysis]
catheter placed on July 13 with dialysis initiation to follow.”
Renal clinic
3
Abbreviations: ESRD, end-stage renal disease; GFR, glomerular filtration rate.
a Timing of dialysis is tied to physicians’approaches to preparing patients for and forestalling the need for dialysis.
Timing of Dialysis Initiation
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
February 2016
Volume 176, Number 2
231
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
uremia, were documented in the medical records of most co-
hort members around the time dialysis was started,5 we also
identified other sources of momentum for initiation of dialy-
sis (Table 3).
Acute Illness
Acute illness was the most prominent source of momentum
for initiation of dialysis. For patients with life-threatening ill-
ness, physicians often described an urgent “need” for dialy-
sis, and the imperative to treat appeared to supplant patients’
choice in the matter (quote 2a) (Table 3).
Even in the absence of urgent clinical indications, simply
being in the hospital seemed to increase the likelihood of ini-
tiation of dialysis. Patients with advanced CKD who were ad-
mitted to the hospital were often labeled by inpatient health
care teams as “predialysis” or “approaching dialysis,” and the
question of when to initiate dialysis was routinely consid-
ered as part of the assessment and care plan. Hospitalization
Table 4. Theme 3: Push-Pull Dynamicsa
Subtheme
Exemplary Quotes
Clinical Service
and Setting
Time Before Dialysis
Initiation, d
Resistance
3a. “He does not want a [dialysis catheter] insertion/trial of hemodialysis unless it is
deemed an absolute emergency (which it is not currently). I have discussed the many
complications as his uremia progresses, including pericarditis, encephalopathy, platelet
dysfunction, hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, hypocalcemia–he understands the risk
and still wants to hold off on hemodialysis initiation at this time.”
Renal inpatient
83
3b. “In the past, patient told me that he is satisfied with the life he had and prefers a
conservative treatment at this point. However, he has second thoughts now. His family,
especially his grandson, would prefer him to start on hemodialysis.”
Renal clinic
1
3c. “Patient is uremic and should be admitted for [dialysis catheter] placement and
hemodialysis initiation…Patient refusing admit for now because he has issues to resolve
at home. States he will return November 3 for elective admit.”
Renal clinic
5
3d. “…Discussed dialysis initiation. Patient very hesitant due to travel arrangements
and family life. Patient’s wife with Alzheimer [disease] and patient is primary caretaker.
When patient is on dialysis, there will be no one with his wife…We would like to start
dialysis next week.”
Renal clinic
8
3e. “I have explained the risks, including death, of waiting until Tuesday to come here
for dialysis considering his recent history of seizures. [Patient] verbalized the
understanding; however, he refused to come here before Tuesday and says that ‘
if you
push further, I even won’t make it on Tuesday.’”
Renal clinic
5
3f. “Feeling much better, no longer with nausea or fatigue…requesting to hold on
starting dialysis for another 30 days.”
Renal clinic
49
“Presented to the emergency room with complaints of nausea for several days and
palpitations…He will think about the option of dialysis.”
Emergency medicine
7
“Patient called [his nephrologist] and stated that he was ready to start dialysis.”
Renal clinic
2
3g. In the past, the patient and his wife were against starting dialysis. Now, however, he
is feeling poorly and he has change[d] his mind. [He] is willing to try dialysis.”
Renal clinic
0
3h. “Initially patient refused hemodialysis, saying he wanted to die with dignity and did
not want to feel like a machine. After further discussion, he consented to dialysis
treatment…Patient was told that if, after a period of time, he was dissatisfied with his
quality of life, dialysis could be terminated at any time.”
Renal inpatient
0
3i. “Patient stated that he does not want dialysis at this point, and that he has to think
about it further. He wants to discuss it with his son but refused to let us call his son. I
explained to him that although death is not imminent today, it could become imminent
within the next week if he does not start dialysis…The patient stated ‘
Then I will just
die.’ I asked him if he would want us to dialyze him if it were a life and death situation,
and he said ‘
Just let me die then.’”
Renal inpatient
1
Paternalism
3j. “I am not convinced that when the time for a life and death decision needs to be
made whether to do or not do dialysis, [the patient] or his family will be steadfast in
deferring dialysis.”
Renal inpatient
6
3k. “He was offered to start renal replacement therapy [5 and 4 months ago] to which
he declined. Patient is now not able to grasp the concept that he needs to start dialysis
or else come to terms with his demise…We spoke to the patient again and told him it is
time to start. He doesn’t seem to be able to grasp the reality of his situation.”
Renal inpatient
1
3l. “[Patient] stated that ‘
he did not care when he started.’ Told him that [dialysis]
would drastically change his life, and he stated that he does not do anything so it did
not matter.”
Renal clinic
29
3m. “‘
I’m an 80-year-old man and I am not sure I want to do that 3 times a week for the
rest of my life. I feel fine now.’ …Has no urgent/emergent indications to start
hemodialysis. We feel that he is competent to make the decision not to start dialysis
today.”
Renal inpatient
14
3n. “[Patient's] wife is reporting worsening of his behavior at home, so in view of these
symptoms we have to assume that uremic encephalopathy may be contributing to some
of these symptoms. Today, patient is being initiated on hemodialysis.”
Renal clinic
0
3o. “I reviewed the risk of bleeding, infection, small chance of death on dialysis with
patient. Alternative will be no dialysis, which will risk the patient’s life with
development of frank pulmonary edema, respiratory failure, and need for ventilator
support. Patient understood the above and consented to [dialysis catheter] placement
and dialysis procedure.”
Renal inpatient
0
a An oppositional relationship between patients and physicians leading up to dialysis initiation.
Research Original Investigation
Timing of Dialysis Initiation
232
JAMA Internal Medicine
February 2016
Volume 176, Number 2
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
for an illness unrelated to kidney disease was sometimes ex-
plicitly viewed by physicians as an “opportunity” to coordi-
nate the initiation of dialysis for patients who experienced ob-
stacles to accessing routine medical care. For instance, for one
patient who was hospitalized for treatment of psychiatric ill-
ness and who had an unstable housing situation, physicians
recommended that dialysis access be placed during the hos-
pitalization because “placement will be easier from an inpa-
tient status.
” This patient ultimately started dialysis during the
same hospitalization. We also found examples in which phy-
sicians seemed to seize the “opportunity” to initiate dialysis
during a hospital admission in patients who had been reluc-
tant to start dialysis (quote 2b) (Table 3).
Medical Optimization
Another source of momentum was physicians’perceived need
to optimize patients’clinical status for an upcoming high-
risk procedure, such as surgery or angiography, with the as-
sumption that outcomes would be more favorable if dialysis
were started in advance of the procedure (quote 2c) (Table 3).
In some patients, dialysis was “required” by physicians be-
fore the relevant procedure would be performed (quote 2d).
Certain preparatory interventions sometimes had the un-
intended effect of precipitating initiation of dialysis. For ex-
ample, several patients experienced worsening renal func-
tion or symptoms after surgery to place a dialysis access,
prompting initiation of dialysis (quote 2e) (Table 3).
Patient-Physician Dynamics
Timing of the initiation of dialysis also seemed to be shaped
by the complex interactions between patients and physi-
cians. There often appeared to be a push-pull relationship be-
tween patients and physicians, in which patients were de-
scribed in progress notes as being “resistant” or “reluctant” to
prepare for or start dialysis (Table 4). Physicians seemed most
concerned about safety and survival, seeing any delay in ini-
tiation of dialysis as potentially hazardous, while patients
seemed to have a range of priorities and concerns.
Resistance
Although some patients were described as “ambivalent” to-
ward or “accepting” of dialysis when physicians indicated it
wastimetostart,manymorepatientsvieweddialysisasatreat-
ment of “last resort” and asked to postpone dialysis when phy-
sicians recommended initiation (quote 3a) (Table 4). Family
members sometimes seemed more eager for patients to start
dialysis than the patients themselves (quote 3b).
Physicians documented a range of pragmatic concerns
cited by patients as reasons for postponing initiation of dialy-
sis, which included competing social or family obligations, fi-
nancial problems, or transportation difficulties (quote 3c)
(Table 4). Although some physicians made note of significant
barriers to dialysis for individual patients, these concerns did
not always seem to affect their recommendation (quote 3d).
At times, physicians pressed patients to start dialysis despite
patients’clear reluctance (quote 3e).
For many patients, timing of initiation of dialysis was tied
to a broader decision about whether to initiate dialysis at all.
It was not uncommon for patients to have “refused” or “de-
clined” offers to initiate dialysis on multiple occasions before
eventually starting treatment. Patients’willingness to start di-
alysis seemed to be shaped by their changing experience of ill-
ness over time (quote 3f) (Table 4). Some patients seemed to
needtobecomeverysickbeforeagreeingtostartdialysis(quote
3g). Physicians described using various arguments to “per-
suade” or “convince” patients to start dialysis (quote 3h). One
patientrefusedtreatmentaltogetherwhenhisphysicianwould
not give him the time to consider his choices (quote 3i).
Paternalism
Most physicians seemed to view dialysis as a beneficial treat-
ment and were skeptical when patients said they did not want
to start dialysis (quote 3j) (Table 4). Some physicians per-
ceived their patients to be “in denial” about or have “poor in-
sight” into the severity of their kidney failure and the “inevi-
table need” for dialysis (quote 3k). Missing appointments with
nephrologists and vascular surgeons for placement of dialy-
sis access was often cast by physicians as “noncompliant” be-
haviororameansof“avoiding”dialysis.Otherpatientsseemed
to defer decisions about initiation of dialysis to their physi-
cians (quote 3l). The question of whether patients were “com-
petent” to make decisions about dialysis seemed to arise most
often in situations in which patients rejected recommenda-
tions to start dialysis (quote 3m). In situations in which pa-
tients presented with cognitive impairment, it was more com-
montofinddocumentationofconcernsaboutwhetherpatients
had uremic encephalopathy as a compelling indication for di-
alysis than it was to find documented concerns about their ca-
pacity to participate in decisions about dialysis (quote 3n).
Patients’treatmentgoalsandvalueswererarelydocumented
in the medical record. When they were documented, many pa-
tientsemphasizedqualityoflifeandautonomy.Incontrastwith
patients,physicianstendedtohaveasafety-consciousapproach
toward initiation of dialysis and focused on the perceived haz-
ardsofdelayingdialysis.Althoughpatientsweretypicallyasked
toprovideinformedconsentbeforedialysiswasinitiated,thede-
cision was frequently cast by physicians as one of “dialysis vs
death” or grave disability (Table 4) (quote 3o). One physician
documented that his patient felt that “he ‘
has no choice’if his
other alternative is ‘
dying.
’
”
Discussion
The medical record serves as important documentation of
health care interactions, accountability, and communica-
tion; it provides a unique vantage point from which to exam-
ine how treatment decisions are made about the timing of ini-
tiation of dialysis. Our analysis suggests that the initiation of
maintenance dialysis reflects the complex interplay of at least
3 interrelated and dynamic processes: the care practices of in-
dividual physicians, sources of momentum for dialysis initia-
tion, and interactions between patients and physicians.
Dialysis is associated with distinct benefits and harms for
individual patients; clinical practice guidelines recommend
that decisions about whether and when to initiate dialysis be
Timing of Dialysis Initiation
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
February 2016
Volume 176, Number 2
233
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
shared between patients and physicians.6,25,26 In a shared de-
cision-making model, treatment decisions integrate pa-
tients’values, goals, and preferences with physicians’exper-
tise on prognosis and the risks and benefits of available
treatments. Our findings spotlight the substantial challenges
to achieving this ideal in real-world clinical settings.
These findings are in accord with studies suggesting that
decisions about dialysis seem to be driven much more by phy-
sician-level factors, such as regional practice style, than by in-
dividualpatientcharacteristics.27,28Qualitativeinterviewswith
patientsandethnographicworkconductedinrenalclinicshave
also indicated that physicians tend to frame dialysis as an in-
evitable treatment rather than as an explicit treatment choice
with associated benefits and harms.29-32 Documentation in the
medical record tended not to focus on patient concerns and
priorities. Instead, physicians emphasized achieving biomedi-
cal targets (ie, level of kidney function, signs and symptoms
ofuremia),coordinatingprocedures,keepingpatientssafe,and
prolonging life. In situations in which patients did not start di-
alysis when recommended or started only when they be-
came very sick, physicians tended to view this course of ac-
tion as maladaptive behavior rather than as an implicit
treatment choice. Taken together, our findings call for stron-
ger efforts to improve patient-physician communication with
aviewtoclarifyingpatients’healthcarevalues,goals,andpref-
erences and better aligning treatment recommendations with
patients’priorities. Our findings also suggest that there is work
to be done to better understand how to best support patients’
readiness to face serious illness and engage in treatment de-
cisions about initiation of dialysis.
We used patients’medical records to analyze decisions
about dialysis. Prior qualitative studies examining decisions
about dialysis have been based on information gathered from
one-time interviews with patients and physicians33-35 or eth-
nographic work conducted in renal clinics.29,30 Interviews do
not provide direct information on how these decisions occur
in a clinical context or on patient-physician interactions. Di-
rect observation may alter the behaviors of patients and
physicians36anddoesnotalwayscapturedecisionsabouttreat-
ment at the time they occur. Nevertheless, our study has limi-
tations. First, owing to the complexity of the themes identi-
fied, our findings do not lend themselves to dichotomous
categorization that would be needed to quantify the fre-
quency of each theme among cohort members. Documenta-
tion was also not uniform across all patients and physicians;
therefore, we could not be certain that a particular theme was
not present in individual cases. Second, we selectively pre-
sented only dominant themes; our results are not exhaustive
of all themes related to the timing of initiation of dialysis.
Themes also reflect interactions with the health care system
and what physicians chose to document in the medical rec-
ord and thus provide only indirect and limited insight on the
perspectivesandexperienceofpatients.Third,ouranalysisex-
amines factors relevant to understanding the timing of initia-
tion of dialysis among patients who initiated dialysis and was
not intended to address decisions about whether to initiate di-
alysis in patients with advanced CKD. Fourth, our study find-
ingswithintheVAmaynotbegeneralizabletootherhealthcare
settings or populations (especially women). Nevertheless, the
VA is the largest integrated health care system in the United
States, and available evidence suggests that dialysis initia-
tion practices in the VA parallel, and are more conservative
than, those found in the wider US population.2 Last, there is
some evidence that the trend toward earlier initiation of di-
alysis may be leveling off in recent years.1,2 Thus, it is pos-
sible that our results may not reflect current practice.
Conclusions
Ourfindingsofferinsightintothecomplexprocessesthatshape
the timing of maintenance dialysis in real-world clinical set-
tingsandsuggestthattheremaybeopportunitiestomakethese
processes more patient centered.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: November 8, 2015.
Published Online: January 25, 2016.
doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2015.7412.
Author Affiliations: Department of Medicine,
University of Washington, Seattle (Wong, Vig,
O’
Hare); Department of Medicine, VA Puget Sound
Healthcare System, Seattle, Washington (Vig,
O’
Hare); Department of Anthropology, University
of Washington, Seattle (Taylor); Chronic Kidney
Disease Initiative, Division of Diabetes Translation,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, Georgia (Burrows); Health Service
Research and Development Center of Innovation,
VA Puget Sound Healthcare System, Seattle,
Washington (Liu, Hebert); Department of Health
Services, University of Washington, Seattle (Liu,
Hebert); Liberia Country Office, Division of Global
Health Protection, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia (Williams).
Author Contributions: Drs Wong and O’
Hare had
full access to all the data in the study and take
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis.
Study concept and design: Wong, Liu, Williams,
Hebert, O’
Hare.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: All
authors.
Drafting of the manuscript: Wong.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: All authors.
Obtained funding: Burrows, Liu, Williams, Hebert,
O’
Hare.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
Burrows, Williams, O’
Hare.
Study supervision: Williams, O’
Hare.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr O’
Hare
reported receiving royalties from UpToDate.
No other disclosures were reported.
Funding/Support: This study was supported by
grant VA IIR 09-094 from the United States
Department of Veterans Affairs and by Interagency
Agreement IAA 15FED1505101-0001 between the
VA Puget Sound Healthcare System and the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention. Dr Wong is
supported by the Clinical Scientist in Nephrology
Fellowship from the American Kidney Fund. Drs
O’
Hare, Hebert, and Liu reported having received
research funding from the Department of Veterans
Affairs Health Services Research and Development
Service. Dr O’
Hare also reported having received
research funding from the National Institutes of
Health and an honorarium from the American
Society of Nephrology.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funding sources
had no role in the design and conduct of the study;
collection, management, analysis and
interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or
approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit
the manuscript for publication.
Disclaimer: The findings and conclusions in this
report are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the official position or policy
of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Department of Veterans Affairs, or US government.
REFERENCES
1. Saran R, Li Y, Robinson B, et al. US Renal Data
System 2014 annual data report: epidemiology of
Research Original Investigation
Timing of Dialysis Initiation
234
JAMA Internal Medicine
February 2016
Volume 176, Number 2
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
kidney disease in the United States. Am J Kidney Dis.
2015;66(1)(suppl 1):S1-S305.
2. Yu MK, O’
Hare AM, Batten A, et al. Trends in
timing of dialysis initiation within versus outside the
Department of Veterans Affairs. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol. 2015;10(8):1418-1427.
3. Stel VS, Tomson C, Ansell D, et al. Level of renal
function in patients starting dialysis: an ERA-EDTA
Registry study. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2010;25
(10):3315-3325.
4. Rosansky SJ, Clark WF, Eggers P, Glassock RJ.
Initiation of dialysis at higher GFRs: is the apparent
rising tide of early dialysis harmful or helpful?
Kidney Int. 2009;76(3):257-261.
5. O’
Hare AM, Wong SP, Yu MK, et al. Trends in the
timing and clinical context of maintenance dialysis
initiation. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015;26(8):1975-1981.
6. National Kidney Foundation. KDOQI clinical
practice guidelines and clinical practice
recommendations for 2006 updates: hemodialysis
adequacy, peritoneal dialysis adequacy and vascular
access. Am J Kidney Dis. 2006;48(suppl 1):S1-S322.
7. Traynor JP, Simpson K, Geddes CC, Deighan CJ,
Fox JG. Early initiation of dialysis fails to prolong
survival in patients with end-stage renal failure.
J Am Soc Nephrol. 2002;13(8):2125-2132.
8. Beddhu S, Samore MH, Roberts MS, et al. Impact
of timing of initiation of dialysis on mortality. J Am
Soc Nephrol. 2003;14(9):2305-2312.
9. Kazmi WH, Gilbertson DT, Obrador GT, et al.
Effect of comorbidity on the increased mortality
associated with early initiation of dialysis. Am J
Kidney Dis. 2005;46(5):887-896.
10. Wright S, Klausner D, Baird B, et al. Timing of
dialysis initiation and survival in ESRD. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol. 2010;5(10):1828-1835.
11. Rosansky SJ, Eggers P, Jackson K, Glassock R,
Clark WF. Early start of hemodialysis may be
harmful. Arch Intern Med. 2011;171(5):396-403.
12. Crews DC, Scialla JJ, Boulware LE, et al; DEcIDE
Network Patient Outcomes in End Stage Renal
Disease Study Investigators. Comparative
effectiveness of early versus conventional timing of
dialysis initiation in advanced CKD. Am J Kidney Dis.
2014;63(5):806-815.
13. Sawhney S, Djurdjev O, Simpson K, Macleod A,
Levin A. Survival and dialysis initiation: comparing
British Columbia and Scotland registries. Nephrol
Dial Transplant. 2009;24(10):3186-3192.
14. Lassalle M, Labeeuw M, Frimat L, et al. Age and
comorbidity may explain the paradoxical
association of an early dialysis start with poor
survival. Kidney Int. 2010;77(8):700-707.
15. Sjölander A, Nyrén O, Bellocco R, Evans M.
Comparing different strategies for timing of dialysis
initiation through inverse probability weighting. Am
J Epidemiol. 2011;174(10):1204-1210.
16. Korevaar JC, Jansen MA, Dekker FW, et al;
Netherlands Cooperative Study on the Adequacy of
Dialysis Study Group. When to initiate dialysis:
effect of proposed US guidelines on survival. Lancet.
2001;358(9287):1046-1050.
17. Tang SC, Ho YW, Tang AW, et al; Hong Kong
Peritoneal Dialysis Study Group. Delaying initiation
of dialysis till symptomatic uraemia—is it too late?
Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2007;22(7):1926-1932.
18. Coronel F, Cigarran S, Herrero JA. Early
initiation of peritoneal dialysis in diabetic patients.
Scand J Urol Nephrol. 2009;43(2):148-153.
19. Hakim RM, Lazarus JM. Initiation of dialysis.
J Am Soc Nephrol. 1995;6(5):1319-1328.
20. Rosansky SJ, Cancarini G, Clark WF, et al.
Dialysis initiation: what’
s the rush? Semin Dial. 2013;
26(6):650-657.
21. Cooper BA, Branley P, Bulfone L, et al; IDEAL
Study. A randomized, controlled trial of early versus
late initiation of dialysis. N Engl J Med. 2010;363
(7):609-619.
22. Harris A, Cooper BA, Li JJ, et al.
Cost-effectiveness of initiating dialysis early:
a randomized controlled trial. Am J Kidney Dis. 2011;
57(5):707-715.
23. Krippendorff K. Content Analysis:
An Introduction to Its Methodology. 3rd ed. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2013.
24. Giacomini MK, Cook DJ; Evidence-Based
Medicine Working Group. Users’guides to the
medical literature: XXIII: qualitative research in
health care A: are the results of the study valid? JAMA.
2000;284(3):357-362.
25. Renal Physicians Association (RPA). Shared
Decision-Making in the Appropriate Initiation of
Withdrawal From Dialysis. 2nd ed. Rockville, MD:
RPA; 2010.
26. United Kingdom Renal Association Clinical
Practice Guidelines. Planning, Initiating and
Withdrawing of Renal Replacement Therapy. 6th ed.
Hampshire, United Kingdom: Renal Association; 2014.
27. O’
Hare AM, Rodriguez RA, Hailpern SM,
Larson EB, Kurella Tamura M. Regional variation in
health care intensity and treatment practices for
end-stage renal disease in older adults. JAMA.
2010;304(2):180-186.
28. Treit K, Lam D, O’
Hare AM. Timing of dialysis
initiation in the geriatric population: toward a
patient-centered approach. Semin Dial. 2013;26(6):
682-689.
29. Kaufman SR, Shim JK, Russ AJ. Old age, life
extension, and the character of medical choice.
J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 2006;61(4):
S175-S184.
30. Russ AJ, Shim JK, Kaufman SR. “Is there life on
dialysis?”: time and aging in a clinically sustained
existence. Med Anthropol. 2005;24(4):297-324.
31. Song MK, Lin FC, Gilet CA, Arnold RM, Bridgman
JC, Ward SE. Patient perspectives on informed
decision-making surrounding dialysis initiation.
Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2013;28(11):2815-2823.
32. Schell JO, Patel UD, Steinhauser KE, Ammarell
N, Tulsky JA. Discussions of the kidney disease
trajectory by elderly patients and nephrologists:
a qualitative study. Am J Kidney Dis. 2012;59(4):
495-503.
33. Hussain JA, Flemming K, Murtagh FE,
Johnson MJ. Patient and health care professional
decision-making to commence and withdraw from
renal dialysis: a systematic review of qualitative
research. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015;10(7):1201-1215.
34. Harwood L, Clark AM. Understanding
pre-dialysis modality decision-making:
a meta-synthesis of qualitative studies. Int J Nurs
Stud. 2013;50(1):109-120.
35. Morton RL, Devitt J, Howard K, Anderson K,
Snelling P, Cass A. Patient views about treatment of
stage 5 CKD: a qualitative analysis of
semistructured interviews. Am J Kidney Dis. 2010;
55(3):431-440.
36. Patton MQ. Qualitative Research and
Evaluation Methods. 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications; 2002.
Timing of Dialysis Initiation
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
February 2016
Volume 176, Number 2
235
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
