 Supraventricular Tachycardia and the Struggle to be Believed
Kathryn A. Wood, RN, PhD,
Post-Doctoral Scholar, Family Health Care Nursing, Box 0606, 2 Koret Way, Nursing 411Y, School
of Nursing, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143 – 0606, PH: (415)
353-8755, Fax: (415) 753-2161, Email: kathryn.a.wood@nursing.ucsf.edu
Carolyn L. Wiener, PhD, and
Adjunct Professor, Social and Behavioral Sciences, Box 0612, 3333 California Street, Suite 455,
University of California, San Francisco San Francisco, CA. 94118 – 0612, PH: (415) 661-5829, Fax:
(415) 661-9444, Email: cwiener@sbcglobal.net
Jeanie Kayser-Jones, RN, PhD, FAAN
Professor, Physiological Nursing, Box 0610, 2 Koret Way, Nursing 611Q, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA. 94143 – 0610, PH: (415) 476-4280, Fax: (415) 476-8899, Email:
jeanie.kayser-jones@nursing.ucsf.edu
Abstract
Background—Little research exists examining patient experiences of life with supraventricular
tachycardia (SVT). Realistic expectations of symptoms, patient management strategies, and
treatment options are important components of patient education and treatment decisions.
Aim—This descriptive qualitative study explored patients’ experiences living with SVT.
Methods—Grounded theory methodology was used with semi-structured interviews of 25 SVT
patients undergoing radiofrequency ablation treatment.
Results—The main core category that emerged from the data was the “struggle to be believed”.
The struggle or work of living with SVT entails: (1) living with the uncertainty of the occurrence
and duration of an episode, (2) “covering up” to manage symptoms and appear normal, (3) searching
for causative factors to prevent further episodes, and (4) experimenting with management techniques
to shorten or end episodes.
Conclusion—Clinical diagnosis and referral for ablation treatment were more difficult for women
suggesting existence of a gender bias. As with many other chronic conditions, the illness trajectory
work is formidable. Patients in this study with SVT, however, reported facing the additional difficulty
of being believed. Disruption in self-esteem and personal relationships are the effects of not being
believed. Providers could avoid minimizing women’s symptoms by listening seriously and offering
realistic expectations; including insight into patient experiences and the trajectory of the dysrhythmia;
and efficacy of drug and ablation treatments.
Keywords
Supraventricular tachycardia; qualitative research; diagnosis; uncertainty; gender bias
Correspondence to: Kathryn A. Wood.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers
we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting
proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could
affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 1.
Published in final edited form as:
Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2007 December ; 6(4): 293–302.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 Introduction
Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) includes a variety of types of reentrant fast heart rhythms
originating in any part of the heart’s conduction system above the ventricles. The major types
of SVT include: atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia, atrioventricular reciprocating
tachycardia, atrial tachycardia, inappropriate sinus tachycardia, and atrial flutter.
Physiologically atrial fibrillation is also a type of SVT, but typically discussed outside of other
SVT rhythms because of the complex differences between it and other SVT rhythms.
Atrioventricular nodal tachycardia is the most common type of SVT, representing 50% to 90%
of all SVT cases.1,2 This type of SVT, along with inappropriate sinus tachycardia, has a higher
prevalence in women. Atrioventricular reciprocating tachycardia is the second most prevalent
type of SVT, accounting for approximately 33% of all SVT.1 Atrioventricular reciprocating
tachycardia and atrial flutter are seen more frequently in men. Other details of the mechanisms
and clinical manifestations of SVT rhythms have been described elsewhere.1–3
Although the types of SVT may differ in physiological mechanisms, the outcome of each is a
rapid heart beat that has a paroxysmal onset and termination. Supraventricular tachycardia
episodes initially occur in late teens to early thirties, with a natural history of increasing episodic
frequency over time. Duration of SVT episodes vary widely from seconds to hours. Episodes
are typically associated with symptoms of palpitations, dizziness, presyncope, nausea, anxiety,
atypical chest pain, diaphoresis, and frank syncope.1–11 While clearly not as life-threatening
as sudden cardiac death or other ventricular arrhythmias, many features of SVT make it
particularly difficult and frustrating for patients to deal with. The unpredictability of the
episodes and inability to control the disabling symptoms can render the patient incapacitated.
Researchers have noted that up to 27% of SVT patients stopped driving because of symptoms
of near syncope or syncope.4,5 Patients with SVT have averaged four hospital admissions or
emergency department visits per year in the 2 years prior to radiofrequency ablation treatment.
10 Investigators have also reported non-lethal cardiac arrest in 2% of SVT subjects, with 16%
requiring an electrical cardioversion to restore normal rhythm.9
Chronic antiarrhythmic drug therapy is the first line treatment for SVT. However, these
medications have a low long-term efficacy requiring frequent changes of drugs and/or dosages
that can add to patients’ frustration. Since the late 1980’s however, catheter ablation therapies
have dramatically changed the treatment options for these patients, offering a permanent cure
without the need for long term drug therapy or surgery.10,12–14 Access to ablation procedures,
performed by cardiac electrophysiology specialists, is acquired through a referral from a
cardiologist or primary care provider.
Despite the highly specified symptomatic and EKG diagnostic criteria, diagnosis and referral
for ablation treatment is not always straightforward. Researchers have noted that the symptoms
commonly reported by patients with SVT mimic other conditions and are often mistaken for
anxiety attacks or panic disorders, especially in women.11 Other researchers have noted gender
related differences in referral patterns for radiofrequency ablation procedures.15 Due to the
sporadic nature of the episodes, it may be difficult and time consuming to capture the SVT on
an EKG or ambulatory cardiac monitoring. If patients are misdiagnosed, they are not referred
in a timely manner for curative ablation therapy. If the SVT is not diagnosed correctly, patients’
lives may be affected tremendously by these not only intrusive, but potentially life-threatening
symptoms. Symptoms of SVT may seem well understood clinically, but how the symptoms
and SVT episodes affect patients’ lives has not been explored. To our knowledge, this is the
first study to examine those patient experiences.
Wood et al.
Page 2
Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 Methods
Design
The data presented here were part of a larger study measuring symptom distress and quality of
life in patients with regular, narrow complex tachycardias referred to as SVT. Inclusion criteria
for both studies were as follows: (1) adults ≥ 18 years old who speak, read, and understand
English; (2) confirmed SVT diagnosis through electrophysiological testing of: atrioventricular
nodal reentrant tachycardia, atrioventricular reciprocating tachycardia, atrial tachycardia,
inappropriate sinus tachycardia, or atrial flutter; (3) adults who have undergone successful
ablation treatment of the SVT as reported on electrophysiology laboratory records; and (4)
physically, mentally able, and willing to participate.
Data Collection
Our study included 25 patients who were interviewed about their experiences of managing and
living with SVT. Twenty-nine subjects were approached for participation, but four declined to
be interviewed. The sample was selected from patients on the electrophysiology service at a
large university-affiliated medical center after approval by the university’s human subject
research committee. Participants were approached at the time of hospitalization following a
radiofrequency catheter ablation procedure, after recovery from sedation, and asked for their
consent to be interviewed. Participants were provided verbal and written details of the study
and consent was obtained. Following the Glaser and Strauss16 maximum variation sampling
technique, purposive sampling was used to obtain as broad a range as possible of patient
experiences. Male and female participants were selected to include diversity in age and race,
varied length of time living with SVT, and a representative reflection of five types of SVT.
Interviews, ranging in length from 30 to 90 minutes, were open-ended and conducted in patient
hospital rooms within 24 hours following the ablation treatment, or arrangements were made
for telephone or face-to-face interviews within one week of the ablation procedure. All
interviews were conducted and transcribed by one researcher (KW). Eighteen of the interviews
were tape recorded, but seven patients refused to be taped. The interviewer took notes during
the interviews for these seven patients. A guide was used for the semi-structured interviews,
but in keeping with grounded theory methodology, the guide was refined and revised as
concepts and categories became apparent. Initial themes for the interview guide were drawn
from clinical experience and spontaneous comments from patients that occurred during clinic
visits or conversations outside of the interviews. The interview guide was initially reviewed
by medical and nursing experts in the field and other patients with SVT to enhance validity.
Sample open-ended questions included, “Tell me about your first episode of SVT” or “What
has living with SVT been like for you?” Participants were also asked about the frequency/
duration of their SVT episodes, descriptors of precipitating factors, and any symptom
management strategies they may have adopted.
Data Analysis
Quantitative data collected from the medical record included: demographics, number of
emergency room visits for treatment of SVT, number of antiarrhythmic medications used, and
left ventricular ejection fraction via echocardiography. Measures of central tendency were used
to analyze the demographics and clinical variables.
Qualitative data collection and analysis were carried out concurrently according to the process
of grounded theory methodology.16,17 Interview transcripts and notes were examined line by
line to identify meanings and openly coded into conceptual categories using constant
comparison of participants’ comments. Properties of each category were outlined and
compared to tease out the similarities and differences. Through axial coding, attempts were
Wood et al.
Page 3
Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 made to interrelate categories by comparison of condition, action/interactional strategies and
consequences. Through selective coding, a core category was identified, and a beginning theory
about the experience of living with SVT was refined from relating other categories to the core
category. Saturation, referred to by Dey as “theoretical sufficiency”,18 was established when
further interviews confirmed existing data and yielded no new concepts. Feedback on data
coding and analytical memos was obtained from four nurse scientist colleagues to assure
ongoing confirmation and trustworthiness in the analysis.
Field notes were invaluable for capturing the emotional responses of participants, strengthening
interview data. The field notes contained interviewer observations of the participants during
initial contact, during the face-to-face interviews, and during subsequent clinic visits after the
interview. These non-verbal observations added to the understanding of the meaning of life
with SVT that was not always captured in the verbal interview data alone. Field notes were
reviewed periodically in the search for additional dimensions of the categories that had emerged
from the interviews.
A question raised by one reviewer of this paper regarding “truthfulness” and “auditability” of
the analysis deserves attention. Regarding truthfulness, grounded theory has roots in the
sociological perspective called symbolic interactionism, which avers that society, reality, and
self are constructed through interaction. This perspective is concerned with the way people
create, shape, resist, and negotiate the meanings of what happens to them, thereby forming
diverse definitions of the situations they face, which in turn, affect their actions. A basic tenet
of both symbolic interaction and grounded theory is that things perceived as real are real in
their consequences. Thus, the focus is on “truth” as interpreted by respondents.
The question of auditability is essentially a question of validity. Every mode of discovery
develops its own standards, canons, and procedures for achieving verifiable results. Therefore,
qualitative research has its own conduct for attaining validity, conduct which is different from
that used in quantitative research. Grounded theory is an inductive method designed to build
theory by following disciplined procedures of coding, theoretical memo writing, comparison
among data, theoretical sampling, theoretical sorting, and identification of a core category. It
is certainly conceivable that another qualitative researcher could come into the same setting
and develop another theory or one that would enlarge upon the one presented in this paper.
19 Both theories could have equal validity. In the end, a theory should be judged on whether
it is useful, fitting, and generative of further inquiry through which its generalizability can be
discovered.16
Theoretically Sensitizing Concept
Strauss and colleagues’ 20,21 identification of the complex types of illness trajectory work
performed in acute hospital settings broke new ground by portraying not only health
professionals but also patients and their families as “workers” and the home as an equally
important work setting. This concept has been augmented by other discussions of the concept
of illness trajectory in examining how patients work at managing different chronically ill states.
22,23 Illness trajectory has been defined as: “not only the physical unfolding of a disease, but
… the total organization of work done over the course of the illness—together with the impact
that the consequences of the illness and its work exert on the lives of the people involved:
patients, family, and health professionals”(p. 37).22 Illness trajectory proved to be a
theoretically sensitizing concept when collecting and analyzing data from these participants
living with SVT.16,24 Sociologist Herbert Blumer introduced the notion of “sensitizing
concepts” to denote interests that give the researcher ideas to pursue and that sensitize the
researcher to ask particular kinds of questions.25 As Charmaz explains, “Grounded theorists
use sensitizing concepts as tentative tools for developing their ideas about the processes that
Wood et al.
Page 4
Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 they define in their data. If particular sensitizing concepts prove to be irrelevant, then we
dispense with them” (p. 17).26 In the research discussed in this paper, the illness trajectory
concept proved to be highly relevant as a means of understanding the illness trajectory work
of living with SVT and the conflicting viewpoints that affect the struggle to validate symptoms
and obtain a correct diagnosis---in short, to “be believed”.
Findings
The sample included 15 females and 10 males, ranging in age from 18 to 81 years. The age
distribution of the 25 participants is presented in Table 1. The majority of the participants were
Caucasian, married, and employed full time; however, there was a range of ethnicities, marital
and employment states in the sample. In all cases, the tachycardia mechanism was ascertained
from invasive electrophysiologic studies at the time of the ablation procedure. The participants
had a variety of types of SVT (Table 2). Cardiac function, measured by ejection fraction, was
normal for all subjects (Table 2); however one subject had a trace of mitral valve prolapse
noted on echocardiogram.
The estimated frequency of SVT episodes ranged from 2–4 times a year to greater than 3 times
a day (mean four times per week). Frequency of SVT episodes in this study, similar to others,
9,27 was extremely variable with a median of 4 times per month and a median duration of 30
minutes (range was one minute to greater than twelve hours). Neither frequency nor duration
of episodes differed significantly between types of SVT, although the participants with
inappropriate sinus tachycardia and atrial flutter tended to have episodes consistently lasting
longer than 2 hours. All subjects reported an increased frequency, duration, and/or severity of
SVT episodes as years passed since their first episode. Participants reported visiting the
emergency department from 0–4 times (mean of 1.3 ± 1.1) within the last year for urgent
treatment of the SVT.
The core category to emerge from the data was “struggling to be believed”. Participants struggle
in an attempt to validate their symptoms and obtain a correct diagnosis. The major factors
associated with this struggle surround the unpredictability and paroxysmal nature of onset and
relief of symptoms, including duration, frequency, and etiology of episodes. The sporadic
nature of episodes required the SVT to be “caught” or documented on an EKG for correct
diagnosis and belief of the patient’s symptoms. The substantive theory evolved from this study
indicated that the illness trajectory work of living with SVT while attempting to surmount the
believability problem included the following categories: (1) living with the uncertainty of the
occurrence and duration of an episode, (2) covering up to manage symptoms and appear normal,
(3) searching for causative factors to prevent further episodes, and (4) experimenting with
management techniques to shorten or stop episodes. Although as with many other chronic
illnesses where the illness trajectory work is formidable, patients in this study reported the
additional stress of dealing with the difficulty of obtaining a diagnosis and the related difficulty
of being believed. Patients are continually engaging in these processes, with varying emphasis,
making modifications as they progress through the trajectory of the illness. For example,
successful manipulation of causative factors and management techniques will be reflected by
less time spent in covering up and decreased uncertainty. Most important, “success” at any
point in the trajectory is only temporary as the episodes will randomly recur, adding further to
the uncertainty. Other examples of the way these processes are intertwined, each affecting one
another, are described below.
Living with Uncertainty
Patients with SVT often have to manage uncertainty by balancing limited options. The
paroxysmal, random nature of the SVT episodes continually kept these participants “on edge”
and unsure of when the next event would occur. Many reported feeling an incredible emotional
Wood et al.
Page 5
Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 burden that they carried constantly as they worried that the frightening physical symptoms may
happen anywhere at any time. Uncertainty was also expressed and related to the fear that this
could be a potentially serious “heart problem” and their mortality would be adversely affected.
“Having this thing totally wrecked my life. I felt so scared and helpless because I
never knew when I’d have another episode, how bad that episode would be, if this
new drug would work … because many of them didn’t…. or if it never stopped
racing…. would I die?”
Managing the illness became the focus of their lives as they juggled activities of everyday life
around the SVT episodes. To decrease the uncertainty, patients spent much energy in efforts
seeking causative factors they could eliminate or manipulate; making dietary or lifestyles
changes to lessen the frequency of episodes; and developing strategies to shorten the duration
of episodes. To avoid potential episodes of SVT, many patients stopped participating in
recreational sports on the possibility that exercise was a precipitating factor, or to escape
embarrassment in front of others.
Patients frequently noted having to completely stop working, driving, or performing leisure
activities because of the severity of symptoms and/or the unpredictability of the SVT episodes.
One female participant shared her concerns:
“I have to drive for work, but I’m always scared it might happen while I’m driving.
Now I always drive in the right hand lane, so if it happens, I can pull over to the
shoulder quickly.”
These actions did nothing to interrupt the cycle of recurrence and often increased the
uncertainty, furthering the sense of struggle, as well as emotional and financial toll on families.
“The episodes followed no pattern. I never knew when they would occur and that was
what was so scary. I was so afraid of having an accident if it occurred when I was
driving, that I just stopped driving all together. This really put a burden on my
husband, because he now had to drive me everywhere. It was pretty tough on my
husband.”
Fatigue further exacerbated the feelings of uncertainty. Patients consistently described the post-
episode fatigue as corresponding to the length of the SVT episode. An episode of SVT lasting
seconds to minutes caused extreme fatigue, but the fatigue was short-lived. Longer episodes
of SVT were associated with more severe fatigue lasting 1–4 days. This type of fatigue was
repeatedly described as “disabling”, “overwhelming”, or “formidable”. Patients became
anxious once the episode began, not only dealing with the uncertainty of the acute episode, but
also the uncertainty of nervously anticipating the need to curtail activities thereafter due to the
impending fatigue. Patients would have to take time off of work, cancel planned activities, and/
or stay in bed for the majority of the next 1–3 days. Anticipating and living with the fatigue
further increased patients’ stress level, which many patients thought would precipitate
additional episodes, exacerbating the cycle of uncertainty.
“The fatigue was overwhelming. I was afraid of taking too much time off work
because I might lose my job or people would think I was really ill. So I started drinking
at least 3 cups of coffee before I went to work the day after an episode to get myself
out the door. But then I realized that the coffee was actually starting up more episodes
of that fast rhythm. It was all so exhausting.”
Both types of fatigue were noted to be associated with an inability to concentrate or focus on
tasks, as mentioned by this 28 year old attorney:
“After each episode I was really worn out for a few days. I had a hard time when I
was in law school because I wouldn’t be able to concentrate or have much energy for
Wood et al.
Page 6
Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 a good day or two after an episode. I felt a lot of pressure to stay ahead in my studies,
in case I had another episode and had to take days off.”
“Covering up” to Appear Normal—Patients dealt with the unpredictably of SVT in
differing ways. One category which emerged from the data was “covering up” to appear normal.
Patients would develop strategies to assist them in normalizing life, or making their lives appear
normal to others. Wiener28 describes the process of normalizing in a group of patients with
rheumatoid arthritis, as “suppressing the physiological imperative and proceeding with the
activity imperative as if normal” (p. 99). The behavioral phenomenon of covering up or
“concealment” has also been noted in other arrhythmia and chronically ill patient groups.29–
32 A female participant recalls how she would cover up in elementary school:
“As a child I would usually pretend that I had a stomach ache if I felt my fast heartbeat
starting. Then I’d have an excuse to run quickly to the bathroom to lie on the floor
and try to slow it down. It was too embarrassing to do that in front of my classmates.”
One woman noticed her friends were including her less frequently in social activities. She
describes her attempts to “cover up”:
“My friends would become nervous when they saw my neck pulsating fast. Some of
them told me they were afraid they might have to do CPR when they were out with
me. I figured out that if I wore a turtleneck or scarf, they wouldn’t ever notice, and I
could kind of hide the fact that I was having one of those episodes.”
A 28 year old man said that he had never shared anything about the SVT events with his new
wife. He didn’t want her to worry; so to “cover up” an episode while they were driving, he
would pull over to the shoulder of the road with the excuse that something seemed wrong with
the tire. He would get out and squat down by the tire; this action usually stopped his SVT.
“That’s how I covered it up.” He was concerned about how long he could continue using this
excuse before his wife caught on.
Several patients mentioned that they had to “cover up” the fact that they had SVT at work in
order to keep their job. Patients did not want to be seen as abnormal, too ill to function, or
taking too many sick days, as these concerns worsened the uncertainty.
Searching for Causative Factors—The majority of patients felt there was no one
consistent precipitating factor related to the SVT episodes and causative factors changed over
time. Patients’ frustration was clear in trying to identify causative factors, through trial and
error with little or no advice from health care providers, to prevent further episodes and decrease
the need to “cover up”. Some patients noticed episodes started only after ingestion of
caffeinated beverages, alcohol, or chocolate. All patients, whether experiencing these triggers
or not, reported making numerous dietary and lifestyle changes on the chance that this would
prevent future episodes. Anxiety during social or business dinners was common when patients
would have to “cover up” with excuses why avoiding alcohol, chocolate, or caffeine was
necessary. Others noted that strenuous physical exercise (i.e., jogging, climbing stairs, or
vigorous exercise) triggered episodes of SVT, or felt that emotional stress was the major
precipitating factor. Patients spoke of the frustration and energy expended trying to eliminate
all stress from their daily life, as many of their physicians recommended. Some patients
additionally reported that a rapid change in body position (i.e., quickly going from sitting to
standing), ingestion of certain foods (i.e., spicy foods or very cold beverages), lying on their
left side, lack of sleep, being overheated, or the act of bending over forward would precipitate
a SVT episode. All patients spoke of the ongoing struggle to eliminate causative factors or
activities one-by-one from their life, in order to eliminate episodes. Frustration and further
uncertainty followed when attempts to eliminate causative triggers proved futile for preventing
additional SVT episodes.
Wood et al.
Page 7
Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 Experimenting with Management Techniques—The participants also spoke of
employing a variety of management strategies (i.e., Valsalva maneuvers, lying down supine
or prone, squatting, coughing repeatedly, standing on their head) when an episode occurred.
“I always felt I could stop the fast rhythm if I could stand on my head as soon as it
started. When this happened in Penney’s one day, I just panicked because I couldn’t
do a head stand without causing a scene. I quickly grabbed a pair of pants that weren’t
even my size as an excuse to go into the dressing room and do a head stand. It worked,
but it also made me anxious about going shopping again.”
Six patients reported trying carotid sinus massage or ocular pressure at home after they had
seen this performed in the emergency department, but they had never received any instructions
on how to correctly carry out these maneuvers. Other patients additionally noted that drinking
ice water, placing a cold, wet towel on their face, or inducing vomiting would usually terminate
their SVT episodes. All patients noted that although some of these maneuvers worked
frequently, no one strategy worked every time increasing the uncertainty of living with SVT.
When the usual management strategies stopped working, patients had to try additional
maneuvers or experiment with new management techniques compounding the feelings of
uncertainty and anxiety.
The Work of Obtaining a Diagnosis—After the difficulty being diagnosed emerged from
the data as a theme, patients were asked directly about their experiences. On top of struggling
through the illness trajectory work of living with SVT, many participants reported that they
had to “work” at obtaining the correct diagnosis of SVT. Primary care physicians were often
unaware of what the patients’ presenting symptoms indicated, and therefore did not refer them
to a specialist in cardiology or electrophysiology. Or, if providers did diagnose the patient
correctly, management consisted of starting and stopping multiple drug regimens over a period
of years. Many patients reported being told that they “had failed” this drug or another, and
ended up feeling like it was something that they personally could have caused, instead of an
ineffective drug. Referral for an ablation was often not suggested, or offered years later with
the disclaimer that “there is this invasive type of procedure, but I don’t think it is the right thing
for you yet.” Patients consistently reported relief followed by frustration when finally
diagnostic testing such as a Holter monitor or EKG was performed and then the tests were read
as normal. Patients perceived that their physicians required documentation of the rhythm in
order to make a diagnosis; otherwise there was hesitancy to label the condition as SVT. This
became a frustrating process as patients tried numerous measures with a variety of EKG
recording equipment to “catch” an episode of the SVT for documentation. All patients felt they
were diagnosed or referred for ablation only after EKG, Holter, or event monitor evidence was
obtained. Although in the case of four patients, the EKG evidence was misinterpreted. In these
cases, the final diagnosis at the time of ablation differed from the original diagnoses because
of the ability to more accurately diagnose arrhythmias with intracardiac electrophysiological
testing.
Typically, patients tried several primary care physicians before they found one who would
“believe them” and refer them to an electrophysiologist for an ablation. In one instance, a
woman reported going to six physicians before one believed her. After numerous visits to three
additional cardiologists, she was finally referred for ablation treatment. Not being believed
perpetuated the self doubt and low self-esteem. The category of working to obtain a correct
diagnosis was noted to have dimensions ranging from: being disbelieved to being believed.
Contrast between Disbelief and Being Believed—Being disbelieved was interpreted
by patients as being seen as untrustworthy, mentally unstable, invisible, or a hypochondriac.
Disbelief also discounted or minimized the significance of the patients’ symptoms and illness.
One female participant describes her experience:
Wood et al.
Page 8
Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 “I just felt like none of the doctors believed me. I think they thought I was making it
up because they can’t see it or get it on an EKG. They gave me Valium or Xanax and
sent me home.”
Another woman echoed similar experiences of feeling discounted and having her symptoms
trivialized:
“He told me that I was just too stressed out, and that I should stop working and
concentrate on being a good wife and mother. Then he gave me a prescription for
Ativan to help me relax. I did everything he said and still had that fast heartbeat.”
Many of the patients expressed disappointment and frustration when an episode of SVT
abruptly ended before it was documented on an EKG. Variations on the following quote were
common:
“Of course, by the time that I got to the emergency room, the fast rhythm had stopped.
On one hand that was a relief; but on the other, that meant I had to continue trying to
get the fast rhythm recorded on paper. The doctors would look at me like I was crazy
and wasting their time when I told them I was having a fast heart rhythm but it had
just stopped.”
Patients spoke of being falsely diagnosed as having panic or anxiety attacks. Some patients
believed this to be the correct diagnosis, but were confused when anti-anxiety drugs did nothing
to prevent further episodes. One female participant expressed relief and hopefulness when her
doctor finally referred her to a specialist. She next described her feelings of shock and betrayal
when she learned that the “specialist” was a psychiatrist, not a cardiologist.
Although described by men and women, being disbelieved was more often seen with female
patients (11 women/2 men). Being believed however, was more often seen among male patients
(4 women/8 men) and had a much shorter trajectory from first physician visit to correct
diagnosis. Patients were not always referred for ablation immediately after seeing an
electrophysiologist, but patients whose symptoms were believed were referred for ablation
more quickly than those patients who were not believed. Men in this study were also more
likely than their female cohorts to initially be prescribed anti-arrhythmic agents instead of anti-
anxiety drugs (8 men/4 women received anti-arrhythmics; 2 men/11 women did not). They
spoke less of frustration and self doubt than the patients who were not believed. Examples from
patients who were believed include:
“My only symptoms were heart palpitations and dizziness. The first doctor diagnosed
me with panic disorder. I was confused by this diagnosis, so I asked for a second
opinion. The second doctor knew immediately it was my heart rhythm and sent me
to a special cardiologist.” “I told my doctor about these things and he asked a lot of
questions. He told me what he thought it was, but also said that it is difficult to catch
these episodes when they are so sporadic and short-lived.”
The second quote above was from a 42 year old man who was treated empirically with anti-
arrhythmic drugs by his physician, even though the diagnosis of SVT was not yet “proven” by
an EKG recording.
Consequences of Not Being Believed—The patients who felt discounted were frustrated
because no one believed their symptoms or experiences. They often felt overwhelmed at having
to manage the SVT by themselves. Not being believed was associated with receipt of anti-
anxiety drugs rather than anti-arrhythmic drugs. The self doubt caused by being discounted
lowered the participants’ self esteem. One woman expressed a common feeling shared by other
participants:
Wood et al.
Page 9
Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 “They did all sorts of tests … but found nothing. I think they thought I was making
it up. I thought about it a lot. Was I really crazy? Was this all in my head? Was I just
thinking I had a fast heart rhythm?”
Some patients noted other friends and family members beginning to doubt them as well.
“I think my friends, especially my husband, may have thought that this was all in my
head. My husband told me later that he had wondered if I was losing my mind, since
the doctors could never find anything wrong.”
Relationships changed as patients avoided dating or social situations for fear that an
embarrassing or frightening episode may happen in public. Spouses/partners became frustrated
over time with the effects of the SVT on their relationships. Many participants reported that
spouses or family members had to take on more responsibilities, as patients’ lives became
seriously affected by the symptoms of SVT episodes. Other patients felt so incapacitated by
the fatigue or emotional despair that they withdrew from family and friends. Still others became
more dependent due to the increased uncertainty and fear of being alone, which required
adjustments in family roles and routines.
Jobs were also lost or work activities limited due to the symptoms associated with SVT
episodes. One patient, a community-based respiratory therapist, had to quit her job, because
carrying the heavy equipment to patients’ homes would initiate an episode of the SVT. Another
woman reported losing her job because her employer felt her multiple physician visits to obtain
a correct diagnosis were increasing health care costs for their company.
Relationships with health care providers also changed if patients felt disbelieved. Many patients
reported a previously positive, trusting relationship with their providers. These relationships
soured quickly however, if the patients felt they were not believed or had their symptoms
discounted. The patients began a pattern of uncertainty and self doubt as they were told it was
“in their head”. After multiple episodes that did not respond to anti-anxiety agents, or repeated
visits where their symptoms were disbelieved, patients’ frustration and anger at their provider
increased. Patients expressed other feelings of betrayal, having great mistrust, anxiety, and
depression over interactions with health care providers. This began the vicious cycle of
searching for other providers, decreased self-esteem, and negative relationships with future
health care providers as time went on.
Consequences of Being Believed—There was great validation and relief after obtaining
a correct diagnosis. The relief was not only verbalized, but physically obvious by participants’
non-verbal behavior of smiles, waving of arms, and other animated actions. Patients reported
that in many cases, just the fact that someone believed them and understood the problem, much
less offered curative treatment, was a relief and a type of treatment in itself. The poignancy of
their condition is captured in the euphoria one woman described when she finally found a
doctor who believed that she was not some “crazy, anxious, hysterical woman who was making
all of this heart rhythm business up.” Often just finding out that there were other patients with
similar experiences brought obvious relief and reassurance. Many patients verbalized feelings
of shock and surprise to find they were not the only person who had SVT and had experienced
these symptoms. Another female participant said:
“Overnight I felt such relief after the ablation. I was beginning to believe that I was
truly crazy and these attacks were all in my head. The doctors finally believed me and
thought I wasn’t crazy, but had a real medical problem.”
Wood et al.
Page 10
Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 Discussion
Patients’ personal perspectives of life with SVT offer health professionals valuable insight into
the patient experience. These data demonstrate that the experience of living with SVT is one
of continuous uncertainty with periods of overwhelming fatigue; searching for elusive
causative factors to prevent further episodes; experimenting with a variety of management
strategies to control the paroxysmal episodes; and struggling to be believed in order to obtain
a correct diagnosis. The theoretically sensitizing concept of illness trajectory work illustrated
a similar phenomenon in patients with other chronic illnesses that increased our perception of
the dimensions of work patients undertake while struggling to live with SVT. The struggle to
be believed strongly impinges upon the ability of these patients to receive timely curative
medical treatment, carry out activities of daily life, and have positive social relationships. If
not believed, life becomes further complicated by self doubt and isolation, the stigma of being
labeled a hypochondriac by friends and family, spending more time covering up, and searching
futilely for ways to prevent or manage the episodes. If patients are believed, the struggle is
shortened and becomes less uncertain, less time is spent covering up, and curative treatment
is accessed sooner.
Other researchers have used qualitative methods to explore the experiences and uncertainty in
chronically ill patients’ lives, strategies for managing the loss of control, as well as other
consequences of the illness.28–38 Investigators have also noted similar feelings of uncertainty
in studies with cardiac patients: pacemaker recipients,32,33 sudden death survivors,31, 34–
36,39–40 atrial fibrillation patients,37,41 those with angina,42 and patients awaiting heart
surgery.38 Others have reported similar experiences of being minimized with mistaken
diagnoses,11,32,37,43 a lack of management options,37 limitation of activities of daily living,
32–34,37,42 continuous pursuit for curative treatment,37 and a need to maintain normalcy
shielding family or friends through concealment of their symptoms.28,31, 33,37 As with
previous study findings, the authors recommend that providers avoid minimizing women’s
symptoms by listening seriously and offering realistic expectations.
Contrary to our assumption that patient experiences would differ based on the type of SVT
diagnosis, the patient experience of struggling to be believed and living with uncertainty was
found to be similar across types of SVT. The patient experience did however, differ based on
gender, with more men being believed, noting a less difficult time obtaining a correct diagnosis
and shorter trajectory prior to curative ablation treatment than the majority of women in this
study. This finding is supported by Dagres and colleagues who reported significant gender
differences in treatment and access to radiofrequency ablation for SVT patients.15 Women
were maintained on anti-anxiety drugs for longer periods of time before being referred for
ablation treatment after a significantly longer duration of symptoms than male patients with
SVT.15 The reason for this delay is unclear because success, complication, and recurrence
rates for radiofrequency ablation show no difference between men and women with SVT.14,
15 Data were not gathered in the current study ascertaining how each gender of patient
described or presented their symptoms to providers, as this could also affect diagnosis. Women
with SVT have however, been reported to be incorrectly diagnosed with panic or anxiety
disorders more often than men.11 Gender bias in the approach to treatment of other female
cardiac patients has also been reported.44–47
Kralik and colleagues have also reported similar findings in their exploration of women’s
experiences with the process of being diagnosed.43 Although these researchers included
women with non-cardiac, chronic illnesses such as multiple sclerosis, breast cancer, or
leukemia, the experience of being diagnosed was similar to many of the participants in this
study. Many women spoke of similar frustration when practitioners questioned the reality of
their symptoms. Women who were eventually diagnosed after chronic symptoms also felt
Wood et al.
Page 11
Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 instantly validated by providers and perceived by others as having a real illness. Like the SVT
patients in this study, hearing the name of the illness was a tangible detail that patients could
refer to and use to pursue potentially curative treatment.43
Participants offered promising and helpful details for health care providers to embrace in caring
for SVT patients. Our data support previous findings that SVT episodes become more frequent
and severe over time, 48 underscoring the need for realistic patient education counseling
including the natural course and illness trajectory work associated with the dysrhythmia and
efficacy of drug and ablation treatments. Patient feelings of uncertainty may be lessened by
realistic, objective information on patient experiences, specifics of management strategies used
by others, and an awareness that no one management strategy will work consistently. Clinical
outcomes of patients with SVT could be improved if practitioners provided realistic
information to patients as well as listening closely to patient symptom descriptions; curative
therapy could be offered in a more timely manner with less need to cover up while spending
time and energy seeking a diagnosis and treatment.
This study was conducted at a tertiary referral center which often handles more difficult,
refractory cases. The SVT patients in our sample may be more symptomatic and display a very
different frequency of SVT symptoms/episodes than at other types of institutions. Subjects in
this study, who dealt with SVT episodes for a mean of 20 years, may have had more severe
symptoms than patients earlier in their illness trajectory. The differences in the dynamics of
interviews based on timing and place (from within 24 hours in the hospital after ablation to
one week later in another location or by phone) could have had strong consequences on the
participants’ responses. The authors however, feel that this was not the case in this study due
to the consistent responses between patients regardless of their location or timing. One
researcher (KW) had spoken with each of the patients at several points in their treatment process
(prior to the procedure in the clinic, in the hospital, and in clinic one month after the procedure)
and found their stories to be consistent in details and emotional responses throughout the
interactions.
Further research could enlarge upon these findings to address how, or if, the ways in which
symptoms are initially described by patients differ by gender or by age; a specific focus on
uncertainty and fatigue as described by these patients; how patient experiences change
following ablation treatment, as well as what the recovery process entails based on factors such
as patients’ culture, marital status, and gender; and whether socioeconomic status affects the
ability to seek a correct diagnosis or the symptom experience of life with SVT. Pursuing issues
of gender bias and delay in referral for ablation treatment is also crucial. Equally important is
how this beginning theory might apply to other types of patients dealing with chronic or
episodic illnesses when medical disbelief is encountered.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to gratefully acknowledge the patients who participated in these interviews.
References
1. Josephson ME, Wellens H. Differential diagnosis of supraventricular tachycardia. Cardiol Clin 1990;8
(3):411–442. [PubMed: 2205383]
2. Akhtar M, Jazayeri MR, Sra J, Blanck Z, Deshpande S, Dhala A. Atrioventricular nodal reentry:
Clinical, electrophysiological, and therapeutic considerations. Circulation 1993;88:282–295.
[PubMed: 8319342]
3. Wood K. Mechanisms and clinical manifestations of supraventricular tachycardias. Prog Cardiovasc
Nurs 1995;10(2):3–14. [PubMed: 7651948]
Wood et al.
Page 12
Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 4. Dhala A, Bremner S, Blanck Z, Sra J, Deshpande S, Jazayeri MR, et al. Impairment of driving abilities
in patients with supraventricular tachycardias. Am J Cardiol 1995;75:516–518. [PubMed: 7864002]
5. Walfridsson U, Walfridsson H. The impact of supraventricular tachycardias on driving ability in
patients referred for radiofrequency ablation. PACE 2005;28:191–195. [PubMed: 15733177]
6. Wolff L. Clinical aspects of paroxysmal rapid heart action. N Engl J Med 1942;226:640–648.
7. Luria MH. Selected clinical features of paroxysmal tachycardia: A prospective study in 120 patients.
Br Heart J 1971;33:351–357. [PubMed: 5579150]
8. Gursoy S, Steurer G, Brugada J, Andries E, Brugada P. Brief report: The hemodynamic mechanism
of pounding in the neck in atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia. N Engl J Med 1992;327:772–
774. [PubMed: 1501653]
9. Wood KA, Drew BJ, Scheinman MM. Frequency of symptoms in supraventricular tachycardia. Am J
Cardiol 1997;79:145–149. [PubMed: 9193013]
10. Epstein LM, Chiesa N, Wong MN, Lee RJ, Griffin JC, Scheinman MM, et al. Radiofrequency catheter
ablation in the treatment of supraventricular tachycardia in the elderly. J Am Coll Cardiol
1994;23:1356–1362. [PubMed: 8176093]
11. Lessmeier TJ, Gamperling D, Johnson-Liddon V, Fromm BS, Steinman RT, Meissner MD, et al.
Unrecognized paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia: Potential for misdiagnosis as panic disorder.
Arch Intern Med 1997;157:537–543. [PubMed: 9066458]
12. Jackman WM, Beckman KJ, McClelland JH, Wang X, Friday KJ, Roman CA, et al. Treatment of
supraventricular tachycardia due to atrioventricular nodal reentry, by radiofrequency catheter
ablation of slow-pathway conduction. N Eng J Med 1992;327:313–318.
13. Calkins H, Sousa J, El-Atassi R, Rosenheck S, de Buitleir M, Kou WH, et al. Diagnosis and cure of
the Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome or paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardias with a single
electrophysiologic test. N Engl J Med 1991;324:1612–1618. [PubMed: 2030717]
14. Morady F. Catheter ablation of supraventricular arrhythmias: State of the art. J Cardiovasc
Electrophysiol 2004;15:124–139. [PubMed: 15028093]
15. Dagres N, Clague JR, Breithardt G, Borggrefe M. Significant gender-related differences in
radiofrequency catheter ablation therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;42:1103–1107. [PubMed:
13678938]
16. Glaser, B.; Strauss, A. Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research. Chicago:
Aldine; 1967.
17. Strauss, A.; Corbin, J. Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing
Grounded Theory. 2. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 1998.
18. Dey, I. Grounding Grounded Theory. San Diego: Academic Press; 1991.
19. Strauss, A. Discovering new theory from previous theory. In: Shibutani, T., editor. Human Nature
and Collective Behavior. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall; 1970. p. 40-53.
20. Corbin, J.; Strauss, A. Unending Work. San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass; 1988.
21. Strauss, A.; Fagerhaugh, S.; Suczek, B.; Wiener, C. Social Organization of Medical Work. New
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction; 1997.
22. Wiener CL, Kayser-Jones J. Defensive work in nursing homes: Accountability gone amok. Soc Sci
Med 1989;28:37–44. [PubMed: 2928813]
23. Corbin JM, Strauss A. A nursing model for chronic illness management based upon the trajectory
framework. Scholarly Inq Nsg Prac 1991;5(3):155–174.
24. Lessor R. Using the team approach of Anselm Strauss in action research: Consulting on a project in
global education. Sociological Perspectives 2000;43(4):S133–S147.
25. Blumer, H. Symbolic Interactionism. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall; 1969.
26. Charmaz, K. Constructing Grounded Theory. London: Sage Publications; 2006.
27. Leitch JW, Klein GJ, Yee R, Leather RA, Kim YH. Syncope associated with supraventricular
tachycardia: An expression of tachycardia rate or vasomotor response? Circulation 1992;85:1064–
1071. [PubMed: 1537103]
28. Wiener C. The burden of rheumatoid arthritis: Tolerating the uncertainty. Soc Sci Med 1975;9:97–
104. [PubMed: 1129605]
Wood et al.
Page 13
Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 29. Wiener CL, Dodd MJ. Coping amid uncertainty: An illness trajectory perspective. Scholarly Inq Nsg
Prac 1993;7(1):17–35.
30. Charmaz K. ‘Discovering’ chronic illness: Using grounded theory. Soc Sci Med 1990;30:1161–1172.
[PubMed: 2360052]
31. Tagney J, James JE, Albarran JW. Exploring the patient’s experiences of learning to live with an
implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) from one UK centre: A qualitative study. Eur J
Cardiovasc Nurs 2003;2:195–203. [PubMed: 14622627]
32. Beery TA, Sommers MS, Hall J. Focused life stories of women with cardiac pacemakers. West J Nsg
Res 2002;24:7–27.
33. Malm D, Hallberg LR. Patients’ experiences of daily living with a pacemaker: A grounded theory
study. J Hlth Psych 2006;11:787–798.
34. Flemme I, Bolse K, Ivarsson A, Jinhage BM, Sandstedt B, Edvardsson N, et al. Life situation of
patients with an implantable cardioverter defibrillator: a descriptive longitudinal study. J Clin Nurs
2001;10(4):563–72. [PubMed: 11822504]
35. Walker RL, Campbell KA, Sears SF, Glenn BA, Sotile R, Curtis AB, et al. Women and the implantable
cardioverter defibrillator: a lifespan perspective on key psychosocial issues. Clin Cardiol 2004;27
(10):543–6. [PubMed: 15553302]
36. Fridlund B, Lindgren EC, Ivarsson A, Jinhage BM, Bolse K, Flemme I, et al. Patients with implantable
cardioverter-defibrillators and their conceptions of the life situation: a qualitative analysis. J Clin
Nurs 2000;9(1):37–45. [PubMed: 11022491]
37. Deaton C, Dunbar SB, Moloney M, Sears SF, Ujhelyi MR. Patient experiences with atrial fibrillation
and treatment with implantable atrial defibrillation therapy. Heart & Lung 2003;32(5):291–9.
[PubMed: 14528186]
38. McCormick KM, McClement S, Naimark BJ. A qualitative analysis of the experience of uncertainty
while awaiting coronary artery bypass surgery. Can J Cardiovasc Nurs 2005;15(1):10–22. [PubMed:
15786794]
39. Dunbar SB, Warner C, Purcell JA. Symptoms experienced after internal cardioverter defibrillator
discharges. Heart & Lung 1993;22:494–501. [PubMed: 8288452]
40. Dunbar SB. Psychosocial issues of patients with implantable cardioverter defibrillators. Am J Crit
Care 2005;14(4):294–303. [PubMed: 15980420]
41. Kang Y. Effects of uncertainty on perceived health status in patients with atrial fibrillation. Nurs Crit
Care 2005;10(4):184–91. [PubMed: 15997972]
42. Jerlock M, Gaston-Johansson F, Danielson E. Living with unexplained chest pain. J Clin Nurs 2005;14
(8):956–64. [PubMed: 16102147]
43. Kralik D, Brown M, Koch T. Women’s experiences of ‘being diagnosed’ with a long-term illness. J
Adv Nsg 2001;33(5):594–602.
44. Ayanian JZ, Epstein AM. Differences in the use of procedures between women and men hospitalized
for coronary heart disease. N Eng J Med 1991;325:221–225.
45. Wong CC, Froelicher ES, Bacchetti P, Barron HV, Gee L, Selby JV, et al. Influence of gender on
cardiovascular mortality in acute myocardial infarction patients with high indication for coronary
angiography. Circulation 1997;96(9 Suppl):II-51–57.
46. de Gevigney G, Mosnier S, Ecochard R, Rabilloud M, Cao D, Excoffier S, et al. Are women with
acute myocardial infarction managed as well as men? Does it have consequences on in-hospital
mortality? Analysis of an unselected cohort of 801 women and 1,718 men. Acta Cardiol 2001;56:169–
179. [PubMed: 11471930]
47. Beery TA. Gender bias in the diagnosis and treatment of coronary artery disease. Heart & Lung
1995;24:427–435. [PubMed: 8582818]
48. Clair WK, Wilkinson WE, McCarthy EA, Page RL, Pritchett ELC. Spontaneous occurrence of
symptomatic paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia in untreated
patients. Circulation 1993;87:1114–1122. [PubMed: 8462140]
Wood et al.
Page 14
Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Wood et al.
Page 15
Table 1
Sample Demographics
n=25
Age (range 18–81 years)
40 years (± 15)
Gender
15 (60%) female
10 (40%) male
Ethnicity-
 Caucasian
 Asian
 African American
20 (80%)
4 (16%)
1 (4%)
Employment-
 Full time
 Unemployed
 Housewives
 Retired
 Disabled
 Full-time Student
11 (44%)
5 (20%)
4 (16%)
3 (12%)
1 (4%)
1 (4%)
Martial Status-
 Married
 Divorced
 Single
 Living together
 Separated
13 (52%)
6 (24%)
3 (12%)
2 (8%)
1 (4%)
Continuous variables are expressed as: Mean (± SD); Categorical variables are expressed as: n (frequency).
Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 1.
 NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Wood et al.
Page 16
Table 2
Clinical Characteristics (n=25)
Types of SVT
AVNRT (n=9)
AVRT (n=8)
ATACH (n=3)
IST (n=2)
AFLUTTER (n=3)
Left Ventricular Ejection Fraction
65% (± 1%)
Number of Anti-arrhythmic drugs tried prior to ablation (range 0–6)
1.6 (± 1.5) drugs (median 2.0)
Variables expressed as Mean (± sd).
SVT: Supraventricular tachycardia; AVNRT: atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia; AVRT: atrioventricular reciprocating tachycardia; ATACH:
atrial tachycardia; IST: inappropriate sinus tachycardia; AFLUTTER: atrial flutter.
Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 1.
