 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Association of a Clinical Practice Guideline
With Blood Culture Use in Critically Ill Children
Charlotte Z. Woods-Hill, MD; James Fackler, MD; Kristen Nelson McMillan, MD; Judith Ascenzi, DNP, RN;
Diego A. Martinez, PhD; Matthew F. Toerper, BS; Annie Voskertchian, MPH; Elizabeth Colantuoni, PhD;
Sybil Ann Klaus, MD, MPH; Scott Levin, PhD; Aaron M. Milstone, MD, MHS
IMPORTANCE Sepsis and septic shock are common and, at times, fatal in pediatrics. Blood
cultures are often obtained when clinicians suspect sepsis, yet are low-yield with a
false-positive rate up to 50%.
OBJECTIVES To determine whether a novel, 2-part, clinical practice guideline could decrease
the rates of total blood cultures and cultures collected from central venous catheters in
critically ill children and to examine the effect of the guideline on patient outcomes.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS A retrospective cohort study was performed to
determine the effect of a new clinical practice guideline on blood culture practices in a
36-bed, combined medical/surgical pediatric intensive care unit of an urban, academic,
tertiary care center from April 1, 2013, to March 31, 2015. All patients admitted to the pediatric
intensive care unit with length of stay of 4 hours or more were evaluated (4560 patient visits:
2204 preintervention, 2356 postintervention visits).
INTERVENTIONS Two documents were developed: (1) fever/sepsis screening checklist and
(2) blood culture decision algorithm. Clinicians consulted these documents when considering
ordering blood cultures and for guidance about the culture source.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES Primary outcome was the total number of blood cultures
collected per 100 patient-days.
RESULTS Of the 2204 children evaluated before the intervention, 1215 were male (55.1%);
median (interquartile range) age was 5 (1-13) years. Postintervention analysis included 2356
children; 1262 were male (53.6%) and median (interquartile range) age was 6 (1-13) years.
A total of 1807 blood cultures were drawn before the intervention during 11 196 patient-days;
984 cultures were drawn after the intervention during 11 204 patient-days (incidence rate,
16.1 vs 8.8 cultures per 100 patient-days). There was a 46.0% reduction after the intervention
in the blood culture collection rate (incidence rate ratio, 0.54; 95% CI, 0.50-0.59). After
the intervention, there was an immediate 25.0% reduction in the rate of cultures per 100
patient-days (95% CI, 4.2%-39.7%; P = .02) and a sustained 6.6% (95% CI, 4.7%-8.4%;
P < .001) monthly decrease in the rate of cultures per 100 patient-days. Significantly fewer
cultures were collected from central venous catheters after vs before the intervention
(389 [39.5%] vs 1321 [73.1%]; P < .001). Rates of episodes defined as suspected infection and
suspected septic shock decreased significantly after the intervention, but patients meeting
these criteria underwent cultures at unchanged frequencies before vs after the intervention
(52.1% vs 47.0%, P = .09, compared with 56.7% vs 55.0%, P = .75). In-hospital mortality
(45 [2.0] vs 37 [1.6]; P = .23) and hospital readmissions (107 [4.9] vs 103 [4.4]; P = .42) were
unchanged after the intervention.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE A systematic approach to blood cultures decreased the total
number of cultures and central venous catheter cultures, without an increase in rates of
mortality, readmission, or episodes of suspected infection and suspected septic shock.
JAMA Pediatr. 2017;171(2):157-164. doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2016.3153
Published online December 12, 2016.
Author Affiliations: Author
affiliations are listed at the end of this
article.
Corresponding Author: Aaron M.
Milstone, MD, MHS, Division of
Infectious Diseases, Department of
Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, 200 N Wolfe St,
Rubenstein 3141, Baltimore, MD
21287 (amilsto1@jhmi.edu).
Research
JAMA Pediatrics | Original Investigation
(Reprinted)
157
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
B
lood cultures are a cornerstone in the evaluation of pa-
tients with sepsis because detection of a bloodstream
infection identifies the cause of sepsis and allows a cli-
nician to target antimicrobial therapy. Standards or guide-
linesarenotavailabletoguideappropriateindicationsfordraw-
ing blood cultures.1 Fever often prompts clinicians to obtain a
blood culture, but not all patients with fever have blood-
stream infection. Blood cultures are generally perceived to be
low-risk, whereas unidentified bacterial sepsis has high mor-
bidity and mortality.
However, the yield of blood cultures drawn from hospital-
izedpatientsislow.2Literatureonadultpatientshasfoundthat
only 5% to 15% of blood cultures obtained from febrile pa-
tients are positive.3 As many as 50% of positive blood cultures
arefalselypositive,mostoftenattributabletocontamination.2,4
In addition, there is a lack of uniformity about the optimal
source for blood cultures. Previous work has suggested that
blood cultures drawn from central venous catheters (CVCs) are
at increased risk of being falsely positive.1,5 Related literature
demonstrated a decrease in false-positive blood cultures froms
peripheral venipuncture rather than CVCs in adults.6 False-
positive cultures contribute to patient harm via additional hos-
pital days, unnecessary antibiotics, and increased costs.7
Given the increased attention in the United States to early
recognition and treatment of sepsis, clinicians must weigh 2
potential conflicting harms: delayed diagnosis and inappro-
priatetesting.Recognizingtheimportanceofbalancingtheun-
intended consequences of inappropriate testing and the need
to promptly evaluate patients with suspected infections, our
objective was to describe a quality improvement project at an
academic tertiary care pediatric intensive care unit (PICU)
implemented to reduce unnecessary blood culture use. The
project’
s goal was to guide clinicians in the appropriate use of
blood cultures for patients whose clinical characteristics raised
concern for bacteremia while decreasing the number of un-
necessary blood cultures collected: an endeavor to establish
microbiologic stewardship in the PICU.
Methods
Setting
The Johns Hopkins Bloomberg Children’
s Center, Baltimore,
Maryland, is an urban, academic tertiary care center with a 36-
bedcombinedmedical/surgicalPICUthatadmitspatientsfrom
birth to 24 years, with an average of 2000 admissions per year.
The PICU is the regional referral center for childhood trauma
and burns, provides care for life-threatening medical illness,
and is the site of varied types of perioperative care for chil-
dren.TheJohnsHopkinsUniversityInstitutionalReviewBoard
approved this retrospective study with a waiver of informed
consent.
Study Design and Population
Weperformedaretrospectivecohortstudytodeterminetheef-
fectofaqualityimprovement–basednewclinicalpracticeguide-
lineonbloodculturepractices.AllpatientsadmittedtothePICU
duringthepreintervention(April1,2013,toMarch31,2014)and
postintervention (April 1, 2014, to March 31, 2015) periods with
a unit length of stay of 4 hours or longer were included.
Quality Improvement Project
In early 2014, review of the PICU’
s blood culture practices
revealed 2 notable observations: (1) frequently, multiple
blood cultures were drawn from patients with fever (includ-
ing cultures from multiple CVC lumens) and (2) frequently,
blood scultures were collected from CVCs and not via
peripheral venipuncture sites. These observations led to a
focused collaboration between PICU and infectious diseases
faculty to standardize clinician approach to blood cultures in
critically ill children. Two documents were developed,
piloted, and revised: the fever/sepsis screening checklist
(Figure 1) and the blood culture decision algorithm
(Figure 2). Together, these documents represented a new
clinical practice guideline for the PICU. Recognizing that
blood culture practices differ across medical specialties and
patient populations, clinicians from other pediatric special-
ties, especially oncology, were engaged to revise the check-
list and algorithm.
The proposed work flow (Figures 1 and 2) was as follows:
iffever,hypothermia,ornewclinicalinstabilityalertedthebed-
side caregiver to the possibility of systemic infection in the pa-
tient, the fever/sepsis screening checklist was consulted. A
checklist-based approach was chosen based on robust litera-
ture demonstrating that checklists provide a systematic frame-
worktodrivebehaviorchangeandimprovepatientoutcomes.8
Beforeabloodculturewasordered,thisdocumentwouldguide
the clinician to consider other possible sources of infection (eg,
surgical site infection or tracheitis), to consider noninfec-
tious sources of fever (eg, opioid withdrawal or surgery within
the preceding 24 hours), and to carefully evaluate the indi-
vidual patient’
s risk factors for bacteremia (eg, prolonged pres-
ence of a CVC or compromised immune system). The goal of
the fever/sepsis screening checklist was not to remove au-
tonomyfromthebedsidecaregiver;rather,itwasmeanttosup-
port a standard structured approach to a patient with a new
fever or change in clinical status. For example, after review-
ing the checklist, the clinician may realize that systemic in-
fectionislowonthedifferentialforastable,febrilepatientwith
Key Points
Question Can a quality improvement initiative safely reduce
unnecessary blood culture use in critically ill children?
Findings In this cohort study, introduction of education and
decision support tools for caregivers was associated with a
reduction in blood culture use, and focused attention on blood
culture collection site was associated with fewer cultures being
collected from central venous catheters after vs before
intervention. In-hospital mortality, readmissions, and rates of
episodes defined as “
suspected infection”and “
suspected septic
shock”did not increase after intervention.
Meaning Education and decision support tools that standardize
approach to fever can safely reduce blood culture use in
hospitalized children.
Research Original Investigation
Reducing Unnecessary Blood Culture Use in Critically Ill Children
158
JAMA Pediatrics
February 2017
Volume 171, Number 2
(Reprinted)
jamapediatrics.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
symptoms of withdrawal after recent narcotic weaning. If, af-
ter completing the fever/sepsis screening checklist, the clini-
cian deemed it appropriate to obtain a blood culture, then he
orshewouldconsultthebloodculturedecisionalgorithm.This
algorithm indicated whether to collect a specimen from pe-
ripheralvenipuncture,aCVC,orboth.Ingeneral,emphasiswas
placed on peripheral venipuncture as the first preference ex-
cept for specific circumstances, such as prior positive culture
from the CVC, clinical instability with use of the CVC line, or
immunocompromised hosts with CVCs. The algorithm also
clarified that obtaining blood cultures from arterial lines was
not an acceptable surrogate for a peripheral specimen given
the risk of contamination and false-positive results.9 Recog-
nizing that a peripheral site may be difficult or traumatic in
some patients, after 2 unsuccessful attempts, clinicians were
instructed to not delay antibiotic administration and to note
on the checklist why a culture from a CVC was obtained. Ini-
tially during the pilot phase, the attending physician’
s signa-
ture on the checklist was required before drawing a CVC blood
culture to emphasize the importance of multiple levels of re-
view before entering a CVC. As the program became estab-
lished, signed forms were no longer required.
After a brief pilot period in March 2014, the new program
was instituted on April 1, 2014. A 4-part strategy for unitwide
implementation was used. Copies of the checklist and algo-
rithm were distributed electronically to PICU staff and paper
copies were placed throughout the unit. The new blood cul-
ture practices were formally discussed at staff meetings and
conferences. Individual attending physicians were given
weekly electronic feedback about the number of blood cul-
tures that were drawn from their patients. Briefly, copies of
completed checklists were reviewed to ensure adherence to
Figure 1. Fever/Sepsis Screening Checklist
Fever/Sepsis Screening Checklist – Pre Culture Review
Instructions: Please complete this form before ordering a blood culture. Bedside RN and frontline provider complete this
together, ideally at bedside.
Screen initiated: Date _______________  Time _______________  Patient name _______________________________ 
Nurse name ___________________________   Provider Name  _______________________________________ 
Blood culture may not be warranted:
 1. Consider other sources of infection on exam/history:
  
a. Conjunctivitis
  
b. Otitis media
  
c. Pharyngitis
  
d. Respiratory symptoms
  
e. Increased trach or ETT secretions
  
f. Urine color/consistency change/dysuria
  
g. Diarrhea (>3 stools/24 hours)
  
h. Superficial wound erythema/drainage/cellulitis
  
 
without any of symptoms in item 1
 2. Patient has non-infectious cause of symptoms
  
a. Withdrawal – recent sedation weans?
  
 
Elevated WAT score?
  
b. Feeding intolerance causing tachycardia, 
  
 
emesis, diarrhea
  
c. Surgery within last 24 hours
 3. Negative blood cultures drawn within last 24-48 
  
hours, and no clinical change in the patient other 
  
than fever
After completion of this tool, is a blood culture indicated?
__________________________________________________ 
If 
yes, 
please 
now 
refer 
to 
Blood 
Culture 
Algorithm 
for 
source 
(peripheral 
vs 
central 
or 
both) 
Provider signature  ________________________________________________ 
Please give to project coordinator
Blood culture may be warranted:
 1. Signs of systemic infection
  
a. Temperature: max min source?
  
 
(*Rectal temp is contraindicated in neutropenic pt)
  
b. Rigors 
  
c. Unexplained tachycardia
  
d. Hypotension
  
e. Poor perfusion
  
f. Metabolic acidosis
  
g. Elevated WBC from baseline
  
h. Elevated or uptrending CRP
  
i. Already on antibiotics but persistent fever or 
  
 
clinical symptoms?
 2. Risk Factors
  
a. Host Immune Status
  
 
i. 
Neutropenic
  
 
ii. 
Congenital immune deficiency
  
 
iii. <6 mos after autologous BMT
  
 
iv. <12 mos after allogeneic BMT
  
 
v. 
Active GVHD
  
 
vi. Steroids (>= 1mg/kg/day PDN equiv)?
  
 
vii. Other therapy for GVHD
  
 
viii. Lymphopenic (eg after ATG, alemtuzumab/
  
 
 
Campath, rituximab)
  
 
ix. Asplenic (s/p splenectomy or functionally asplenic)
  
 
x. 
Neonate?
  
b. Central Line present AND concern for:
  
 
i. 
Symptoms (eg hypotension) when infusing
  
 
 
through the line
  
 
ii. 
Line site inflamed, tender, purulent?
  
 
iii. Line repaired?
  
 
iv. Cuff exposed 
  
 
v. 
Consider duration of line – abx-coated
  
 
 
PICC>56 days or abx-coated Cook >28 days?
  
 
vi. Concern for line contamination? (eg hub in diaper,
  
 
 
cap removed accidentally)
  
c. Patient has these possible portals of infection:
  
 
i. 
Mucositis
  
 
ii. 
Skin ulcers/bullae/wounds
  
 
iii. Active GVHD
abx indicates antibiotic;
ATG, antithymocyte globulin;
Campath, alemtuzumab;
Cook, manufacturer of catheters;
CRP, C-reactive protein; BMT, bone
marrow transplant;
ETT, endotracheal tube;
GVHD, graft-vs-host disease;
PDN, prednisone; PICC, peripherally
inserted central catheter;
s/p, status/post; trach, tracheostomy;
WAT, Withdrawal Assessment Tool;
and WBC, white blood cell.
Reducing Unnecessary Blood Culture Use in Critically Ill Children
Original Investigation Research
jamapediatrics.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Pediatrics
February 2017
Volume 171, Number 2
159
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
the new guidelines, although as blood culture rates began to
decrease, adherence data were no longer collected. Figure 3
illustrates the timeline of events in the implementation of
this program, highlighting that multiple cycles of multi-
disciplinary communication and process refinement were
required.
Outcome Measures
Our primary outcome was the number of blood cultures
drawn per 100 patient-days. Secondary demographic, clini-
cal, and hospital utilization measures were collected to
ensure unbiased before and after comparisons and to inves-
tigate other potential effects of the intervention. Secondary
outcome measures included number of blood cultures
drawn from CVCs vs peripheral venipuncture, patient length
of stay, in-hospital mortality, hospital and PICU readmission
within 7 days of discharge, number of episodes of suspected
infection and suspected septic shock, number of blood cul-
tures for episodes of suspected infection and suspected sep-
tic shock, and mortality in patients with suspected septic
shock. Episodes of suspected infection and septic shock
were detected by the presence of a set of clinical events
occurring concomitantly (ie, within a 24-hour time window)
during a PICU visit. The anchor time point for an episode was
the time of a new (ie, first dose) broad-spectrum antibiotic
(Table 1) or 48 hours or longer from prior administration of a
broad-spectrum antibiotic. With the use of this anchor time,
episodes were defined as (1) suspected infection: recorded
temperature 38.5°C or higher or lower than 36.0°C within 24
hours (ie, before or after) of receiving a new broad-spectrum
antibiotic, and (2) suspected septic shock: recorded tempera-
ture 38.5°C or higher or lower than 36.0°C and vasopressor
Figure 2. Blood Culture Decision Algorithm
Yes
Complete fever checklist (may not require
another blood culture if cultured within
last 48 h). If blood culture indicated,
draw optimal volume
(peripheral preferred)d,f
Culture central
catheter plus a
peripheral sourced
Evaluate possible
sources
Evaluation of patient
with fever or instabilitya
Evaluation of patient
with a positive blood culture
Evaluate possible
sources of
infection
Culture any
suspected
sourcesd
Consider drawing
a single blood
culture (peripheral 
preferred)
per 48 h,
coordinate with
other blood
drawsd
Evaluation of afebrile,
severely
immunocompromised
patient where fever
may be suppressedb
Culture any
suspected sourcesd
Draw optimal volume
blood culture, prefer
peripheral sourced,f
Obtain a single blood
sample, coordinate
with other blood draws
(peripheral preferred)d
Consider catheter
removal
First fever or
new instability?c
About to
broaden
coverage?
Instability with
line use?
Immunocompromised?
Yes
Draw simultaneous
blood cultures from
every lumen in use,
plus a peripheral
sourced,e,f
Immunocompromised?
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Begin appropriate
antibiotics
a Signs of instability include rigors, hypothermia, hypotension, tachycardia, mental
status changes, poor perfusion, glucose instability, and metabolic acidosis.
bExamples of severely immunocompromised patients with masked signs of
sepsis are a patient who is receiving corticosteroid therapy (�1 mg/kg/d) after a
bone marrow transplant, induction therapy for hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis, and reduction or induction therapy for Burkitt lymphoma.
c Fever is considered first or new if it occurs 48 hours or more after the last fever.
dAfter 2 unsuccessful peripheral attempts and 1 unsuccessful arterial attempt,
consider a central culture.
e Differential time to positivity is a useful way to distinguish catheter-related
bloodstream infections from bacteremia unrelated to central catheter care. To
be valid, equal volumes of blood must be obtained simultaneously from each
lumen and a peripheral source and inoculated in the same culture media. Do
not let difficulty obtaining a peripheral blood culture delay initiation of
appropriate antibiotics (standard is <60 minutes from neutropenic fever to
broad-spectrum coverage).
f Consider blood cultures from central catheter lumens and peripherally to
distinguish catheter infections from bacteremia and to inform possible salvage
of the central catheter. If considering catheter salvage, reculture every positive
lumen daily until negative.
Research Original Investigation
Reducing Unnecessary Blood Culture Use in Critically Ill Children
160
JAMA Pediatrics
February 2017
Volume 171, Number 2
(Reprinted)
jamapediatrics.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
administration within 24 hours of receiving a new broad-
spectrum antibiotic.
Itwasthendeterminedwhetherabloodculturewasdrawn
within 24 hours of the new antibiotic administration time (ie,
anchor time). Data on most secondary measures were col-
lected retrospectively from the electronic medical record sys-
tem (Sunrise Clinical Manager, version 15.3; Allscripts). Blood
culture data were collected using infection surveillance soft-
ware (TheraDoc, version 4.5.5; Premier).
Statistical Analysis
To measure the effect of this quality improvement program
on blood culture use, we compared patients admitted to the
PICU in the preintervention period of April 1, 2013, to March
31, 2014, with those in the postintervention period of April 1,
2014, to March 31, 2015. Demographic characteristics of
patients in the preintervention and postintervention periods
were compared using χ2 tests. We measured the effect of the
program on blood culture use by comparing blood culture
rates per 100 patient-days in the preintervention and post-
intervention periods using a Poisson regression model and
then using a quasi-experimental interrupted time-series
model for the log-transformed monthly blood culture
rates.10,11 The interrupted time-series model estimates (1) the
relative change in the blood culture rates per month during
the preintervention period; (2) the immediate effect of the
intervention, reported as the relative change in the blood cul-
ture rate comparing the first month of the postintervention
period with the last month of the preintervention period; and
(3) the sustained effect of the intervention, reported as the
relative change in the blood culture rate per month during the
postintervention period. To determine the robustness of our
findings, we performed a sensitivity analysis by varying the
start time of the intervention period in the interrupted time-
series model.12 Secondary outcomes were evaluated with Wil-
coxon rank sum tests for continuous variables, χ2 tests for cat-
egorical variables, and 2-sided Poisson tests for comparing
independent incidence rates. Data were analyzed using
StataSE, version 13.1 (StataCorp). The interrupted time-series
models were fit using the itsa module in StataSE, version 13.1.
Results
During the study period, there were 4560 patient visits to the
PICU, including 2204 before the intervention and 2356 after
Figure 3. Rate of Blood Cultures Before vs After Introduction of a Quality Improvement Initiative to Optimize
Blood Culture Use in the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU), and Timeline of Events Key to Implementation
0
25
20
15
10
5
0
25
20
15
10
5
Rate of Blood Cultures, per 100
Patient-days
Apr
Mar
2013
May Jun
Jul
Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun
Jul
Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb
Total No. of blood cultures
A
a
a
e
f
f
b
c
d
2014
Calendar Time
2015
Apr
Mar
Rate of Blood Cultures, per 100
Patient-days
2013
May Jun
Jul
Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun
Jul
Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb
CVC blood cultures
B
a
a
b
c
d
2014
Calendar Time
2015
e
f
f
A, Total blood cultures per 100
patient-days before and after
intervention. B, Central venous
catheter (CVC) cultures per 100
patient-days before and after
intervention. Individual data markers
represent blood culture rates per 100
patient-days displayed by month in
the PICU; solid line represents
predicted rate from the interrupted
time series analysis with 95% CIs
(blue-shaded area). The arrows
indicate key dates in the
development and implementation of
the quality improvement initiative.
a Multidisciplinary discussions about
blood culture practices in the PICU.
bObservations of repeated blood
cultures in patients with persistent
fever and cultures frequently drawn
from CVCs.
c Weekly feedback about culture
practices is distributed to PICU
faculty and fever/sepsis screening
checklist is distributed throughout
the PICU.
dEngagement with multidisciplinary
providers to create blood culture
decision algorithm.
e Blood culture decision algorithm is
implemented for all PICU patients.
f Refinement of blood culture
decision algorithm in response to
health care professional feedback.
Reducing Unnecessary Blood Culture Use in Critically Ill Children
Original Investigation Research
jamapediatrics.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Pediatrics
February 2017
Volume 171, Number 2
161
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
the intervention. Patient demographics are described in
Table 2. Before the intervention there were 1807 blood cul-
tures drawn during 11 196 patient-days; after the intervention
there were 984 blood cultures drawn during 11 204 patient-
days (incidence rate, 16.1 vs 8.8 blood cultures per 100 patient-
days), resulting in an overall 46.0% reduction in the collec-
tion rate of blood cultures comparing the postintervention and
preintervention periods (incidence rate ratio [IRR], 0.54; 95%
CI, 0.50-0.59) (Figure 3). Overall, there were fewer blood cul-
tures collected from CVCs in the postintervention period com-
pared with the preintervention period (389 [39.5%] vs 1321
[73.1%]; P < .001).
The interrupted time series analysis found that, before the
intervention, the rate of blood cultures per 100 patient-days
was not changing (IRR per month, 1.002; 95% CI, 0.98-1.04;
P = .83). After introduction of the intervention, there was an
immediate 25.0% reduction in the rate of blood cultures per
100 patient-days (95% CI, 4.2%-39.7%; P = .02). In the post-
intervention period, there was a sustained 6.6% monthly de-
crease in the rate of blood cultures collected per 100 patient-
days (95% CI, 4.7%-8.4%; P < .001) (Figure 3). The sensitivity
analysis with varying start dates for the intervention period
confirmed that the immediate drop in blood culture rates cor-
related with the actual intervention start date.
There were decreases in the rates of suspected infection
and suspected septic shock per 100 patient-days between the
postintervention and preintervention periods (Table 2). How-
ever, the proportions of suspected infection occurrences dur-
ing which blood cultures were drawn within 24 hours were not
significantly different in the preintervention and postinter-
vention periods (52.1% and 47.0%; P = .09) (Table 2). Simi-
larly, the proportions of suspected septic shock occurrences
Table 1. Broad-Spectrum Antibiotics and Vasoactive Medications
Included in the Analysis
Category
Medications
Broad-spectrum antibiotics:
New defined as ordered during PICU
admission and receipt of first dose or
≥48 h from any broad-spectrum
antibiotic administration
Aztreonam arginine, cefepime
hydrochloride, cefotaxime
sodium, ceftazidime sodium,
ceftriaxone sodium, gentamicin
sulfate, imipenem sodium,
meropenem sodium,
piperacillin-tazobactam sodium,
vancomycin hydrochloride
Vasoactive medications:
Included if ordered within 24 h of the
initiation of new broad-spectrum
antibiotic therapy and temperature
≥38.5°C or <36.0°C, and ≥48 h from any
vasoactive medication administration
Dobutamine hydrochloride,
dopamine hydrochloride,
epinephrine, milrinone lactate,
norepinephrine bitartrate,
phenylephrine, vasopressin
Abbreviation: PICU, pediatric intensive care unit.
Table 2. Demographic and Clinical Characteristics of Patient Visits Before and After an Intervention
to Improve Blood Culture Use in a PICUa
PICU Visit Characteristic
No. (%)
P Value
Before Intervention
(n = 2204 Visits)
After Intervention
(n = 2356 Visits)
Demographics
Age, median (IQR), y
5 (1-13)
6 (1-13)
.27
Male
1215 (55.1)
1262 (53.6)
.50
Race/ethnicity
Black/African American
774 (35.1)
765 (32.5)
.07
White
966 (43.8)
1080 (45.8)
Other
342 (15.5)
349 (14.8)
Unknown
122 (5.5)
162 (6.9)
Ethnicity
Hispanic or Latino
104 (4.7)
133 (5.6)
.01
Clinical measures
Patient-days
11 196
11 204
Blood cultures drawn, No. (rate per 100 patient-days)
1807 (16.1)
984 (8.8)
<.001
Suspected infection, No. (rate per 100 patient-days)b
660 (5.9)
496 (4.4)
<.001
With blood cultures
344 (52.1)
228 (47.0)
.09
Suspected septic shock, No. (rate per 100 patient-days)c
205 (1.8)
159 (1.4)
.02
With blood cultures
117 (56.7)
88 (55.0)
.75
In-hospital mortality
45 (2.0)
37 (1.6)
.23
For suspected septic shock occurrences
25 (12.2)
16 (10.0)
.51
Hospital Utilization Measures
Length-of-stay, median (IQR), d
Hospital
5 (2-11)
4 (2-10)
.41
PICU
1.81 (0.9-4.2)
1.91 (1.0-4.0)
.04
7-d Readmission
Hospital
107 (4.9)
103 (4.4)
.42
PICU
69 (3.1)
74 (3.1)
.98
Abbreviations: IQR, interquartile
range; PICU, pediatric intensive care
unit.
a Before: April 1, 2013, through
March 31, 2014; after: April 1, 2014,
through March 31, 2015.
bSuspected infection was defined as
new initiation of broad-spectrum
antibiotic therapy in the PICU and a
temperature of 38.5C° or higher or
lower than 36.0C° within 24 hours
of the initial antibiotic dose. New
initiation of antibiotic therapy was
defined as treatment ordered
during PICU admission and either
receipt of the first dose or 48 hours
or more from any other
broad-spectrum antibiotic
administration.
c Suspected septic shock was defined
as new initiation of broad-spectrum
antibiotic therapy in the PICU and a
temperature of 38.5C° or higher or
lower than 36.0C° and new
vasopressor requirement within
24 hours of the initial antibiotic
dose. New initiation of antibiotic
therapy was defined as therapy
ordered during PICU admission and
either receipt of the first dose or 48
hours or more from any other
broad-spectrum antibiotic
administration.
Research Original Investigation
Reducing Unnecessary Blood Culture Use in Critically Ill Children
162
JAMA Pediatrics
February 2017
Volume 171, Number 2
(Reprinted)
jamapediatrics.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
during which blood cultures were drawn within 24 hours were
not significantly different in the preintervention and post-
intervention periods (56.7% and 55.0%; P = .75). Comparing
the preintervention and postintervention periods, there were
nosignificantdifferencesinin-hospitalmortality(2.0%vs1.6%;
P = .23) or mortality in the subgroup of patients with sus-
pected septic shock occurrences (12.2% vs 10.0%; P = .51). Dur-
ingthepreinterventionandpostinterventionperiods,bothhos-
pital7-dayreadmissionrates(4.9%and4.4%;P = .42)andPICU
7-day readmission rates (3.1% and 3.1%; P = .98) were not sig-
nificantly different. Hospital length of stay was similar be-
tween the 2 periods, but median (interquartile range) PICU
length of stay was significantly shorter in the preintervention
compared with the postintervention period (1.81 [0.9-4.2] vs
1.91 [1.0-4.0] days; P = .04).
Discussion
Anovel,2-tieredclinicalpracticeguidelineimprovedbloodcul-
ture use in a tertiary care PICU. A transdisciplinary collabora-
tion successfully implemented a multifaceted approach to en-
gage frontline clinicians in practice change, solicited and
provided bidirectional feedback, and refined implementation
tools. Subsequently, fewer blood cultures were collected, cli-
nicians continued to order blood cultures in patients meeting
criteria for “suspected infection” or “suspected septic shock”
with similar frequencies before vs after intervention, periph-
eral venipuncture became the preferred site for blood culture
collection,andmortalityandreadmissionratesremainedstable.
Although the 2016 task force recommendations on sepsis
are clear that recognition of sepsis “mandates urgent atten-
tion,
” clinicians struggle with imperfect diagnostic tools.13(p18)
Blood cultures are considered an important screening tool in
patients with fever and possible bacteremia, but the yield is
low and up to half are falsely positive.1,2 One aim of this proj-
ect was to address the absence of clinical consensus about why
and how to obtain a blood culture in a critically ill pediatric pa-
tient to decrease the number of unnecessary blood cultures
being drawn. By engaging physicians, nurses, and the vascu-
lar access team in the discussion, we developed 2 novel docu-
ments that provided a framework for all members of the PICU
team to reference when considering ordering a blood culture.
These documents are now well established in our PICU, and
we have documented a sustained decrease in the overall num-
ber of blood cultures being drawn after intervention. This shift
in practice required a multifaceted approach: providing phy-
sicians with feedback about the numbers of cultures per-
formedontheirpatientsenhancedearlybuy-inaboutthescope
of the problem, presenting the new guideline at various ven-
ues and in a serial fashion increased our ability to engage front-
line caregivers in the PICU, and seeking feedback repeatedly
about the 2 documents ensured that we could adapt the tools
to the reality of our unit’
s workflow and environment. Both
documents underwent many revisions in response to ques-
tions and comments brought forth by PICU and non-PICU pro-
viders, highlighting that quality improvement is an iterative
process whose champions must be flexible.
Because sepsis is common and deadly in PICU patients, we
considered whether a reduction in the rate of blood cultures
collected reflects a potentially detrimental decreased level of
surveillance for a serious disease. During our study period,
mortalityandPICUandhospitalreadmissionrateswerenotsig-
nificantly different before and after the guidelines were intro-
duced. Furthermore, rates of suspected septic shock occur-
rences were decreased after the intervention, and rates of
mortality in those with suspected septic shock were not sig-
nificantly different in the preintervention and postinterven-
tion periods. We did not see an increase in the number of epi-
sodes of suspected septic shock after intervention to suggest
delayed diagnosis by decreased use of blood cultures, nor did
we observe a decreased proportion of suspected septic shock
occurrences during which a blood culture was obtained that
would suggest inappropriate undertesting. These findings sug-
gestthatimportantbalancingmetricsremainedstableafterthe
intervention and that clinicians still ordered appropriate blood
cultures when faced with patients who exhibited clinical signs
of septic shock despite the overall reduction in blood culture
use. Our data observed a reduced number of suspected infec-
tions and suspected septic shock occurrences. Because these
2 outcomes, by definition, required initiation of new antibiot-
ics, it is possible that education around appropriate blood cul-
ture use had an unintended consequence of improving antibi-
otic stewardship, a finding that needs to be further explored.
Together, these results suggest that improved use of blood
culturesandareductioninunnecessarytestingispossiblewhile
maintainingdiligentscreeningforbacteremiawhenclinicalsus-
picion arises. Fever is one sign of sepsis, but sepsis ultimately
is a clinical diagnosis that is supported by, but not dependent
on, a blood culture. Asking clinicians to systematically work
through a sound and thoughtful algorithm when faced with a
changeinpatientstatuskeepssepsisonthedifferentialanddoes
not allow anyone to ignore the warning sign that fever and hy-
pothermia can represent. Blood cultures remain a critical tool
to diagnose sepsis and guide management and should not be
abandoned, but their use can be safely improved.
Limitations
This was a single-center, quality improvement project. Work
to implement similar practice changes at 2 additional PICUs
is currently under way to test our findings’generalizability.
There are limited published data on blood culture utilization
rates from other hospitals to compare whether the baseline
blood culture utilization rate in this PICU was high before start-
ing the intervention, although the existing data suggest that
our preintervention use was lower (160 per 1000 patient-
days vs a published 228 per 1000 patient-days).14 When com-
paring patient demographics across the 2 time periods, data
werenotavailabletoadjustforanypotentialdifferencesincase
mix or patient acuity; however, similar populations of pa-
tients were admitted over the 2 years of study. Our defini-
tions of suspected infection and suspected septic shock and
our method of extracting electronic medical record data may
have misclassified some outcomes. For example, a postopera-
tive patient with a temperature lower than 36°C receiving peri-
operativeaztreonamowingtomedicationallergieswouldhave
Reducing Unnecessary Blood Culture Use in Critically Ill Children
Original Investigation Research
jamapediatrics.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Pediatrics
February 2017
Volume 171, Number 2
163
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
met our criteria for suspected infection or a patient receiving
ceftriaxone sodium for tracheitis who then requires phenyl-
ephrine for transient hypotension during procedural seda-
tion would have met the criteria for suspected septic shock.
These misclassifications should have been similar across the
study periods and would not be expected to bias the results.
Conclusions
A systematic approach to blood cultures may help to opti-
mize laboratory use in critically ill children. This clinical
decision support initiative decreased the total number of
cultures and the proportion drawn from CVCs. The concern
that fewer cultures would equate to a detrimental decreased
level of surveillance for sepsis was not borne out in our
results, with stable postintervention mortality rates and
readmission rates and, most importantly, no increase in epi-
sodes of suspected septic shock after intervention or mor-
tality associated with episodes of suspected septic shock.
Further studies are needed to define how differences in unit
practices and culture would affect the effectiveness and
implementation of safe strategies to improve blood cul-
ture use.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: August 18, 2016.
Published Online: December 12, 2016.
doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2016.3153
Author Affiliations: Department of
Anesthesiology/Critical Care Medicine, The Johns
Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland
(Woods-Hill, Fackler, Nelson McMillan); Department
of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, The
Children’
s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania (Woods-Hill); Department of
Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins Nursing, Baltimore,
Maryland (Ascenzi); Department of Emergency
Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland (Martinez, Toerper, Levin); Division of
Infectious Diseases, Department of Pediatrics,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland (Voskertchian, Milstone);
Department of Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore,
Maryland (Colantuoni); MITRE Corporation, Mclean,
Virginia (Klaus); Department of Pediatrics, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland (Klaus); Department of Civil Engineering,
The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland
(Levin); Department of Epidemiology, Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, Maryland (Milstone).
Author Contributions: Drs Woods-Hill and
Milstone had full access to all the data in the study
and take responsibility for the integrity of the data
and the accuracy of the data analysis.
Study concept and design: Woods-Hill, Fackler, Nelson
McMillan, Ascenzi, Martinez, Klaus, Milstone.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data:
Woods-Hill, Nelson McMillan, Martinez, Toerper,
Voskertchian, Colantuoni, Levin, Milstone.
Drafting of the manuscript: Woods-Hill, Nelson
McMillan, Martinez, Voskertchian, Colantuoni,
Milstone.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Fackler, Nelson McMillan,
Ascenzi, Martinez, Toerper, Voskertchian,
Colantuoni, Klaus, Levin, Milstone.
Statistical analysis: Martinez, Voskertchian,
Colantuoni, Levin, Milstone.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
Ascenzi, Toerper, Voskertchian.
Study supervision: Nelson McMillan, Ascenzi, Levin,
Milstone.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Fackler
receives grant support from OBS Medical. Dr Klaus
is employed by the MITRE Corporation. Dr Milstone
receives grant support from Sage Products Inc.
Drs Fackler, Levin, and Milstone receive grant
support from the MITRE Corporation. No other
disclosures were reported.
Funding/Support: This work was funded in part by
the MITRE Corporation, an independent, not-for-
profit organization that operates federally funded
research and development centers.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funding source
had no role in the design and conduct of the study;
collection, management, analysis, and interpretation
of the data; preparation, review, or approval of the
manuscript; and decision to submit the manuscript
for publication.
Additional Contributions: Anne King, RN (Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine), assisted in
revising the fever/infection screening checklist and
blood culture decision algorithm. There was no
financial compensation.
REFERENCES
1. Baron EJ, Miller JM, Weinstein MP, et al. A guide
to utilization of the microbiology laboratory for
diagnosis of infectious diseases: 2013
recommendations by the Infectious Diseases
Society of America (IDSA) and the American Society
for Microbiology (ASM)(a). Clin Infect Dis. 2013;57
(4):e22-e121.
2. Lamy B, Dargère S, Arendrup MC, Parienti JJ,
Tattevin P. How to optimize the use of blood cultures
for the diagnosis of bloodstream infections?
a state-of-the art. Front Microbiol. 2016;7:697.
3. Bone RC, Fisher CJ Jr, Clemmer TP, Slotman GJ,
Metz CA, Balk RA; Methylprednisolone Severe
Sepsis Study Group. Sepsis syndrome: a valid
clinical entity. Crit Care Med. 1989;17(5):389-393.
4. Shafazand S, Weinacker AB. Blood cultures in
the critical care unit: improving utilization and yield.
Chest. 2002;122(5):1727-1736.
5. Kallel H, Dammak H, Mahjoubi F, et al.
Contamination of blood cultures drawn from
central vein catheter and peripheral venipuncture:
prospective study of 75 pairs [in French]. Pathol Biol
(Paris). 2006;54(1):44-48.
6. Boyce JM, Nadeau J, Dumigan D, et al. Obtaining
blood cultures by venipuncture versus from central
lines: impact on blood culture contamination rates
and potential effect on central line-associated
bloodstream infection reporting. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol. 2013;34(10):1042-1047.
7. Alahmadi YM, Aldeyab MA, McElnay JC, et al.
Clinical and economic impact of contaminated
blood cultures within the hospital setting. J Hosp
Infect. 2011;77(3):233-236.
8. Pronovost P, Needham D, Berenholtz S, et al.
An intervention to decrease catheter-related
bloodstream infections in the ICU. N Engl J Med.
2006;355(26):2725-2732.
9. Koh DB, Gowardman JR, Rickard CM,
Robertson IK, Brown A. Prospective study of
peripheral arterial catheter infection and comparison
with concurrently sited central venous catheters. Crit
Care Med. 2008;36(2):397-402.
10. Schweizer ML, Braun BI, Milstone AM. Research
methods in healthcare epidemiology and
antimicrobial stewardship-quasi-experimental
designs. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2016;37(10):
1135-1140.
11. Linden A. Itsa: Stata module for conducting
interrupted time series analysis for single and
multiple groups. Linden Consulting website.
http://lindenconsulting.org/stats.html. Published
2014. Accessed February 22, 2016.
12. Popoola VO, Colantuoni E, Suwantarat N, et al.
Active surveillance cultures and decolonization to
reduce Staphylococcus aureus infections in the
neonatal intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol. 2016;37(4):381-387.
13. Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, et al.
The Third International Consensus Definitions for
Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA. 2016;315
(8):801-810.
14. Flett KB, Ozonoff A, Graham DA, Sandora TJ,
Priebe GP. Impact of mandatory public reporting of
central line–associated bloodstream infections on
blood culture and antibiotic utilization in pediatric
and neonatal intensive care units. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol. 2015;36(8):878-885.
Research Original Investigation
Reducing Unnecessary Blood Culture Use in Critically Ill Children
164
JAMA Pediatrics
February 2017
Volume 171, Number 2
(Reprinted)
jamapediatrics.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
