 Leading Edge
Commentary
How Much Longer Will We Put Up With
$100,000 Cancer Drugs?
Paul Workman,1 Giulio F. Draetta,2 Jan H.M. Schellens,3,4 and Rene
´ Bernards5,*
1Cancer Research UK Cancer Therapeutics Unit, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK
2Department of Genomic Medicine and Institute for Applied Cancer Science, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas, USA
3Division of Clinical Pharmacology, the Netherlands Cancer Institute, 1066 CX Amsterdam, the Netherlands
4Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences (UIPS), Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands
5Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis and Cancer Genomics Centre Netherlands, the Netherlands Cancer Institute, 1066 CX Amsterdam,
the Netherlands
*Correspondence: r.bernards@nki.nl
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.01.034
The spiraling cost of new drugs mandates a fundamentally different approach to keep life-
saving therapies affordable for cancer patients. We call here for the formation of new relationships
between academic drug discovery centers and commercial partners, which can accelerate the
development of truly transformative drugs at sustainable prices.
The Problem
The recently developed targeted drugs
and immunotherapies deliver significant
benefit
to
cancer
patients.
However,
the spiraling prices of these new drugs
threaten the financial sustainability of can-
cer treatment. Healthcare spending has
risen sharply in the United States, reach-
ing 17.1% of the gross domestic product
in 2014. Cancer drugs are of particular
concern, even if they only represent a
fraction of the overall costs. As early as
2012, 12 of the 13 newly-approved cancer
drugs were priced above $100,000 annu-
ally, and the situation has only gotten
worse since (Light and Kantarjian, 2013;
Mailankody and Prasad, 2015). Particu-
larly worrisome is the notion that these
drugs often need to be combined for
optimal clinical results. For instance, the
cost of the combination of nivolumab
(anti-PD-1) and ipilimumab (anti-CTLA4)
is priced around $252,000, exceeding
the median cost of a US home ($240,000
in 2016). With a lifetime risk of developing
cancer of close to 40%, the problem
is clear.
The pharmaceutical industry has tradi-
tionally defended these high prices by
pointing at the high attrition rate during
clinical drug development and the cost
of large registration studies. But are these
arguments still as sturdy in the new era
of personalized medicine? Targeted can-
cer drugs are often genotype-selective,
which makes for a higher success rate
due to better upfront patient selection.
Consequently, approval of such drugs
often no longer requires expensive phase
III trials with thousands of patients. As one
example, the registration study of the
ALK
inhibitor
crizotinib
required
only
347 patients with ALK-positive lung can-
cer (Shaw et al., 2013). Furthermore,
in 2016 FDA approved crizotinib for
the
treatment
of
lung
cancer
pa-
tients with mutations in ROS1, which the
drug also inhibits, on the basis of a study
of only 50 patients (Shaw et al., 2014).
So why are drug prices going up instead
of down? One clue can be gleaned
from the pricing of the recent checkpoint
blockade immunotherapeutics nivolumab
and pembrolizumab. Both drugs received
initial FDA approvals in 2014 for metasta-
tic melanoma, but their indication was
widened in 2015 to include certain lung
cancers and renal cancer (nivolumab)
and in 2016 to head and neck cancer
(pembrolizumab) and Hodgkin lymphoma
(nivolumab). If development cost would
be a major factor in the pricing structure,
a simple law of economics would have
mandated a considerable reduction in
price when the eligible patient population
increases, but that has hardly happened.
This is a recurring theme in pharma. For
instance, trastuzumab was first approved
for advanced breast cancer and later
also for early disease (adjuvant) without
a reduction in price. Healthcare payers
should not accept this lack of price-vol-
ume relationship. Moreover, there is very
little relationship between drug price and
clinical benefit (Mailankody and Prasad,
2015). This has sparked widespread criti-
cism, alleging that cancer drug pricing is
primarily based on ‘‘what the market will
bear.’’ There is a clear and urgent neces-
sity to lower cancer drug prices to keep
lifesaving drugs available and affordable
for patients. As one patient advocate
recently put it: ‘‘Innovation is meaningless
if nobody can afford it.’’
Lack of Effective Solutions
Much has been written about the reasons
behind the exorbitant drug prices and
what to do about it. One recurring theme
is the notion that the US federal govern-
ment is prohibited by law from negoti-
ating drug prices as a result of the 2003
Medicare Prescription Drug, Improve-
ment and Modernization Act. Considering
that Medicare and Medicaid spend $ 140
billion on medicines annually, this repre-
sents a serious impediment in driving
down drug prices. Lack of competition
and a general absence of a connection
between drug price, sales volume, and
clinical performance are other arguments
in the drug pricing discussion (Jaffe,
2015). Indeed, lack of competition and
bargaining power made US prices of can-
cer drugs among the highest in the world,
increasing by 10% annually between
1995 and 2013, far above the average
inflation rate (Howard et al., 2015).
Cell 168, February 9, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Inc.
579
 While negotiations may bring prices
down, a recent cost comparison in EU
countries shows that the ability of indi-
vidual nations to negotiate discounts is
limited, most likely due to the modest
market sizes of the EU countries (van
Harten et al., 2016). In the longer term,
it is unlikely that the European Union
will be able to collectively negotiate with
the pharmaceutical industry, given that
some nations in the EU with a large
pharma sector are likely to protect their
national interests. The UK’s pioneering
National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence
(NICE)
has
been
able
to
restrain prices to £30,000 per ‘‘quality-
adjusted life year’’ (QUALY) added or
£50,000 per QUALY for ‘‘end of life’’
treatments that include many cancer
drugs—but this has also resulted in
many
oncology
agents
being
turned
down or delayed, leading to complaints
from patient groups and manufacturers.
There is also increasing evidence of pres-
sure on pricing in the US. Researchers at
the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center have developed an online tool
called Drug Abacus to help healthcare
providers assess the value of cancer
drugs (www.drugabacus.org/). What is
urgently needed however are mecha-
nisms to encourage scientific and thera-
peutic innovations that will allow cancer
patients to access new treatments at
affordable and sustainable prices.
Inefficiency in Drug Development
One element that contributes significantly
to the high cost of cancer drugs is the
inefficiency of the overall commercial
enterprise. As one recent example, there
are currently 803 clinical trials testing
checkpoint immune-therapeutics (at least
12 antibodies from a dozen different
pharma companies), which together plan
to enroll over 166,000 patients (Brawley,
2016). There is enormous redundancy in
these studies, as many pharmaceutical
companies perform similar trials with
comparable drugs, but fail to share the
data generated. This herd mentality is
caused in part by the notion that immune
checkpoint therapies can indeed lead to
long-lasting remissions (potentially even
to cures) and that significant numbers of
patients in each clinical indication benefit
from these treatments. While it is in the
short-term good that so many patients
get access to potentially lifesaving drugs,
in the longer term, patients will have to
pay the price for this inefficiency and
duplication.
Another factor is the frequent absence
of a rigorous biomarker program to iden-
tify patients who may benefit from a given
drug. The primary incentive of the pharma
industry is to increase sales, which are
restricted by identifying drug-responsive
subpopulations. Biomarkers are critical,
as they represent a handle to control
drugs costs to society. Regulatory bodies
should set standards for drug approval
employing validated and clinically useful
biomarkers for patient selection. This
will prevent patients being treated with
toxic drugs that do not improve survival
and/or quality of life and will save costs
to society.
Historically, some 90% of all drugs
entering the clinic have failed at some
stage and most biotech start-ups have
a similar fate. This severe attrition rate
in
drug
discovery
and
development
has been attributed to various factors,
including failure to validate drug targets
with sufficient rigor; limited predictive
value of animal models; inability to firmly
identify tumor subtypes that might benefit
from treatment; poorly defined clinical
endpoints;
organizational
pressure
to
continue clinical development, such as
stock market considerations for small
one-product biotech firms; and senior
management fear of admiting defeat in
larger pharma. The Tufts Center for the
Study of Drug Development has esti-
mated that the development of a drug on
average costs $2.558 billion, but it is
difficult
to
determine
how
this
was
calculated—and includes costs of failed
projects and controversially incorporates
selected examples of successful drugs
and the cost of capital (Avorn, 2015).
Some consideration should be given to
the fact that large pharmaceutical com-
panies encounter significant challenges
due to the large size of their operations,
redundant activities at multiple sites,
huge infrastructure costs, heavily ma-
trixed organizations with multiple levels
of decision makers, and endless rounds
of restructuring, mergers, acquisitions
and down-sizing—which
all ultimately
contribute to time delays (time is money!),
reduced
productivity,
and
increased
expenses.
Smaller
biotech
start-ups
have significant challenges as well, with
tremendous recent increases in space
and infrastructure build-up costs and
competition for talent (with consequent
increased employee salaries), particularly
in the Boston and San Francisco commu-
nities. Furthermore, all commercial en-
tities, large and small, spend very signifi-
cant sums on hefty salaries for senior
management. We therefore assume that
both organizational and scientific ineffi-
ciencies contribute to escalating drug
development costs.
A New Approach
Many of the fundamental discoveries that
formed the basis for new categories of
cancer drugs were made by academia.
Examples of truly disruptive contributions
from academic research that enabled
radically different treatment strategies
include the identification of recurrent
mutations in cancers from the large-
sale sequencing efforts (enabling tar-
geted therapeutics) and the decades-
long investments in unraveling the basic
biology underlying recognition of cancer
cells by the immune system (enabling
recent immuno-oncology drugs). The Na-
tional Cancer Institute budget of over
5 billion dollars annually virtually guaran-
tees that this stream of innovations in
oncology drug targets from academia
will not dry up any time soon. It should
also be recognized that academic drug
discovery has already been very success-
ful as several drugs that are part of the
therapeutic armamentarium have been
developed
by
academic
researchers,
e.g., the brain tumor DNA alkylating drug
temozolomide and the prostate cancer
CYP17 inhibitor agent abiraterone, as
well as the biomarker strategy for the
PARP inhibitor olaparib in BRCA mutant
ovarian cancer patients.
To further develop these academic
discoveries,
the
traditional
model
of
self-supporting
research
investigators
who drive their independent research
programs needs to be complemented
by
concerted
multidisciplinary
team
efforts
that
are
adequately
financed
and staffed with scientists having all the
required expertise to enable drug dis-
covery (Frye et al., 2011; Schultz Kirke-
gaard and Valentin, 2014). Indeed, in
recent years there has already been
a steady increase in the number of
580
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
 academic centers involved in drug dis-
covery. The Cancer Research UK Can-
cer Therapeutics Unit at The Institute
of Cancer Research, London (www.icr.
ac.uk/our-research/our-research-centres/
cancer-research-uk-cancer-therapeutics-
unit) and the Institute for Applied Cancer
Science at MDAnderson cancer center
(www.mdanderson.org/cancermoonshots/
research_platforms/Institute_for_applied_
cancer_science.html) are just two exam-
ples of relatively large-scale academic
cancer drug discovery units that have
been established to date. The Academic
Drug
Discovery
consortium
currently
lists 146 drug discovery centers in 15
countries, 80% of which have programs
in oncology drug development (www.
addconsortium.org/).
A key advantage of academic drug
discovery is the freedom and indeed in-
centivization to tackle major challenges
that would be viewed as too risky by
big pharma and even by many biotech
companies. Currently only a fraction of
the cancer genes listed in the Cancer
Gene Census have drugs or chemical
leads that act on the cognate protein.
This means that there are very large
numbers of cancer genes that remain
to be drugged. For example, we have
no drugs that work directly on mutant
KRAS, mutant p53 or MYC. Hence there
is a huge amount of work to be done to
complete the job of drugging of the can-
cer genome. Moreover, there are gene
classes that do not fall into the conven-
tional categories of oncogene addiction
and synthetic lethality targets, including
non-oncogene addiction, microenviron-
mental, drug resistance and immuno-
oncology targets.
Tackling any one of these new targets
carries very high risk—either biological
risk because there is relatively little knowl-
edge of the role of the gene in cancer, or
technical risk because the protein is not
readily druggable by current technology.
These are the targets for which academic
drug discovery can make an enormous
impact in a number of ways. For example:
(1) conducting very rigorous target valida-
tion to ensure robustness of the effects;
(2) linkage of the sensitivity to a robust
biomarker that can be potentially used
for patient selection as well as pharma-
codynamic biomarkers to demonstrate
target engagement as part of a Pharma-
cologic Audit Trail (Banerji and Workman,
2016); (3) demonstration of druggability
by a small molecule approach; (4) pro-
duction of chemical probe or biolog-
ical reagent
that
demonstrates
proof
of concept in a disease-relevant animal
model; (5) progression of a candidate
drug through preclinical development;
and (6) conduct of an early stage clin-
ical trial to show tolerability and proof
of concept in cancer patients (Hoelder
et al., 2012).
Factors that have improved the suc-
cess of cancer drug discovery efforts
in academia include embedding experi-
enced drug discovery scientists within a
comprehensive cancer center that pro-
vides expertise in basic cancer research,
clinical trials and treatment. The recruit-
ment of experienced medicinal chemists
and drug discovery biologists has been
critical. Adequate funding and resources
to support a portfolio of projects as well
the range of expertise and technologies
is important as is experienced leadership
and decision-making.
Once new chemical entities have been
developed and tested in experimental
animals, the (mostly academic) hospi-
tals become involved in the three major
phases of clinical testing of compounds.
Selected Good Laboratory Practice and
Good
Manufacturing
Practice-certified
academic pharmacies can develop and
manufacture oral and/or parenteral drug
formulations fit for clinical use. Aca-
demic clinicians clearly have the skills to
execute large clinical trials, especially
given that some of the recent large clinical
trials were ‘‘investigator initiated,’’ mean-
ing that an academic investigator was
leading the study. Based on the argu-
ments above, it is evident that academia
in principle has all the tools and skill sets
to discover drug targets, to convert these
targets into clinical candidates and to test
these compounds rigorously in clinical
trials.
Bringing Drugs to Patients under
New Assumptions
There are three main reasons why aca-
demic drug development typically stalls
at the stage of clinical testing. First, the
stringent quality control over the large-
scale manufacturing of clinical grade
drugs and their formulation is not a routine
skill of academic groups. Second, the
funds to support the high cost of per-
forming non-clinical regulatory toxicology
studies and clinical trials are hard to raise
by non-profit organizations. Third, even
when these first two steps could be
executed, academic drug discovery and
development units are not equipped to
handle marketing and sales of approved
drugs. Yet, it is at the level of commercial-
ization that the interests of large pharma
to maximize return on investment are
diagonally disparate from the typically
idealistic motivation that drives most
academics to spend countless hours at
modest compensation to solve important
problems in oncology. Nevertheless, aca-
demics are driven into the arms of big
pharma after initial proof of concept clin-
ical trials for the reasons listed above.
While it is gratifying for most academic in-
vestigators to see their discoveries reach
the clinic, it leaves them unable to influ-
ence the pricing of ‘‘their’’ drugs when
they reach the market. There are exam-
ples of charities funding later stage trials,
but these are exceptions and academic
drug discovery cannot rely on charity
funding only to bring their candidates to
patients.
How can we break free of this catch 22
situation in academic drug development?
A possible solution may reside in what
happens to cancer drugs when their
patents expire. At this point so-called
‘‘generic’’ drug makers bring generic ver-
sions (biosimilars in the case of biological
agents) to the market at greatly reduced
prices. These lower prices are possible
because the companies do not bear the
cost of research and development. Given
that generic drug makers are used to
working with lower profit margins, they
may be one potential partner to develop
highly innovative, but de-risked, drugs
from academic drug discovery and devel-
opment (Figure 1). Especially when the
drugs have a strong mechanistic rationale
and an associated biomarker of response
(key aspects of academic drug develop-
ment), the registration trials can be small
and the success rate much higher than
in traditional pharma trials. As a result,
the prices of such drugs can be far lower
than we have witnessed recently. Regu-
latory bodies are also open to novel
ways for drug approval. The European
Medicines Agency (EMA) has launched
an adaptive licensing program enabling
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
581
 companies to obtain marketing authori-
zation approval on the basis of a small
well
designed,
biomarker
supported
trial. Post-marketing commitments of the
company forcing them and the commu-
nity to deliver extended proof of benefit
at acceptable risk is a safeguard to them
and the community that the early market
launch was justified. If such commitments
are not met, the drug will be withdrawn.
Two elements will be mission critical
for this model to succeed. First, aca-
demic organizations will need to abide
by their societal responsibility and resist
the temptation to sell their drug candi-
date to the highest bidder. Second, it will
be imperative that agreements on price
caps are part of the negotiations with
potential investors or with companies
that take forward drugs arising from aca-
demic drug development. Ideally, this
approach would also be accompanied
by pricing strategy leading to affordable
drug cost in middle- and low-income
countries, thereby reducing inequality in
global cancer therapy. Given the substan-
tial de-risking achieved prior to commer-
cialization, our model should be attractive
to these parties and their investors. The
academic drug discovery and develop-
ment units could be sustained in this
model by receiving royalties on sales of
the drugs they originated.
We need to recognize that building up
a collection of academic centers with
required scale and expertise that would
produce significant numbers of drug can-
didates will take time and money and will
not be an overnight solution to the global
pricing problem. It is, however, a move
in the right direction. Moreover, the crea-
tion of such groups alongside generics
partners or newly created commercial en-
tities will create competition and drive
down prices in conventional pharma and
biotech.
Where to Start with Academic Drug
Discovery and Development?
There is quite a bit of low hanging fruit
to be harvested by academic consortia.
In addition to their main task of discov-
ering mechanistically innovative drugs, a
near term focus should be on the repur-
posing of existing patent-expired drugs
by finding new indications for these
drugs, linked to effective biomarkers that
are predictive of response. Academic
groups are well equipped to carry out
this research, and it would help if specific
funding mechanisms would be made
available for such projects. We emphasize
that such funds should not be allocated
at the expense of investments in funda-
mental cancer research. Second, aca-
demic consortia should also focus on
finding effective combinations for drugs
that were abandoned for lack of single
agent activity, which appears in one out
of three cases to be the primary reason
new chemical entities are dropped from
early phase clinical trials (Dimasi, 2001).
Lack of single agent activity is often
caused by redundancy or feedback in
signaling pathways, which makes the
inhibition of a single pathway ineffective
without
concomitant
inhibition
of
the
redundant or feedback pathway. As one
example, had the BRAF inhibitor vemura-
fenib been tested initially in BRAF mutant
colon cancer, it would have been dis-
carded as ineffective, whereas it turned
out to be very effective in BRAF mutant
melanoma. We argue that far too many
Figure 1. The Academic Drug Discovery and Development Continuum and Its Relationships with Stakeholders
Critical components of the cancer drug discovery and development process through commercialization are described. Through comprehensive integration of
expertise, cancer biologists and geneticists, drug discovery scientists and pharmacologists are able to precisely formulate a Clinical Candidate Profile based on
tumor subtype(s) and patient population that might best benefit from treatment. Project financing leverages philanthropic donations and partnerships with CROs
and generic drug makers, allowing not-for profit entities to retain control from the start through commercialization.
CRO, contract research organization, a provider of services to the biopharmaceutical industry; PD, pharmacodynamics, determines a drug mechanism of action
and safety profile; generic drug maker, a high-volume, low profit margin organization devoted to the manufacturing and commercialization of drugs past their
patent expiry; pharmaco-economics, a comprehensive evaluation of the impact of a given program on the health of a population, often leads to decisions on
policies; response biomarker, a biological indicator predicting response to a given treatment.
582
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
 potentially useful drugs are discarded
early for the wrong reasons.
Besides tackling these initial lower risk
projects, which can serve as a proof of
concept (and cash flow) for the model
proposed here, the academic drug dis-
covery centers should have as a major
emphasis the challenging task of discov-
ering and developing drugs against highly
innovative drug targets emerging from
academic research. Such efforts must
have a sharp focus on mechanism-based
therapies with strong associated bio-
markers of response to reduce attrition
rates while allowing small clinical trials to
show efficacy.
By partnering with generic drug makers
or new companies specifically formed
to enable this new model, academic
drug discovery units and interested drug
makers can lead by example and deliver
innovative drugs at sustainable prices.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
R.B. is the founder of Qameleon Therapeutics
(www.qamelonrx.com) that seeks to build a new
model
of
partnership
between
generic
drug
makers and academia as described in this com-
mentary. The authors are involved in multiple
drug discovery and development projects with
actual or potential commercial revenues and act
as advisers to several companies. We welcome
interaction with any drug maker interested in
considering academic partnerships as described
herein.
REFERENCES
Avorn, J. (2015). N. Engl. J. Med. 372, 1877–1879.
Banerji, U., and Workman, P. (2016). Semin. Oncol.
43, 436–445.
Brawley, L. (2016). Cancer Lett. 42, 2–18.
Dimasi, J.A. (2001). Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 69,
297–307.
Frye, S., Crosby, M., Edwards, T., and Juliano, R.
(2011). Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 10, 409–410.
Hoelder, S., Clarke, P.A., and Workman, P. (2012).
Mol. Oncol. 6, 155–176.
Howard, D.H., Bach, P.B., Berndt, E.R., and Conti,
R.M. (2015). J. Econ. Perspect. 29, 139–162.
Jaffe, S. (2015). Lancet 386, 2127–2128.
Light, D.W., and Kantarjian, H. (2013). Cancer 119,
3900–3902.
Mailankody, S., and Prasad, V. (2015). JAMA On-
col. 1, 539–540.
Schultz Kirkegaard, H., and Valentin, F. (2014).
Drug Discov. Today 19, 1699–1710.
Shaw, A.T., Kim, D.-W., Nakagawa, K., Seto, T.,
Crino
´ , L., Ahn, M.-J., De Pas, T., Besse, B., Solo-
mon, B.J., Blackhall, F., et al. (2013). N. Engl. J.
Med. 368, 2385–2394.
Shaw, A.T., Ou, S.H., Bang, Y.J., Camidge, D.R.,
Solomon, B.J., Salgia, R., Riely, G.J., Varella-
Garcia, M., Shapiro, G.I., Costa, D.B., et al.
(2014). N. Engl. J. Med. 371, 1963–1971.
van Harten, W.H., Wind, A., de Paoli, P., Saghatch-
ian, M., and Oberst, S. (2016). Lancet Oncol. 17,
18–20.
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
583
