 Laryngoscope Investigative Otolaryngology
V
C 2017 The Authors Laryngoscope Investigative Otolaryngology
published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of The Triological Society
The Efficacy of Lavender Aromatherapy in Reducing Preoperative
Anxiety in Ambulatory Surgery Patients Undergoing Procedures
in General Otolaryngology
Michael Wotman, BA
; Joshua Levinger, MD; Lillian Leung, PAC; Aron Kallush, BA;
Elizabeth Mauer, MS; Ashutosh Kacker, MD
Background: Preoperative anxiety is a common problem in hospitals and other health care centers. This emotional state
has been shown to negatively impact patient satisfaction and outcomes. Aromatherapy, the therapeutic use of essential oils
extracted from aromatic plants, may offer a simple, low-risk and cost-effective method of managing preoperative anxiety. The
purpose of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of lavender aromatherapy in reducing preoperative anxiety in ambulatory
surgery patients undergoing procedures in general otolaryngology.
Methods: A prospective and controlled pilot study was conducted with 100 patients who were admitted to New York-
Presbyterian/Weill Cornell Medical Center for ambulatory surgery from January of 2015 to August of 2015. The subjects
were allocated to two groups; the experimental group received inhalation lavender aromatherapy in the preoperative waiting
area while the control group received standard nursing care. Both groups reported their anxiety with a visual analog scale
(VAS) upon arriving to the preoperative waiting area and upon departure to the operating room.
Results: According to a Welch’s two sample t-test, the mean reduction in anxiety was statistically greater in the experi-
mental group than the control group (p 5 0.001).
Conclusion: Lavender aromatherapy reduced preoperative anxiety in ambulatory surgery patients. This effect was mod-
est and possibly statistically significant. Future research is needed to confirm the clinical efficacy of lavender aromatherapy.
Key Words: Ambulatory surgical procedures, anti-anxiety agents, lavandula, otolaryngology, pilot projects.
Level of Evidence: 2b
INTRODUCTION
Preoperative anxiety is a common problem in hospi-
tals and other health-care centers. Regardless of the sever-
ity
of
surgical
intervention,
patients
may
experience
considerable apprehension from fear of the operation,
anesthesia, and postoperative pain.1 Preoperative anxiety
has been shown to negatively impact patient satisfaction
and outcomes. This emotional state is associated with
increased use of narcotics and anesthetics, prolonged dura-
tion of hospitalization and postoperative wound healing,
and reduced ability to fight infection and comprehend
information about surgery.2–4 Pharmacologic therapies,
such as sedatives and opioids, are often used to treat pre-
operative anxiety. However, these medications have unde-
sirable
side
effects,
including
fatigue,
confusion,
and
restlessness.5 Moreover, they can affect a patient’s ability
to actively participate in his or her postoperative care and
delay hospital discharge.6,7
Aromatherapy, a form of complementary and alter-
native medicine (CAM), may offer a simple, low-risk and
cost-effective method of reducing preoperative anxiety.
The therapeutic use of essential oils extracted from aro-
matic plants to affect a person’s mood and health, aro-
matherapy has a wide range of applications. It is fast-
acting, noninvasive, has minimal side effects, and can be
applied in multiple forms, including massage, inhalation,
compress, and baths with mineral and herbal substan-
ces.2 Aromatherapy was utilized in Egypt and India
thousands of years ago as a remedy for different dis-
eases, is now an established nursing practice in the
United Kingdom, and has become increasingly popular
in the United States.3,8,9 The precise mechanism of aro-
matherapy is currently unclear; it is presumed to act
both physiologically and psychologically. The process of
inhalation aromatherapy begins when olfactory recep-
tors are stimulated by volatile molecules. Depolarization
of the primary olfactory neuron leads to generation of an
action potential, which is propagated along the olfactory
nerve axon to the olfactory bulb. From the olfactory
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits
use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is
properly cited, the use is non-commercial and no modifications or
adaptations are made.
From the Department of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery,
(M.W., J.L, L.L., A.K., A.KACKER); and the Department of Healthcare Pol-
icy and Research (E.M.), New York-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, New York, U.S.A.
Editor’s Note: This Manuscript was accepted for publication 2
October 2017.
Financial disclosures/Conflicts of Interest: There are no conflicts of
interest or financial disclosures regarding the publication of this paper.
Send correspondence to Ashutosh Kacker, MD, 1305 York Avenue,
5th Floor. New York, NY 10021. Email: ask9001@med.cornell.edu
DOI: 10.1002/lio2.121
Laryngoscope Investigative Otolaryngology 2: December 2017
Wotman et al:: Anxiety Reduction with Lavender
Aromatherapy
437
 bulb, axons of mitral cells enter the olfactory tract,
which divides into medial and lateral olfactory striae.
The lateral olfactory stria projects to the amygdala, a
key structure of the limbic system involved in behavior
and emotions.
Lavender is an important essential oil with a wide
range of applications and few reported sensitivities. It is
known for its sedative and relaxing effects. The precise
mechanism
by
which
lavender
exerts
its
anxiolytic
effects is uncertain. Two components of the lavender
plant, linalool and linalyl acetate, have been shown to
stimulate the parasympathetic nervous system. Linalyl
acetate is recognized as a narcotic while linalool is
known to act as a sedative.10 Other reported mecha-
nisms include interaction with NMDA or GABAA recep-
tors,
voltage-dependent
sodium
channels,
voltage-
dependent calcium channels, and glutamatergic and cho-
linergic neurotransmission.11 Moreover, the anxiolytic
efficacy of lavender aromatherapy has been assessed in
numerous clinical settings. Lavender aromatherapy was
shown to reduce anxiety in patients in the coronary
intensive care unit (ICU),10 dental office,12,13 before
open-heart
surgery,8
general
surgery,1
intrauterine
device (IUD) insertion,9 during peripheral venous cannu-
lation,14 and after myocardial infarction5 and percutane-
ous
coronary
intervention.15
On
the
other
hand,
lavender therapy had no significant effect on anxiety in
patients undergoing radiotherapy,16 colonoscopy,17 and
after coronary artery bypass surgery.2 In one study, lav-
ender and unscented aromatherapy both decreased anxi-
ety and improved sense of well-being before breast
surgery.18 The authors attributed their findings to a pla-
cebo effect related to added attention given to patients.
The discrepancies in the literature may also be attribut-
able to variations in study design, such as differences in
dosage, duration, method of application, and specie of
lavender, as well as different levels of anxiety experi-
enced by patients in different clinical settings. Moreover,
there is a paucity of literature pertaining to the use of
lavender aromatherapy in the ambulatory surgery set-
ting, in which preoperative waiting time is brief and a
convenient method of reducing anxiety is needed. In
light of these findings, it was decided to conduct this
pilot study to investigate the efficacy of lavender aroma-
therapy in reducing preoperative anxiety in ambulatory
surgery
patients
undergoing
procedures
in
general
otolaryngology.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study Design and Participants
A prospective and controlled pilot study was conducted
with 100 patients who were admitted to New York-Presbyte-
rian/Weill Cornell Medical Center for ambulatory surgery from
January of 2015 to August of 2015. Inclusion criteria included
patients over the age of 18 years, able to communicate with the
researchers, and agreeable to receiving aromatherapy before
surgery. These subjects planned to undergo a general otolaryn-
gology outpatient procedure, such as septoplasty, inferior turbi-
nate
reduction,
tonsillectomy,
functional
endoscopic
sinus
surgery, and sialoendoscopy. The study was limited to this sub-
set of patients for convenience and to minimize variation in
preoperative anxiety. Those who were allergic to lavender or
diagnosed with a mental illness were excluded from the study.
Importantly, patients with an impaired sense of smell were not
excluded from the study. The Institutional Review Board (IRB)
of Weill Cornell Medical College approved the entire study
process.
Procedure
A convenience sampling method was used to select and
enroll patients for the study. Subjects were recruited from the
patient groups of two attending physicians in the Department
of Otolaryngology at Weill Cornell Medical College. Before the
start of the study, an attending otolaryngologist had already
been providing aromatherapy to patients. Therefore, subjects
for the experimental arm were selected from his patient group.
The subjects of the control group were selected from the patient
group of a second physician who also performed procedures in
general otolaryngology but did not provide patients with aroma-
therapy. An amendment was added to this procedure during the
course of the study. After a sufficient number of patients were
enrolled in the experimental group, participants for the control
arm were selected from both patient groups. Upon arrival to
the preoperative waiting area, the aims and methods of the
study were explained to patients who met the inclusion criteria.
Consent was obtained in writing and subjects were assured of
data confidentiality. Both arms of the study completed a two-
part questionnaire. The first part was given after consent was
obtained and included a visual analog scale (Fig. 1) from 0–10
to measure anxiety level and a check box for whether patients
had been wearing cologne or perfume. Those in the experimen-
tal group were then given a lavender AromaTab and instructed
to open the patch on the minimum scent, remove the adhesive
back, and place the tab over the gown in the abdominal region.
Those in the control group were not given aromatherapy, but
rather received standard nursing care, which involves the rou-
tine preoperative care provided to patients by the nursing and
anesthesia staff, including provision of preoperative medica-
tions, such as anxiolytics.
Shortly before departure to the operating room, a second
survey with a visual analog scale was given to both groups. The
experimental group answered three additional questions related
to their experience. They were asked if they felt calmer with
the aromatherapy, if they found the lavender scent pleasant,
and if they used aromatherapy on a regular basis. The partici-
pants in the experimental group received aromatherapy for a
minimum of 30 minutes.
Instruments
Lavender essential oil was chosen for its calming and
relaxing effects. Lavender-sandalwood AromaTabs, scented tabs
on a self-adhesive level with 100% pure essential oils, were
used to administer the aromatherapy. This method is a simple,
controlled and consistent delivery system. With a dual-notched
protective plastic covering, patients can choose a minimum or
maximum scent exposure based on personal preference. Fur-
ther, a visual analog scale was used to evaluate each partici-
pant’s anxiety upon arrival to the preoperative area and before
departure to the operating room. This tool provides a clear
Fig. 1. Visual Analog Scale.
Laryngoscope Investigative Otolaryngology 2: December 2017
Wotman et al:: Anxiety Reduction with Lavender
Aromatherapy
438
 understanding of the patient’s anxiety level as subjects self-
ascribe their level of anxiety on a 10-cm horizontal line between
0 and 10 that is anchored by verbal descriptions of no, moder-
ate, and high anxiety. A higher score indicates a greater level of
anxiety.
Data Analysis
Demographic
characteristics
and
anxiety
scores
upon
arrival were described as N (%) or mean, median, and spread
and compared between the treatment and control groups by
Pearson’s Chi-Squared test or Welch’s two-sample t-test, as
appropriate. To control for differences in arrival anxiety scores
between the two groups, an anxiety change score was calculated
as the departure anxiety score minus the arrival anxiety score.
Welch’s two sample t-test was again employed to assess differ-
ences in anxiety change between the two
groups. Lastly,
responses to aromatherapy questions within the treatment
group were described as N (%) and respective 95% confidence
intervals were calculated to assess the precision of the obtained
estimates. All analyses were performed in R version 3.3.2
(Vienna, Austria). All p-values were two-sided with statistical
significance evaluated at the 0.05 alpha level.
RESULTS
Many
patients
were
prescreened,
but
of
those
approached, 115 subjects were enrolled in the study. Of
the 115 patients enrolled, 15 patients withdrew or were
removed from the study. Insufficient exposure to aroma-
therapy was the primary reason for removal from the
study. This was attributable to early transport to the
operating room. One patient removed the AromaTab
after experiencing nausea.
The statistical analysis was performed with 100
patients. There were 50 patients in each arm of the
study. Patient characteristics, including age, sex, height,
and weight, did not differ significantly between the
experimental and control groups (Table I). There were
22 females and 28 males in the control group; the mean
age of the subjects was 40.3 years. In the experimental
group, there were 26 females and 24 males; the mean
age was 43.28 years. Finally, in the control group, there
were two individuals with documented anxiety disorders
and three individuals with documented anxiolytic medi-
cations. There were two individuals with documented
anxiety disorders and nine individuals with documented
anxiolytic medications in the experimental group.
Patient anxiety was recorded upon arrival to the
preoperative waiting area and before departure to the
operating room (Table II). The mean arrival anxiety was
3.79 in the control group and 4.74 in the experimental
group. The mean departure anxiety was 3.78 in the
TABLE I.
Characteristics of Control and Treatment Groups.
Control
N (%) or Mean (SD)
Treatment
N (%) or Mean (SD)
Test Statistic (df)*
P
Sex
Female
22 (44.00%)
26 (52.00%)
0.361 (1)
0.548
Male
28 (56.00%)
24 (48.00%)
Age (years)
40.30 (14.38)
43.28 (15.15)
21.009 (97.732)
0.316
Height (m)
1.72 (0.10)
1.72 (0.10)
20.221 (97.816)
0.825
Weight (lbs)
167.82 (42.13)
167.60 (36.28)
0.028 (95.883)
0.977
Pearson’s Chi-Squared or Welch’s two sample t-tests, as appropriate
*Test Statistic is Chi-Square or t, as appropriate
TABLE II.
Anxiety Scores of Control and Treatment Groups.
Arrival Anxiety
N
Mean
SD
Median
Min
Max
Test Statistic (df)*
P
Control
50
3.79
2.35
4.00
0.00
10.00
22.085 (97.603)
0.040
Treatment
50
4.74
2.20
5.00
0.00
10.00
Departure Anxiety
N
Mean
SD
Median
Min
Max
Test Statistic (df)
P
Control
50
3.78
2.33
4.00
0.00
10.00
0.248 (96.875)
0.804
Treatment
50
3.67
2.09
4.00
0.00
9.00
Anxiety Change (Departure - Arrival)
N
Mean
SD
Median
Min
Max
Test Statistic (df)
P
Control
50
20.01
1.29
0.00
24.00
4.00
3.294 (86.993)
0.001
Treatment
50
21.07
1.87
21.00
24.00
5.00
Welch’s two sample t-tests
*Test Statistic is t
Laryngoscope Investigative Otolaryngology 2: December 2017
Wotman et al:: Anxiety Reduction with Lavender
Aromatherapy
439
 control group and 3.67 in the experimental group. More-
over, the mean change in anxiety was calculated for
both arms of the study (Fig. 2). Anxiety in the control
group decreased on average by 0.01 while anxiety in the
experiment group decreased on average by 1.07. Accord-
ing to a Welch’s two sample t-test, the mean reduction
in anxiety was statistically greater in the experimental
group than the control group (p 5 0.001). The partici-
pants that received aromatherapy answered three addi-
tional questions related to their experience (Table III). A
majority of the subjects reported that they felt calmer
with the intervention (77.08%) and found the lavender
scent pleasant (92.0%). Most patients (86%) did not use
aromatherapy on a regular basis.
DISCUSSION
Preoperative anxiety is a common problem in hospi-
tals and other health care settings. This emotional state
is associated with adverse patient outcomes and satisfac-
tion. Aromatherapy may offer a simple, low-risk, and
cost-effective method of reducing preoperative anxiety.
Therefore, a controlled pilot study was conducted to assess
the efficacy of lavender aromatherapy in reducing preoper-
ative anxiety in ambulatory surgery patients undergoing
procedures in general otolaryngology. The results of the
study indicate that lavender aromatherapy resulted in a
statistically significant reduction in preoperative anxiety
as measured by the subjects with a visual analog scale.
This is consistent with a significant number of publications
that have illustrated the anxiolytic effects of lavender aro-
matherapy in different clinical settings.
In retrospect, the clinical significance of this reduc-
tion in anxiety is questionable as the mean anxiety in
the experimental group only decreased by a value of
1.07. Moreover, there are several important limitations
of this study. Firstly, the experimental and control
groups were non-blinded, allowing for the possibility of a
placebo effect to have influenced the results. The use of
standard nursing care as the control precluded from
effective blinding. In future studies, an unscented pla-
cebo or alternative essential oil may be used as a more
effective control. However, the use of an unscented pla-
cebo may interfere with blinding while an alternative
scent may not serve as a true placebo. Secondly, a conve-
nience sampling method was utilized in this study. This
method of sampling is subject to selection bias and may
limit the generalizability of the results. A larger study
utilizing a random sampling method should be used in
further investigations.
The statistical analysis was limited by a lack of con-
trol for any confounding factors, such as preoperative
use of pharmacologic anxiolytics, prior surgical experi-
ence, and differing surgical procedures, which may have
caused patients to experience different levels of preoper-
ative anxiety. Of important note, the difference in preop-
erative anxiety between the control and experimental
groups was statistically significant (p 5 0.04). The exper-
imental group demonstrated higher preoperative anxiety
scores. A review of the preoperative evaluations and
operative reports revealed that both groups had the
same number of individuals with documented anxiety
disorders
while
the
experimental
group
had
more
patients using anxiolytic medications, suggesting that
these two factors did not contribute significantly to the
difference in preoperative anxiety. Since all patients
underwent ambulatory procedures in general otolaryn-
gology, with many patients undergoing either functional
endoscopic sinus surgery, septoplasty/turbinate reduc-
tion, sialoendoscopy, or tonsillectomy, the differing sur-
geries between the two groups most likely did not
contribute greatly to the difference in preoperative anxi-
ety. Nevertheless, the experimental group did demon-
strate higher anxiety scores initially and it is therefore
expected that the experimental group anxiety scores
would trend closer to the average on the second mea-
surement, regardless of treatment. Given the question-
able clinical significance and limitations of this study,
further research is needed to substantiate the clinical
benefits of lavender aromatherapy in the ambulatory
surgery
setting,
especially
its
efficacy
in
reducing
adverse patient outcomes, limiting use of preoperative
Fig. 2. Change in Anxiety in Control and Treatment Groups.
TABLE III.
Experimental Group Questionnaire.
Did the patient feel calmer
with aromatherapy?
N (%)
95% CI
No
11 (22.92%)
13.31–36.54%
Yes
37 (77.08%)
63.46–86.69%
missing
2
Did the patient find the
lavender scent
pleasant?
No
4 (8.00%)
3.15–18.84%
Yes
46 (92.00%)
81.16–96.85%
Does the patient use
aromatherapy on
a regular basis?
No
43 (86.00%)
73.81–93.05%
Yes
7 (14.00%)
6.95–26.19%
Laryngoscope Investigative Otolaryngology 2: December 2017
Wotman et al:: Anxiety Reduction with Lavender
Aromatherapy
440
 anxiolytic medications, and improving patient satisfac-
tion. However, it should be noted that a majority of
patients reported that they felt calmer while receiving
aromatherapy and found the lavender scent pleasant.
Given the simplicity, low cost, and safe profile of laven-
der aromatherapy, the authors promote its use in reduc-
ing preoperative anxiety in the ambulatory surgery
setting.
CONCLUSION
Given the adverse effects of preoperative anxiety
and the simplicity of aromatherapy, health care pro-
viders should consider the use of preoperative lavender
aromatherapy in the ambulatory surgery setting, in
which a short preoperative waiting time necessitates a
convenient method of anxiety reduction. In this study,
lavender aromatherapy reduced preoperative anxiety in
ambulatory surgery patients undergoing procedures in
general otolaryngology. This effect was modest and pos-
sibly statistically significant. The study has several
important limitations as well. Future research is needed
to confirm the clinical efficacy of lavender aromatherapy.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the nursing staff of the
preoperative department at New York-Presbyterian/Weill
Cornell Medical Center for their assistance with conduct-
ing the study and the ambulatory surgery patients who
participated in this research.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Braden R, Reichow S, Halm MA. The use of the essential oil lavandin to
reduce preoperative anxiety in surgical patients. J Perianesth Nurs
2009;24(6):348–355.
2. Seifi Z, Beikmoradi A, Oshvandi K, et al. The effect of lavender essential
oil on anxiety level in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass graft
surgery: A double-blinded randomized clinical trial. Iran J Nurs Mid-
wifery Res 2014;19(6):574–580.
3. Fayazi S, Babashahi M, Rezaei M. The effect of inhalation aromatherapy
on anxiety level of the patients in preoperative period. Iran J Nurs Mid-
wifery Res 2011;16(4):278–283.
4. Ni C-H, Hou W-H, Kao C-C, et al. The anxiolytic effect of aromatherapy
on patients Awaiting ambulatory surgery: a randomized controlled trial.
Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 2013;2013:927419.
5. Najafi Z, Taghadosi M, Sharifi K, et al. The effects of inhalation aroma-
therapy on anxiety in patients with myocardial infarction: a randomized
clinical trial. Iran Red Crescent Med J 2014;16(8):e15485.
6. Stea S, Beraudi A, De Pasquale D. Essential oils for complementary treat-
ment of surgical patients: state of the art. Evid Based Complement
Alternat Med 2014;2014:726341.
7. Kim S, Kim HJ, Yeo JS, et al. The effect of lavender oil on stress, bispec-
tral index values, and needle insertion pain in volunteers. J Altern Com-
plement Med 2011;17:823–826.
8. Hosseini S, Heydari A, Vakili M, et al. Effect of lavender essence inhala-
tion on the level of anxiety and blood cortisol in candidates for open-
heart surgery. Iran J Nurs Midwifery Res 2016;21(4):397–401.
9. Shahnazi M, Nikjoo R, Yavarikia P, Mohammad-Alizadeh-Charandabi S.
Inhaled lavender effect on anxiety and pain caused from intrauterine
device insertion. J Caring Sci 2012;1(4):255–261.
10. Karadag E, Samancioglu S, Ozden D, Bakir E. Effects of aromatherapy on
sleep quality and anxiety of patients. Nurs Crit Care 2017;22;105–112.
11. Schuwald AM, N€
oldner M, Wilmes T, et al. Lavender oil-potent anxiolytic
properties via modulating voltage dependent calcium channels. PLoS
ONE 2013;8(4):e59998.
12. Lehrner J, Marwinski G, Lehr S, et al. Ambient odors of orange and lav-
ender reduce anxiety and improve mood in a dental office. Physiol
Behav 2005;86(1–2):92–95.
13. Zabirunnisa M, Gadagi JS, Gadde P, Myla N, Koneru J, Thatimatla C.
Dental patient anxiety: Possible deal with Lavender fragrance. J Res
Pharm Pract 2014;3(3):100–103.
14. Karaman T, Karaman S, Dogru S, et al. Evaluating the efficacy of laven-
der aromatherapy on peripheral venous cannulation pain and anxiety: A
prospective, randomized study. Complement Ther Clin Pract 2016;23:64–
8.
15. Cho M-Y, Min ES, Hur M-H, Lee MS. Effects of aromatherapy on the anxi-
ety, vital signs, and sleep quality of percutaneous coronary intervention
patients in intensive care units. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med
2013;2013:381381.
16. Graham PH, Browne L, Cox H, Graham J. Inhalation aromatherapy dur-
ing radiotherapy: results of a placebo-controlled double-blind random-
ized trial. J Clin Oncol 2003;21(12):2372–2376.
17. Muzzarelli L, Force M, Sebold M. Aromatherapy and reducing preproce-
dural anxiety: A controlled prospective study. Gastroenterol Nurs 2006;
29(6):466–471.
18. Franco L, Blanck TJ, Dugan K, et al. Both lavender fleur oil and
unscented oil aromatherapy reduce preoperative anxiety in breast sur-
gery patients: a randomized trial. J Clin Anesth 2016;33:243–249.
Laryngoscope Investigative Otolaryngology 2: December 2017
Wotman et al:: Anxiety Reduction with Lavender
Aromatherapy
441
