 [The author responds:]
D
avid Spence misses the point of
the series of 3 articles in suggest-
ing that they are about cost.1–3 These
articles systematically review the best
available evidence from randomized
controlled trials using a hierarchy of ev-
idence; cost is the least and last consid-
eration. The clear conclusion from the
available evidence, independent of cost,
is that thiazides are the best first-choice
drugs. In other words, if thiazides were
the most expensive antihypertensive
drug class, the conclusion would be the
same.
Spence inaccurately implies that the
evidence in these articles is biased. It is
true that I am the Managing Director
of the BC Therapeutics Initiative.
However, he does not understand the
relationship between the Therapeutics
Initiative and BC Pharmacare. The
Therapeutics Initiative assesses evi-
dence of the efficacy and safety of new
and existing drugs and provides a sum-
mary of that evidence to Pharmacare.
The Therapeutics Initiative does not
consider or include cost in that assess-
ment. Evaluation of cost and cost-
effectiveness evidence is the mandate of
the Pharmacoeconomics Initiative. The
Drug Benefit Committee of Pharma-
care and the Director of Pharamacare
make funding decisions on the basis of
summaries of evidence (not funding ad-
vice) from the Therapeutics Initiative
and Pharmacoeconomics Initiative plus
other considerations.
Spence is asking us to put aside evi-
dence from randomized controlled tri-
als and in its place accept the conclu-
sion from 2 retrospective observational
studies.4,5 Both of these studies were
funded by the drug industry and the
conclusions ratified their vested inter-
est. In my opinion, this type of study
reflects the profound influence drug
companies can have on measures of
drug compliance that rely on dispensed
medication. The industry accomplishes
this by providing drug samples (not de-
tectable as dispensed medication) and
intensive one-on-one promotion to
physicians. Answering whether medica-
tion persistence differs with different
drugs necessitates randomization of pa-
tients to the alternate drugs and blind-
ing of both physicians and patients.
James M. Wright
Departments of Pharmacology &
Therapeutics and Medicine
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC
References
1.
Wright JM. Choosing a first-line drug in the
management of elevated blood pressure: What is
the evidence? 1: Thiazide diuretics. CMAJ 2000;
163(1):57-60.
2.
Wright JM. Choosing a first-line drug in the
management of elevated blood pressure: What is
the evidence? 2: β-Blockers. CMAJ 2000;163(2):
188-92.
3.
Wright JM. Choosing a first-line drug in the
management of elevated blood pressure: What 
is the evidence? 3: Angiotensin-converting-
enzyme-inhibitors. CMAJ 2000;163(3):293-6.
4.
Caro JJ, Salas M, Speckman JL, Raggio G, Jack-
son JD. Persistence with treatment for hyperten-
sion in actual practice. CMAJ 1999;160(1):31-7.
5.
Bloom BS. Continuation of initial antihyperten-
sive medication after 1 year of therapy. Clin Ther
1998;20:1-11.
Change the Canada Health
Act? Why?
I
am concerned about your recent edi-
torial on the Canada Health Act
(CHA).1 It suggests that the CHA is un-
sustainable at current government
funding levels and therefore needs to be
revisited. This is equivalent to respond-
ing to an increase in the cost of prose-
cuting drunk drivers by raising the
blood alcohol limit rather than by in-
creasing funding for police and prose-
cutors. The answer lies not in abandon-
ing the CHA’s principles but in
reconsidering the financing of the cur-
rent system.
The editorial suggests that compre-
hensiveness is potentially the most un-
sustainable of the CHA’s 5 principles,
largely owing to advances in medical
technology and the resulting elevation
of public expectations. A natural conse-
quence of successful research is to in-
crease our ability to care for our pa-
tients. Not surprisingly, these advances
may cost more than the technology
currently available. Should we maintain
the status quo in order to contain costs?
Obviously, this is not what Canadians
want. The cheapest solution is not nec-
essarily the most efficient one.
Although I agree that a better
method of financing — both for
medicare and capital investment —
must be found, I disagree that this nec-
essarily requires re-examination of the
CHA’s principles. The CHA embraces,
ideologically, what many Canadians
feel to be essential, both for health care
and as an expression of our nationality.
If changes are going to be made on an
ideologic basis, there should be evi-
178
JAMC • 23 JANV. 2001; 164 (2)
Submitting letters
Letters may be submitted via our Web site or by mail, courier, email
(pubs@cma.ca) or fax. They should be no more than 300 words long and must be
signed by all authors. A signed copy of letters submitted by email must be sent
subsequently to CMAJ by fax or regular mail. Letters written in response to an
article published in CMAJ must be submitted within 2 months of the article’s
publication date. CMAJ corresponds only with the authors of accepted letters.
Letters are subject to editing and abridgement.
eLetters
We encourage readers to submit letters to the editor via the eLetters service on our
Web site (www.cma.ca/cmaj). Our aim is to post by the next business day
correspondence that contributes significantly to the topic under discussion. eLetters
will be appended to the article in question in eCMAJ and will also be considered
for print publication in CMAJ. Beginning with the Aug. 22, 2000, issue, eLetters
can be submitted by clicking on the mailbox icon at the end of the HTML text of
any eCMAJ article.
Letters
Correspondance
Return to January 23, 2001 Table of Contents
 dence that the national ideology has
changed. If changes are going to be
made on the basis of efficiency, there
should be proof that such changes are
for the better. At the moment, evidence
is lacking on both levels.
Kevin Busche
PGY-4, Neurology
Department of Clinical Neurosciences
University of Calgary
Calgary, Alta.
Reference
1.
Time for a new Canada Health Act [editorial].
CMAJ 2000;163(6):689.
Helping physicians with
alcohol problems
A
recent public health item in CMAJ
pointed out that although the pre-
cise prevalence of problems with alco-
hol and other drugs among physicians
is unknown, it is probably similar to
that in the general population.1 Single
and colleagues’ estimate of 9% was
quoted.2 This estimate applies to cur-
rent drinkers who have experienced any
of a list of specific problems at least
once in the past year; these individuals
do not necessarily need treatment. Sin-
gle and colleagues broke down the
overall estimate by demographic vari-
ables: 7.6% of those with university ed-
ucation and 5.8% of those employed in
a profession reported any alcohol-
related problem in the past year. These
latter figures are probably better esti-
mates of the rate of problems among
physicians.
More recent data from the
1996–1997 National Population Health
Survey showed that, overall, 2.5% of
people who drank in the year before the
survey drank at “levels associated with
clinical dependence on alcohol.”3 The
rates were 1.1% for those with a uni-
versity education and 0.8% for those
employed in professional or semi-
professional positions. These figures
approximate the percentages of physi-
cians ever having received treatment for
problems with alcohol and other drugs:
1.2% in Ontario,4 1.8% in Canada5 and
1.3% in the United States.6
Most provincial medical associations
have programs for physicians who need
treatment for problems with alcohol
and other drugs. However, the discrep-
ancy between estimates of those who
experience consequences of drinking
and those who require and receive
treatment points to a large group whose
needs are not being addressed. Provin-
cial physician health programs include
educational outreach and lectures to
medical students and physicians,7 but
there is little help for those who feel
distress and are beginning to develop
problems. Medical schools, hospitals,
professional organizations and individ-
ual physicians should unite in a health
promotion approach to physician
health that goes beyond prevention
programs, to reduce systemic stresses
and involve physicians in building a
healthier work environment.
Joan M. Brewster
Department of Public Health Sciences
University of Toronto
Toronto, Ont.
References
1.
Weir E. Substance abuse among physicians.
CMAJ 2000;162(12):1730.
2.
Single E, Brewster JM, MacNeil P, Hatcher J,
Trainor C. The 1993 General Social Survey II:
alcohol problems in Canada. Can J Public Health
1995;86:402-7.
3.
Single E, Truong MV, Adlaf E, Ialomiteanu A.
Canadian profile 1999. Toronto: Centre for Ad-
diction and Mental Health; 1999.
4.
Brewster JM. Prevalence of alcohol and other
drug problems among physicians. JAMA 1986;
255:1913-20.
5.
Brewster JM, Ruel J-M. Patterns of drug use
among Canadian physicians, pharmacists, and
lawyers. Fourth annual scientific meeting of the
Canadian Medical Society on alcohol and other
drugs; 1992 Nov 23; Vancouver.
6.
Hughes PH, Brandenburg, N, Baldwin DC,
Storr CL, Williams KM, Anthony JC, et al.
Prevalence of substance use among US physi-
cians. JAMA 1992;267:2333-9.
7.
Kaufmann M. PHP annual report: OMA Physi-
cian Health Program completes fourth success-
ful year. Ont Med Rev 2000;67:39-43.
Policies must keep pace 
with the evolution of vaccines
A
lthough I wholeheartedly support
your editorial on vaccination, I feel
that one important element was lack-
ing: the need for ongoing research.1
Concerns have been expressed about
various vaccines at various times, and
re-evaluations have led us to modify
certain products and policies.
The pertussis vaccine is a different
product today than it was some years
ago. Policies regarding the administra-
tion of injected and oral poliomyelitis
vaccines have been changed. We are
now in the process of eliminating
thimerosal as a preservative and replac-
ing it with other agents. Questions have
been raised regarding a possible rela-
tionship between the measles–mumps–
rubella vaccine and the significant in-
crease in the incidence of autism; such
an association remains unproven, but
more research is needed. We are ad-
ministering more vaccines than ever be-
fore, and concern has been expressed
about possible overburdening of the
immune system in some infants; this
needs to be evaluated.
As responsible and caring people of
science, we must keep our minds open
and, from time to time, recheck beliefs
and policies we have taken for granted.
Victor C. Goldbloom
Pediatrician
Montreal, Que.
Reference
1.
Vaccination: refuting the refusals [editorial].
CMAJ 2000;163(7):801.
Letters
CMAJ • JAN. 23, 2001; 164 (2)
179
