 Corresponding author: Mitchell Edelson, MD, Hanjani Institute for Gynecologic Oncology, 1200 Old York Rd, Abington, PA 19001; 
Mitchell.Edelson@jefferson.edu.
A.A.W. and M.I.E. were Expert Panel Co-Chairs.
ASCO Clinical Practice Guidelines Committee approval: January 25, 2016.
AUTHORS’ DISCLOSURES OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Disclosures provided by the authors are available with this article at www.jco.org
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Administrative support: Kari Bohlke, Jessica Oldham
Manuscript writing: All authors
Final approval of manuscript: All authors
AUTHORS’ DISCLOSURES OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The following represents disclosure information provided by authors of this manuscript. All relationships are considered compensated. 
Relationships are self-held unless noted. I = Immediate Family Member, Inst = My Institution. Relationships may not relate to the 
subject matter of this manuscript. For more information about ASCO’s conflict of interest policy, please refer to www.asco.org/rwc or 
jco.ascopubs.org/site/ifc.
Alexi A. Wright
No relationship to disclose
Kari Bohlke
No relationship to disclose
Deborah K. Armstrong Consulting or Advisory Role: Morphotek, Eisai (I), Vertex
Research Funding: Clovis Oncology, AstraZeneca, Eisai (I), Exelixis (I)
Other Relationship: US Food and Drug Administration, Eviti
Michael A. Bookman
Employment: McKesson
Honoraria: Genentech/Roche
Consulting or Advisory Role: Boehringer Ingelheim, Genentech/Roche, AstraZeneca, Abbvie, Sanofi, Novartis, Immunogen, 
Endocyte, Gradalis, Oxigene, Vertex, Pfizer, Clovis Oncology, Tesaro
William A. Cliby
Research Funding: GamaMabs Pharma
Robert L. Coleman
Honoraria: National Comprehensive Cancer Network, Clovis Oncology, Genentech/Roche, Esperance Pharmaceuticals, Department 
of Defense-Congressionally Directed Medical Research Programs
Research Funding: AstraZeneca/MedImmune, Esperance Pharmaceuticals, OncoMed, Array BioPharma, Clovis Oncology, Amgen, 
Johnson & Johnson, Merrimack
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Millennium, Merck, Amgen, AstraZeneca/MedImmune, Array BioPharma, Merrimack, 
Gradalis, Bayer, Clovis Oncology
Don S. Dizon
Consulting or Advisory Role: UpToDate, Pfizer
Research Funding: Aeterna Zentaris
Joseph J. Kash
Speakers’ Bureau: Novartis
Larissa A. Meyer
Honoraria: TRM Oncology
Research Funding: AstraZeneca
Kathleen N. Moore
Consulting or Advisory Role: Genentech/Roche (Inst), Immunogen (Inst), Advaxis, AstraZeneca (Inst), Amgen (Inst), Clovis 
Oncology (Inst), Merrimack
Alexander B. Olawaiye
Consulting or Advisory Role: Plasma Surgical
Jessica Oldham
No relationship to disclose
Ritu Salani
Consulting or Advisory Role: Clovis
Dee Sparacio
Stock or Other Ownership: Exact Sciences (I), Putnam Global Health Care Fund
Speakers’ Bureau: WEGO Health Solutions
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Eye for Pharma, AstraZeneca/MedImmune
William P. Tew
No relationship to disclose
Ignace Vergote
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Published in final edited form as:
Gynecol Oncol. 2016 October ; 143(1): 3–15. doi:10.1016/j.ygyno.2016.05.022.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy for Newly Diagnosed, Advanced 
Ovarian Cancer: Society of Gynecologic Oncology and American 
Society of Clinical Oncology Clinical Practice Guideline
Alexi A. Wright, Kari Bohlke, Deborah K. Armstrong, Michael A. Bookman, William A. Cliby, 
Robert L. Coleman, Don S. Dizon, Joseph J. Kash, Larissa A. Meyer, Kathleen N. Moore, 
Alexander B. Olawaiye, Jessica Oldham, Ritu Salani, Dee Sparacio, William P. Tew, Ignace 
Vergote, and Mitchell I. Edelson
Alexi A. Wright, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School; Don S. Dizon, 
Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; Kari 
Bohlke, American Society of Clinical Oncology, Alexandria, VA; Deborah K. Armstrong, Johns 
Hopkins Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baltimore, MD; Michael A. Bookman, US 
Oncology Research and Arizona Oncology, Tucson, AZ; William A. Cliby, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
MN; Robert L. Coleman and Larissa A. Meyer, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX; Joseph J. Kash, Edward Cancer Center, Naperville; Jessica Oldham, 
Society of Gynecologic Oncology, Chicago, IL; Kathleen N. Moore, Stephenson Oklahoma 
Cancer Center at the University of Oklahoma, Oklahoma City, OK; Alexander B. Olawaiye, 
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh; Mitchell I. Edelson, Hanjani Institute for 
Gynecologic Oncology, Abington Hospital, Jefferson Health, Abington, PA; Ritu Salani, The Ohio 
State University, Columbus, OH; Dee Sparacio, Hightstown, New Jersey; William P
. Tew, 
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY; and Ignace Vergote, Leuven Cancer 
Institute, Leuven, Belgium.
Abstract
Purpose—To provide guidance to clinicians regarding the use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy and 
interval cytoreduction among women with stage IIIC or IV epithelial ovarian cancer.
Methods—The Society of Gynecologic Oncology and the American Society of Clinical 
Oncology convened an Expert Panel and conducted a systematic review of the literature.
Consulting or Advisory Role: AstraZeneca (Inst), Amgen NV (Inst), Array Biopharma (Inst), Biogen Indec (Inst), Boehringer 
Ingelheim (Inst), Bristol-Myers Squibb (Inst), Eisai (Inst), Eli Lilly and Company (Inst), Endocyte (Inst), Fresenius (Inst), GE 
Healthcare (Inst), Genentech (Inst), GlaxoSmithKline (Inst), Hampton Medical Conferences (Inst), Intuitive Surgical (Inst), Janssen-
Cilag (Inst), MedImmune (Inst), Menarini Ricerche Spa (Inst), Merck Sharp & Dohme (Inst), Morphotek (Inst), Nektar (Inst), Novo 
Nordisk (Inst), Oasmia Pharmaceutical AB (Inst), PharmaMar (Inst), Phillips Gilmore Oncology (Inst), Quintiles Belgium (Inst), 
Roche-Hoffmann (Inst), Sanofi (Inst), Shering-Plough (Inst), Sigma-Tau Pharmaceuticals (Inst), Telik (Inst), TRM Oncology (Inst), 
Kendle Inc Research (Inst)
Research Funding: Amgen (Inst), AstraZeneca (Inst), Boehringer Ingelheim (Inst), Bristol-Myers Squibb (Inst), Chugai Pharma 
(Inst), Eisai (Inst), Exelixis (Inst), Fresenius Biotech (Inst), GlaxoSmithKline (Inst), Proacta (Inst), Ipsen (Inst), Janssen-Cilag (Inst), 
Merck Sharp & Dohme (Inst), Merrimack (Inst), Morphotek (Inst), Nektar (Inst), Nerviano Medical Sciences (Inst), Novartis (Inst), 
Pfizer (Inst), Quintiles (Inst), Roche (Inst), Sandoz (Inst), Sanofi (Inst), Schering-Plough (Inst), Vifor Pharma (Inst), Wyeth (Inst)
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: GCI Health, Roche, Oasmia Pharmaceutical AB, PharmaMar, AstraZeneca
Mitchell I. Edelson
Employment: Merck (I)
Stock or Other Ownership: Merck (I)
Wright et al.
Page 2
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Results—Four phase III clinical trials form the primary evidence base for the recommendations. 
The published studies suggest that for selected women with stage IIIC or IV epithelial ovarian 
cancer, neoadjuvant chemotherapy and interval cytoreduction are noninferior to primary 
cytoreduction and adjuvant chemotherapy with respect to overall and progression-free survival and 
are associated with less perioperative morbidity and mortality.
Recommendations—All women with suspected stage IIIC or IV invasive epithelial ovarian 
cancer should be evaluated by a gynecologic oncologist prior to initiation of therapy. The primary 
clinical evaluation should include a CT of the abdomen and pelvis, and chest imaging (CT 
preferred). Women with a high perioperative risk profile or a low likelihood of achieving 
cytoreduction to < 1 cm of residual disease (ideally to no visible disease) should receive 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Women who are fit for primary cytoreductive surgery, and with 
potentially resectable disease, may receive either neoadjuvant chemotherapy or primary 
cytoreductive surgery. However, primary cytoreductive surgery is preferred if there is a high 
likelihood of achieving cytoreduction to < 1 cm(ideally to no visible disease) with acceptable 
morbidity. Before neoadjuvant chemotherapy is delivered, all patients should have confirmation of 
an invasive ovarian, fallopian tube, or peritoneal cancer. Additional information is available at 
www.asco.org/NACT-ovarian-guideline and www.asco.org/guidelineswiki.
INTRODUCTION
Nearly 75% of women with ovarian cancer are diagnosed with advanced stage disease 
(International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics [FIGO] IIIC or IV) at presentation. 
Treatment with primary cytoreductive surgery (PCS) followed by chemotherapy has been 
the standard of care for these women. Recently, however, two randomized clinical trials 
(RCTs) compared PCS and chemotherapy to neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT) followed 
by interval cytoreductive surgery (ICS) and adjuvant chemotherapy for women with 
advanced ovarian cancer.1,2 These trials demonstrated that NACT was noninferior to PCS 
with respect to progression-free and overall survival and resulted in a lower incidence of 
treatment-related morbidity and mortality. However, both trials have been criticized because 
the median overall survival, mean operative time, and rates of optimal cytoreduction were 
lower than expected.3 The choice between PCS and NACT remains controversial. The 
purpose of this guideline is to provide clinicians with information regarding the use of 
NACT and interval cytoreduction versus primary cytoreduction and chemotherapy among 
women with stage IIIC or IV epithelial ovarian cancer.
GUIDELINE QUESTIONS
This clinical practice guideline addresses the following clinical questions: (1) What clinical 
evaluations should be performed in all women with suspected or newly diagnosed stage IIIC 
or IV epithelial ovarian cancer? (2) Which patient and disease factors should be used as 
criteria for identifying patients who are not suitable for PCS? (3) How do NACT and PCS 
compare with respect to progression-free survival, overall survival, and perioperative 
morbidity and mortality in women with newly diagnosed stage IIIC or IV epithelial cancer 
who are fit for primary cytoreduction and have potentially resectable disease, and how 
should this information be used to select initial treatment? (4) What additional clinical 
Wright et al.
Page 3
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 evaluations should be performed in all women with suspected or newly diagnosed stage IIIC 
or IV epithelial ovarian cancer before NACT is delivered? (5)What is the preferred 
chemotherapy regimen for women with stage IIIC or IV epithelial ovarian cancer who will 
receive NACT? (6) Among women treated with NACT, does the timing of interval 
cytoreduction or the number of chemotherapy cycles after interval cytoreduction affect the 
safety or efficacy of treatment? (7)What are the treatment options for patients with 
progressive disease on NACT?
METHODS
Guideline Development Process
The Expert Panel met four times. The authors were asked to consider the available evidence, 
contribute to the development of the guideline, provide critical review, and finalize the 
guideline recommendations. Members of the Expert Panel (Appendix Table A1, online only) 
were responsible for reviewing and approving the penultimate version of guideline, which 
was then circulated for external review and submitted to Gynecologic Oncology and the 
Journal of Clinical Oncology (JCO) for editorial review and consideration for publication. 
The guideline was also reviewed and approved by the ASCO Clinical Practice Guidelines 
Committee, SGO Publications, and the SGO Clinical Practice Committees prior to 
publication.
The recommendations were developed by an Expert Panel with multidisciplinary 
representation. Panelists were drawn from both community and academic settings, and they 
included gynecologic oncologists, medical oncologists, and a patient/advocacy 
representative. Panelists considered evidence from a systematic review of phase III RCTs, 
meta-analyses, and multicenter cohort studies published between March 20, 2005, and 
March 20, 2015. A list of search terms is provided in the Data Supplement. Meeting 
abstracts were included if they provided results from still-unpublished RCTs and were 
presented at meetings of ASCO, SGO, or the European Society for Medical Oncology 
(ESMO) from 2010 to 2015.
Articles were selected for inclusion in the systematic review of the evidence based on the 
following criteria:
•
Population: Women with newly diagnosed stage III or stage IV epithelial ovarian 
cancer, fallopian tube cancer, or primary peritoneal cancer.
•
Study type: Evidence regarding the outcomes of NACT was drawn from 
published or presented phase III RCTs. Evidence regarding predictive and 
prognostic factors in advanced ovarian cancer was drawn from RCTs, 
multicenter cohort studies, meta-analyses, and population-based observational 
data. Inclusion of influential single-center cohort studies was made at the 
discretion of the panel.
Additional information, including a Data Supplement with additional evidence tables, a Methodology Supplement, slide sets, clinical 
tools and resources, and links to patient information at www.cancer.net, is available at www.asco.org/NACT-ovarian-guideline and 
www.asco.org/guidelineswiki.
Wright et al.
Page 4
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Articles were excluded from the systematic review if they were editorials, commentaries, 
letters, news articles, case reports, narrative reviews, or published in a non-English language.
Ratings for the type and strength of the recommendation and the quality of the evidence are 
provided with each recommendation. The basis for these ratings is described in the 
Methodology Supplement (www.asco.org/NACT-ovarian-guideline), which also provides 
details regarding the literature search, data extraction processes, and other aspects of the 
guideline development. Guideline staff will work with the Expert Panel cochairs to keep 
abreast of the need for any substantive updates to the guideline. Based on formal review of 
the emerging literature and input from the Panel, SGO and ASCO will determine the need to 
update the guideline.
Guideline Disclaimer
The Clinical Practice Guidelines and other guidance published herein are provided by the 
American Society of Clinical Oncology, Inc. (ASCO) to assist providers in clinical decision 
making. The information herein should not be relied upon as being complete or accurate, nor 
should it be considered as inclusive of all proper treatments or methods of care or as a 
statement of the standard of care. With the rapid development of scientific knowledge, new 
evidence may emerge between the time information is developed and when it is published or 
read. The information is not continually updated and may not reflect the most recent 
evidence. The information addresses only the topics specifically identified therein and is not 
applicable to other interventions, diseases, or stages of diseases. This information does not 
mandate any particular course of medical care. Further, the information is not intended to 
substitute for the independent professional judgment of the treating provider, as the 
information does not account for individual variation among patients. Recommendations 
reflect high, moderate, or low confidence that the recommendation reflects the net effect of a 
given course of action. The use of words like “must,” “must not,” “should,” and “should 
not” indicates that a course of action is recommended or not recommended for either most or 
many patients, but there is latitude for the treating physician to select other courses of action 
in individual cases. In all cases, the selected course of action should be considered by the 
treating provider in the context of treating the individual patient. Use of the information is 
voluntary. ASCO provides this information on an “as is” basis and makes no warranty, 
express or implied, regarding the information. ASCO specifically disclaims any warranties 
of merchantability or fitness for a particular use or purpose. ASCO assumes no 
responsibility for any injury or damage to persons or property arising out of or related to any 
use of this information, or for any errors or omissions.
Guideline and Conflicts of Interest
The Expert Panel was assembled in accordance with ASCO’s Conflict of Interest Policy 
Implementation for Clinical Practice Guidelines (“Policy,” found at http://www.asco.org/
rwc). All members of the Panel completed ASCO’s disclosure form, which requires 
disclosure of financial and other interests, including relationships with commercial entities 
that are reasonably likely to experience direct regulatory or commercial impact as a result of 
promulgation of the guideline. Categories for disclosure include employment; leadership; 
stock or other ownership; honoraria, consulting or advisory role; speaker’s bureau; research 
Wright et al.
Page 5
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 funding; patents, royalties, other intellectual property; expert testimony; travel, 
accommodations, expenses; and other relationships. In accordance with the Policy, the 
majority of the members of the Panel did not disclose any relationships constituting a 
conflict under the Policy.
RESULTS
Four RCTs met eligibility criteria and form the primary evidence base for the guideline 
recommendations.1,2,4,5 At the time that the recommendations were being formulated, two 
of these trials had been published1,2 and two were available only as oral presentations from 
national meetings.4,5 All four trials enrolled women with stage IIIC or IV epithelial ovarian 
cancer, but two studies also included women with substage IIIA and IIIb disease,2,5 and the 
specific requirements regarding biopsy, imaging, serum, or staging laparoscopy findings 
varied by study (Table 1). The two published trials provided results for overall and 
progression-free survival as well as perioperative morbidity and mortality. Secondary 
analyses of the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) trial 
explored survival by patient subset, and evaluated quality of life. Results from the 
unpublished trials focused on perioperative outcomes.
Elements of study quality were assessed for the two published RCTs with detailed results 
provided in Data Supplement 1. Factors such as randomization, intention to treat, funding 
sources, etc. generally indicated a low to intermediate potential risk of bias in each trial. 
Refer to Methodology Supplement for definitions of quality ratings.
Key results from each RCT are presented in Table 1. In the two published RCTs, NACT was 
noninferior to PCS with respect to overall and progression-free survival.1,2 A secondary 
analysis of the EORTC 55971 trial suggested that outcomes by treatment arm varied by 
stage of disease and tumor size.6 Specifically, patients with stage IIIC cancer and less 
extensive metastatic tumors (≤ 45 mm) had higher survival with PCS than with NACT, and 
patients with stage IV disease and larger metastatic tumors (> 45 mm) had better survival 
with NACT than with PCS.6 In all four RCTs, perioperative morbidity was lower with 
NACT than with PCS.
Information about prognostic and predictive factors in ovarian cancer was collected from 
nine multicenter or population-based cohort studies,7–15 three single-center cohort 
studies,16–18 and one meta-analysis.19 These studies evaluated predictors of optimal 
cytoreduction, predictors of perioperative morbidity and mortality, and prognostic factors in 
advanced ovarian cancer with detailed results provided in Data Supplement 2.
RECOMMENDATIONS
An algorithm for the clinical evaluation and treatment of women with suspected stage IIIC 
or IV epithelial ovarian cancer, fallopian tube cancer, or primary peritoneal cancer is 
displayed in Figure 1.
Wright et al.
Page 6
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CLINICAL QUESTION 1
What clinical evaluations should be performed in all women with suspected or newly 
diagnosed stage IIIC or IV epithelial ovarian cancer?
Recommendation 1.1—All women with suspected stage IIIC or IV invasive epithelial 
ovarian cancer should be evaluated by a gynecologic oncologist prior to initiation of therapy 
to determine whether they are candidates for PCS. (Type: evidence based; benefits outweigh 
harms; evidence quality: intermediate; strength of recommendation: strong.)
Recommendation 1.2—A primary clinical evaluation should include a CT of the 
abdomen and pelvis with oral and intravenous contrast and chest imaging (CT preferred) to 
evaluate the extent of disease and the feasibility of surgical resection. The use of other tools 
to refine this assessment may include laparoscopic evaluation or additional radiographic 
imaging (eg, FDG-PET scan or diffusion-weighted MRI). (Type: informal consensus; 
benefits outweigh harms; evidence quality: intermediate; strength of recommendation: 
moderate.)
Literature review and analysis: Three multicenter cohort studies8,10,11 and one meta-
analysis19 evaluated CT findings and/or serum CA-125 predictors of suboptimal 
cytoreduction (residual disease > 1 cm). The use of CT of the abdomen and pelvis and serum 
CA-125 as predictors of suboptimal cytoreduction was evaluated among 350 women with 
stage III or IV ovarian cancer diagnosed from 2001 to 2012.11 Clinical factors that were 
associated with suboptimal cytoreduction were age ≥ 60 years, CA-125 ≥ 500 U/mL, and an 
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Physical Status classification of 3 or 4 
(https://www.asahq.org/resources/clinical-information/asa-physical-status-classification-
system). Radiologic predictors of suboptimal cytoreduction were retroperitoneal lymph 
nodes above the renal hilum (including supradiaphragmatic) > 1 cm, diffuse small bowel 
adhesions or thickening, small bowel mesentery lesions > 1 cm, root of the superior 
mesenteric artery lesions > 1 cm, perisplenic lesions > 1 cm, and lesser sac lesions > 1 cm.
CT and clinical predictors of suboptimal cytoreduction were also evaluated among 115 
women diagnosed with stage III or IV ovarian cancer diagnosed between 2005 and 2008.10 
Factors that were associated with suboptimal cytoreduction were elevated preoperative blood 
platelet count (though this result was not statistically significant); diffuse peritoneal 
thickening, and ascites on at least two-thirds of CT scan slices.
A meta-analysis of 14 studies and 154 additional patients evaluated pretreatment CA-125 as 
a predictor of suboptimal cytoreduction.19 High CA-125 (> 500 U/mL) increased the risk of 
suboptimal cytoreduction (odds ratio, 3.69; 95% CI, 2.02 to 6.73) but had low sensitivity 
(68.9%) and specificity (63.2%) as a predictor of suboptimal cytoreduction.
Cross-validation of CT predictors of cytoreduction was performed using three cohorts of 
women with stage III or IV ovarian cancer treated at different institutions.8 Predictors of 
suboptimal cytoreduction in the first cohort were diaphragm disease and large bowel 
mesentery implants. The accuracy of these predictors was 77% in the first cohort but was 
lower in the other two cohorts (34% and 64%, respectively). The researchers concluded that 
Wright et al.
Page 7
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the high accuracy rates of CT predictors of suboptimal cytoreduction could not be confirmed 
in cross validation.
While FDG-PET has the potential to inform operability, there are limited data to inform its 
use on a routine basis. In one prospective evaluation, compared with CT alone, FDG-PET 
was significantly better at the detection of carcinomatosis involving the subdiaphragmatic 
and small bowel peritoneal surfaces but ultimately did not correlate with the extent of 
surgery required.17 Whole-body MRI with diffusion-weighted sequence (WB-DWI/MRI) 
has also been studied in a small group of patients with suspected ovarian cancer for 
assessing surgical resection. Compared with CT and FDG-PET/CT, WB-DWI/MRI had 
higher accuracy in detecting peritoneal staging as well as high accuracy in detecting distant 
metastases.18
The safety and findings of staging laparoscopy have been evaluated in both a single-
institution study and a multicenter study of women with advanced ovarian cancer.9,16 Both 
studies demonstrated that staging laparoscopy is both feasible and safe, and provides a 
reliable assessment of the extent of the disease burden.
Clinical interpretation: The initial evaluation of a woman with presumed stage IIIC/IV 
ovarian carcinoma should focus on whether she is a candidate to undergo PCS with 
acceptable risks and associated morbidity. A gynecologic oncologist has specialized in the 
surgical and medical management of gynecologic malignancies and is trained to perform the 
surgery needed to manage women with ovarian cancer and to understand the risks and 
complications associated with such therapeutic procedures. Studies have shown that women 
with ovarian cancer who are treated by a gynecologic oncologist are more likely to undergo 
proper staging, cytoreductive surgery, and receive adjuvant chemotherapy, compared with 
gynecologists and general surgeons, and have superior survival.20–22 The complex surgery 
needed to achieve resection of all visible disease completely or at least to < 1 cm is more 
likely to occur when the surgery is performed at hospitals with specialists who perform these 
procedures frequently.23–26 Given that residual tumor still serves as the most important 
predictor of overall survival, the initial decision about surgery requires the input of a 
gynecologic oncologist.
CLINICAL QUESTION 2
Which patient and disease factors should be used as criteria for identifying patients who are 
not suitable for PCS?
Recommendation 2.1—Women who have a high perioperative risk profile or a low 
likelihood of achieving cytoreduction to < 1 cm (ideally to no visible disease) should receive 
NACT. (Type: evidence based; benefits outweigh harms; evidence quality: intermediate; 
strength of recommendation: moderate.)
Recommendation 2.2—Decisions that women are not eligible for medical or surgical 
cancer treatment should be made after a consultation with a gynecologic oncologist and/or a 
medical oncologist with gynecologic expertise. (Type: informal consensus; benefits 
outweigh harms; evidence quality: intermediate; strength of recommendation: moderate.)
Wright et al.
Page 8
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Literature review and analysis: Population-based or multicenter cohort studies evaluated 
risk factors for high perioperative morbidity and mortality or for poor overall survival after 
primary cytoreduction. Using SEER-Medicare data, Thrall et al12 analyzed data from more 
than 5,000 women age 65 years or older who had undergone cytoreductive surgery for 
advanced ovarian cancer. Overall 30-day mortality was 8%. Among women with elective 
admissions and no NACT, 30-day mortality varied by age, cancer stage, and comorbidity. 
Older women (age ≥ 75 years) who had stage III disease and a modified Charlson 
comorbidity score of ≥ 1 or stage IV disease had higher 30-day mortality. These patients 
accounted for 26% of patients and roughly half of the deaths, with a 30-day mortality of 
13%. A low-risk group consisted of younger patients (age 65 to 74 years) with either stage 
III or stage IV disease and a comorbidity score of ≤ 1. These patients accounted for 49% of 
the patient population and had a 30-day mortality of 4%. The authors noted that these results 
require confirmation from prospective investigation.
Wright et al14 examined perioperative morbidity and mortality among more than 28,000 
women diagnosed with ovarian cancer who underwent surgery between 1998 and 2007 
using the Nationwide Inpatient Sample. Overall, perioperative morbidity was 17% among 
women under the age of 50 years, but it rose to 30% among women age 70 to 79 years and 
32% among women age 80 years or older. In multivariable models, rates of surgical site 
complications, medical complications, infectious complications, and death increased with 
age, the number of radical procedures, and the Charlson comorbidity index.
Patient and tumor factors also contributed to 30-day morbidity in another study, which 
examined 564 women who underwent surgery for stage III or stage IV cancer from 1994 to 
2003.7 In a multivariate analysis, factors that were associated with an increased risk of 30-
day morbidity included: increasing age, an ASA score of 3 or 4, low albumin (< 3.5 g/dL), a 
higher surgical complexity score, and stage IV disease. Older age and an ASA score of 3 or 
4 were also associated with higher 3-month mortality.
General prognostic factors in advanced ovarian cancer were evaluated in a study of 1,895 
women with stage III ovarian cancer treated with primary cytoreduction and 
chemotherapy.13 Independent predictors of mortality were older age, worse Gynecologic 
Oncology Group (GOG) performance status, residual disease, and histology (compared with 
serous tumors, mortality was lower with endometrioid tumors and higher with clear cell and 
mucinous tumors).
Clinical interpretation: Factors that have been studied and shown to increase the risk of 
morbidity associated with cytoreductive surgery include advanced age or frailty, multiple 
chronic conditions, poor nutritional status, low albumin, and newly diagnosed venous 
thromboembolism (Table 2). Recent studies have focused on using tools to assess the 
patient’s functional age and frailty status, which can better predict the risk of morbidity.27,28 
Additionally a surgical risk calculator based on the American College of Surgeons NSQIP 
database has been developed to predict surgical complications (http://
www.riskcalculator.facs.org/). However, a recent study in a gynecologic oncology 
population demonstrated that the calculator was able to predict the risk of death and cardiac 
complications, but was not accurate for other surgical complications.29 The SGO/ASCO 
Wright et al.
Page 9
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Panel looks forward to reviewing validated and tested, user-friendly risk prediction tools 
when they are available, but at present, none can be fully recommended.
After assessing the patient’s status to undergo cytoreductive surgery, an assessment of 
resectability of the cancer to < 1 cm (ideally to no visible disease) must be performed. 
Baseline imaging with a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis and chest imaging (CT 
preferred) serves as the standard initial assessment of disease distribution and the initial 
evaluation of feasibility of resection. Women who have evidence of disease that has spread 
to the lungs or mediastinum, unresectable parenchymal liver metastasis, bulky periportal 
lymph nodes, mesenteric retraction, or nonresectable extra abdominal lymph nodes are best 
treated with initial NACT. While the goal for primary surgery should be resection to no 
visible disease, maximal cytoreduction to < 1 cm still provides benefit,30 including the 
option of receiving intraperitoneal and intravenous (IP/IV) chemotherapy, which has a 
demonstrated survival benefit compared with intravenous (IV) chemotherapy.31 Women with 
a low likelihood of achieving cytoreduction to < 1 cm (ideally to no visible disease), due to 
disease distribution, should receive NACT.
At present there are no prospectively validated nonoperative tools to predict the likelihood of 
maximal cytoreduction to < 1 cm or no visible disease. CT imaging may underestimate the 
distribution of disease, and therefore may have limitations for predicting which women can 
achieve surgical cytoreduction to < 1 cm (ideally to no visible disease). Alternative imaging 
modalities including WB-DWI/MRI and/or positron emission tomography have also been 
suggested to be useful in evaluating the extent of disease, but they require further evaluation 
before being recommended. More recently, the use of diagnostic laparoscopy has been 
suggested as a modality to better assess tumor distribution and predict surgical resection to a 
goal of no visible postoperative tumor or residuum. Some centers have demonstrated 
external validity using laparoscopic evaluation of tumor distribution for this purpose. In a 
randomized trial from the Netherlands, Buist et al32 reported that laparoscopy was of 
additive value to predict the outcome of PCS and to prevent futile laparotomies. However, at 
present, the role of laparoscopy is still undefined as there are insufficient published data to 
suggest that it is more accurate than clinical or radiologic studies. A Cochrane review of 
multiple trials did not show a decrease in the rates of women undergoing a suboptimal 
debulking surgery when laparoscopy was used in the triage of a patient with ovarian cancer; 
however, the authors noted that no women (who might achieve maximal cytoreduction to < 1 
cm or no visible disease) were excluded from having cytoreductive surgery.33
CLINICAL QUESTION 3
How do NACT and PCS compare with respect to progression-free survival, overall survival, 
and perioperative morbidity and mortality in women with newly diagnosed stage IIIC or IV 
epithelial ovarian cancer who are fit for primary cytoreduction and have potentially 
resectable disease, and how should this information be used to select initial treatment?
Recommendation 3.1—For women who are fit for PCS, with potentially resectable 
disease, either NACT or PCS may be offered based on data from phase III RCTs that 
demonstrate that NACT is noninferior to PCS with respect to progression-free and overall 
Wright et al.
Page 10
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 survival. NACT is associated with less peri- and postoperative morbidity and mortality and 
shorter hospitalizations, but PCS may offer superior survival in selected patients. (Type: 
evidence based; benefits outweigh harms; evidence quality: intermediate; strength of 
recommendation: moderate.)
Recommendation 3.2—For women with a high likelihood of achieving a cytoreduction 
to < 1 cm (ideally to no visible disease) with acceptable morbidity, PCS is recommended 
over NACT. (Type: evidence based; benefits outweigh harms; evidence quality: intermediate; 
strength of recommendation: moderate.)
Recommendation 3.3—For women who are fit for PCS but are deemed unlikely to have 
cytoreduction to < 1 cm (ideally to no visible disease) by a gynecologic oncologist, NACT is 
recommended over PCS. NACT is associated with less peri- and postoperative morbidity 
and mortality and shorter hospitalizations. (Type: evidence based; benefits outweigh harms; 
evidence quality: intermediate; strength of recommendation: moderate.)
Literature review and analysis: Four randomized clinical trials—EORTC 55971, 
CHORUS, JCOG0602, and SCORPION—have compared NACT and interval cytoreduction 
with primary cytoreduction and chemotherapy among women with stage IIIC or IV 
epithelial ovarian cancer (CHORUS and JCOG0602 also included women with stage IIIA 
and stage IIIB disease).
In EORTC 55971,1 670 women were randomly assigned to either PCS followed by at least 
six cycles of platinum-based chemotherapy or to three cycles of neoadjuvant platinum-based 
chemotherapy, followed by interval cytoreduction in those who had a response to 
chemotherapy or stable disease, followed by at least three cycles of platinum-based 
chemotherapy. Among women in the primary cytoreduction arm, 94% underwent primary 
cytoreduction and 88% started chemotherapy. Among women in the NACT arm, 98% started 
NACT and 88% underwent interval cytoreduction. Residual tumor of 1 cm or less was 
achieved in 42% of patients in the primary cytoreduction arm and in 81% of patients in the 
NACT arm. In the intent-to-treat analysis, the NACT arm was noninferior to the PCS arm 
with respect to the primary outcome of overall survival (Table 1). Perioperative morbidity 
and mortality were numerically lower in the NACT arm. In a subset analysis, patients with 
stage IIIC cancer and less extensive metastatic tumors (≤ 45 mm) had higher survival with 
PCS than with NACT, and patients with stage IV disease and larger metastatic tumors (> 45 
mm) had better survival with NACT than with PCS.6 Patients outside of these two subgroups 
had similar survival with either NACT or PCS.
In the CHORUS trial,2 550 women were randomly assigned to either PCS followed by six 
cycles of platinum-based chemotherapy or to three cycles of NACT, followed by interval 
cytoreduction, followed by three courses of platinum-based chemotherapy. Of the 276 
women in the PCS arm, 91% underwent surgery and 77% started postoperative 
chemotherapy. Of the 274 women in the NACT arm, 92% received NACT and 79% 
underwent interval cytoreduction. Cytoreduction to < 1 cm residual disease was achieved in 
41% of patients in the PCS arm and 73% of patients in the NACT arm (P = 0.0001). The 
NACT arm was noninferior to the PCS arm with respect to the primary outcome of overall 
Wright et al.
Page 11
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 survival (Table 1). Postoperative mortality and serious (grade 3 or 4) postoperative adverse 
events were less common in the NACT arm than in the PCS arm. The frequency of serious 
chemotherapy-related adverse events was not statistically significantly different in the two 
study arms.
The SCORPION trial examined perioperative outcomes for 55 women assigned to PCS and 
52 women assigned to NACT, all of whom had a significant upper abdominal disease 
burden.34 Complete cytoreduction was achieved in 58% of women in the NACT arm and 
46% of women in the primary cytoreduction arm, with a shorter median operative time in 
the neoadjuvant arm (Table 1). The frequency of upper abdominal procedures and major 
postoperative complications was lower in the neoadjuvant arm, as was the length of hospital 
stays.
Data from JCOG0602 were presented at the 2014 ASCO Annual Meeting.5 Three hundred 
and one women were randomly assigned to either PCS followed by eight cycles of 
carboplatin and paclitaxel or to NACT with four cycles of carboplatin and paclitaxel 
followed by interval cytoreduction, followed by four more cycles of paclitaxel and 
carboplatin. Operative time during surgery was longer in the NACT arm than in the PCS 
arm, but patients in the NACT arm experienced less blood loss and ascites during or after 
surgery, and were less likely to experience a grade 3 or grade 4 nonhematologic adverse 
events after surgery (Table 1).
One significant limitation of NACT, compared with PCS, is that there are insufficient data to 
support the use of IP/IV chemotherapy as adjuvant treatment after NACT. Several RCTs 
have demonstrated that IP/IV chemotherapy improves survival in optimally resected, stage 
III ovarian cancer, compared with IV chemotherapy alone.31,35,36 In GOG 172, women who 
received IP/IV chemotherapy had a 16-month improvement in median overall survival, 
compared with women treated with IV chemotherapy alone.31
Clinical interpretation: To date, the EORTC and CHORUS studies are the only published 
randomized phase III trials to compare NACT and PCS. In both studies the median 
progression-free and overall survival were similar among women who received NACT 
followed by ICS and those who underwent PCS followed by chemotherapy. However, critics 
of these trials have noted that both had a shorter median overall survival than what has been 
reported in previous studies. Prior phase III clinical trials have reported median overall 
survival times of 45 to 66 months in women who undergo PCS with < 1 cm of residual 
disease, while the median overall survival was only 32 months and 44 months in patients 
with < 1 cm residual and no residual disease, respectively, after PCS in the EORTC study. 
Additionally, some have argued that the “surgical effort” in both EORTC and CHORUS may 
be lower than the standard of care since the median operative times and rates of upper 
abdominal surgeries were lower than expected in clinical practice and much lower than what 
was reported in the SCORPION and JCOG0602 trials.
Alternatively, the lower median overall survival reported in the EORTC and CHORUS trials 
may reflect the population of patients who were willing to be randomly assigned to a trial 
comparing PCS and NACT and who had clear evidence of advanced-stage disease based on 
Wright et al.
Page 12
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 imaging only. The short survival results may reflect the trial participants, rather than 
differences in treatment, which included a population of patients who were older, with a 
poorer performance status, and had higher stage tumors compared with other trials. 
Observational studies examining women > 65 years of age in the SEER-Medicare database 
had median survivals that were similar to the EORTC and CHORUS trial participants.37,38 
In addition, nearly 25% of the patients enrolled in the CHORUS trial received single-agent 
carboplatin instead of a platinum-based doublet in both the PCS and neoadjuvant arms. 
Together, these results suggest that PCS and NACT have similar results in this patient 
population, but it remains to be seen whether these results apply to populations of patients 
who are younger, have better performance statuses, or have less bulky disease in light of the 
data from an exploratory subset analysis of EORTC, which showed that patients with less 
extensive tumors (≤ 45 mm) had better survival with PCS compared with NACT.6
The extent of residual disease after PCS is a significant prognostic predictor in ovarian 
cancer reviews.30,39 A recent meta-analysis of studies evaluating survival among patients 
undergoing PCS for advanced ovarian cancer demonstrated a significant survival advantage 
associated with patients who had no gross visible disease after surgery; each 10% increase in 
cytoreduction to no visible disease was associated with a 2.3 month increase in median 
survival.39 It is unclear whether the extent of residual disease reflects tumor biology, surgical 
aggressiveness, or both, but PCS to < 1 cm (ideally no visible disease) remains one of the 
most significant predictors of survival. Therefore, PCS is recommended for those patients 
with a high likelihood of achieving a cytoreduction to < 1 cm (ideally no visible disease) 
with acceptable morbidity.
CLINICAL QUESTION 4
What additional clinical evaluations should be performed in all women with suspected or 
newly diagnosed stage IIIC or IV epithelial ovarian cancer before NACT is delivered?
Recommendation 4—Before NACT is delivered, all patients should have histologic 
confirmation (core biopsy preferred) of an invasive ovarian, fallopian tube, or peritoneal 
cancer. In exceptional cases, when a biopsy cannot be performed, cytologic evaluation 
combined with a serum CA-125 to carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) ratio > 25 is acceptable 
to confirm the primary diagnosis and exclude cancers that are not ovarian, fallopian tube, or 
primary peritoneal carcinomas (Type: informal consensus; benefits outweigh harms; 
evidence quality: intermediate; strength of recommendation: moderate.)
Literature review and analysis: The frequency of other nonovarian cancers was described 
in both the EORTC and CHORUS trials. In the EORTC trial, eligible patients had to have 
either biopsy-proven stage IIIC or IV invasive epithelial ovarian cancer, primary peritoneal 
cancer, or fallopian tube cancer, or fine-needle aspirate showing adenocarcinoma in a patient 
with a pelvic mass, metastases outside the pelvis of at least 2 cm in diameter, regional lymph 
node metastasis, or proof of stage IV disease, and a CA-125 to CEA ratio of > 25.1 If the 
CA-125 to CEA ratio was 25 or lower, patients had to have a barium enema or colonoscopy, 
gastroscopy or radiologic examination of the stomach, and mammography to exclude 
presence of an alternate primary tumor. Using these criteria, the incidence of other 
Wright et al.
Page 13
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 malignancies was 3%, with 18 of 670 randomized patients having a change in diagnosis 
after cytoreductive surgery.
In the CHORUS trial, participants had clinical or radiographic evidence of a pelvic mass 
with extrapelvic disease compatible with FIGO 1988 stage III or IV ovarian, fallopian tube, 
or primary peritoneal cancer, and a CA-125 to CEA ratio > 25.2 If the CA-125 to CEA ratio 
was < 25, a gastrointestinal carcinoma had to be excluded. For women assigned to NACT, 
the diagnosis was confirmed by laparoscopy, biopsy, or cytology. Among the 474 study 
participants who had surgery, 3% were found to have a nonovarian cancer.
Clinical interpretation: A central tenet of oncology is that pathology should be obtained 
before treatment is initiated to confirm that a malignancy is present, to identify the site of 
origin, and to plan optimal treatment since malignancies are treated differently based upon 
their site of origin. Thus, all patients must have a histologic or cytologic evaluation (core 
biopsy preferred) to confirm the primary diagnosis of an invasive ovarian, fallopian tube, or 
primary peritoneal cancer and exclude other primaries before receiving chemotherapy. In 
addition, data on inherited mutations (eg, germline BRCA), cell surface proteins (eg, PD-
L1), and the tumor microenvironment are beginning to be used for treatment selection and 
clinical trial enrollment [eg, poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors, 
immunotherapy]. The panel expects that this information will become increasingly 
important with time, and thus recommends obtaining a core biopsy prior to treatment to 
perform immunohistochemistry to verify the diagnosis and site of origin since cytology may 
be insufficient to distinguish between borderline and invasive cancer cells, and tumor cells 
may be too necrotic to identify after exposure to chemotherapy.
CLINICAL QUESTION 5
What is the preferred chemotherapy regimen for women with stage IIIC or IV epithelial 
ovarian cancer who will receive NACT?
Recommendation 5—For NACT, a platinum/taxane doublet is recommended. However, 
alternate regimens, containing a platinum agent, may be selected based on individual patient 
factors. (Type: evidence based; benefits outweigh harms; evidence quality: intermediate; 
strength of recommendation: moderate.)
Literature review and analysis: Since the publication of GOG 111, GOG 158, and AGO-
OVAR3,40–42 the standard of care for first-line treatment of advanced ovarian cancer has 
been six cycles of carboplatin and paclitaxel. In the EORTC trial, 83% of patients received 
treatment with a combination of carboplatin and paclitaxel delivered every 3 weeks. 
However, only 76% of CHORUS participants received both carboplatin and paclitaxel; 
nearly 24% were treated with single-agent carboplatin. Alternate regimens were used rarely 
in both trials: 6.3% of participants in EORTC and 1% in CHORUS received another 
chemotherapy combination. Information on the use of specific chemotherapy regimens in 
the JCOG0602 or SCORPION trials is limited.
Clinical interpretation: Treatment of advanced ovarian cancer has evolved over the past 
decade. Several large phase III studies have demonstrated improved survival with alternate 
Wright et al.
Page 14
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 treatment strategies, including IP/IV chemotherapy,31 dose-dense paclitaxel,43 and the 
addition of bevacizumab for patients with inoperable or sub-optimally cytoreduced 
disease.44 To date, randomized trials of NACT have tested an every-3-week regimen of IV 
carboplatin and paclitaxel. At some institutions, clinicians have replaced the 3-week 
administration of paclitaxel with the “dose-dense” weekly approach in light of the superior 
survival demonstrated in JGOG 3016.43 Similarly, in GOG 262, which compared carboplatin 
and weekly paclitaxel to carboplatin and paclitaxel every 3 weeks (with administration of 
bevacizumab at the discretion of the treating physician, but delivered to 84% of patients), 
patients who received weekly paclitaxel had a similar progression-free survival to those who 
received carboplatin and paclitaxel with bevacizumab every 3 weeks in the intent-to-treat 
analysis.45 In the 112-patient cohort in whom bevacizumab was not used, patients receiving 
weekly paclitaxel (n = 55) had a significantly longer median PFS (14.2 v 10.3 months; HR, 
0.62; 95% CI, 0.40 to 0.95). In the MITO-7 trial, however, weekly administration of lower 
doses of carboplatin and paclitaxel was not superior to administration of carboplatin and 
paclitaxel every 3 weeks.46 Thus, the use of weekly paclitaxel for NACT should be formally 
tested in future clinical trials.
At many institutions, patients who receive NACT are not treated with IP/IV chemotherapy 
after ICS. At present, data on the use of IP/IV chemotherapy after NACT and ICS is limited. 
A phase II Southwest Oncology Group Study examined the use of IP/IV chemotherapy after 
NACT and ICS in a group of patients with bulky stage III/IV (pleural effusion only) ovarian 
cancer for whom optimal cytoreduction was thought to be unlikely on radiographic imaging. 
Among 58 eligible patients, only 26 patients received NACT, ICS, and postoperative IP/IV 
chemotherapy; in this group, the median progression free and overall survival were 29 and 
34 months, respectively.47 Another ongoing multinational randomized phase II study, 
PETROC/OV21, is comparing IP/IV carboplatin and paclitaxel versus continued treatment 
with IV carboplatin and paclitaxel among women who received NACT and optimal ICS.48 
This trial was originally designed as a phase II/III clinical trial, but was later modified to a 
randomized phase II trial due to poor accrual. Nevertheless, in an interim analysis, reported 
in abstract form, IP/IV chemotherapy was found to be both feasible and safe to use after 
NACT.49 A comparison of the rates of progression-free survival at 9 months (the new 
primary end point of the trial) showed 42.2% of women randomized to receive IV 
chemotherapy had progressive disease, compared with 23.3% of those who received IP/IV 
chemotherapy. While these studies suggest that it is feasible and safe to use IP/IV 
chemotherapy after optimal ICS, there are insufficient data about the efficacy of this 
approach to make a formal recommendation either for or against the use of IP/IV 
chemotherapy after NACT at this time.
CLINICAL QUESTION 6
Among women treated with NACT, does the timing of ICS or the number of chemotherapy 
cycles after ICS affect the safety or efficacy of treatment?
Recommendation 6—RCTs tested surgery following three or four cycles of 
chemotherapy in women who had a response to NACT or stable disease. ICS should be 
performed after ≤ 4 cycles of NACT for women with a response to chemotherapy or stable 
Wright et al.
Page 15
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 disease. Alternate timing of surgery has not been prospectively evaluated but may be 
considered based on patient-centered factors. (Type: informal consensus; benefits outweigh 
harms; evidence quality: insufficient; strength of recommendation: weak.)
Literature review and analysis: RCTs have not addressed whether the timing of ICS or the 
number of chemotherapy cycles after ICS affect the safety or efficacy of treatment. In both 
the EORTC and CHORUS studies, patients received three cycles of NACT before ICS and 
three cycles thereafter. In the JCOG0602 study, ICS followed four cycles of carboplatin and 
paclitaxel, but survival data from this trial are not expected until 2017.
Rates of cytoreduction to < 1 cm (and no visible disease) are higher among patients treated 
with NACT, compared with PCS, but have less prognostic significance.1 Böhm et al15 have 
developed and validated the three-tier Chemotherapy Response Score as a simple, 
prognostically significant, and reproducible system for grading the response to NACT using 
ICS specimens. This three-tier scoring system, which uses pathologists’ ratings of the most 
viable residual disease present in the omentum at ICS (where lower scores indicate poor 
response to NACT and higher scores indicate good response), predicted PFS and sensitivity 
to first-line platinum in analyses that adjusted for age, stage, and debulking status.
Clinical interpretation: Patients’ responses to NACT should be regularly monitored with 
clinical assessments and routine measurement of CA-125 each cycle and radiographic 
imaging should be performed early (preferentially after three cycles of chemotherapy) to 
assess clinical response. To date, phase III studies have only tested surgery after ≤ 4 cycles 
of chemotherapy, and alternate timing has not been prospectively evaluated. Future studies 
should validate the Chemotherapy Response Score in prospective RCTs, and explore 
whether it can be used to risk-stratify patients for additional treatment.
CLINICAL QUESTION 7
What are the treatment options for patients with progressive disease on NACT?
Recommendation 7—Patients with progressive disease on NACT have a poor prognosis. 
Options include alternative chemotherapy regimens, clinical trials, and/or discontinuation of 
active cancer therapy and initiation of end-of-life care. In general, there is little role for 
surgery and it is not typically advised, unless for palliation (eg, relief of a bowel 
obstruction). (Type: evidence based; benefits outweigh harms; evidence quality: 
intermediate; strength of recommendation: strong.)
Literature review and analysis: Women who develop progressive disease during first-line 
treatment with chemotherapy (ie, platinum-refractory disease) have a poor prognosis with a 
median overall survival of < 1 year, and often shorter.50 RCTs have not compared treatment 
options for women who develop progressive disease during NACT. However, if treatment 
with further chemotherapy is appropriate, then use of agents that do not have cross-
resistance to carboplatin or paclitaxel (eg, gemcitabine, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, or 
bevacizumab) would be recommended.
Wright et al.
Page 16
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Clinical interpretation: Patients who develop progressive disease during neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy should avoid ICS unless they have a demonstrated response to an alternate 
chemotherapy. It is very unlikely that an optimal surgical cytoreduction can be achieved in 
patients with primary platinum-refractory disease, and the survival benefit of a potentially 
morbid surgery is uncertain in this context. Instead, patients should be offered opportunities 
to participate in clinical trials, palliative chemotherapy with alternate agents, and/or 
discontinuation of active cancer therapy and initiation of end-of-life care.
PATIENT AND CLINICIAN COMMUNICATION
For women with advanced ovarian cancer, decision-making regarding first-line treatment 
should be a process that is shared between clinicians and their patients.51 Clinicians must 
communicate evidence-based options for treatment, inclusive of their benefits and risks, and 
patients must be allowed to express their goals and preferences. It is important to recognize 
that patients are no longer reliant solely upon their medical team for information, and often 
access other sources online, in print, or through social media and support groups.
For patients faced with a decision between PCS and NACT, it is essential that providers first 
explain the diagnosis, including the extent of disease identified, stage, and prognostic 
implications of what is known. Only by ensuring a common starting point can each discuss 
and ultimately decide on a treatment plan. For women in whom the choice is between NACT 
and PCS, sharing data about comparative morbidity, survival, and quality-of-life outcomes in 
plain language can help to ensure understanding and help patients make more informed 
decisions.
HEALTH DISPARITIES
Although ASCO and SGO clinical practice guidelines represent expert recommendations on 
the best practices in disease management to provide the highest level of cancer care, it is 
important to note that many patients have limited access to medical care. Racial and ethnic 
disparities in health care contribute significantly to this problem in the United States. 
Patients with cancer who are members of racial/ethnic minorities suffer disproportionately 
from comorbidities, experience more substantial obstacles to receiving care, are more likely 
to be uninsured, and are at greater risk of receiving care of poor quality than other 
Americans. Many other patients lack access to care because of their geographic location and 
distance from appropriate treatment facilities. Awareness of these disparities in access to 
care should be considered in the context of this clinical practice guideline, and health care 
providers should strive to deliver the highest level of cancer care to these vulnerable 
populations.
Older women with ovarian cancer also receive less surgery and chemotherapy than younger 
women, suffer worse toxicity, and have worse overall survival. Performance status alone has 
been shown to be an inadequate tool to predict toxicity in older patients from therapy. Use of 
formal geriatric assessment tools is a promising direction for risk-stratifying older patients 
on trials.52 The GOG elderly group recently completed two important trials: (1) the first 
prospective trial of first-line chemotherapy in an older patient population in the United 
Wright et al.
Page 17
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 States (comparing dose-modified carboplatin, carboplatin/paclitaxel, and carboplatin/weekly 
paclitaxel), and (2) a geriatric preoperative assessment tool to predict surgical morbidity. 
Both studies included patients who received NACT. Once published, these results will 
further guide clinicians in the treatment of older women with ovarian cancer.
MULTIPLE CHRONIC CONDITIONS
Creating evidence-based recommendations to inform treatment of patients with additional 
chronic conditions, a situation in which the patient may have two or more such conditions—
referred to as multiple chronic conditions (MCC)—is challenging. Patients with MCC are a 
complex and heterogeneous population, making it difficult to account for all of the possible 
permutations to develop specific recommendations for care. In addition, the best available 
evidence for treating index conditions, such as cancer, is often from clinical trials whose 
study selection criteria may exclude these patients to avoid potential interaction effects or 
confounding of results associated with MCC. As a result, the reliability of outcome data 
from these studies may be limited, thereby creating constraints for expert groups to make 
recommendations for care in this heterogeneous patient population.
As many patients for whom guideline recommendations apply present with MCC, any 
treatment plan needs to take into account the complexity and uncertainty created by the 
presence of MCC and highlights the importance of shared decision making regarding 
guideline use and implementation. Therefore, in consideration of recommended care for the 
target index condition, clinicians should review all other chronic conditions present in the 
patient and take those conditions into account when formulating the treatment and follow up 
plan.
COST IMPLICATIONS
Decisions between PCS and NACT should be driven by the expected clinical risks and 
benefits rather than by cost. Nevertheless, cost may warrant consideration when the two 
treatment options appear similarly beneficial, or when cost is an important concern for the 
patient. The comparative cost of PCS and NACT has been evaluated using observational data 
from SEER-Medicare. Among 4,506 older women with advanced ovarian cancer, the costs 
associated with PCS and NACT were similar for women with stage IIIC disease, but PCS 
was associated with higher costs in women with stage IV disease.53 The cost of care among 
older women (age ≥ 65 years) with advanced ovarian cancer has also been evaluated using a 
5-year Markov model, which assumed similar overall survival with PCS and NACT based 
upon the results of EORTC 55971.54 In this study, NACT was associated with a cost savings 
of $5,616 compared with PCS, when costs included surgery, chemotherapy, and hospital 
stays. To date, researchers have not included quality-adjusted life-years in comparisons of 
the costs between PCS and NACT. Given the limitations of current data, the relative costs of 
the two treatment approaches remain uncertain.
Wright et al.
Page 18
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 EXTERNAL REVIEW
The draft was submitted to two external reviewers with content expertise in medical and 
gynecologic oncology. Revisions made in response to the external reviews were reviewed 
and approved by the Expert Panel.
GUIDELINE IMPLEMENTATION
ASCO guidelines are developed for implementation across health settings. Barriers to 
implementation include the need to increase awareness of the guideline recommendations 
among front-line practitioners and survivors of cancer and caregivers, and to provide 
adequate services in the face of limited resources. The guideline Bottom Line Box was 
designed to facilitate implementation of recommendations. This guideline will be distributed 
widely through the ASCO Practice Guideline Implementation Network. ASCO guidelines 
are posted on the ASCO Web site and most often published in the Journal of Clinical 
Oncology and the Journal of Oncology Practice.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
There are several areas that the panel agreed required future study, including:
•
Development and validation of a preoperative risk prediction model to identify 
patients who are at high risk of morbidity from PCS
•
Optimized selection criteria to determine whether an R0 resection is feasible 
with PCS based upon radiographic imaging and/or laparoscopic findings
•
Examination of the value of functional imaging (eg, perfusion CT, dynamic MRI, 
PET-CT) in risk-stratifying patients for PCS versus NACT
•
Prospective validation of the Chemotherapy Response Score in RCTs, and an 
exploration of whether it can be used to risk-stratify patients for future therapies 
after completion of adjuvant chemotherapy
•
Determination of benchmarks for clinical complete remission rate, pathologic 
complete remission rate, and progression-free survival in patients treated with 
NACT to facilitate the design of clinical trials in this population
•
Exploration of novel agents in the NACT setting (eg, targeted therapies, 
immunotherapy, vaccines, and cancer stem-cell–directed treatments) with or 
without chemotherapy
•
Determination of whether there is a role for IP/IV chemotherapy in the setting of 
NACT
•
Prospective study of weekly dose-dense paclitaxel versus every-3-week 
paclitaxel in the setting of NACT
•
Prospective study to determine the ideal timing of ICS and the number of cycles 
of chemotherapy delivered before and after surgery
Wright et al.
Page 19
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 •
Performance of a large, pragmatic, randomized clinical trial of PCS versus 
NACT in the United States since the median overall survival, mean operative 
time, and rates of optimal cytoreduction in existing trials were lower than 
expected
•
Development of an ASCO Value in Cancer Care Framework for NACT.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank Jason Wright, Christina Annunziata, Neelima Denduluri, Cynthia Anderson, the ASCO Clinical Practice 
Guidelines Committee, the SGO Publications Committee, and the SGO Clinical Practice Committee for their 
thoughtful reviews and insightful comments on this guideline document.
W.P.T. received support through the National Institutes of Health/National Cancer Institute (NIH/NCI) Cancer 
Center Support Grant P30 CA008748, and A.A.W. received support from the NIH/NCI K07 CA166210 award.
REFERENCES
1. Vergote I, Tropé CG, Amant F, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy or primary surgery in stage IIIC or 
IV ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med. 2010; 363:943–953. [PubMed: 20818904] 
2. Kehoe S, Hook J, Nankivell M, et al. Primary chemotherapy versus primary surgery for newly 
diagnosed advanced ovarian cancer (CHORUS): an open-label, randomised, controlled, non-
inferiority trial. Lancet. 2015; 386:249–257. [PubMed: 26002111] 
3. Kang S. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for ovarian cancer: do we have enough evidence? Lancet. 2015; 
386:223–224. [PubMed: 26002110] 
4. Fagotti, A., Vizzielli, G., Fanfani, F., et al. Phase III SCORPION trial (ID number: NCT01461850) 
in epithelial cancer patients with high tumor load receiving PDS versus NACT: An interim analysis 
on peri-operative outcome; Proceedings Society of Gynecologic Oncology Annual Meeting on 
Women’s Cancer; 2015. (abstr LBA1)
5. Onda T, Yoshikawa H, Shibata T, et al. Comparison of treatment invasiveness between upfront 
debulking surgery versus interval debulking surgery following neoadjuvant chemotherapy for stage 
III/IV ovarian, tubal, and peritoneal cancers in phase III randomized trial: JCOG0602. J Clin Oncol. 
2014; 32:353s. (suppl; abstr 5508). 
6. van Meurs HS, Tajik P, Hof MH, et al. Which patients benefit most from primary surgery or 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy in stage IIIC or IV ovarian cancer? An exploratory analysis of the 
European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer 55971 randomised trial. Eur J Cancer. 
2013; 49:3191–3201. [PubMed: 23850170] 
7. Aletti GD, Santillan A, Eisenhauer EL, et al. A new frontier for quality of care in gynecologic 
oncology surgery: multi-institutional assessment of short-term outcomes for ovarian cancer using a 
risk-adjusted model. Gynecol Oncol. 2007; 107:99–106. [PubMed: 17602726] 
8. Axtell AE, Lee MH, Bristow RE, et al. Multi-institutional reciprocal validation study of computed 
tomography predictors of suboptimal primary cytoreduction in patients with advanced ovarian 
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2007; 25:384–389. [PubMed: 17264334] 
9. Fagotti A, Vizzielli G, De Iaco P, et al. A multicentric trial (Olympia-MITO 13) on the accuracy of 
laparoscopy to assess peritoneal spread in ovarian cancer. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2013; 209:462 e1–
462 e11. [PubMed: 23891632] 
10. Gerestein CG, Eijkemans MJ, Bakker J, et al. Nomogram for suboptimal cytoreduction at primary 
surgery for advanced stage ovarian cancer. Anticancer Res. 2011; 31:4043–4049. [PubMed: 
22110240] 
11. Suidan RS, Ramirez PT, Sarasohn DM, et al. A multicenter prospective trial evaluating the ability 
of preoperative computed tomography scan and serum CA-125 to predict suboptimal 
Wright et al.
Page 20
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cytoreduction at primary debulking surgery for advanced ovarian, fallopian tube, and peritoneal 
cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2014; 134:455–461. [PubMed: 25019568] 
12. Thrall MM, Goff BA, Symons RG, et al. Thirty-day mortality after primary cytoreductive surgery 
for advanced ovarian cancer in the elderly. Obstet Gynecol. 2011; 118:537–547. [PubMed: 
21860281] 
13. Winter WE III, Maxwell GL, Tian C, et al. Prognostic factors for stage III epithelial ovarian 
cancer: a Gynecologic Oncology Group Study. J Clin Oncol. 2007; 25:3621–3627. [PubMed: 
17704411] 
14. Wright JD, Lewin SN, Deutsch I, et al. Defining the limits of radical cytoreductive surgery for 
ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2011; 123:467–473. [PubMed: 21958535] 
15. Böhm S, Faruqi A, Said I, et al. Chemotherapy response score: Development and validation of a 
system to quantify histopathologic response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in tubo-ovarian high-
grade serous carcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2015; 33:2457–2463. [PubMed: 26124480] 
16. Fagotti A, Vizzielli G, Fanfani F, et al. Introduction of staging laparoscopy in the management of 
advanced epithelial ovarian, tubal and peritoneal cancer: impact on prognosis in a single institution 
experience. Gynecol Oncol. 2013; 131:341–346. [PubMed: 23938372] 
17. Hynninen J, Kemppainen J, Lavonius M, et al. A prospective comparison of integrated FDG-PET/
contrast-enhanced CT and contrast-enhanced CT for pretreatment imaging of advanced epithelial 
ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2013; 131:389–394. [PubMed: 23994535] 
18. Michielsen K, Vergote I, Op de Beeck K, et al. Whole-body MRI with diffusion-weighted 
sequence for staging of patients with suspected ovarian cancer: a clinical feasibility study in 
comparison to CT and FDG-PET/CT. Eur Radiol. 2014; 24:889–901. [PubMed: 24322510] 
19. Kang S, Kim TJ, Nam BH, et al. Preoperative serum CA-125 levels and risk of suboptimal 
cytoreduction in ovarian cancer: a meta-analysis. J Surg Oncol. 2010; 101:13–17. [PubMed: 
20025071] 
20. Chan JK, Kapp DS, Shin JY, et al. Influence of the gynecologic oncologist on the survival of 
ovarian cancer patients. Obstet Gynecol. 2007; 109:1342–1350. [PubMed: 17540806] 
21. Earle CC, Schrag D, Neville BA, et al. Effect of surgeon specialty on processes of care and 
outcomes for ovarian cancer patients. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006; 98:172–180. [PubMed: 16449677] 
22. Goff BA, Matthews BJ, Wynn M, et al. Ovarian cancer: patterns of surgical care across the United 
States. Gynecol Oncol. 2006; 103:383–390. [PubMed: 17005244] 
23. Bristow RE, Chang J, Ziogas A, et al. Impact of National Cancer Institute Comprehensive Cancer 
Centers on ovarian cancer treatment and survival. J Am Coll Surg. 2015; 220:940–950. [PubMed: 
25840536] 
24. Bristow RE, Zahurak ML, Diaz-Montes TP, et al. Impact of surgeon and hospital ovarian cancer 
surgical case volume on in-hospital mortality and related short-term outcomes. Gynecol Oncol. 
2009; 115:334–338. [PubMed: 19766295] 
25. Cliby WA, Powell MA, Al-Hammadi N, et al. Ovarian cancer in the United States: contemporary 
patterns of care associated with improved survival. Gynecol Oncol. 2015; 136:11–17. [PubMed: 
25449311] 
26. Vernooij F, Heintz AP, Coebergh JW, et al. Specialized and high-volume care leads to better 
outcomes of ovarian cancer treatment in the Netherlands. Gynecol Oncol. 2009; 112:455–461. 
[PubMed: 19136148] 
27. Audisio RA, Pope D, Ramesh HS, et al. Shall we operate? Preoperative assessment in elderly 
cancer patients (PACE) can help. A SIOG surgical task force prospective study. Crit Rev Oncol 
Hematol. 2008; 65:156–163. [PubMed: 18082416] 
28. Hurria A, Gupta S, Zauderer M, et al. Developing a cancer-specific geriatric assessment: a 
feasibility study. Cancer. 2005; 104:1998–2005. [PubMed: 16206252] 
29. Rivard C, Nahum R, Slagle E, et al. Evaluation of the performance of the ACS NSQIP surgical risk 
calculator in gynecologic oncology patients undergoing laparotomy. Gynecol Oncol. 2016; 
141:281–286. [PubMed: 26899020] 
30. Elattar A, Bryant A, Winter-Roach BA, et al. Optimal primary surgical treatment for advanced 
epithelial ovarian cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011; 8:CD007565.
Wright et al.
Page 21
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 31. Armstrong DK, Bundy B, Wenzel L, et al. Gynecologic Oncology Group: Intraperitoneal cisplatin 
and paclitaxel in ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med. 2006; 354:34–43. [PubMed: 16394300] 
32. Buist, MR., van de Vrie, R., Rutten, MJ., et al. Laparoscopy to predict the result of primary 
cytoreductive surgery in advanced ovarian cancer (LapOvCa): A multicentre randomised 
controlled trial; ESGO19: International Meeting of the European Society of Gynaecological 
Oncology; Nice, France. 2015. 
33. Rutten MJ, Leeflang MM, Kenter GG, et al. Laparoscopy for diagnosing resectability of disease in 
patients with advanced ovarian cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014; 2:CD009786.
34. Fagotti A, Ferrandina G, Vizzielli G, et al. Phase III randomised clinical trial comparing primary 
surgery versus neoadjuvant chemotherapy in advanced epithelial ovarian cancer with high tumour 
load (SCORPION trial): Final analysis of peri-operative outcome. Eur J Cancer. 2016; 59:22–33. 
[PubMed: 26998845] 
35. Alberts DS, Liu PY, Hannigan EV, et al. Intraperitoneal cisplatin plus intravenous 
cyclophosphamide versus intravenous cisplatin plus intravenous cyclophosphamide for stage III 
ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med. 1996; 335:1950–1955. [PubMed: 8960474] 
36. Markman M, Bundy BN, Alberts DS, et al. Phase III trial of standard-dose intravenous cisplatin 
plus paclitaxel versus moderately high-dose carboplatin followed by intravenous paclitaxel and 
intraperitoneal cisplatin in small-volume stage III ovarian carcinoma: an intergroup study of the 
Gynecologic Oncology Group, Southwestern Oncology Group, and Eastern Cooperative Oncology 
Group. J Clin Oncol. 2001; 19:1001–1007. [PubMed: 11181662] 
37. Thrall MM, Gray HJ, Symons RG, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy in the Medicare cohort with 
advanced ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2011; 123:461–466. [PubMed: 21945309] 
38. Wright JD, Ananth CV, Tsui J, et al. Comparative effectiveness of upfront treatment strategies in 
elderly women with ovarian cancer. Cancer. 2014; 120:1246–1254. [PubMed: 24443159] 
39. Chang SJ, Hodeib M, Chang J, et al. Survival impact of complete cytoreduction to no gross 
residual disease for advanced-stage ovarian cancer: a meta-analysis. Gynecol Oncol. 2013; 
130:493–498. [PubMed: 23747291] 
40. du Bois A, Lück HJ, Meier W, et al. A randomized clinical trial of cisplatin/paclitaxel versus 
carboplatin/paclitaxel as first-line treatment of ovarian cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003; 95:1320–
1329. [PubMed: 12953086] 
41. McGuire WP, Hoskins WJ, Brady MF, et al. Cyclophosphamide and cisplatin compared with 
paclitaxel and cisplatin in patients with stage III and stage IV ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med. 1996; 
334:1–6. [PubMed: 7494563] 
42. Ozols RF, Bundy BN, Greer BE, et al. Phase III trial of carboplatin and paclitaxel compared with 
cisplatin and paclitaxel in patients with optimally resected stage III ovarian cancer: a Gynecologic 
Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol. 2003; 21:3194–3200. [PubMed: 12860964] 
43. Katsumata N, Yasuda M, Isonishi S, et al. Long-term results of dose-dense paclitaxel and 
carboplatin versus conventional paclitaxel and carboplatin for treatment of advanced epithelial 
ovarian, fallopian tube, or primary peritoneal cancer (JGOG 3016): a randomised, controlled, 
open-label trial. Lancet Oncol. 2013; 14:1020–1026. [PubMed: 23948349] 
44. Oza AM, Cook AD, Pfisterer J, et al. Standard chemotherapy with or without bevacizumab for 
women with newly diagnosed ovarian cancer (ICON7): overall survival results of a phase 3 
randomised trial. Lancet Oncol. 2015; 16:928–936. [PubMed: 26115797] 
45. Chan JK, Brady MF, Penson RT, et al. Weekly vs. every-3-week paclitaxel and carboplatin for 
ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med. 2016; 374:738–748. [PubMed: 26933849] 
46. Pignata S, Scambia G, Katsaros D, et al. Carboplatin plus paclitaxel once a week versus every 3 
weeks in patients with advanced ovarian cancer (MITO-7): a randomised, multicentre, open-label, 
phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014; 15:396–405. [PubMed: 24582486] 
47. Tiersten AD, Liu PY, Smith HO, et al. Phase II evaluation of neoadjuvant chemotherapy and 
debulking followed by intraperitoneal chemotherapy in women with stage III and IV epithelial 
ovarian, fallopian tube or primary peritoneal cancer: Southwest Oncology Group Study S0009. 
Gynecol Oncol. 2009; 112:444–449. [PubMed: 19138791] 
Wright et al.
Page 22
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 48. Mackay HJ, Provencheur D, Heywood M, et al. Phase ii/iii study of intraperitoneal chemotherapy 
after neoadjuvant chemotherapy for ovarian cancer: ncic ctg ov.21. Curr Oncol. 2011; 18:84–90. 
[PubMed: 21505599] 
49. Mackay H, Gallagher CJ, Parulekar WR, et al. OV21/PETROC: A randomized Gynecologic 
Cancer Intergroup (GCIG) phase II study of intraperitoneal (IP) versus intravenous (IV) 
chemotherapy following neoadjuvant chemotherapy and optimal debulking surgery in epithelial 
ovarian cancer (EOC). J Clin Oncol. 2016; 34 (suppl; abstr LBA5503). 
50. Gordon AN, Fleagle JT, Guthrie D, et al. Recurrent epithelial ovarian carcinoma: a randomized 
phase III study of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin versus topotecan. J Clin Oncol. 2001; 
19:3312–3322. [PubMed: 11454878] 
51. Dizon DS, Politi MC, Back AL. The power of words: discussing decision making and prognosis. 
ASCO Educational Book. 2013:442–446. [PubMed: 23714568] 
52. Tew WP, Fleming GF. Treatment of ovarian cancer in the older woman. Gynecol Oncol. 2015; 
136:136–142. [PubMed: 25448455] 
53. Forde GK, Chang J, Ziogas A, et al. Costs of treatment for elderly women with advanced ovarian 
cancer in a Medicare population. Gynecol Oncol. 2015; 137:479–484. [PubMed: 25866323] 
54. Rowland MR, Lesnock JL, Farris C, et al. Cost-utility comparison of neoadjuvant chemotherapy 
versus primary debulking surgery for treatment of advanced-stage ovarian cancer in patients 65 
years old or older. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2015; 212:763 e1–763 e8. [PubMed: 25644442] 
55. Kumar A, Janco JM, Mariani A, et al. Risk-prediction model of severe postoperative complications 
after primary debulking surgery for advanced ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2016; 140:15–21. 
[PubMed: 26541980] 
Wright et al.
Page 23
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 THE BOTTOM LINE
Guideline Question
To provide guidance to clinicians and patients regarding the use of neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy (NACT) and interval cytoreduction among women with advanced 
epithelial ovarian cancer.
Target Population
Women with newly diagnosed or suspected stage IIIC or IV epithelial ovarian cancer, 
fallopian tube cancer, or primary peritoneal cancer.
Target Audience
Gynecologic and medical oncologists and women with advanced ovarian cancer.
Methods
An Expert Panel was convened to develop clinical practice guideline recommendations 
based on a systematic review of the medical literature.
Key Points
Recommendation 1.1. All women with suspected stage IIIC or IV invasive 
epithelial ovarian cancer should be evaluated by a gynecologic oncologist prior to 
initiation of therapy to determine whether they are candidates for primary 
cytoreductive surgery (PCS). (Type: evidence based; benefits outweigh harms; 
evidence quality: intermediate; strength of recommendation: strong.)
Recommendation 1.2. A primary clinical evaluation should include a computed 
tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis with oral and intravenous 
contrast and chest imaging (CT preferred) to evaluate the extent of disease and the 
feasibility of surgical resection. The use of other tools to refine this assessment 
may include laparoscopic evaluation or additional radiographic imaging (eg, 
[18F]fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography [FDG-PET] scan or 
diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]). (Type: informal 
consensus; benefits outweigh harms; evidence quality: intermediate; strength of 
recommendation: moderate.)
Recommendation 2.1. Women who have a high perioperative risk profile or a low 
likelihood of achieving cytoreduction to < 1 cm (ideally to no visible disease) 
should receive NACT. (Type: evidence based; benefits outweigh harms; evidence 
quality: intermediate; strength of recommendation: moderate.)
Recommendation 2.2. Decisions that women are not eligible for medical or 
surgical cancer treatment should be made after a consultation with a gynecologic 
oncologist and/or a medical oncologist with gynecologic expertise. (Type: 
informal consensus; benefits outweigh harms; evidence quality: intermediate; 
strength of recommendation: moderate.)
Wright et al.
Page 24
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Recommendation 3.1. For women who are fit for PCS, with potentially resectable 
disease, either NACT or PCS may be offered based on data from phase III RCTs 
that demonstrate that NACT is noninferior to PCS with respect to progression-free 
and overall survival. NACT is associated with less peri- and postoperative 
morbidity and mortality and shorter hospitalizations, but PCS may offer superior 
survival in selected patients. (Type: evidence based; benefits outweigh harms; 
Evidence quality: intermediate, Strength of recommendation: moderate)
Recommendation 3.2. For women with a high likelihood of achieving 
cytoreduction to < 1 cm (ideally to no visible disease disease) with acceptable 
morbidity, PCS is recommended over NACT. (Type: evidence based; benefits 
outweigh harms; evidence quality: intermediate; strength of recommendation: 
moderate.)
Recommendation 3.3. For women who are fit for PCS but are deemed unlikely to 
have cytoreduction to < 1 cm (ideally to no visible disease) by a gynecologic 
oncologist, NACT is recommended over PCS. NACT is associated with less peri- 
and postoperative morbidity and mortality and shorter hospitalizations. (Type: 
evidence based; benefits outweigh harms; evidence quality: intermediate; strength 
of recommendation: moderate.)
Recommendation 4. Before NACT is delivered, all patients should have histologic 
confirmation (core biopsy preferred) of an invasive ovarian, fallopian tube, or 
peritoneal cancer. In exceptional cases, when a biopsy cannot be performed, 
cytologic evaluation combined with a serum CA-125 to carcinoembryonic antigen 
(CEA) ratio > 25 is acceptable to confirm the primary diagnosis and exclude a 
nongynecologic cancer. (Type: informal consensus; benefits outweigh harms; 
evidence quality: intermediate; strength of recommendation: moderate.)
Recommendation 5. For NACT, a platinum/taxane doublet is recommended. 
However, alternate regimens, containing a platinum agent, may be selected based 
on individual patient factors. (Type: evidence-based, benefits outweigh harms; 
evidence quality: intermediate; strength of recommendation: moderate.)
Recommendation 6. RCTs tested surgery following three or four cycles of 
chemotherapy in women who had a response to NACT or stable disease. Interval 
cytoreductive surgery should be performed after ≤ 4 cycles of NACT for women 
with a response to chemotherapy or stable disease. Alternate timing of surgery has 
not been prospectively evaluated but may be considered based on patient-centered 
factors. (Type: informal consensus; benefits outweigh harms; evidence quality: 
insufficient; strength of recommendation: weak.)
Recommendation 7. Patients with progressive disease on NACT have a poor 
prognosis. Options include alternative chemotherapy regimens, clinical trials, 
and/or discontinuation of active cancer therapy and initiation of end-of-life care. 
In general, there is little role for surgery and it is not typically advised, unless for 
palliation (eg, relief of a bowel obstruction). (Type: evidence-based; benefits 
Wright et al.
Page 25
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 outweigh harms; evidence quality: intermediate; strength of recommendation: 
strong.)
Additional Resources
More information, including a Data Supplement with additional evidence tables, a 
Methodology Supplement with information about evidence quality and strength of 
recommendations, slide sets, and clinical tools and resources, is available at 
www.asco.org/NACT-ovarian-guideline and www.asco.org/guidelineswiki. Patient 
information is available at www.cancer.net.
ASCO and SGO believe that cancer clinical trials are vital to inform medical 
decisions and improve cancer care and that all patients should have the opportunity 
to participate.
Wright et al.
Page 26
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig 1. 
Algorithm for the clinical evaluation and treatment of women with suspected stage IIIC or 
IV epithelial ovarian cancer, fallopian tube cancer, or primary peritoneal cancer. CT, 
computed tomography; NACT, neoadjuvant chemotherapy; PCS, primary cytoreductive 
surgery.
Wright et al.
Page 27
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Wright et al.
Page 28
Table 1
Phase III RCTs of Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy in Stage III or IV Epithelial Ovarian Cancer
Author,
Year, and
Study
Enrollment Criteria
Primary End Point
Study
Arm
No. of
Patients
Age
(years)
Stage
IV
Operative
Time (min)
No Residual
Disease
Grade 3 to
4 Postoperative
Complications
PFS
(months)
OS (months)
Fagotti et al,
  201634
  SCORPION
Pathologically proven
  ovarian cancer, stage
  IIIC-IV. 
Intraoperative
  high tumor load
  (Fagotti’s score of 8 
to
  12) assessed by
  staging laparoscopy.
Surgical
  complications
NACT
PCS
55
55
55
54
7%
15%
275
451
P = 0.0001
58%
46%
P = 0.16
6%
53%*
P = 0.0001
Not yet reported
    Not yet reported
Kehoe et al,
  20152
  CHORUS
Stages III or IV 
ovarian
  cancer based upon
  imaging or clinical
  evidence of pelvic
  mass with extrapelvic
  disease; CA-125 to
  CEA ratio > 25; if 
less,
  had to exclude
  gastrointestinal
  carcinoma.
OS
NACT
PCS
274
276
65
66
25%
25%
120
120
39%
17%
P = 0.0001
14%
24%
P = 0.007
12.0
10.7
ITT analysis:
HR, 0.91; 95%
  CI, 0.76
  to 1.09
24.1
22.6
ITT analysis:
HR, 0.87; 95% CI, 
0.72
  to 1.05
Upper bound of 
one-
  sided 90% CI = 
0.98;
  excludes
  noninferiority
  boundary of 1.18
Onda et al, 
20145
  JCOG0602
  Meeting
  abstract
Stage III or IV
  based on CT, MRI, 
and
  cytologic tests. CA-
  125 > 200 U/mL and
  CEA < 20 ng/mL
OS
NACT
PCS
152
149
61
59
30%
32%
302
240
P < 0.001
63%
30%
(includes 
ICS
  results in
  PCS arm)
5%
15%
P = 0.005
(Nonhematologic
  adverse events)
Not yet reported
    Not yet reported
Vergote et al,
  20101
  EORTC 
55971
Biopsy-proven stage 
IIIC
  or IV. If no biopsy
  specimen, fine-needle
  aspirate showing
  adenocarcinoma was
  allowed under certain
  circumstances.
OS
NACT
PCS
334
336
63
62
24%
23%
180
165
51%
19%
Hemorrhage
NACT: 4%
PCS: 7%
Infections
NACT: 2%
PCS: 8%
Venous
NACT: 0
PCS: 3%
12
12
ITT analysis:
HR, 1.01; 90%
  CI, 0.89
  to 1.15
30
29
ITT analysis:
HR, 0.98; 90% CI, 
0.84
  to 1.13
P = 0.01 for
  noninferiority
Abbreviations: CA-125, cancer antigen 125; CEA, carcinoembryonic antigen; HR, hazard ratio; ICS, interval cytoreductive surgery; ITT, intent-to-treat; NACT, neoadjuvant chemotherapy; OS, overall 
survival; PCS, primary cytoreductive surgery; PFS, progression-free survivial; RCT, randomized clinical trial.
*Two patients in the PCS group had grade 5 complications.
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Wright et al.
Page 29
Table 2
Risk Factors for Perioperative Morbidity or Mortality7,12,14,55
Advanced age or frailty
Multiple chronic conditions
Poor nutritional status or low albumin
Ascites
Newly diagnosed venous thromboembolism
Body mass index
Stage
Performance status
Gynecol Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 02.
