 Wu et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat4388     2 November 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
1 of 10
APPLIED SCIENCES AND ENGINEERING
A swarm of slippery micropropellers penetrates the 
vitreous body of the eye
Zhiguang Wu1,2, Jonas Troll3, Hyeon-Ho Jeong1, Qiang Wei4, Marius Stang5, Focke Ziemssen5, 
Zegao Wang6, Mingdong Dong6, Sven Schnichels5, Tian Qiu1*, Peer Fischer1,3*
The intravitreal delivery of therapeutic agents promises major benefits in the field of ocular medicine. Traditional 
delivery methods rely on the random, passive diffusion of molecules, which do not allow for the rapid delivery of 
a concentrated cargo to a defined region at the posterior pole of the eye. The use of particles promises targeted 
delivery but faces the challenge that most tissues including the vitreous have a tight macromolecular matrix that 
acts as a barrier and prevents its penetration. Here, we demonstrate novel intravitreal delivery microvehicles—
slippery micropropellers—that can be actively propelled through the vitreous humor to reach the retina. The 
propulsion is achieved by helical magnetic micropropellers that have a liquid layer coating to minimize adhesion 
to the surrounding biopolymeric network. The submicrometer diameter of the propellers enables the penetration 
of the biopolymeric network and the propulsion through the porcine vitreous body of the eye over centimeter 
distances. Clinical optical coherence tomography is used to monitor the movement of the propellers and confirm 
their arrival on the retina near the optic disc. Overcoming the adhesion forces and actively navigating a swarm of 
micropropellers in the dense vitreous humor promise practical applications in ophthalmology.
INTRODUCTION
Ocular drug delivery plays an important role in ophthalmology and 
is used to treat diseases ranging from diabetic retinopathy, glauco-
ma, to diabetic macular edema (1). Although topical administration 
is currently available to treat diseases in the anterior of the eye 
including the cornea, ciliary body, and the lens (2), delivery to the 
posterior part of the eye via topical administration, systemic admin-
istration, and intravitreal injection is very ineffective and difficult 
because of the lacrimal fluid–eye barrier and the retina–blood barrier 
(3, 4). To overcome these difficulties, nanoparticles have been in-
jected into the eye, and their passive diffusion toward the retina has 
been investigated (5–7). Passive diffusion, however, suffers from long 
diffusion time and decreased activity of the biomedical agents (8). 
Moreover, it is systemic and therefore comes with an increased risk 
of side effects (9). It therefore still remains challenging to achieve 
targeted delivery with intravitreal administration.
In contrast, actively propelled micro- and nanoparticles provide 
a novel potential pathway for the targeted delivery of drugs in the 
human body (10–13). A few synthetic microparticle systems that can 
be actively propelled in biological media have been developed. These 
have predominantly focused on propulsion in liquids or fluid- 
filled 
cavities in the body, such as chemically propelled structures that 
can move in the low-pH fluids of the stomach (14–16) or magneti-
cally propelled structures that can move in blood (17–19). A swarm 
of magnetic propellers has also been moved and imaged in the 
stomach of a mouse (20). In addition, it has been shown that an 
enzymatic coating of microparticles can facilitate the penetration of 
mucus (21). The translation of a larger cylindrical magnetic struc-
ture (~285 m in outer diameter and ~1800 m in length) that is 
moved by a magnetic gradient field is reported to be restricted in 
the vitreous (22). The propulsion in the vitreous over long distances 
has not yet been realized because of the strong obstruction by the 
biopolymer network. We demonstrate that sufficiently small struc-
tures that are wirelessly actuated are able to efficiently move through 
vitreous, when they are equipped with a suitable surface chemistry.
Active microrheology shows that the mesh size of the (porcine) 
vitreous is ~500 nm, suggesting that nanoparticles with sizes well be-
low this threshold can move relatively unhindered, provided that 
they do not experience any adhesion (23). Moreover, we reported 
that magnetic helical nanopropellers of ~120 nm in diameter and 
~400 nm in length are able to propel in nanoporous hyaluronan 
solutions, a model fluid mimicking the vitreous (24). These results 
indicate that if the size of the propellers is much smaller than the 
mesh size of the complex network, then their interaction with the 
polymeric network is minimized; therefore, the propulsion of nano-
propellers, but not larger micropropellers, is possible in the nano-
porous medium. However, both the propulsive speed and load 
capacity of nanopropellers are limited because of their small size. 
Therefore, it is beneficial to nevertheless increase the propeller size 
as much as possible, while facilitating the penetration of the porous 
biological media.
Here, we report the first micropropellers that can penetrate the 
vitreous humor and that can reach the retina. The propellers are 
helical in shape, with the diameter that is comparable to the mesh 
size of the biopolymeric network of the vitreous and are functionalized 
with a perfluorocarbon surface coating that minimizes the interaction 
of the propellers with biopolymers, including collagen bundles that are 
present in the vitreous. The coating is inspired by a liquid layer found 
on the carnivorous Nepenthes pitcher plant, which presents a slip-
pery surface on the peristome to catch insects (25–27). The nontoxic 
silicone oil and fluorocarbon coatings are also used as slippery sur-
faces in medical applications (28, 29). Under the wireless actuation of 
an external magnetic field, the coated micropropellers not only show 
1Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Heisenbergstrasse 3, 70569 Stuttgart, 
Germany. 2Key Laboratory of Microsystems and Microstructures Manufacturing, Min-
istry of Education, Harbin Institute of Technology, Yi Kuang Jie 2, Harbin 150080, 
China. 3Institute of Physical Chemistry, University of Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 55, 
70569 Stuttgart, Germany. 4Max Planck Institute for Medical Research, Jahnstraße 
29, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. 5Center of Ophthalmology, University Eye Hospi-
tal Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. 6Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center (iNANO), 
Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark.
*Corresponding author. Email: qiu@is.mpg.de (T.Q.); fischer@is.mpg.de (P.F.)
Copyright © 2018 
The Authors, some 
rights reserved; 
exclusive licensee 
American Association 
for the Advancement 
of Science. No claim to 
original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed 
under a Creative 
Commons Attribution 
NonCommercial 
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Wu et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat4388     2 November 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
2 of 10
controllable propulsion but also can be driven as a large swarm over 
centimeter distances through the eyeball and can reach the retina 
within 30 min. The micropropellers are imaged with standard opti-
cal coherence tomography (OCT).
We expect that the complete operating procedure (as demon-
strated in Fig. 1), including intravitreal injection, long-range self- 
propulsion, and noninvasive monitoring via a clinically approved 
instrument, advances the targeted delivery with a view toward fu-
ture ophthalmological therapies.
RESULTS
Fabrication and perfluorocarbon surface coating of the 
slippery micropropellers
The fabrication of the slippery micropropellers consists of two main 
steps: the preparation of helical microstructures and their coating 
(Fig. 2A). The helical microstructures were fabricated using physi-
cal vapor shadow growth via glancing angle deposition (GLAD) 
(30, 31), as previously described (21, 32). The helices were deposited 
with a body of silica as the structural element and nickel (or iron) as 
the magnetic segment (see Materials and methods for details). The 
surface functionalization consisted of a gas phase deposition of a 
perfluorosilane and the subsequent fusion with a slippery perfluoro-
carbon liquid layer (33). Last, the slippery microhelices were released 
from the wafer with ultrasound and well dispersed into aqueous 
media. The fusion of the perfluorocarbon liquid onto the perfluoro-
carbon molecule–functionalized microhelices results in a fully cov-
ered and durable liquid surface layer.
The scanning electron microscope (SEM) image in Fig. 2B shows 
many structurally identical microhelices on part of a silicon wafer. 
Billions of microhelices are obtained on a 51-mm diameter  wafer 
in a single fabrication process. The enlarged ESB (energy-selective 
backscatter)– 
SEM image Fig. 2B shows the presence of the nickel seg-
ment and the typical helix geometry with a length of 2 m and a silica 
head of 500 nm in diameter, which approximately matches the mesh 
size of network in the vitreous. Figure 2C shows that the contact angles 
of the array of uncoated microhelices and of the perfluorocarbon liq-
uid layer–functionalized microhelices are 8° ± 1° and 146° ± 1°, re-
spectively. The large increase of the water contact angle verifies the 
effective enhancement of the hydrophobicity and the decrease of the 
surface energy by the coating. Furthermore, Fourier transform in-
frared (FTIR) spectroscopy (Fig. 2C) shows that the coated micro-
propellers show infrared peaks assigned to the perfluorocarbon 
liquid, which confirms the successful functionalization with the 
perfluorocarbon materials.
Controlled propulsion in the vitreous
Porcine eyes are often used as model systems for human eyes because 
of similarities in the anatomy and similar properties of the vitreous 
(34). The micropropellers were driven wirelessly via a rotating mag-
netic field with an amplitude of 8 mT (80 G). To confirm that the 
propulsion occurred inside the vitreous, we injected a mixture of 
micropropellers and passive silica microparticles into the vitreous 
and was subjected it to a rotating magnetic field. As expected, only 
the micropropellers did penetrate the vitreous (fig. S1). The time-
lapse images in Fig. 3A show the rotation of an uncoated micropro-
peller for one period with a magnetic field of 8 mT at a relatively low 
rotation frequency of 6 Hz (to facilitate observation). The uncoated 
propeller is unable to complete one full rotation and only exhibits 
a wobbling motion, i.e., not rotating around the helix’s long axis 
(movie S1). In contrast, the corresponding time-lapse images in 
Fig. 3B (movie S2) show that a single slippery propeller, with the 
same magnetic actuation parameters as the uncoated propellers, can 
rotate around its long axis, and it propels forward within 1.5 s (nine 
periods). The rotation angle  = d/p × 360°, where p is the pitch of 
the helix, was quantified by measuring the distance d between the 
crest and the head of the propeller (Fig. 3, A and B). As shown in 
Fig. 3C, the rotation angle of the slippery propeller continuously 
changes from 0° to 360°, which corresponds to a complete rotation 
over one period. However, the uncoated helix propeller shows 
hindered motion and only reorients slightly before returning to its 
starting position (0°). We ascribe this behavior to adhesion to the 
vitreous. The data reveal that the slippery liquid coating layer is 
crucial for the propulsion of the micropropellers in the vitreous, and 
this is also reflected in the Brownian diffusion coefficients of coated 
and uncoated particles (Fig. 3D). In agreement with previous mea-
surements (6), the diffusion coefficient decreases as the particle size 
increases. In particular, 1-m particles display only minor or negli-
gible diffusion in the vitreous. The slippery particles, however, show 
much higher diffusion coefficients compared with uncoated silica 
particles in the vitreous, with ~7- and ~5-fold enhancements, respec-
tively, for the 300- and 500-nm particles (Fig. 3D).
We find that only a small fraction of the micropropellers can 
propel in the vitreous if they are only functionalized with the perflu-
orocarbon molecules (fig. S2A). However, with the fluorocarbon 
liquid layer, the micropropellers show efficient propulsion and sus-
tain their propulsion over long (centimeter) distances. The coating 
thus is crucial, and its liquid nature affords a defect-free coverage, 
considerable pressure stability, and a self-healing effect (26). The 
time- 
lapse image in fig. S2B and movie S3 show that a large popula-
tion of the slippery micropropellers moves from the aqueous buffer 
across the boundary into the vitreous (fig. S2C). It should be noted 
that, besides nickel, it is also possible to grow micropropellers with 
more biocompatible materials, such as iron (fig. S3). We show that 
slippery propellers made of Fe and TiO2 material also display con-
trolled intravitreal propulsion when actuated by the external rotating 
magnetic field (fig. S4). Statistical analysis shows that the intravit-
real propulsion is not affected by the use of these other materials 
(fig. S5). Moreover, we find that the perfluorocarbon liquid layer is 
Fig. 1. Schematic of the three-step targeted delivery procedure used for the 
slippery micropropellers. (1) Injection of the micropropellers into the vitreous 
humor of the eye. (2) Magnetically driven long-range propulsion of the micropro-
pellers in the vitreous toward the retina. (3) Observation of the micropropellers at 
the target region near the surface of the retina by OCT.
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Wu et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat4388     2 November 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
3 of 10
stable over time and that the coated micropropellers are still able to 
move in the vitreous after more than a month of storage under am-
bient conditions.
The micropropellers rotate and thus translate for magnetic field 
strengths above 2.5 mT (fig. S8). A high percentage of micropropellers 
move when exposed to a physiological buffer and solution for 2 hours 
(fig. S6 and table S1). Using quantitative dynamic atomic force micros-
copy (AFM), we demonstrate in fig. S7 that the liquid perfluorocarbon 
coating lowers the adhesion force significantly (the bare surface: 
10.0 ± 5.0 nN, the coated surface: 4.0 ± 2.4 nN). The adhesion force 
of the slippery propellers exhibits only minor changes after expo-
sure to physiological buffer and shaking for 2 hours (4.6 ± 1.5 nN), 
indicating good stability of the slippery coating on the micropropel-
lers. The movement direction of the micropropellers is controlled in 
real time through the manipulation of the external magnetic field. 
The time-lapse image in Fig. 3E shows that the propellers follow 
controlled paths in the vitreous (movie S4). The velocity depends 
on the rotational frequency of the magnetic field. As shown in Fig. 3F, 
the average velocity in water increases from 1.4 m/s at 10 Hz to 
11.4 m/s at 100 Hz. The propulsion in the vitreous exhibits a simi-
lar trend over the 10- to 70-Hz range from 0.7 to 10.6 m/s. The 
step-out frequency (when the propeller can no longer rotate in syn-
chrony with the external magnetic field) in the vitreous is 70 Hz, 
which is lower than that in water (100 Hz), indicating that the dy-
namic viscosity is higher and approximately 1.4 centipoise (cP), 
which is similar to the dynamic viscosity of porcine vitreous (1.6 cP) 
according to the literature (34).
Propulsion behavior in heterogeneous media
The heterogeneity of the vitreous results in unique locomotion be-
havior compared with that in other model fluids. Two typical trajec-
tories observed in the vitreous are shown in Fig. 4A. We observed 
that some propellers can be stuck before resuming their movement 
in the vitreous, which is typically not observed in homogeneous vis-
coelastic media (24). As shown in the histogram in Fig. 4B, the dy-
namic velocity in an aqueous glycerol solution (~25%) displays a 
narrower speed distribution, ranging from 5 to 20 m/s. In contrast, 
the dynamic velocity in the vitreous ranges from 0 to 40 m/s. More 
than 5% of propellers temporally show no propulsion, suggesting 
that they are occasionally stuck.
Furthermore, the micropropellers translating in the vitreous 
show larger deviations in their pointing angle compared to those 
moving in homogeneous glycerol solutions, as the trajectories in fig. 
S9A show. To quantify the locomotion in heterogeneous media, we 
examine the dynamic swing angle (SA)—defined as the angle be-
tween the instantaneous pointing direction and the target direction 
(the rotational axis of the external magnetic field), as illustrated 
in fig. S9A. We statistically analyzed more than 1000 instantaneous 
velocities of the propellers in the vitreous and glycerol solution, re-
spectively. The results in fig. S9 suggest that, in the glycerol solu-
tion, the majority (~75%) of the SA lies in the range of −10° to 10°, 
and ~96% of SA is in the range of −45° to 45°. In comparison, the 
distribution of SA in the vitreous is wider, ~48% lies within −10° to 
10°, and ~84% the SA varies from −45° to 45°, but the average intra-
vitreal propulsion direction is still maintained. The large SA in the 
Fig. 2. Fabrication and characterization of the perfluorocarbon-coated “slippery” micropropellers. (A) Schematic of the fabrication process. (B) SEM (top) and ESB-
SEM (bottom) images of the micropropellers. The yellow arrows indicate the length (l) of the propeller and the diameter (d) of the head of the propeller. The white area is 
the nickel part of the propeller. Scale bars, 500 nm. (C) FTIR spectroscopy of the micropropellers without coating and with the perfluorocarbon coating, and the perfluo-
rocarbon liquid. The enlarged spectra are displayed at the bottom right, proving the presence of the perfluorocarbon. The contact angles of the wafer with an array of 
coated helices (top) and uncoated helices (bottom) are shown, respectively.
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Wu et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat4388     2 November 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
4 of 10
vitreous indicates that the propellers frequently change their direc-
tion while navigating the heterogeneous collagen network of the 
vitreous.
Although the SA diverges in the vitreous, the slippery micropro-
pellers demonstrate negligible deviation over their long-range 
propulsion, given by the external rotating magnetic field. The tra-
jectories in Fig. 4C show the horizontal propulsion (in the intended 
X direction) of the three slippery micropropellers in vitreous, with a 
total travel distance of 100 m, while their vertical displacements 
(in Y direction) are below 5 m. As shown in Fig. 4D, the target 
angle (TA) is defined as TA = tan− 1(dv/dh), where dv and dh are the 
vertical and horizontal displacements, respectively. TA is the mea-
sure of the ability of the micropropellers to reach a target over lon-
ger distances, and the corresponding statistics is shown in Fig. 4D. 
The data confirm the precise directionality during the magnetic 
propulsion of the slippery micropropellers in the vitreous despite 
large short-time fluctuations.
Long-range propulsion of coated micropropellers observed 
with an OCT system
To investigate the propulsion of micropropellers in an intact eye, 
we loaded the propellers with fluorescent nanodiamonds for fluo-
rescence imaging. As shown in Fig. 5A, a mixture (~100 l) containing 
the fluorescence-labeled micropropellers and passive fluorescent 
microparticles (20 m in diameter) was injected close to the center 
of an intact (resected) porcine eye. The deposition of a thin Al2O3 
Fig. 3. Controllable movement of the perfluorocarbon-coated micropropellers in the vitreous humor. (A) Schematic and time-lapse microscopy images showing 
the incomplete rotation of an uncoated micropropeller for one period (p) in the vitreous. (B) Schematic and time-lapse images showing the magnetically powered pro-
pulsion of the coated slippery propeller in the vitreous for 1.5 s (nine periods). In both schematic images, the green and the red dashed lines indicate the original position 
of the particles and the position of the particles during the application of the rotating magnetic field, respectively. The red arrows in both figures indicate the propulsion 
direction of the propeller. Scale bars, 1 m. (C) Rotation angle of the uncoated propeller and the slippery propeller in the vitreous under the application of a rotating 
magnetic field. (D) Measured passive diffusion coefficients of uncoated silica particles and the slippery layer–functionalized particles in the vitreous. (E) Controllable 
magnetic field–driven propulsion of the coated micropropellers in the vitreous. The lines indicate the trajectories of the propellers (movie S4). Scale bar, 20 m. (F) De-
pendence of the propulsion velocity of the slippery micropropellers on the driving frequency of the magnetic field in the vitreous, 25% glycerol solution, and water, re-
spectively. Error bars represent SDs.
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Wu et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat4388     2 November 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
5 of 10
layer before the fluorescence functionalization provides a chemical-
ly uniform coating of the micropropellers and facilitates the coating 
with the slippery surface. The statistical analysis of the intravitreal 
propulsion in fig. S5 demonstrates that the thin Al2O3 coating and 
the use of Fe instead of Ni do not adversely affect the movement of 
the slippery propellers in the vitreous (fig. S5 and table S1). Subse-
quently, we placed the porcine eye in the rotating magnetic field for 
30 min, so that the propellers could move to the retina. The eye was 
then carefully opened, and the vitreous was mechanically removed. 
The retina was cut into six pieces (~1 cm by 1 cm each). The retina 
cell nuclei were stained with 4′, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) 
(see Materials and methods for details) and imaged by fluorescence 
microscopy. We observed red fluorescence on the retina segment 
that contained the expected target region (Fig. 5B). In contrast, two 
negative control groups were conducted. In the first control group, 
propellers and passive particles were injected into the eye, but no 
magnetic field was applied. After 30 min, no obvious red fluores-
cence was observed on the retina (fig. S10B), indicating, as expected, 
that the propellers cannot diffuse through the vitreous and reach 
the retina without magnetic propulsion. In the second control group, 
an area of the retina that is away from the target region (optic disc) 
was observed after the magnetic propulsion (fig. S10C), and no red 
fluorescence was found, which supports the precise target-reaching 
ability of the micropropellers.
One major challenge is to image artificial micro- and nanopropel-
lers with a suitable technique in vivo (35).We therefore used a standard 
clinical OCT instrument for the observation of the micropropellers 
close to the retina in a noninvasive and label-free manner. After 
Fig. 4. Characterization of the movement the slippery micropropellers in the vitreous. (A) Two typical trajectories of the micropropellers and their corresponding 
dynamic velocities (inset). (B) Histograms of the dynamic velocities of the microhelices in the vitreous and 25% glycerol. (C) Flexural trajectories of the slippery micropro-
pellers in the vitreous over a horizontal distance of 100 m. (D) Directionalities between the start and end points over a horizontal distance of 100 m. The distribution of 
the TA of the micropropellers in the vitreous is statistically analyzed (n > 60).
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Wu et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat4388     2 November 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
6 of 10
magnetic actuation, we placed the intact eye in front of a clinical 
imaging platform that combines scanning laser ophthalmoscopy 
(SLO) and OCT (see Materials and methods for details). The pas-
sive fluorescent microparticles were used as a label to locate and 
mark the intravitreal injection spot. The fluorescence image ac-
quired with the scanning laser imaging modality is shown in Fig. 5C, 
which indicates that the passive fluorescent particles remain near 
the center of the vitreous of the eye. In contrast, the OCT scans of 
the vitreous-retina boundary reveal the swarm of micropropellers 
both on the retina and very close to it (Fig. 5, D to H, and movie S5). 
Figure 5D shows the autofluorescence image of the retina, in which 
the optic disc (labeled as D) is seen in the top left. The corresponding 
cross-sectional OCT images (both X and Y directions) are shown in 
Fig. 5 (F and G; corresponding positions are marked by the two 
green arrows in Fig. 5D, respectively). In both cross-sectional scans, 
a large number of micrometer-sized particles are observed close to 
the retina near the optic disc. The region away from the optic disc 
(labeled by the yellow arrow in Fig. 5D) serves as a negative control, 
where only a negligible number of spots are found near the retina 
(Fig. 5H). A 3D reconstruction of the OCT scans at the optic disc 
region (labeled by the white dashed box in Fig. 5D) quantifies the 
spatial distribution of the micropropellers near the retina. The dis-
tribution is displayed as a heat map in Fig. 5E and spots correspond-
ing to the microparticles that are located in the region very close to 
the optic disc area with a diameter of ~6 mm. Considering that the 
volume of the injected solution (~100 l) has a diameter of ~6 mm, 
the results indicate that the propulsion of the micropropellers shows 
an excellent directionality under the control of the external magnetic 
field, which is consistent with the observation of their locomotion 
under the microscope (Fig. 4, C and D).
The distance from the center of the porcine eye to the retina is 
~15 mm. Micropropellers were observed close to the retina by OCT 
after an actuation period of 30 min, suggesting that the propulsion 
velocity is at least ~8 m/s. The velocity is comparable to the veloc-
ities measured under the microscope (10 ± 3 m/s at 70 Hz; Fig. 3F). 
Therefore, similar active propulsion behavior is achieved in the in-
tact porcine eye, as in a dissected piece of the vitreous. The results 
indicate that the slippery micropropellers can be manipulated to a 
target position on the retina and that OCT allows for their noninva-
sive tracking during ophthalmological applications.
DISCUSSION
We demonstrate that two major criteria should be fulfilled for the 
propulsion in biological media: (i) matched size of the particles to 
the macromolecular network and (ii) reduced interaction between the 
Fig. 5. Movement of the slippery micropropellers in the complete eyeball. (A) Schematic illustrating the movement of the slippery micropropellers in the vitreous (V) 
toward the retina (R). Passive fluorescent particles are injected with the micropropellers to mark the injection position. (B) Fluorescent microscopy image of the incised 
retina at the target region after the magnetic propulsion. Micropropellers [loaded with fluorescent nanodiamonds (red)] are observed on the retina [cell nuclei stained by 
DAPI (blue)]. Scale bar, 20 m. (C) Fluorescence image shows that the passive fluorescent particles are located near the center of the vitreous. Scale bar, 1 mm. (D) Auto-
fluorescence image of the retina near the optic disc. “D” stands for optic disc. Scale bar, 1 mm. (E) Colormap calculated by the three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction of 
the OCT scans, showing the distribution of the micropropellers in the corresponding dashed-line box in (D). (F and G) OCT images of X and Y scans, respectively, near the 
propellers’ landing zone. The dashed-line circles label the region of the micropropellers near the retina. The scan planes are indicated as green arrows in (D). (H) OCT im-
age of the Y scan away from the optic disc, indicated as the yellow arrow in (D). Scale bars, 500 m in (F to H).
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Wu et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat4388     2 November 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
7 of 10
propellers and the biopolymer network. The slippery micropropellers 
are designed to have a spherical head with a helical tail, both ~500 nm 
in diameter to match the mesh size of the vitreous, since a previous 
study has determined that the particles with a diameter of ~500 nm 
show a relatively unhindered movement through the biopolymeric 
network of the porcine vitreous (6, 22). The shape of the helix tail is 
based on a study that determined the optimal geometry of helical micro-
propellers (36). The microhelical propellers were accomplished by a 
physical vapor shadow growth technique, which permits the growth of 
helical magnetic microarchitectures with sizes ranging from the nano-
scale to the microscale. Notably, nanosized helical propellers can also 
move with a high relative velocity of ~3 body lengths per second in 
biological viscoelastic media (24). However, the absolute velocity of 
1.5 m/s is low because of their nanosized body length. Hence, the 
micropropellers reported herein not only match the mesh size of vit-
reous network but also achieve a velocity that is almost one order of 
magnitude faster than the velocity of the nanopropellers.
The strong adhesion between the collagen fibrils and the parti-
cles is the other major obstacle for active propulsion of particles 
through the vitreous (37). A number of surface coatings have been 
compared (table S1), and the perfluorocarbon molecule functional-
ization with a liquid slippery coating has been found to be most prom-
ising for intravitreal propulsion. The coating is plant inspired, drawn 
from the example of the Nepenthes pitcher plant, which uses a per-
fluorocarbon liquid layer to reduce adhesion. Unlike the antifouling 
surface of the natural lotus plant that relies on an air-liquid interface 
(38), the perfluorocarbon liquid surface shows exceptional stability 
under pressure and resists physical damage (26), as we observe the 
propellers’ long-time operation (even after months of storage).
The approach reported herein outperforms delivery methods based 
on passive diffusion in several aspects: First, the targeted region on 
the retina is as small as ~6 mm in diameter, whereas conventional 
passive diffusion does not permit the delivery of drugs to a specific 
region on the retina. Despite large directional fluctuations at short 
times due to the heterogeneous biopolymer network, the micropro-
pellers maintain excellent long-range directionality when propelled 
by the magnetic field. Further improvements in the precision of the 
delivery are possible with a controlled injection system and real- 
time feedback navigation during the propulsion in the vitreous. 
Targeted delivery promises lower side effects and a higher efficiency 
with the proposed technology. Second, the experimental results 
suggest that the particles can move from the center of the vitreous 
to the retina in 30 min. The delivery time is ~10 times shorter than 
that due to passive diffusion of particles of similar size [it has been 
reported that ~340-nm albumin/hyaluronic acid particles need 6 hours 
to cover ~1 cm (39)].
Most biological tissues are porous: For example, the extracellular 
matrix has a pore size of approximately 100 to 300 nm (40), and the 
mucus has a pore size of 100 nm to several micrometers (41). The 
propulsion mechanism reported here is general and can be applied 
to various porous biological media, where the active motion of the 
propellers holds considerable promise. The biocompatibility and bio-
degradability of the slippery propeller are important for clinical oc-
ular applications. The materials of the slippery propellers such as 
silica and perfluorocarbons are classified as a GRAS (“generally re-
garded as safe”) agent and are approved for eye surgery, respectively 
(42, 43). Although Ni is toxic, it can be replaced with more biocom-
patible Fe with very similar performance characteristics, as we show 
herein (figs. S3 and S4).
In summary, we report the first long-range active propulsion of 
micropropellers through biological tissues. The propulsion is en-
abled by magnetic helical micropropellers that have a diameter com-
parable to the mesh size of the medium and a liquid perfluorocarbon 
coating that effectively minimizes adsorption of the micropropellers 
to the vitreous. We show that the coated helical micropropellers 
(0.5 m in diameter and 2 m in length) are able to propel in the 
vitreous body of a porcine eye at a speed of ~10 m/s. We used a 
clinical OCT to monitor the movement of the particles and to con-
firm their arrival at the retina. The long-distance intravitreal propul-
sion of microrobots in the eye, demonstrated here in combination 
with clinically noninvasive imaging, lays the basis for targeted delivery 
in real tissues and potential clinical applications.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Fabrication of the liquid-coated micropropellers
The uncoated SiO2-Ni microhelices were prepared using the GLAD 
method, as previously reported (32). A Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) mono-
layer of 500-nm silica particles was deposited on a 51-mm diameter 
silicon wafer to be consistent with SI uni silicon wafer (21). Nickel 
(~150 nm) was then deposited onto the silica particles with an angle 
of incidence of 85° in our customized GLAD system, followed by 
silica deposited under rotation to form a left- 
handed helix with 
1.8 turns. The wafer containing the microhelices was then treated 
with an oxygen plasma (PVA TePla 100, Plasma Systems) at 200 mW 
for 15 s, and the activated wafer containing the micropropellers was 
then incubated with 20 l of perfluorocarbon silane (1H,1H,2H,2H- 
 
perfluorooctyltriethoxysilane) under vacuum for 20 min, followed by 
heating at 85°C at atmospheric pressure for 1 hour. The microhelices 
were then immersed in a perfluorocarbon liquid (Fluorinert FC-70, 
Sigma-Aldrich) and left overnight in a shaker. After rinsing with ace-
tone, the wafer was gently dried under nitrogen. Before the propulsion 
experiments in the vitreous, the micropropellers were magnetized dia-
metrically by an electromagnet (Walker Scientific Inc.) with a strength 
of 1.7 T. Micropropellers (on a wafer area of ~6 mm2) were suspended 
into 20 l of phosphate- 
buffered saline (PBS; pH 7.6) (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific) by sonication for 3 min before injection into the vitreous.
Characterization techniques
The contact angle was measured with a Dataphysics OCAH 230, and 
a 3-l water droplet was deposited on the surfaces (silicon wafer, the 
silicon wafer with an array of microhelices, the silicon wafer with a 
slippery perfluorocarbon liquid coating, and the silicon wafer with an 
array of microhelices coated with the slippery perfluorocarbon coat-
ing). The contact angle results are the average of three droplet measure-
ments. The SEM characterization was conducted with a Zeiss Ultra 55 
at an operating voltage of 5 keV. A drop of the sample suspension 
was dropped on a silicon wafer for imaging of the coated micropro-
pellers. FTIR–attenuated total reflection analysis was conducted with 
a Bruker VERTEX 70v in the single reflection mode at 45°. The mag-
netization of the microhelix was measured in a superconducting quan-
tum interference device (SQUID). A piece of silicon wafer (~10 mm2) 
with deposited microhelices (a total number of ~1.54 × 107) was mea-
sured at 300 K by the SQUID magnetometer (Magnetic Property 
Measurement System, Quantum Design). The magnetization-applied 
magentic field (M-H) curve of the wafer piece is plotted in fig. S12.
The quantitative dynamic AFM measurements were conducted, 
as previously reported (44, 45). The morphology and quantitative 
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Wu et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat4388     2 November 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
8 of 10
nanomechanical measurements with AFM were recorded with a 
Peakforce Tapping mode using a commercial MultiMode VIII 
(Bruker) AFM under ambient conditions. Before the measurement, 
the silicon cantilever (RETSAP-300, Bruker) was calibrated with a 
standard procedure, and the spring constant, deflection sensitivity, and 
tip radius were determined to be 38.14 N/m, 26.57 nm/V, and 6 nm, re-
spectively. The quantitative mechanical measurement was performed 
at a scan frequency of 0.1 Hz, with optimized feedback parameters 
and a resolution of 512 by 512 pixels. The mechanical properties were 
all measured using the same cantilevers. All the images and the ad-
hesion distribution were analyzed using the commercial software SPIP 
(Scanning Probe Image Processor, Image Metrology, Denmark).
Preparation of the vitreous and propulsion experiments 
under the microscope
Porcine eyes were obtained from a local slaughter house after slaugh-
ter, stored on ice for transportation, and kept at 4°C for no more 
than 36 hours before the experiments. The samples for the micro-
scope propulsion experiments were dissected from the porcine vit-
reous and used within 30 min after dissection. The sample with a 
volume of ~10 l was placed on a glass coverslip (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific) with a Gene Frame (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Then, ~2 l 
of PBS (pH 7.6) buffer solution containing micropropellers was in-
jected into the vitreous using a 10-l pipette, and the sample was 
sealed with another piece of coverslip to prevent evaporation. For 
the control experiment, ~2 l of PBS buffer solution containing micro-
propellers was injected into the 25% glycerol with the same process 
as the vitreous treatment. The sample was placed at the center of 
three orthogonal pairs of custom Helmholtz coils and observed un-
der a microscope (Zeiss Observer) [objective, 50× and numerical 
aperture (NA) = 0.5 or objective, 100× and NA = 0.75]. The movies 
were captured using a complementary metal-oxide semiconductor 
camera (Andor Zyla) at ~48 frames per second, with 60N-C 1″ 1.0× 
Adapter (Zeiss) for the 50× objective and a 1.6× C-Mount Adapter 
(Best Scientific) for the 100× objective, respectively. ImageJ (version 
1.51p, National Institutes of Health) was used to track the movement 
of the slippery micropropellers with the plugin Manual Tracking. 
The driving magnetic field has a strength of 8 mT, and the rotational 
frequency was swept from 10 to 80 Hz in a step of 10 Hz for the 
propulsion in the vitreous and 25% glycerol, and it was swept from 
10 to 140 Hz in a step of 10 Hz for the propulsion in water. Five 
movies were taken for each frequency, and at least 20 propellers were 
tracked to calculate the average velocity and the SDs.
Stability of the slippery coating under  
physiological conditions
To investigate the slippery coating over a longer period, the micro-
propellers were placed in physiological PBS buffers, and the wafer 
containing the slippery helices was incubated with 5% (w/v) bovine 
serum albumin under stirring at 500 rpm for a period ranging from 
0 to 2 hours. The propulsion performance was evaluated after the 
exposure by determining the percentage of propellers that showed 
successful propulsion in vitreous.
Fluorescence imaging of the micropropellers
To prepare the fluorescent nanodiamond–functionalized slip-
pery micropropellers, the oxygen plasma–treated microhelices 
were immersed into the toluene solution containing 1% (v/v) 
3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.01% (v/v) 
triethanolamine at 75°C overnight (46). After washing with toluene, 
acetone, and water, the wafer was then incubated with nanodiamonds 
[0.1 mg/ml; 40 nm in diameter, carboxylic groups; Adámas Nano-
technologies], 200 mM 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide, 
and 50 mM N-hydroxysuccinimide in 0.1 M acetic acid at pH 5 
overnight under intensive stirring (47). To functionalize the slip-
pery layer onto the microhelices, an Al2O3 adhesion layer with a 
thickness of 10 nm was deposited onto the microhelix wafer via 
atomic layer deposition (ALD) for 100 cycles by repeatedly pulsing 
the trimethylaluminum precursors and water for 0.15 s, respectively. 
The ALD and nanodiamond-functionalized wafer with microhelix 
patterns was subjected to the same coating procedure as the un-
coated microhelix wafer.
A ~3-mm incision was made, and 100 l of solution containing 
the fluorescent slippery micropropellers was injected into the center 
of the vitreous using a 100-l pipette. The eye was placed in a mag-
netic field of 80 mT rotating at 70 Hz. After the magnetic propul-
sion, the porcine eye was cut with a scalpel, followed by mechanically 
removing the vitreous, cutting the sclera into squares (1 cm by 1 cm) 
according to the report (48), and staining with DAPI. The fluores-
cence of the propellers was excited by a light-emitting diode (LED) 
(Illumination system Colibri.2, Carl Zeiss Microscopy) with a cen-
ter wavelength of 470 nm, and the fluorescent images were captured 
through a beam splitter HC BS 409 (AHF Analysentechnik AG) and 
a filter (607/36 BrightLine HC, AHF Analysentechnik AG). The flu-
orescence of DAPI was excited by a LED with a center wavelength 
of 365 nm, and the images were captured through a beam splitter 
HC-Quadband (AHF Analysentechnik AG) and a filter (409/LP 
Longpass Filter BrightLine, AHF Analysentechnik AG). The exper-
iment was independently repeated three times.
OCT imaging of the micropropellers
The microhelices were mixed with 20-m silica microparticles (~0.02%; 
sicastar-greenF, micromod Partikeltechnologie GmbH). A ~3-mm 
incision was made, and 100 l of solution was injected into the center 
of the vitreous using a 100-l pipette. The eye was then placed at the 
center of a custom-built three-axis Helmholtz coil setup. A rotational 
magnetic field with a strength of 8 mT and a frequency of 70 Hz was 
applied. The rotational axis was pointed toward the optic disc re-
gion of the retina, and the rotational direction was counterclockwise 
(viewing from the side of the lens). The eye was then placed on the 
imaging instrument that combines scanning laser imaging and high- 
resolution OCT [SPECTRALIS Heidelberg Engineering Retinal 
Angiography (HRA)+OCT, Heidelberg Engineering GmbH] by a 
custom holder. Fluorescent silica particles were imaged under a 
485-nm laser excitation and a 510-nm emission filter in the HRA 
mode. The slippery micropropellers were imaged by OCT scans with 
both 19 slices in X and Y directions, respectively. The experiment 
was independently repeated three times. Counting of micropropellers 
in each OCT scan was conducted, and pseudocolor images were gener-
ated by a custom script in MATLAB (R2017a, MathWorks).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/4/11/eaat4388/DC1
Fig. S1. Schematic of the experimental scheme used to confirm the movement of the 
propellers in the vitreous.
Fig. S2. Intravitreal propulsion of micropropellers with different coatings.
Fig. S3. SEM images of the micropropellers grown with TiO2 and Fe.
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Wu et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat4388     2 November 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
9 of 10
Fig. S4. Time-lapse images showing the controlled movement (forward/backward) of the 
slippery Fe-containing propellers when actuated by the external magnetic field.
Fig. S5. Percentage of propelling micropropellers containing Ni (black) and those made with 
Fe (red) in vitreous with different surface coatings.
Fig. S6. Percentage of propelling slippery propellers in vitreous before and after incubation 
within 5% bovine serum albumin in PBS solution for 2 hours.
Fig. S7. Characterization of the surface coating on the micropropellers by AFM.
Fig. S8. Intravitreal propulsion of the slippery propellers as a function of the magnetic field 
strength.
Fig. S9. Propulsion of the slippery micropropellers in glycerol solution.
Fig. S10. Fluorescence images of the excised retina.
Fig. S11. Investigation of the distribution of the propellers on the retina.
Fig. S12. The M-H curve of a wafer piece (area of 10 mm2) containing an array of microhelices.
Table S1. Statistical analysis of micropropellers moving in vitreous as a function of the surface 
coating.
Movie S1. Wobbling motion of an uncoated micropropeller in the vitreous under the actuation 
of a rotating magnetic field with a strength of 8 mT and a frequency of 6 Hz.
Movie S2. Propulsion of a slippery micropropeller in the vitreous under the actuation of a 
rotating magnetic field with a strength of 8 mT and a frequency of 6 Hz.
Movie S3. A large swarm of slippery micropropellers moves across the boundary of an 
aqueous buffer into the vitreous and continues propelling in the vitreous under a rotating 
magnetic field with a strength of 8 mT and a frequency of 70 Hz.
Movie S4. Controlled motion of slippery micropropellers in the vitreous under a rotating 
magnetic field with a strength of 8 mT and a frequency of 50 Hz.
Movie S5. OCT shows the distribution of the slippery micropropellers at the vitreous-retina 
boundary.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1. A. Patel, K. Cholkar, V. Agrahari, A. K. Mitra, Ocular drug delivery systems: An overview. 
World J. Pharmacol. 2, 47–64 (2013).
 2. S. Resnikoff, D. Pascolini, D. Etya’ale, I. Kocur, R. Pararajasegaram, G. P. Pokharel, 
S. P. Mariotti, Global data on visual impairment in the year 2002. Bull. World Health Organ. 
82, 844–851 (2004).
 3. P. M. Hughes, O. Olejnik, J.-E. Chang-Lin, C. G. Wilson, Topical and systemic drug delivery 
to the posterior segments. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 57, 2010–2032 (2005).
 4. A. Urtti, Challenges and obstacles of ocular pharmacokinetics and drug delivery.  
Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 58, 1131–1135 (2006).
 5. H.-Y. Zhou, J.-L. Hao, S. Wang, Y. Zheng, W.-S. Zhang, Nanoparticles in the ocular drug 
delivery. Int. J. Ophthamol. 6, 390–396 (2013).
 6. Q. Xu, N. J. Boylan, J. S. Suk, Y.-Y. Wang, E. A. Nance, J.-C. Yang, P. J. McDonnell, R. A. Cone, 
E. J. Duh, J. Hanes, Nanoparticle diffusion in, and microrheology of, the bovine vitreous 
ex vivo. J. Control. Release 167, 76–84 (2013).
 7. B. T. Käsdorf, F. Arends, O. Lieleg, Diffusion regulation in the vitreous humor. Biophys. J. 
109, 2171–2181 (2015).
 8. A. J. Witkin, G. C. Brown, Update on nonsurgical therapy for diabetic macular edema. 
Curr. Opin. Ophthalmol. 22, 185–189 (2011).
 9. K. G. Janoria, S. Gunda, S. H. Boddu, A. K. Mitra, Novel approaches to retinal drug delivery. 
Expert Opin. Drug Deliv. 4, 371–388 (2007).
 10. J. Wang, Nanomachines: Fundamentals and Applications (Wiley-VCH, 2013).
 11. W. Qin, T. Peng, Y. Gao, F. Wang, X. Hu, K. Wang, J. Shi, D. Li, J. Ren, C. Fan, Catalysis-driven self‐
thermophoresis of Janus plasmonic nanomotors. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 56, 515–518 (2017).
 12. D. Fan, Z. Yin, R. Cheong, F. Q. Zhu, R. C. Cammarata, C. L. Chien, A. Levchenko, 
Subcellular-resolution delivery of a cytokine through precisely manipulated nanowires. 
Nat. Nanotechnol. 5, 545–551 (2010).
 13. B. Dai, J. Wang, Z. Xiong, X. Zhan, W. Dai, C.-C. Li, S.-P. Feng, J. Tang, Programmable 
artificial phototactic microswimmer. Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 1087–1092 (2016).
 14. B. E.-F. de Ávila, P. Angsantikul, J. Li, M. A. Lopez-Ramirez, D. E. Ramírez-Herrera, 
S. Thamphiwatana, C. Chen, J. Delezuk, R. Samakapiruk, V. Ramez, M. Obonyo, L. Zhang, 
J. Wang, Micromotor-enabled active drug delivery for in vivo treatment of stomach 
infection. Nat. Commun. 8, 272 (2017).
 15. W. Gao, R. Dong, S. Thamphiwatana, J. Li, W. Gao, L. Zhang, J. Wang, Artificial 
micromotors in the mouse’s stomach: A step toward in vivo use of synthetic motors.  
ACS Nano 9, 117–123 (2015).
 16. J. Li, B. E.-F. de Ávila, W. Gao, L. Zhang, J. Wang, Micro/nanorobots for biomedicine: 
Delivery, surgery, sensing, and detoxification. Sci. Robot. 2, eaam6431 (2017).
 17. P. L. Venugopalan, R. Sai, Y. Chandorkar, B. Basu, S. Shivashankar, A. Ghosh, Conformal 
cytocompatible ferrite coatings facilitate the realization of a nanovoyager in human 
blood. Nano Lett. 14, 1968–1975 (2014).
 18. R. Cheng, W. Huang, L. Huang, B. Yang, L. Mao, K. Jin, Q. ZhuGe, Y. Zhao, Acceleration of 
tissue plasminogen activator-mediated thrombolysis by magnetically powered 
nanomotors. ACS Nano 8, 7746–7754 (2014).
 19. A. Ghosh, P. Fischer, Controlled propulsion of artificial magnetic nanostructured 
propellers. Nano Lett. 9, 2243–2245 (2009).
 20. A. Servant, F. Qiu, M. Mazza, K. Kostarelos, B. J. Nelson, Controlled in vivo swimming of a 
swarm of bacteria-like microrobotic flagella. Adv. Mater. 27, 2981–2988 (2015).
 21. D. Walker, B. T. Käsdorf, H.-H. Jeong, O. Lieleg, P. Fischer, Enzymatically active biomimetic 
micropropellers for the penetration of mucin gels. Sci. Adv. 1, e1500501 (2015).
 22. F. Ullrich, C. Bergeles, J. Pokki, O. Ergeneman, S. Erni, G. Chatzipirpiridis, S. Pané, 
C. Framme, B. J. Nelson, Mobility experiments with microrobots for minimally invasive 
intraocular surgery. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 54, 2853–2863 (2013).
 23. T. Qiu, D. Schamel, A. G. Mark, P. Fischer, Active microrheology of the vitreous of the eye 
applied to nanorobot propulsion, in 2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 
Automation (ICRA) (IEEE, 2014), pp. 3801–3806.
 24. D. Schamel, A. G. Mark, J. G. Gibbs, C. Miksch, K. I. Morozov, A. M. Leshansky, P. Fischer, 
Nanopropellers and their actuation in complex viscoelastic media. ACS Nano 8, 
8794–8801 (2014).
 25. H. F. Bohn, W. Federle, Insect aquaplaning: Nepenthes pitcher plants capture prey with 
the peristome, a fully wettable water-lubricated anisotropic surface. Proc. Natl. Acad.  
Sci. U.S.A. 101, 14138–14143 (2004).
 26. T.-S. Wong, S. H. Kang, S. K. Y. Tang, E. J. Smythe, B. D. Hatton, A. Grinthal, J. Aizenberg, 
Bioinspired self-repairing slippery surfaces with pressure-stable omniphobicity. Nature 
477, 443–447 (2011).
 27. D. C. Leslie, A. Waterhouse, J. B. Berthet, T. M. Valentin, A. L. Watters, A. Jain, P. Kim, 
B. D. Hatton, A. Nedder, K. Donovan, E. H. Super, C. Howell, C. P. Johnson, T. L. Vu, 
D. E. Bolgen, S. Rifai, A. R. Hansen, M. Aizenberg, M. Super, J. Aizenberg, D. E. Ingber,  
A bioinspired omniphobic surface coating on medical devices prevents thrombosis and 
biofouling. Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 1134–1140 (2014).
 28. J. Chen, C. Howell, C. A. Haller, M. S. Patel, P. Ayala, K. A. Moravec, E. Dai, L. Liu, I. Sotiri, 
M. Aizenberg, An immobilized liquid interface prevents device associated bacterial 
infection in vivo. Biomaterials 113, 80–92 (2017).
 29. Y. K. Chan, N. Cheung, W. S. Chan, D. Wong, Quantifying silicone oil emulsification in 
patients: Are we only seeing the tip of the iceberg? Graefes Arch. Clin. Exp. Ophthalmol. 
253, 1671–1675 (2015).
 30. M. M. Hawkeye, M. J. Brett, Glancing angle deposition: Fabrication, properties, and 
applications of micro- and nanostructured thin films. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 25, 1317–1335 
(2007).
 31. K. Robbie, J. C. Sit, M. J. Brett, Advanced techniques for glancing angle deposition.  
J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B Microelectron. Nanometer Struct. Process Meas. Phenom. 16, 
1115–1122 (1998).
 32. A. G. Mark, J. G. Gibbs, T.-C. Lee, P. Fischer, Hybrid nanocolloids with programmed 
three-dimensional shape and material composition. Nat. Mater. 12, 802–807 (2013).
 33. H. Zhou, H. Wang, H. Niu, A. Gestos, X. Wang, T. Lin, Fluoroalkyl silane modified silicone 
rubber/nanoparticle composite: A super durable, robust superhydrophobic fabric 
coating. Adv. Mater. 24, 2409–2412 (2012).
 34. B. Lee, M. Litt, G. Buchsbaum, Rheology of the vitreous body: Part 2. Viscoelasticity of 
bovine and porcine vitreous. Biorheology 31, 327–338 (1994).
 35. M. Medina-Sánchez, O. G. Schmidt, Medical microbots need better imaging and control. 
Nature 545, 406–408 (2017).
 36. D. Walker, M. Kübler, K. I. Morozov, P. Fischer, A. M. Leshansicy, Optimal length of low 
Reynolds number nanopropellers. Nano Lett. 15, 4412–4416 (2015).
 37. L. Peeters, N. N. Sanders, K. Braeckmans, K. Boussery, J. Van de Voorde, S. C. De Smedt, 
J. Demeester, Vitreous: A barrier to nonviral ocular gene therapy. Invest. Ophthalmol.  
Vis. Sci. 46, 3553–3561 (2005).
 38. L. Jiang, Y. Zhao, J. Zhai, A lotus-leaf-like superhydrophobic surface: A porous 
microsphere/nanofiber composite film prepared by electrohydrodynamics. Angew. 
Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 43, 4338–4341 (2004).
 39. H. Koo, H. Moon, H. Han, J. H. Na, M. S. Huh, J. H. Park, S. J. Woo, K. H. Park, I. C. Kwon, 
K. Kim, H. Kim, The movement of self-assembled amphiphilic polymeric nanoparticles 
in the vitreous and retina after intravitreal injection. Biomaterials 33, 3485–3493 
(2012).
 40. R. M. Kuntz, W. M. Saltzman, Neutrophil motility in extracellular matrix gels: Mesh size 
and adhesion affect speed of migration. Biophys. J. 72, 1472–1480 (1997).
 41. S. K. Lai, Y.-Y. Wang, J. Hanes, Mucus-penetrating nanoparticles for drug and gene 
delivery to mucosal tissues. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 61, 158–171 (2009).
 42. J. G. Croissant, Y. Fatieiev, N. M. Khashab, Degradability and clearance of silicon, 
organosilica, silsesquioxane, silica mixed oxide, and mesoporous silica nanoparticles. 
Adv. Mater. 29, 1604634 (2017).
 43. M. Soheilian, G. A. Peyman, H. Wafapoor, G. C. Navarro, H. Thompson, Surgical 
management of traumatic retinal detachment with perfluorocarbon liquid.  
Int. Ophthalmol. 20, 241–249 (1996).
 44. D. Xia, S. Zhang, J. Ø. Hjortdal, Q. Li, K. Thomsen, J. Chevallier, F. Besenbacher, M. Dong, 
Hydrated human corneal stroma revealed by quantitative dynamic atomic force 
microscopy at nanoscale. ACS Nano 8, 6873–6882 (2014).
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Wu et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat4388     2 November 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
10 of 10
 45. L. Liu, Q. Li, S. Zhang, X. Wang, S. V. Hoffman, J. Li, Z. Liu, F. Besenbacher, M. Dong, 
Identification of a novel parallel -strand conformation within molecular monolayer of 
amyloid peptide. Adv. Sci. 3, 1500369 (2016).
 46. J. A. Howarter, J. P. Youngblood, Optimization of silica silanization by 
3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane. Langmuir 22, 11142–11147 (2006).
 47. J. Benesch, P. Tengvall, Blood protein adsorption onto chitosan. Biomaterials 23, 
2561–2568 (2002).
 48. K. Januschowski, S. Müller, C. Krupp, M. S. Spitzer, J. Hurst, M. Schultheiss,  
K.-U. Bartz-Schmidt, P. Szurman, S. Schnichels, Glutamate and hypoxia as a stress model 
for the isolated perfused vertebrate retina. J. Vis. Exp. 2015, 52270 (2015).
Acknowledgments: We are grateful to C. Miksch for LB deposition and GLAD, J. P. Spatz for 
SEM access, S. Jagiella for the help with FTIR, G. Schütz for SQUID access, and J. Hurst for the 
histological section. We thank Q. He, B. E.-F. de Ávila, F. Serwane, and U. Choudhury for helpful 
discussions. Funding: The research was in part supported by the European Research Council 
under the ERC Grant Agreement Chiral MicroBots (no. 278213) and by the Max Planck Society. 
Z. Wu was supported by the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation. M.D. would like to thank the 
EU H2020RISE, 2016-MNR4S Cell project. Author contributions: P.F., Z. Wu, and T.Q. conceived 
the project. P.F. and T.Q. supervised the studies. Z. Wu, H.-H.J., Q.W., and T.Q. carried out the 
preparation and the characterization of the micropropellers. Z. Wu, T.Q., and J.T. characterized 
the movement of the micropropellers. M.S., F.Z., and S.S. conducted the OCT and SLO 
experiments. Z. Wang and M.D. conducted AFM experiments. Z. Wu, T.Q., and P.F. interpreted 
the data and co-wrote the paper. Competing interests: Z. Wu, T.Q., and P.F. are inventors on a 
patent application related to this work filed by Max Planck Innovation GmbH (EP17187924.0, 
filed 25 August 2017). P.F. is an inventor on a patent related to this work filed by Max Planck 
Innovation GmbH (US8768501B2, granted 1 April 2014). All other authors declare that they 
have no competing interests. Data and materials availability: All data needed to evaluate the 
conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. 
Additional data related to this paper may be requested from the authors.
Submitted 26 February 2018
Accepted 25 September 2018
Published 2 November 2018
10.1126/sciadv.aat4388
Citation: Z. Wu, J. Troll, H.-H. Jeong, Q. Wei, M. Stang, F. Ziemssen, Z. Wang, M. Dong, S. Schnichels, 
T. Qiu, P. Fischer, A swarm of slippery micropropellers penetrates the vitreous body of the eye. 
Sci. Adv. 4, eaat4388 (2018).
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 A swarm of slippery micropropellers penetrates the vitreous body of the eye
Schnichels, Tian Qiu and Peer Fischer
Zhiguang Wu, Jonas Troll, Hyeon-Ho Jeong, Qiang Wei, Marius Stang, Focke Ziemssen, Zegao Wang, Mingdong Dong, Sven
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aat4388
 (11), eaat4388.
4
Sci Adv 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/4/11/eaat4388
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2018/10/29/4.11.eaat4388.DC1
REFERENCES
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/4/11/eaat4388#BIBL
This article cites 46 articles, 4 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
registered trademark of AAAS.
is a
Science Advances 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
(ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New
Science Advances 
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
