 INTERNATIONAL
SOCIETY FOR PROSTHETICS
AND ORTHOTICS
https://doi.org/10.1177/0309364617736089
Prosthetics and Orthotics International
2018, Vol. 42(5) 498 
–503
© The International Society for
Prosthetics and Orthotics 2017
DOI: 10.1177/0309364617736089
journals.sagepub.com/home/poi
Background
Lower limb amputation is considered a major health event 
that can negatively impact a person’s functional mobility.1,2 
Restoring functional mobility following lower limb amputa-
tion should be considered a primary goal of the rehabilita-
tion process.3,4
In addition to the restoration of functional mobility, a 
second, more general rehabilitation goal is optimizing the 
person’s quality of life and satisfaction. Prosthetists, 
Mobility Analysis of AmpuTees (MAAT I):  
Quality of life and satisfaction are  
strongly related to mobility for patients 
with a lower limb prosthesis
Shane R Wurdeman, PhD, CP, FAAOP1,2,  
Phillip M Stevens, MEd, CPO, FAAOP1,3 and  
James H Campbell, PhD, CO, FAAOP1
Abstract
Background: While rehabilitation professionals are historically trained to place emphasis on the restoration of mobility 
following lower limb amputation, changes in healthcare dynamics are placing an increased emphasis on the limb loss 
patient’s quality of life and general satisfaction. Thus, the relationship between these constructs and mobility in the 
patient with lower limb loss warrants further investigation.
Objectives: To determine the relationship between mobility of the patient with lower limb loss and both (1) general 
satisfaction and (2) quality of life.
Study design: Retrospective chart analysis.
Methods: A retrospective chart review of the Prosthetic Limb Users Survey of Mobility and the Prosthesis Evaluation 
Questionnaire—Well-Being subsection. Pearson correlations were used to test relationships.
Results: Data from 509 patients with a lower limb prosthesis were included. Mobility was found to be positively correlated 
with quality of life (r 
= 
0.511, p 
< 
0.001, 95% confidence interval (0.443, 0.569)) and general satisfaction (r 
= 
0.475, p 
< 
0.001, 
95% confidence interval (0.403, 0.542)), as well as their arithmetic mean (i.e. Prosthesis Evaluation Questionnaire—Well-
Being) (r 
= 
0.533, p 
< 
0.001, 95% confidence interval (0.466, 0.592)).
Conclusion: This study provides evidence of a strong positive correlation between mobility and both quality of life and 
general satisfaction. Thus, in the holistic care of a patient with lower limb loss, maximizing mobility would correlate with 
greater quality of life and general satisfaction.
Clinical relevance
There is growing emphasis on the quality of life and general satisfaction experienced by patients undergoing prosthetic 
rehabilitation. The results of this study underscore the importance of providing prosthetic rehabilitation that maximizes 
the patient’s mobility, noting that these individuals also report greater quality of life and general satisfaction.
Keywords
MAAT, amputation, mobility, quality of life, prosthetics
Date received: 16 February 2017; accepted: 13 September 2017
1 
Department of Clinical and Scientific Affairs, Hanger Clinic, Austin, 
TX, USA
2 
School of Allied Health Sciences, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
TX, USA
3 
School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
Corresponding author:
Shane R Wurdeman, Hanger Clinic, 11155 Main St., Houston, TX 
77025, USA. 
Email: swurdeman@hanger.com
736089 POI0010.1177/0309364617736089Prosthetics and Orthotics InternationalWurdeman et al.
research-article2017
Original Research Report
 Wurdeman et al. 
499
physical therapists, and physiatrists are trained with a 
mindset of providing a patient with a tool (i.e. the prosthe-
sis) and training the patient to use that tool in order to 
improve mobility. This process is undertaken in the belief 
that it positively impacts a patient’s life, with expectations 
of improved quality of life and satisfaction. The objectives 
of enhanced mobility, quality of life and satisfaction appear 
to be closely related, yet their relationships either have not 
been clearly reported or have been confined to limited 
population sizes where such relationships were not the pri-
mary objective of the studies.
Suckow et al.5 investigated the impact of mobility for 
individuals with lower limb amputation on the construct of 
quality of life. This was done through a series of focus 
group interview sessions with 26 individuals of varying 
amputation etiologies, levels of amputation, and age. 
Among the participants, 65% felt mobility, or the lack 
thereof, had an impact on their quality of life. In another 
study, Norvell et al.6 reported a significant association 
between mobility and satisfaction with life in a group of 75 
individuals with lower limb loss. In one of the larger stud-
ies, Pell et al.7 investigated 149 individuals with a major 
lower limb amputation assessing various aspects of quality 
of life using the Nottingham Health Profile questionnaire.8 
Following stepwise logistic regression, mobility was found 
to be the only component that differed significantly between 
individuals with limb loss and non-amputee controls. In a 
recent systematic review, Davie-Smith et al.9 looked at var-
ious factors impacting quality of life for individuals with 
lower limb amputation due to peripheral arterial disease. 
Notably, the ability to walk successfully with a prosthesis 
was reported to have the greatest positive impact on quality 
of life. This led the authors to conclude the ability to walk 
with a prosthesis is of primary importance toward improv-
ing quality of life for this patient population.
This study is the first within a series of mobility analyses 
of amputees (MAAT) utilizing retrospective chart review 
of outcomes data being collected for patients with lower 
limb prostheses. The purpose of this study was to further 
establish the relationship between mobility and both qual-
ity of life and satisfaction for patients with lower limb 
amputation by examining a large group of diverse patients 
in a retrospective chart review. Based on the limited studies 
available,5,7,9 it was hypothesized that mobility would be 
positively correlated with quality of life. Additionally, 
based on the findings of Norvell et al.,6 it was further 
hypothesized that mobility would be strongly correlated 
with a patient’s general satisfaction with their situation.
Methods
Study design
In the first of the MAAT initiative, we performed a multi-
site, retrospective review of outcomes data collected within 
a large, multi-site prosthetics provider. A convenience 
sample of the most recent 550 patients were extracted for 
analysis. The target goal was 500 patients with an expecta-
tion of 10% of data dropped due to incomplete information 
or not meeting inclusion criteria. For patients with multiple 
outcome data sets on file, only the most recent data were 
considered to eliminate patient duplication. Patients with 
incomplete outcome data were excluded. This retrospective 
database review was approved by Western Investigational 
Review Board (Protocol #20170059).
Participants
Individuals with unilateral and bilateral lower limb ampu-
tation were included. Individuals were required to be the 
following: (1) age 18 or older, (2) present with amputation 
level/s of ankle disarticulation, transtibial, knee disarticu-
lation, transfemoral, or hip disarticulation/hemipelvec-
tomy, (3) currently using a prosthesis, and (4) should have 
the ability to read, write, and understand English or 
Spanish. There were no restrictions with regard to pros-
thetic device or Medicare Functional Classification Level 
(MFCL). MFCL is a United States–based classification 
system whereby all lower limb prosthesis users are catego-
rized into four distinct classifications based on current and 
potential function. These classifications provide broad 
guidance for payment for services for prostheses by 
Medicare and are also utilized by most major third-party 
payers.3
Procedure
Patients were asked to complete a self-report survey out-
comes packet as part of their routine prosthetic care. 
Administration of the outcomes packet occurred at various 
points in a given subject’s prosthetic rehabilitation, includ-
ing during a follow-up appointment with a legacy prosthe-
sis, at the patient’s initial evaluation appointment for a 
replacement prosthesis or during the transition of a major 
prosthetic component such as the socket, foot, or knee. 
The outcomes packet includes the 12-item Prosthetic 
Limb Users Survey of Mobility (PLUS-M)3,10,11 1 and the 
well-being subsection of the Prosthesis Evaluation 
Questionnaire (Prosthesis Evaluation Questionnaire—
Well-Being (PEQ-WB)).12–15 The 12-item PLUS-M is a 
patient-reported outcome measure that asks individuals to 
rate the level of difficulty they experience across 12 differ-
ent mobility tasks. Patients provide responses to the vary-
ing tasks reflecting five levels of ease: (1) Unable to do, 
(2) With much difficulty, (3) With some difficulty, (4) With 
a little difficulty, and (5) Without any difficulty. Each 
response is graded with its associated score (1–5). The 
summed score of all responses are then cross-referenced to 
a standardized t-score.16 This conversion facilitates com-
parison to a reference population as a t-score has a mean of 
50 and a standard deviation of 10 points. For PLUS-M sur-
veys that were missing a response, the appropriate scoring 
 500 
Prosthetics and Orthotics International 42(5)
procedure was used as outlined by the instrument authors.16 
Evidence of validity and reliability have been established 
for use of the PLUS-M in assessing self-rated mobility in 
patients with lower limb amputation.3,16
The PEQ-WB was originally published as a subsection 
of the larger Prosthesis Evaluation Questionnaire (PEQ).12 
The complete PEQ is long and the extensive time required 
for administration and scoring make it prohibitive in the 
clinical setting.12 The PEQ-WB subsection, however, com-
prises only two questions that ask the patient to reflect on 
satisfaction and quality of life over the past 4 weeks. 
Specifically, the patient is asked to rate how satisfied they 
have been with how things have worked out since their 
amputation (i.e. general satisfaction) and to rate their qual-
ity of life. Notably, although the label “well-being” was 
attached to this subsection when first published, the cur-
rent definition of “well-being” from organizations such as 
Health People 2020 places “well-being” as a sub-domain 
under quality of life.17 Furthermore, satisfaction is a type 
of positive emotion a patient holds about their life that 
contributes to well-being among other emotions. As a 
result, this study does not attempt to investigate the con-
struct of well-being, but rather, the issues of quality of life 
and satisfaction. However, as it is the PEQ-WB composite 
score (comprising the mean of the scores for quality of life 
and satisfaction) that has been found to have evidence of 
validity and reliability, this score was also correlated with 
mobility.
Initially, the PEQ and PEQ-WB were published as con-
tinuous visual analog scales. However, for ease of adminis-
tration and subsequent scoring, various subsections of the 
PEQ have been administered in the format of 5- and 
10-point ordinal scales.18 As a standard of practice in par-
ticipating clinics in this retrospective analysis, the PEQ-WB 
was administered in the format of a 10-point ordinal scale 
to allow for increased resolution over a 5-point ordinal 
scale. Notably, this concession to increase the ease of 
administration may have decreased resolution compared to 
a visual analog scale. Evidence of validity has been estab-
lished for measuring both quality of life and satisfaction 
with the PEQ-WB in patients with lower limb amputa-
tion,19 and the PEQ is considered among the most com-
monly utilized survey instruments in prosthetics research.
There are many outcome measures available to meas-
ure quality of life and general satisfaction, and many of 
these are more detailed and informative than the PEQ-WB 
questions. However, these instruments require increased 
time to administer and score compared to the PEQ-WB. 
As these questionnaires were implemented as part of 
standard of delivery of care, there was great emphasis 
placed on clinical feasibility with priority given to brev-
ity 
when 
selecting 
these 
outcomes 
instruments. 
Specifically, it is felt that as an additional task for clini-
cians in their busy work routine, any substantial time 
commitment would decrease the administration rates of 
the outcome measure.
Analysis
The relationships between PLUS-M t-scores, satisfaction, 
quality of life, and PEQ-WB scores were investigated 
using separate Pearson product moment correlations. For 
all correlation analyses, the 95th percentile confidence 
interval was determined through the implementation of a 
bootstrapping procedure with 1000 iterations. Correlation 
coefficient effect sizes were classified according to 
Cohen’s recommendations.20,21 All statistical analyses 
were done in SPSS v20.
Results
A convenience sample of the most recent 550 patients 
from participating clinics with completed outcome data 
sets was extracted. The patient demographic data were 
then checked at time of evaluation to confirm inclusion 
criteria. This resulted in dropping nine patients which 
were under age 18. For each ordinal score of the 
PEQ-WB, PLUS-M mobility t-scores were tabulated, 
and any data points outside the 95% tolerance interval 
based on the ordinal score’s mean were noted as outliers, 
resulting in an additional dropping of 32 data points. 
This resulted in 509 patients for which correlations were 
analyzed (Table 1).
Quality of life and satisfaction were examined sepa-
rately. Quality of life was significantly and positively cor-
related with the patient’s PLUS-M t-score (r = 0.511, 
p < 0.001, 95% confidence interval (CI) (0.443, 0.569); 
Figure 1). This was noted to be a strong correlation by 
Cohen standards.20,21 Similarly, general satisfaction with 
how things have worked out with regard to the patient’s 
amputation over the past 4 weeks was also significantly 
and positively correlated with the individual’s PLUS-M 
t-score (r = 0.475, p < 0.001, 95% CI (0.403, 0.542); 
Figure 2). This is referenced as a moderate correlation by 
Cohen standards.20,21 The score for the PEQ-WB was sig-
nificantly and positively correlated with the patient’s 
PLUS-M t-score (r = 0.533, p < 0.001, 95% CI (0.466, 
0.592); Figure 3). This is noted to be a strong relationship 
by Cohen standards.20,21
Discussion
The objective of this study was to determine the relation-
ship between self-reported mobility, and both quality of 
life and satisfaction for patients with a lower limb amputa-
tion. The results of this study confirm the initial hypothesis 
that there is a positive relationship between both of these 
constructs and mobility.
The emphasis of prosthetic rehabilitation has historically 
centered on mobility. By contrast, quality of life and satis-
faction have been less recognized. Encouragingly, changes 
in healthcare policies appear to be placing an increased 
emphasis on patient’s quality of life and satisfaction, as 
 Wurdeman et al. 
501
evidenced by the launch of the Patient Centered Outcomes 
Research Institute by the enactment of the United States 
Affordable Care Act of 201022 and the funding of the 
National Institutes of Health Patient-Reported Outcomes 
Measurement Information System (PROMIS).23 Both of 
these actions have increased the focus on measuring patient-
reported outcomes including satisfaction and quality of life.
The close relationship between these factors and mobil-
ity should be fully appreciated in patients with a lower 
limb amputation. In this study, the significant relationships 
between mobility and both quality of life and satisfaction 
highlight the importance of maximizing mobility in 
patients with lower limb loss, both for the associated 
immediate functional benefits as well as its influence on 
the generalized domains of both quality of life and satis-
faction in this population.
Quality of life and general satisfaction are multi-dimen-
sional with individuals valuing these various dimensions 
at different levels. Mobility appears to explain a high 
percentage of the variability associated with quality of life, 
general satisfaction and their arithmetic mean, the 
PEQ-WB subsection score, with observed coefficients of 
determinations of 26.1%, 22.6%, and 28.4%, respectively.
During post-amputation rehabilitation, it is the role of 
the treating clinical team to identify those modifiable fac-
tors that may improve the patient’s quality of life and 
Table 1. Study cohort characteristics.
Total patients included
509
 Male
363
 Female
146
Age (years)
 Mean
56.4
 SD
14.6
 Range
17–95
Height (cm)
 Mean
175.0
 SD
14.1
 Range
88.9–203.2
Mass (kg)
 Mean
91.9
 SD
24.2
 Range
42.2–199.6
Etiology (# of patients)
 Vascular disease/diabetes
202
 Injury/trauma
163
 Infection (without diabetes)
48
 Cancer/tumor
23
 Congenital/birth
22
 Other
30
 Unknown
21
Amputation level (# of patients)
 BK/Symes
350
 AK/KD
108
 PFA
1
 Bilateral
53
  AK-BK
8
  AK-AK
4
  BK-PFA
4
  AK-PFA
1
SD: standard deviation; BK: below knee; AK: above knee; KD: knee 
disarticulation; PFA: partial foot amputation.
Figure 1. For patients with a lower limb prosthesis there 
is a strong and significant, positive relationship between 
quality of life and mobility. Quality of life was measured 
through the component question of the Prosthesis Evaluation 
Questionnaire—Well-Being subsection (PEQ-WB). Patient 
mobility was assessed via the Prosthetic Limb Users Survey of 
Mobility (PLUS-M). The positive relationship would indicate the 
individuals that are more mobile enjoy a higher quality of life 
(n 
= 
509).
Figure 2. For patients with a lower limb prosthesis, there 
is a significant, positive relationship between their general 
satisfaction and mobility. These findings indicate the individuals 
that are more mobile generally report greater satisfaction with 
regard to how things have worked out since their amputation. 
Satisfaction was measured through the component question 
of the Prosthesis Evaluation Questionnaire—Well-Being 
subsection (PEQ-WB). Patient mobility was assessed via the 
Prosthetic Limb Users Survey of Mobility (PLUS-M) (n 
= 
509).
 502 
Prosthetics and Orthotics International 42(5)
satisfaction. The maximization of mobility appears to be a 
significant consideration in this responsibility. Studies 
such as this one can support the relationships between key 
outcome metrics and those considerations identified as pri-
mary goals in rehabilitation. Future work is needed to 
expand this analysis to investigate other potential factors 
influencing quality of life and satisfaction for the patient 
with lower limb amputation.
Study limitations
A strength of this study was its large study population. 
Studies in the domain of prosthetic rehabilitation rarely 
have sample sizes greater than 100 and are typically less 
than 40. The large sample size in this study (n = 509) rein-
forces that the findings represent the entire population of 
lower limb prosthesis users, reduce impact of individual 
variance, and increase statistical power to find significant 
results above and beyond individual variance or residual 
error. However, there are limitations. Specifically, as a ret-
rospective analysis of outcomes data collected at multiple 
clinic sites at varying regions across the country, our 
results may overlook geographic or cultural variations 
related to mobility and quality of life that exist in local 
regions. Furthermore, having multiple clinicians involved 
in data collection introduces the chance for error. To mini-
mize this limitation, clinicians were trained via face-to-
face training sessions as part of the outcomes collection 
procedure. Additionally, our sample only included one 
individual with only a partial foot amputation, potentially 
limiting generalizability to these individuals. Finally, there 
are alternate ways of measuring quality of life and general 
satisfaction that may be more detailed and informative 
than the PEQ-WB questions. However, these alternate 
questionnaires are also more time-consuming and may 
have undermined clinician participation.
Conclusion
Functional mobility is compromised in individuals dealing 
with lower limb loss. While prosthetic rehabilitation has 
traditionally placed large emphasis on improving and 
maximizing mobility, more recently rehabilitation has 
started to focus on both the quality of life and general sat-
isfaction of the affected individuals.22,23 This study pro-
vides evidence that mobility is positively related to both 
considerations. Thus, in the holistic care of a patient with 
lower limb loss, maximizing mobility should be consid-
ered a primary goal.
Author contributions
Study concept and design: S.R. Wurdeman, P.M. Stevens, J.H. 
Campbell
Analysis of data: S.R. Wurdeman
Interpretation of data: S.R. Wurdeman, P.M. Stevens, J.H. 
Campbell
Initial Drafting of manuscript: S.R. Wurdeman
Critical revision of manuscript for important intellectual con-
tent: S.R. Wurdeman, P.M. Stevens, J.H. Campbell
Statistical analysis: S.R. Wurdeman
Study supervision: J.H. Campbell
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect 
to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support 
for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: 
American Orthotics and Prosthetics Association Small Grant 
(grant/award number: ‘EB-043016’).
References
 1. Fortington L, Rommers G, Geertzen J, et al. Mobility in 
elderly people with a lower limb amputation: a systematic 
review. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2012; 13(4): 319–325.
 2. Penn-Barwell J. Outcomes in lower limb amputation fol-
lowing trauma: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Injury 2011; 42(12): 1474–1479.
 3. Hafner B, Gaunaurd I, Morgan S, et al. Construct validity of 
the Prosthetic Limb Users Survey of Mobility (PLUS-M) in 
adults with lower limb amputation. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 
2017; 98(2): 277–285.
 4. Singh R, Hunter J, Philip A, et al. Gender differences 
in amputation outcome. Disabil Rehabil 2008; 30(2): 
122–125.
Figure 3. For patients with a lower limb prosthesis, there 
is a strong, significant relationship between the Prosthesis 
Evaluation Questionnaire—Well-Being subsection (PEQ-
WB) and mobility. The positive relationship indicates patients 
reporting greater mobility tend to report higher quality of life 
and satisfaction. The PEQ-WB comprises the arithmetic mean 
of individual questions of quality of life and satisfaction and has 
been previously validated to be administered separate from 
the entire PEQ. Mobility was measured through the Prosthetic 
Limb Users Survey of Mobility (n 
= 
509).
 Wurdeman et al. 
503
 5. Suckow B, Goodney P, Nolan B, et al. Domains that deter-
mine quality of life in vascular amputees. Ann Vasc Surg 
2015; 4: 722–730.
 6. Norvell D, Turner A, Williams R, et al. Defining success-
ful mobility after lower extremity amputation for compli-
cations of peripheral vascular disease and diabetes. J Vasc 
Surg 2011; 2: 412–419.
 7. Pell J, Donnan P, Fowkes F, et al. Quality of life following 
lower limb amputation for peripheral arterial disease. Eur J 
Vasc Surg 1993; 7(4): 448–451.
 8. Hunt S and McEwen J. The development of a subjective 
health indicator. Sociol Health Illn 1980; 2: 231–246.
 9. Davie-Smith F, Coulter E, Kennon B, et al. Factors influ-
encing quality of life following lower limb amputation for 
peripheral arterial occlusive disease: a systematic review 
of the literature. Prosthet Orthot Int. Epub ahead of print 1 
February 2017. DOI: 10.1177/0309364617690394.
 
10. Hafner B, Morgan S, Abrahamson D, et al. Characterizing 
mobility from the prosthetic limb user’s perspective: use of 
focus groups to guide development of the Prosthetic Limb 
Users Survey of Mobility (PLUS-M). Prosthet Orthot Int 
2016; 40(5): 582–590.
 
11. Morgan S, Amtmann D, Abrahamson D, et al. Use of cog-
nitive interviews in the development of the PLUS-M item 
bank. Qual Life Res 2014; 23(6): 1767–1775.
 
12. PR Study, http://www.prs-research.org/, http://www.prs-
research.org/files/PEQ.pdf (accessed 1 October 2016).
 
13. Prinsen E, Nederhand M, Olsman J, et al. Influence of a 
user-adaptive prosthetic knee on quality of life, balance con-
fidence, and measures of mobility: a randomised cross-over 
trial. Clin Rehabil 2015; 29(6): 581–591.
 
14. Paradisi F, Delussu A, Brunelli S, et al. The conventional 
non-articulated SACH or a multiaxial prosthetic foot for 
hypomobile transtibial amputees? A clinical comparison 
on mobility, balance, and quality of life. Sci World J 2015; 
2015: 261801.
 
15. Kark L, Odell R, McIntosh A, et al. Quantifying prosthetic 
gait deviation using simple outcome measures. World J 
Orthop 2016; 7(6): 383–391.
 
16. UWCORR. Prosthetic limb users survey, http://plus-m.org/ 
(accessed 20 December 2016).
 
17. H.P, 2020, HealthyPeople.gov, https://www.healthypeople.
gov/2020/about/foundation-health-measures/Health-Related-
Quality-of-Life-and-Well-Being (accessed July 2017).
 
18. Franchignoni F, Giordano A, Ferriero G, et al. Measuring 
mobility in people with lower limb amputation: Rasch 
analysis of the mobility section of the prosthesis evaluation 
questionnaire. J Rehabil Med 2007; 39(2): 138–144.
 
19. Legro M, Reiber G, Smith D, et al. Prosthesis evaluation 
questionnaire for persons with lower limb amputations: 
assessing prosthesis-related quality of life. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil 1998; 79(8): 931–938.
 
20. Cohen J. A power primer. Psychol Bull 1992; 112(1): 155–
159.
 
21. Cohen J. Statistical Analysis for the Behavioral Science. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1988.
 
22. Patient Centered Outcomes Research Institute, http://www.
pcori.org (accessed July 2017).
 
23. Patient-reported outcomes measurement information sys-
tem. National Institutes of Health Office of Strategic 
Coordination—the common fund, https://commonfund.nih.
gov/promis/index (accessed July 2017).
