 Neuronal Remapping and Circuit Persistence in Economic 
Decisions
Jue Xiea and Camillo Padoa-Schioppaa,b,c
aDepartment of Neuroscience, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO 63110
bDepartment Economics, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO 63110
cDepartment Biomedical Engineering, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO 63110
Abstract
The orbitofrontal cortex plays a central role in good-based economic decisions. When subjects 
make choices, neurons in this region represent the identities and values of offered and chosen 
goods. Notably, choices in different behavioral contexts may involve a potentially infinite variety 
of goods. Thus a fundamental question concerns the stability versus flexibility of the decision 
circuit. Here we show in rhesus monkeys that neurons encoding the identity or the subjective value 
of particular goods in a given context "remap" and become associated with different goods when 
the context changes. At the same time, the overall organization of the decision circuit and the 
functional role of individual cells remain stable across contexts. In particular, two neurons 
supporting the same decision in one context also support the same decision in different contexts. 
These results demonstrate how the same neural circuit can underlie economic decisions involving 
a large variety of goods.
 Introduction
Clinical1-3 and lesion4-6 studies indicate that the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) is necessary for 
economic choice behavior. Neurons in this area encode the value of individual goods7-11, the 
identity of the choice outcome8,12-14 and the chosen value8,15-17. These signals capture both 
the input and the output of a good-based decision, suggesting that choices between goods 
emerge from a decision circuit within the OFC18,19. In this perspective, a fundamental 
question concerns the stability versus flexibility of the circuit. Choices in different 
behavioral contexts may involve a potentially infinite variety of goods. To handle this 
enormous variability, the decision circuit must adapt to represent the goods available for 
choice at any given time. However, to generate effective decisions in different behavioral 
contexts, the overall organization of the decision circuit should persist across contexts.
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence: Camillo Padoa-Schioppa, Ph.D., Department of Neuroscience, Washington University in St Louis, Campus Box 
8108, Tel: 314-747-2253, camillo@wustl.edu. 
Author Contributions: J.X. and C.P.-S. designed the study; J.X. collected and analyzed the data; J. X. and C. P.-S. wrote the 
manuscript.
Competing Financial Interests: The authors declare no competing financial interest.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 09.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2016 June ; 19(6): 855–861. doi:10.1038/nn.4300.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To shed light onto how the decision circuit re-organizes across behavioral contexts, we 
examined the activity of neurons in the OFC while monkeys executed economic decisions 
between different sets of goods. We found that neurons encoding the identity or the 
subjective value of a particular good in a given context remapped and became associated 
with different goods when the context changed. At the same time, the overall organization of 
the decision circuit and the functional role of individual cells remained stable across 
contexts. Specifically, two neurons supporting the same (opposite) decision in one context 
also supported the same (opposite) decision in different contexts. In other words, neuronal 
pools persisted across behavioral contexts. Our results challenge the understanding that 
neuronal responses in OFC are primarily driven by sensory features, and demonstrate how 
the same neural circuit can underlie economic decisions involving a large variety of goods.
 Results
In the experiments, rhesus monkeys chose between different juices offered in variable 
amounts. Offers were represented by symbols on a computer monitor and the animals 
indicated their choices with an eye movement. Previous work in similar conditions shows 
that different groups of cells in OFC encode the subjective value of individual goods (offer 
value), the binary choice outcome (chosen juice) and the subjective value of the chosen good 
(chosen value)8,20. For each of these variables, the slope of the encoding can be positive 
(higher firing rates for higher values) or negative (higher firing rates for lower values). In the 
present study we examined whether and how neuronal representations in the OFC adapted 
when the goods available for choice changed. Here A, B, C and D indicate four different 
juice types and "X:Y" indicates choices between juices X and Y, with X preferred to Y. Each 
recording session consisted of two blocks of trials (Fig. 1). In experimental sessions, 
different juice pairs were offered in the two blocks (A:B, C:D design). We recorded the 
activity of neurons in the central OFC and analyzed it in multiple time windows (see Online 
Methods).
 Encoding stability and neuronal remapping
Inspection of individual cells revealed that most neurons encoded the same variable in the 
two trial blocks. We illustrate five examples (Fig. 2). One cell (Fig. 2a) encoded the offer 
value of kiwi punch in the first block; the same cell encoded the offer value of apple juice in 
the second block. Similarly, another cell (Fig. 2b) encoded the offer value of peach juice in 
the first block and the offer value of cherry juice in the second block. A third cell (Fig. 2c) 
encoded the chosen juice in both blocks. In the first block, the activity was high when the 
animal chose lemon Kool-Aid; in the second block, the activity was high when the animal 
chose grape juice. Finally, two cells (Fig. 2d,e) encoded the chosen value in both trial 
blocks. The slope of the encoding was positive for one neurons (Fig. 2d) and negative for 
the other neuron (Fig. 2e). Note that for offer value cells (Fig. 2ab) and chosen juice cells 
(Fig. 2c), encoding the same variable in both trial blocks meant that these neurons were 
associated with a particular juice in the first block and with a different juice in the second 
block.
Xie and Padoa-Schioppa
Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Our data set included 718 neurons recorded in experimental sessions (A:B, C:D design) and 
387 neurons recorded in control sessions, where the same juice pair was offered in both trial 
blocks (A:B, A:B design). For a population analysis, we proceeded as follows. Trial types 
were defined by two offers and a choice (e.g., [1A:2B, A]). For each cell and each time 
window, we conducted a 1-way ANOVA (p<0.01) across trial types separately for each 
block. Neurons that passed the criterion in at least one block in any time window were 
identified as task-related and included in further analyses (504 cells in experimental 
sessions, 255 cells in control sessions). The activity of each cell in each time window was 
regressed against variables offer value, chosen value and chosen juice. The variable encoded 
by the cell was identified as that which provided the highest total R2 across time windows, 
and the cell was untuned if it was not explained by any variable (see Online Methods). Each 
neuron in each trial block was thus assigned to one of six groups depending on the encoded 
variable and on the sign of the encoding: offer value +, offer value −, chosen value +, chosen 
value −, chosen juice and untuned, where symbols "+" and "−" indicate whether the variable 
was encoded with a positive or negative slope.
Figure 3a depicts the contingency table obtained for the population of control cells (A:B, 
A:B design). Neurons tend to concentrate on the main diagonal, indicating that they encoded 
the same variable with the same sign in both trial blocks. This result was expected because 
the two trial blocks were essentially identical in control sessions. However, some cells fell 
outside the main diagonal, indicating that our classification had some degree of inaccuracy 
(see Online Methods). To assess whether the prevalence of neurons on the main diagonal 
was statistically significant, we conducted two statistical tests based on odds ratios (Fig. 3b) 
and on a bootstrap analysis (Fig. 3c). Both tests assessed, for each position in the 
contingency table, whether the cell count deviated from chance level, assuming that the 
classifications in the two trial blocks were independent. Both tests provided the same results: 
cell counts for control sessions were significantly above chance (p<0.01) only for positions 
on the main diagonal.
Figure 3d depicts the contingency table obtained for experimental cells (A:B, C:D design). 
Again, neurons tend to concentrate on the main diagonal, indicating that they encoded the 
same variable with the same sign in both trial blocks. In this case, however, the result was 
not foregone and quite remarkable. Consider neurons encoding the offer value in the first 
block. In principle, when the animal progresses to the second block, the entire circuit could 
re-organize itself in such a way that "old" offer value cells are randomly reassigned to any 
variable. Alternatively, offer value cells associated with a particular juice no longer available 
(A or B) could exit the pool and become temporarily untuned, while other cells, previously 
untuned, become associated with one of the current juices (C or D). In contrast with these 
plausible scenarios, OFC neurons generally encoded the same variable in the two trial blocks 
(an element of stability). Thus offer value cells and chosen juice cells became associated 
with new juices in the new trial block (an element of flexibility). The analysis of odds ratios 
(Fig. 3e) and the bootstrap analysis (Fig. 3f) both indicated that cell counts were 
significantly above chance only on the main diagonal (p<0.01). Note that experimental cells 
classified as offer value or chosen juice in one block were not more likely than chance to be 
Xie and Padoa-Schioppa
Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 classified as untuned in the other trial block (see bottom row and rightmost column in Fig. 
3e,f).
Several control analyses confirmed these results (Supplementary Figs. 1, 2, 3 and 4).
 Contextual remapping is essentially complete
In the analyses illustrated in Fig. 3, the null hypothesis represented the scenario under which 
the classifications obtained in the two trial blocks were independent. The results 
demonstrated that they were not, and this observation held true for both experimental and 
control cells. A separate set of analyses was designed to contrast the results obtained in the 
experimental condition (A:B, C:D design) with those obtained in the control condition (A:B, 
A:B design). In other words, we examined whether the classification patterns obtained in the 
experimental condition differed from the benchmark provided by the control condition. We 
performed several tests.
First, we examined whether the frequency of neurons presenting consistent classifications 
differed significantly across conditions. To do so, we considered the number of cells located 
on and off the main diagonal in the contingency table, separately for experimental (Fig. 3d) 
and control (Fig. 3a) cells. We thus obtained a 2×2 table (Fig. 4a). A statistical test failed to 
find any significant difference between the two conditions (odds ratio = 1.29; p = 0.11, 
Fisher's exact test). It may be argued that chosen value cells should respond similarly in the 
two trial blocks even if changing juices affected the other groups of neurons. Thus we 
repeated this analysis excluding cells classified as chosen value in either trial block (Fig. 
4b). The results were essentially identical (odds ratio = 1.39; p = 0.10, Fisher's exact test).
Second, we directly compared the contingency tables obtained for the two conditions 
(experimental and control). To do so, we first constructed for each condition a reduced 4×4 
contingency table by pooling cells encoding the same variable with opposite signs. Thus 
cells in each block were assigned to one of four groups: offer value, chosen value, chosen 
juice and untuned (Fig. 5a,c). (This reduction was performed because the chi-square test 
requires that the expected cell counts be sufficiently large21.) We then concatenated the 
reduced contingency tables obtained for experimental and control conditions and we 
obtained a 4×4×2 table. A chi-square test of joint independence21 indicated that the first two 
dimensions of this table were independent of the third dimension (p = 0.7, chi2 = 11.77, d.f. 
= 15). In other words, the patterns of classification obtained across trial blocks did not differ 
between control and experimental conditions.
Third, we conducted the odds ratio analysis on the reduced contingency tables described 
above (Fig. 5b,d). Replicating the results obtained for the full contingency tables (Fig. 3), 
cell counts were significantly above chance (p<0.01) only on the main diagonal. We then 
performed element-wise comparisons between the odds ratios obtained in the two 
conditions21. Each odds ratio can be thought of as quantifying the strength of association 
between two particular variables across the two trial blocks. Thus we examined whether 
these association strengths depend on the condition (experimental versus control). To do so, 
we first estimated the common odds ratios across conditions21. Then we computed, for each 
condition, the expected cell counts based on the common odds ratios. Finally, we compared 
Xie and Padoa-Schioppa
Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the empirical cell counts with the expected cell counts using the Breslow-Day statistic for 
homogeneous associations21. Fig. 5e illustrates the p values obtained from the Breslow-Day 
tests. For most locations on the table, the association strength did not differ significantly 
between the two conditions. Locations corresponding to associations [offer value, untuned] 
and [untuned, chosen juice] appeared to depart from chance level (p = 0.02 and p = 0.04, 
respectively). However, these effects did not reach statistical significance once we accounted 
for multiple comparisons. An additional analysis of conditional odds ratios21 confirmed this 
point (Supplementary Fig. 5).
To summarize, we did not find any systematic difference between the classification patterns 
obtained in the experimental and control conditions. This result implies that the 
classification patterns measured in the experimental condition were as consistent as one 
could expect, given the fact that classification procedures bear some degree of inaccuracy. 
Thus the neuronal remapping from one set of juices to the next was essentially complete.
 Persistence of neuronal pools
Consider neurons recorded in experimental sessions (A:B, C:D design). The results 
discussed so far indicate that offer value cells and chosen juice cells associated with one 
particular juice in the first trial block became associated with a different juice in the second 
trial block. These cells maintained their functional role in the decision circuit, but they 
remapped onto one of the goods available in the current behavioral context. Importantly, two 
different juices were offered in each trial block. If the decision circuit is indeed stable, one 
would expect not only that individual cells encode the same variable in the two blocks, but 
also that neuronal pools persists across trial blocks. In other words, two neurons 
"supporting" the same decision in the first block should support the same decision also in the 
second block. Our data confirmed this prediction.
To examine the composition of neuronal pools, we identified for each offer value cell the 
juice encoded in each trial block. As illustrated (Fig. 6a), most neurons encoding the offer 
value of the preferred juice (juice A) in the first block also encoded the offer value of the 
preferred juice (juice C) in the second block, while most neurons encoding the offer value of 
the non-preferred juice (juice B) in the first block also encoded the offer value of the non-
preferred juice (juice D) in the second block. The analysis of chosen juice cells provided 
similar results (Fig. 6b), and similar results were also obtained for control cells (Fig. 6c,d). 
In all these cases, most cells remapped from the preferred (non-preferred) juice in the first 
block to the preferred (non-preferred) juice in the second block (all p<0.001, Fisher's exact 
test). For control sessions, this result was expected. For experimental sessions, however, this 
result was noteworthy and rather consequential. It implied that neuronal pools within the 
decision circuit remained stable across behavioral contexts.
OFC has often been discussed in relation to its sensory inputs, especially gustatory and 
olfactory inputs22-26. If neuronal responses in this area were primarily driven by sensory 
features, we would expect relatively stable associations between individual neurons and 
specific juices in our task. In contrast, our results indicate a high degree of flexibility in the 
neural representation. To further explore this point, we conducted a follow-up experiment in 
which one juice was offered in both trial blocks but with different preference ranking (A:B, 
Xie and Padoa-Schioppa
Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 C:A design; with A preferred to B, and C preferred to A). We recorded and analyzed the 
activity of 329 cells (161 task-related cells). Surprisingly, offer value cells recorded in these 
conditions typically remapped according to the preference ranking of the juices rather than 
to the juice identities. In other words, neurons encoding the offer value A in the first block 
typically came to encode the offer value C in the second block, while neurons encoding the 
offer value B in the first block came to encode the offer value A in the second block (Fig. 6e, 
p<0.02, Fisher's exact test). Similar results were observed for chosen juice cells (Fig. 6f, 
p<0.01, Fisher's exact test). Thus neuron-juice associations in our experiments were not 
driven by the sensory features of the juices.
 Discussion
The neuronal mechanisms through which subjective values are compared during economic 
decisions are not well understood, but there is general consensus that decisions between 
goods take place in an abstract representation27-30. Importantly, the three groups of neurons 
identified in OFC are computationally sufficient to generate choices19, suggesting that good-
based decisions emerge from a neural circuit within this region18. In this framework, the 
present study provides a first assessment of how the decision circuit adapts to the goods 
available at any given time. This adaptation presents two complementary aspects. On the one 
hand, the association between individual cells and particular goods is highly flexible, as 
neurons remap to encode the identities and subjective values of the goods currently 
available. On the other hand, the overall organization of the circuit – including the variable 
encoded by each neuron and the composition of neuronal pools – persists across behavioral 
contexts. Taken together, circuit persistence and neuronal remapping make it possible for the 
same circuit to generate decisions involving a potentially infinite variety of goods.
In principle, the fact that individual cells encode the same variable in different contexts 
might be dictated by intrinsic properties of the neuronal populations. For example, offer 
value cells (capturing the decision input) and chosen juice cells (capturing the decision 
output) might be preferentially found in different cortical layers and/or might present 
different patterns of local and long-distance connectivity. Along similar lines, different 
groups of cells might preferentially correspond to pyramidal cells versus interneurons. Of 
note, a neural network in which economic decisions emerge from a balance of recurrent 
excitation and pooled inhibition suggests that chosen juice cells are primarily excitatory 
while chosen value cells are primarily inhibitory19,31. Future research should examine in 
greater detail the neuronal circuitry within the OFC, including the excitatory or inhibitory 
nature of different cell groups and their location in cortical layers.
We use the term "remapping" in analogy to hippocampal place cells, whose place fields 
relocate when animals move to a new arena32. Similar to the mapping between hippocampal 
neurons and the Euclidean space, the mapping between orbitofrontal neurons and the space 
of goods may be viewed as a collective property of the neural assembly33. The rules that 
govern this mapping – i.e., how a given pool of cells becomes assigned to one particular 
good – remain unclear. In this study, assignments appeared driven by the preference ranking, 
but we cannot rule out alternative schemes. Notably, the preferred juice was always offered 
in a smaller range in our experiments. Previous work indicates that unequal value ranges 
Xie and Padoa-Schioppa
Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 impose a cascade of neuronal and synaptic adaptations, with offer value cells adapting to the 
range of offered values34,35 and downstream populations accounting for this adaptation36. In 
this light, the remapping patterns observed here might have been the most efficient for the 
system in our conditions. Future work will investigate the mechanisms of remapping, 
including the rules governing more complex situations where choices are made between 
multiple goods.
The experiment in which neurons remapped according to the preference ranking as opposed 
to the juice identity (A:B, C:A design) makes it clear that neuron-juice associations were not 
driven by the sensory features of the goods. This finding resonates with the results of an 
earlier study, in which monkeys were delivered one of three foods and different foods were 
paired in different trial blocks37. An important difference between the present finding and 
earlier results is that the previous study did not distinguish between different groups of 
neurons. Consequently, the results afforded at least two interpretations. One possibility is 
that neurons encoded the value of a particular food in the first block and then remapped to 
encode the value of a different food in the second block. Another possibility is that neurons 
encoded the outcome value independently of the food identity in both blocks, while adapting 
to the expected value of the outcome in each trial block. Recent critiques35,38 generally favor 
the latter interpretation, which corresponds to a "quantitative" adaptation34. In contrast, the 
present results for offer value and chosen juice cells can only be interpreted in terms of 
remapping, which corresponds to a "qualitative" adpatation34.
The present results also resonate with previous work on reversal learning showing that 
neurons in the primate OFC are associated with a given outcome, independently of how that 
outcome is signaled to the animal7,39. However, our results add significant complexity to 
that picture, because they show that OFC neurons are not rigidly associated with any given 
outcome (juice). Rather, OFC neurons remap onto one of the possible outcomes available in 
any behavioral context. While previous reports could have justified the opposite prediction, 
the core concept shared by present and past observations is that neuronal representations in 
the OFC are highly flexible.
The remapping of neuron-juice associations described here is a form of neuronal plasticity. 
Some insight into the time course of this process come from a previous study, in which we 
examined decisions between three juices (A, B, C in decreasing order of preference) offered 
pairwise40. In that study, trials with the three juice pairs (A:B, B:C, A:C) were randomly 
interleaved, and neuron-juice associations did not change from trial to trial. For example, 
some neurons encoded the offer value B in both A:B trials and B:C trials and were untuned 
in A:C trials. Taken together, earlier and present result indicate that neuronal remapping in 
the OFC takes place over the time scale of minutes, not seconds.
In conclusion, we examined how the neuronal representation of good identities and 
subjective values re-organizes when economic goods available for choice change. In accord 
with the fact that choices in different contexts may involve a potentially infinite variety of 
goods, neurons in the OFC remapped to represent the goods available at any given time. 
Most remarkably, the overall organization of the decision circuit and the composition of 
Xie and Padoa-Schioppa
Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 neuronal pools remained stable across behavioral contexts. Thus the same neural circuit may 
generate decisions between any two goods.
 Online Methods
 Experimental design and neuronal recordings
Two adult male rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta; V, 8.3 kg; C, 11.7 kg) participated in the 
study. Before training, a head restraining device and an oval recording chamber (main axes 
50×30 mm) were implanted on the skull under general anesthesia. The chamber was 
centered on stereotaxic coordinates (A30, L0) and allowed access to bilateral OFC with 
penetrations on a nearly coronal plane. During the experiments, monkeys sat in an 
electrically insulated enclosure with their head restrained and performed a juice choice task. 
Visual stimuli were presented on a computer monitor placed 57 cm in front of the monkey. 
Eye positions were monitored with an infrared video camera (Eyelink, SR research). The 
behavioral task was controlled through custom-written software (http://
www.monkeylogic.net) based on Matlab (MathWorks).
Structural MRI scans were obtained before and after the surgery. Coronal images parallel to 
the paths of electrodes were reconstructed from the two MRIs to provide a reference for 
recording locations. Recordings were performed in the orbital gyrus, in a region roughly 
corresponding to area 13m. Neuronal data were collected from the left hemisphere of 
monkey V (A 31:35, L −7: −11) and both hemispheres of monkey C (A 33:38, L −6: −10, 
left hemisphere; A 33:38, L 6:11, right hemisphere). Most of the recordings were performed 
using 4 or 6 individual tungsten electrodes (125 μm diameter, Frederick Haer) 
simultaneously. The electrodes, placed ≥1 mm apart from each other, were advanced using a 
custom-built motorized micro-drive (step size: 2.5 μm). A subset of data was collected using 
8- or 16-channel linear arrays (U-probe; Plexon). U-probes had a diameter of 185 μm and 
contacts were 100 μm from each other. U-probes were advanced with the same micro-drive 
system used for single electrodes. Electrical signals were amplified (gain: 10,000), band-
pass filtered (low-pass cut-off: 300 Hz, high-pass cutoff: 6 kHz; Lynx 8, Neuralynx), and 
recorded at 25 kHz resolution (Power 1401, Cambridge Electronic Design). Action 
potentials were detected online and saved to disk for spike sorting, which was performed 
using standard software (Spike 2, Cambridge Electronic Design). Only neurons that 
remained stable and well-isolated during two consecutive blocks were included in the 
analysis.
Figure 1 illustrates the experimental design. In each trial, the animal chose between two 
juices offered in variable amounts. The trial began with the monkey gazing a fixation point 
in the center of the monitor (center fixation window = 2°). After 1.5 s, two sets of squares 
representing the two offers appeared on the two sides of the fixation point. For each offer, 
the color indicated the juice type and the number of squares indicated juice quantity, with 
each square representing a juice quantum (65/70 μl for monkey V/C). The animal 
maintained center fixation for a randomly variable delay (1-2 s, uniform distribution) 
followed by a go signal, which was indicated by the extinction of the center fixation point 
and the appearance of two saccade targets. The monkey had 1.5 s to indicate its choice with 
Xie and Padoa-Schioppa
Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 a saccade and was required to maintain target fixation (peripheral fixation window = 3°) for 
0.75 s before juice delivery.
Each session included two blocks of trials, and two different juices were used in each block. 
A, B, C and D indicate different juice types, and "X:Y" indicates choices between juices X 
and Y, with juice X preferred to juice Y. An "offer type" was defined by two offers (e.g., 
[1A:3B]), while a "trial type" was defined by an offer type and one choice (e.g., [1A:3B, B]). 
In experimental sessions, we used four different juices (A:B, C:D design; 499/219 cells 
recorded from monkey V/C). In control sessions, we used the same juice pair in both blocks 
(A:B, A:B design; 225/162 cells recorded from monkey V/C). Experimental and control 
sessions were interleaved in the experiments, but the order was not determined using a 
formal randomization. Blinding was not used. We also conducted a follow-up experiment in 
which the preferred juice of the first block was used as a non-preferred juice in the second 
block (A:B, C:A design; 329 cells recorded from monkey V). Trial blocks lasted 200-250 
trials and typically included 9-11 offer types (e.g., x-axis of Fig. 2a). In each block, offer 
types were pseudo-randomly interleaved and the left/right configurations of the offers were 
counterbalanced. In all sessions, the two blocks were separated by a 10-15 minute break. At 
the beginning of each block, we let the monkeys practice for 20 ± 2 trials to adapt to the 
current juice pairs. Practice trials were excluded from the analysis. The number of cells 
collected for each condition and the number of trials ran for each cell (sample size) were not 
pre-determined using a statistical method, but were comparable to those of previous 
studies8,40.
 Behavioral analysis and neuronal classification
Behavioral data were analyzed separately for each trial block as previously described8,40. 
The "choice pattern" was defined as the percent of trials in which the animal chose the non-
preferred juice as a function of the log quantity ratio of the two juices. In the analysis, we 
fitted the choice pattern with a normal cumulative distribution function (probit). The flex of 
the sigmoid, corresponding to the indifference point, provided a measure for the relative 
value between the two juices.
The analysis performed for each cell in each trial block followed the procedures used in 
previous studies8,20. Neuronal activity was examined in the following time windows: pre-
offer (0.5 s before offer), post-offer (0.5 s after the offer), late delay (0.5-1.0 s after the 
offer), pre-go (0.5 s before the go), reaction time (from the go to the saccade), pre-juice (0.5 
s before the juice), post-juice (0.5 s after juice), and post-juice2 (0.5-1.0 s after juice). Firing 
rates were obtained by averaging spike counts over each time window and across trials for 
each trial type. A "neuronal response" was defined as the firing rate of one cell, in one block, 
in one time window, as a function of the trial type. The two responses recorded for the same 
cell, in the same time window, in the two blocks defined a "response pair". For each neuron 
and each time window, we performed a 1-way ANOVA (factor: trial type) separately in each 
block. We imposed a p<0.01 threshold and admitted to subsequent analyses only response 
pairs that met this criterion in at least one block. Neurons that passed this ANOVA criterion 
in at least one time window were identified as "task-related". For a control, we repeated the 
Xie and Padoa-Schioppa
Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 analysis of Fig. 3 imposing a more conservative ANOVA threshold (p<0.001), and we 
obtained very similar results.
This study builds on previous work showing that under similar behavioral conditions 
neurons in the OFC encode three variables, namely offer value, chosen value and chosen 
juice8. Thus as a preliminary step, we repeated on the current data set the analyses 
conducted previously. Specifically, we pooled all the available neurons (protocols A:B, A:B; 
A:B, C:D and A:B, C:A). Data from each trial block were considered separately, so that the 
entire data set included 2,868 cells. Since data from each trial block were analyzed 
separately, each actual neuron contributed two "cells" to this analysis. Each cell was 
analyzed in eight time windows, and we imposed the ANOVA criterion. We then computed 
the same 19 variables examined previously and we applied the same two procedures for 
variable selection8. Confirming earlier observations, both procedures selected variables offer 
value A, offer value B, chosen value and chosen juice. We also performed a post-hoc 
analysis pitching each selected variable against other, non-selected variables. We found that 
the marginal explanatory power of each selected variable was statistically higher than that of 
any other, competing variable (all p<0.02; binomial test). These results closely replicate 
previous findings8,40,41.
The neuronal classification was performed separately for each trial block. Here we describe 
the procedures referring to the A:B block. Previous work (and the preliminary analysis 
described above) showed that the vast majority of neuronal responses encoded one of four 
variables: offer value A, offer value B, chosen value and chosen juice8. For each variable, 
the encoding was linear and either positive (increasing firing rate for increasing values) or 
negative (increasing firing rate for decreasing values)8,20. Importantly, neurons typically 
encoded the same variable with the same sign across time windows20. To classify any given 
neuron, we proceeded as in previous studies8,20. We only considered time windows that 
passed the ANOVA criterion and we performed a linear regression of each response on each 
variable. A variable was said to "explain" the response if the regression slope differed 
significantly from zero (p<0.05). The regression also provided an R2, which was set equal to 
zero if the variable did not explain the response. For each variable we then computed the 
total R2 across time windows taking into consideration the sign of the encoding. 
Specifically, we set R2 equal to zero if the sign of the encoding was opposite to the sign of 
the variable under consideration. We identified the signed encoded variable as that which 
provided the highest total R2. Thus each neuron in each trial block was assigned to one of 
the following classes: offer value +, offer value −, chosen value +, chosen value −, and 
chosen juice. If none of the regression slopes differed significantly from zero, the neuron 
was classified as untuned.
The study was designed to examine whether and how the variable encoded by any given cell 
varied from block to block in experimental sessions (A:B, C:D design). Since the four 
variables are generally correlated8 and since neuronal firing rates are highly variable, we 
expected that our classification procedure might bear some degree of inaccuracy. Recordings 
in control session (A:B, A:B design) were conducted to obtain a benchmark for the encoding 
consistency.
Xie and Padoa-Schioppa
Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  Comparing neuronal classifications across trial blocks
To compare the classifications across blocks at the population level, we constructed 
contingency tables separately for data collected in control sessions and experimental 
sessions (Fig. 3a,d). The rows and columns of these tables represent the classifications of 
neurons in the two blocks respectively, while the numbers represent cell counts. Cells 
located on the main diagonal of these tables encoded the same variables in both trial blocks. 
Our purpose was to assess, for each location in the contingency table, whether the cell count 
deviated significantly from chance level, assuming independent classifications in the two 
trial blocks. To this end, we used two statistical tests.
The first test was based on odds ratios. We indicate with Xi,j the number of cells encoding 
variable i in the first block and variable j in the second block. For each location (i, j) in the 
table, we computed a 2×2 matrix with elements: a11 = Xi,j, a12 = Σn≠j Xi,n, a21 = Σm≠i Xm,j, 
a22 = Σn≠j, m≠i Xm,n. The odds ratio for location (i, j) was defined as: ORi,j = (a11 / a12) / 
(a21 / a22). If the likelihood of a neuron encoding variable i in the first block is independent 
of the likelihood of it encoding variable j in the second block, the expected value of ORi,j 
equals 1. In other words, the chance level for odds ratio is 1. Conversely, ORi,j>1 (ORi,j<1) 
indicated that the cell count in location (i, j) was above (below) chance level. To assess 
whether departures from chance level were statistically significant, we used Fisher's exact 
test (two tails)21. Exact p values are shown in Supplementary Fig. 6.
The second test was based on a bootstrap analysis, in which we estimated the distribution of 
cell count for each element of the contingency tables. The classifications of neurons in the 
two blocks constituted two separate data sets. We sampled with replacement from the two 
data sets independently and randomly paired the two samples. We thus constructed a 
contingency table with the same number of cells recorded in the experiments. We repeated 
the procedure 10,000 times. For each location in the contingency table, we thus obtained a 
bootstrap distribution of cell counts, to which we compared the cell counts obtained 
experimentally. Numbers indicated in Fig. 3c,f represent the fraction of bootstrap repetitions 
for which the cell count was equal or larger than that obtained experimentally (i.e., the p 
values).
In some cases, the representations provided by a population of cells in different contexts can 
be compared using a linear decoder analysis42. However, this approach was not possible in 
our study because offer types and relative values varied from session to session. Hence, 
neurons recorded in different sessions could not be pooled. Conversely, the results obtained 
in control sessions provided us with a valuable benchmark. Thus in a series of analyses we 
compared directly the classification results obtained for experimental and control cells (see 
Results). For each condition, we constructed a reduced contingency table (Fig. 5a,c). To 
compare the two tables, we estimated the common odds ratios and the expected cell counts, 
and we ran for each element of the table a Breslow-Day test21. All the chi-square values are 
shown in Supplementary Fig. 7.
Xie and Padoa-Schioppa
Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  Comparing neuron-juice associations across trial blocks
The analyses illustrated in Figs. 3, 4 and 5 indicated that neurons generally encoded the 
same variable (offer value, chosen value, chosen juice) with the same slope sign (+ or −) in 
both trial blocks. In subsequent analyses we assumed that this was the case and we 
reclassified neurons accordingly. We imposed that each cell encode the same variable (offer 
value, chosen juice, chosen value) with the same sign (+ or −) in both trial blocks. Critically, 
offer value cells and chosen juice cells could be associated with either juice in each block. 
This resulted in 14 possible combinations (e.g., [offer value A+, offer value C+], [offer value 
A+, offer value D+], etc.). Each cell was assigned to a particular combination based on the 
total R2 summed across time windows and trial blocks. Neurons that could not be explained 
by the same variable in both trial blocks were excluded from this analysis.
Focusing on offer value cells and chosen juice cells, we sought to assess whether the neuron-
juice association recorded in the first trial block was generally correlated with the neuron-
juice association recorded in the second trial block. Specifically, we wanted to examine 
whether neuron-juice associations were typically dictated by the preference ranking of the 
juices. We thus constructed 2×2 contingency tables, separating neurons according to whether 
they were associated with the preferred juice or to the non-preferred juice in each trial block 
(Fig. 6). Each contingency table was examined using Fisher's exact test, which established 
whether the two neuron-juice associations were significantly correlated across the 
population.
 Statistical notes and code availability
The primary results of this study were based on analyses of categorical data. Fisher's exact 
test and the bootstrap procedure had minimal assumptions, and the Breslow-Day test had a 
cell count requirement21 that was met by our reduced contingency tables. Importantly, these 
analyses followed neuronal classification procedures based on least-squares linear 
regressions, which assume normality and equal variance. As previously discussed8, data in 
our experiments approximately satisfied normality because individual data points in the 
regressions were averages of 10-20 trials. In contrast, variances were generally unequal, with 
high-variance data points closer to the behavioral indifference point (where choices were 
split). Because correcting for unequal variance would effectively reduce the weight of these 
data points43, which were in many respects the most informative, we deemed it preferable to 
use uncorrected data. However, a control variable-selection analysis in which linear 
regressions were corrected for unequal variance provided similar results ([8], not shown).
All experimental procedures conformed to the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of 
Laboratory Animals and were approved by the Animal Studies Committee at Washington 
University in St Louis. All analyses were performed using custom code written in Matlab 
(MathWorks) and available upon request. A Supplementary Methods Checklist is available.
 Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Xie and Padoa-Schioppa
Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  Acknowledgements
We thank H. Schoknecht for help with animal training, A. Raghuraman for help with recording, and X. Cai, K. 
Conen, E. Han, I. Monosov and L. Snyder for comments on the manuscript. This work was supported by the 
National Institutes of Health (grant numbers R01-DA032758 and R01-MH104494 to C.P.-S.) and by the McDonnell 
Center for Systems Neuroscience (pre-doctoral fellowship to J.X.).
References
1. Rahman S, Sahakian BJ, Cardinal RN, Rogers R, Robbins T. Decision making and neuropsychiatry. 
Trends Cogn Sci. 2001; 5:271–277. [PubMed: 11390298] 
2. Volkow ND, Li TK. Drug addiction: the neurobiology of behaviour gone awry. Nat Rev Neurosci. 
2004; 5:963–970. [PubMed: 15550951] 
3. Strauss GP, Waltz JA, Gold JM. A review of reward processing and motivational impairment in 
schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 2014; 40(Suppl 2):S107–116. [PubMed: 24375459] 
4. Gallagher M, McMahan RW, Schoenbaum G. Orbitofrontal cortex and representation of incentive 
value in associative learning. J Neurosci. 1999; 19:6610–6614. [PubMed: 10414988] 
5. Camille N, Griffiths CA, Vo K, Fellows LK, Kable JW. Ventromedial frontal lobe damage disrupts 
value maximization in humans. J Neurosci. 2011; 31:7527–7532. [PubMed: 21593337] 
6. Rudebeck PH, Saunders RC, Prescott AT, Chau LS, Murray EA. Prefrontal mechanisms of 
behavioral flexibility, emotion regulation and value updating. Nat Neurosci. 2013; 16:1140–1145. 
[PubMed: 23792944] 
7. Thorpe SJ, Rolls ET, Maddison S. The orbitofrontal cortex: neuronal activity in the behaving 
monkey. Exp Brain Res. 1983; 49:93–115. [PubMed: 6861938] 
8. Padoa-Schioppa C, Assad JA. Neurons in orbitofrontal cortex encode economic value. Nature. 2006; 
441:223–226. [PubMed: 16633341] 
9. Raghuraman AP, Padoa-Schioppa C. Integration of multiple determinants in the neuronal 
computation of economic values. J Neurosci. 2014; 34:11583–11603. [PubMed: 25164656] 
10. Howard JD, Gottfried JA, Tobler PN, Kahnt T. Identity-specific coding of future rewards in the 
human orbitofrontal cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015
11. Zhou J, Jia C, Feng Q, Bao J, Luo M. Prospective coding of dorsal raphe reward signals by the 
orbitofrontal cortex. J Neurosci. 2015; 35:2717–2730. [PubMed: 25673861] 
12. Klein-Flugge MC, Barron HC, Brodersen KH, Dolan RJ, Behrens TE. Segregated encoding of 
reward-identity and stimulus-reward associations in human orbitofrontal cortex. J Neurosci. 2013; 
33:3202–3211. [PubMed: 23407973] 
13. Lara AH, Kennerley SW, Wallis JD. Encoding of gustatory working memory by orbitofrontal 
neurons. J Neurosci. 2009; 29:765–774. [PubMed: 19158302] 
14. McDannald MA, et al. Orbitofrontal neurons acquire responses to 'valueless' Pavlovian cues during 
unblocking. Elife. 2014; 3:e02653. [PubMed: 25037263] 
15. Critchley HD, Rolls ET. Hunger and satiety modify the responses of olfactory and visual neurons 
in the primate orbitofrontal cortex. J Neurophysiol. 1996; 75:1673–1686. [PubMed: 8727405] 
16. Gottfried JA, O'Doherty J, Dolan RJ. Encoding predictive reward value in human amygdala and 
orbitofrontal cortex. Science. 2003; 301:1104–1107. [PubMed: 12934011] 
17. Sul JH, Kim H, Huh N, Lee D, Jung MW. Distinct roles of rodent orbitofrontal and medial 
prefrontal cortex in decision making. Neuron. 2010; 66:449–460. [PubMed: 20471357] 
18. Padoa-Schioppa C. Neurobiology of economic choice: a good-based model. Annu Rev Neurosci. 
2011; 34:333–359. [PubMed: 21456961] 
19. Rustichini A, Padoa-Schioppa C. A neuro-computational model of economic decisions. J 
Neurophysiol. 2015 in press. 
20. Padoa-Schioppa C. Neuronal origins of choice variability in economic decisions. Neuron. 2013; 
80:1322–1336. [PubMed: 24314733] 
21. Agresti, A. An Introduction to Categorical Data Analysis. Wiley; 2007. 
Xie and Padoa-Schioppa
Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 22. Gottfried JA, Zelano C. The value of identity: olfactory notes on orbitofrontal cortex function. Ann 
N Y Acad Sci. 2011; 1239:138–148. [PubMed: 22145883] 
23. Pritchard TC, et al. Satiety-responsive neurons in the medial orbitofrontal cortex of the macaque. 
Behav Neurosci. 2008; 122:174–182. [PubMed: 18298260] 
24. Rolls ET. The orbitofrontal cortex and reward. Cereb Cortex. 2000; 10:284–294. [PubMed: 
10731223] 
25. Small DM. Flavor is in the brain. Physiol Behav. 2012; 107:540–552. [PubMed: 22542991] 
26. Verhagen JV, Engelen L. The neurocognitive bases of human multimodal food perception: sensory 
integration. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2006; 30:613–650. [PubMed: 16457886] 
27. Cisek P. Making decisions through a distributed consensus. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2012
28. Glimcher, PW. Foundations of neuroeconomic analysis. Oxford University Press; Oxford; New 
York: 2011. 
29. Rangel A, Hare T. Neural computations associated with goal-directed choice. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 
2010; 20:262–270. [PubMed: 20338744] 
30. Rushworth MF, Kolling N, Sallet J, Mars RB. Valuation and decision-making in frontal cortex: one 
or many serial or parallel systems? Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2012
31. Wang XJ. Probabilistic decision making by slow reverberation in cortical circuits. Neuron. 2002; 
36:955–968. [PubMed: 12467598] 
32. Muller RU, Kubie JL. The effects of changes in the environment on the spatial firing of 
hippocampal complex-spike cells. J Neurosci. 1987; 7:1951–1968. [PubMed: 3612226] 
33. Wills TJ, Lever C, Cacucci F, Burgess N, O'Keefe J. Attractor dynamics in the hippocampal 
representation of the local environment. Science. 2005; 308:873–876. [PubMed: 15879220] 
34. Padoa-Schioppa C. Range-adapting representation of economic value in the orbitofrontal cortex. J 
Neurosci. 2009; 29:14004–14014. [PubMed: 19890010] 
35. Kobayashi S, Pinto de Carvalho O, Schultz W. Adaptation of reward sensitivity in orbitofrontal 
neurons. J Neurosci. 2010; 30:534–544. [PubMed: 20071516] 
36. Padoa-Schioppa C, Rustichini A. Rational attention and adaptive coding: a puzzle and a solution. 
American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings. 2014; 104:507–513.
37. Tremblay L, Schultz W. Relative reward preference in primate orbitofrontal cortex. Nature. 1999; 
398:704–708. [PubMed: 10227292] 
38. Schultz W. Neuronal reward and decision signals: from theories to data. Physiol Rev. 2015; 
95:853–951. [PubMed: 26109341] 
39. Morrison SE, Saez A, Lau B, Salzman CD. Different time courses for learning-related changes in 
amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex. Neuron. 2011; 71:1127–1140. [PubMed: 21943608] 
40. Padoa-Schioppa C, Assad JA. The representation of economic value in the orbitofrontal cortex is 
invariant for changes of menu. Nat Neurosci. 2008; 11:95–102. [PubMed: 18066060] 
41. Cai X, Padoa-Schioppa C. Contributions of orbitofrontal and lateral prefrontal cortices to economic 
choice and the good-to-action transformation. Neuron. 2014; 81:1140–1151. [PubMed: 24529981] 
42. Saez A, Rigotti M, Ostojic S, Fusi S, Salzman CD. Abstract context representations in primate 
amygdala and prefrontal cortex. Neuron. 2015; 87:869–881. [PubMed: 26291167] 
43. Neter, J.; Wasserman, W.; Kutner, MH. Applied linear statistical models: regression, analysis of 
variance, and experimental designs. Irwin, Homewood, IL: 1990. 
Xie and Padoa-Schioppa
Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Experimental design. The top and bottom row show the time course of a trial in the first and 
second block of trials, respectively. The two offers are represented by sets of colored 
squares, with the color indicating the juice type and the number of squares indicating the 
juice quantity (see Online Methods).
Xie and Padoa-Schioppa
Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Activity of five example neurons recorded in experimental sessions (A:B, C:D design). For 
each cell, the left and right panels show, respectively, the activity recorded in the first trial 
block (A:B) and that recorded in the second trial block (C:D). In each panel, the x-axis 
indicates offer types ranked by the quantity ratio of the two juices, black symbols represent 
the percentage of trials in which the monkey chose the less preferred juice, and red symbols 
represent the average firing rate. Red diamonds/circles indicate trials in which the animal 
chose the preferred/non-preferred juice, and error bars indicate SEM. (a) Cell encoding the 
Xie and Padoa-Schioppa
Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 offer value A (kiwi punch) in the first block and the offer value C (apple juice) in the second 
block. (b) Cell encoding the offer value B (peach juice) in the first block and the offer value 
D (cherry juice) in the second block. (c) Cell encoding the chosen juice A (lemon Kool-Aid) 
in the first block and the chosen juice C (grape juice) in the second trial block. (d,e) Cells 
encoding the chosen value in both trial blocks, with a positive slope (d) and with a negative 
slope (e). Firing rates shown here are from the following time windows: (a) post-offer, (b) 
post-juice, (c) post-juice 2, (d) post-juice 2, (e) late delay (see Online Methods). For these 
neurons, the number of trials in each trial block was as follows: (a) 179, 179, (b) 180, 180, 
(c) 180, 180, (d) 180, 180, (e) 200, 181.
Xie and Padoa-Schioppa
Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Comparing classifications across trial blocks. This population analysis was conducted 
separately for control cells (panels a,b,c) and experimental cells (panels d,e,f). (a) 
Contingency table, control cells (N = 255). Rows and columns represent, respectively, the 
classification obtained in the first and in the second block of trials. Numbers in the table 
indicate cell counts. For offer value and chosen value cells, the slope of the encoding could 
be positive (+) or negative (−). Task-related cells not explained by any variable were 
classified as untuned. (b) Analysis of odds ratios, control cells. Numbers represent the odds 
ratios obtained for each location in panel a. Chance level is 1, and numbers >1 (<1) indicate 
that the cell count was above (below) that expected by chance. For each location, we 
performed Fisher's exact test. Red asterisks indicate that the cell count was significantly 
above chance (p<0.01). Cell counts significantly below chance are not indicated here. 
However, Supplementary Fig. 6a shows all the exact p values. (c) Bootstrap analysis, 
control cells. Numbers represent the p values obtained from the bootstrap analysis. Red 
asterisks indicate that the cell count was significantly above chance (p<0.01). (d) 
Contingency table, experimental cells (N = 504). Same format as in panel a. Rows and 
columns represent the classification obtained in the A:B block and in the C:D block, 
respectively. (e) Analysis of odds ratios, experimental cells. Same format as in panel b. 
Supplementary Fig. 6b shows the exact p values. (f) Bootstrap analysis, experimental cells. 
Same format as in panel c.
Xie and Padoa-Schioppa
Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Classification consistency in experimental and control cells. (a) Cross-classification of all 
task-related cells (N = 759). Numbers indicate cell counts. For each row, the two columns 
indicate the total number of neurons on and off the main diagonal in the contingency tables 
shown in Fig. 3a and Fig. 3d. (b) Cross-classification obtained excluding cells classified as 
chosen value in either block (N = 457). Same format as in panel a.
Xie and Padoa-Schioppa
Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
Direct comparison of experimental and control conditions. (a) Reduced contingency table, 
control cells (N = 255). Rows and columns represent, respectively, the classification 
obtained in the first and in the second trial block. Numbers in the table indicate cell counts. 
Cells encoding the same variable with opposite signs were pooled (see Results). (b) Analysis 
of odds ratios, control cells. Numbers in the table represent the odds ratios obtained for the 
corresponding location in panel a. Numbers >1 (<1) indicate that the cell count was above 
(below) that expected by chance. Red asterisks indicate that the cell count was significantly 
above chance (p<0.01, Fisher's exact test). Exact p values are shown in Supplementary Fig. 
6c. (c) Reduced contingency table, experimental cells (N = 504). Same format as in panel a. 
(d) Analysis of odds ratios, experimental cells. Same format as in panel b. Exact p values are 
shown in Supplementary Fig. 6d. (e) Results of element-wise comparisons of panels b and 
d. Numbers indicate the p values obtained from the Breslow-Day tests (d.f. = 1). For this 
test, the null hypothesis represent the scenario under which the two odds ratios in 
corresponding positions are drawn from the same distribution. The test is performed after 
computing a common odds ratio across conditions21. Chi-square values are shown in 
Supplementary Fig. 7.
Xie and Padoa-Schioppa
Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. 
Persistence of neuronal pools. (a) Cross-classification of offer value cells, experimental 
condition. For each offer value cell, we identified the juice encoded in the A:B block (rows) 
and that encoded in the C:D block (columns). Numbers in the table indicate cell counts. 
Most neurons are on the main diagonal. In other words, most cells encoding the offer value 
A came to encode the offer value C, while most cells encoding the offer value B came to 
encode the offer value D (for single-cell examples, see Fig. 2a,b). (b) Cross-classification of 
chosen juice cells, experimental condition (for a single-cell example, see Fig. 2c). (c,d) 
Cross-classification obtained in the control condition (c: offer value cells, d: chosen juice 
cells). Same format as in panels a, b. (e,f) Cross-classification obtained with the A:B, C:A 
design (e: offer value cells, f: chosen juice cells). Same format as in panels a, b. In every 
panel, the Cell count on the main diagonal was significantly higher than expected by chance 
in all panels. Exact p values were as follows: (a) p = 5.8×10−5, (b) p = 2.8×10−7, (c) p = 
4.2×10−8, (d) p = 2.7×10−7, (e) p = 0.018, (f) p = 0.0013 (Fisher's exact test).
Xie and Padoa-Schioppa
Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
