 Immunochemical engineering of cell surfaces to
generate virus resistance
Jia Xiea, Devin Sokb, Nicholas C. Wuc, Tianqing Zhenga, Wei Zhangd, Dennis R. Burtonb, and Richard A. Lernera,1
aDepartment of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037; bDepartment of Immunology and Microbiology, The Scripps Research Institute,
La Jolla, CA 92037; cDepartment of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037; and dShanghai
Institute for Advanced Immunochemical Studies, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 201210, China
Contributed by Richard A. Lerner, March 14, 2017 (sent for review February 17, 2017; reviewed by Raymond A. Dwek, Dario Neri, and David I. Watkins)
Modern immunochemical engineering allows the creation of cells
that either secrete antibodies or incorporate them into various
cellular compartments, including the plasma membrane. Because
the receptors for most viruses are known, if one can achieve the
proper stoichiometry and geometry, plasma membrane-associated
antibodies to these receptors should block viral infection. In this
report, we test this concept for two different viruses, human
rhinovirus and HIV. Plasma membrane-tethered antibodies effi-
ciently rendered cells permanently nonpermissive for infection by
both these viruses. Membrane-bound antibodies were much more
efficient than free antibody in preventing infection, likely because
of the effective molarity of membrane bound antibodies. Such
resistant cells may restore immune-competence to otherwise
compromised HIV patients.
HIV | cell surfaces | prevention
T
he association of Ig with the plasma membrane of naive B
cells creates the B-cell receptor (BCR) that interacts with its
cognate antigen to initiate proliferation and differentiation of
naïve cells into plasma and memory cells. The BCR also pro-
motes specific antigen internalization to initiate antigen pro-
cessing into peptides for presentation to helper T cells. Recently,
we have constructed combinatorial antibody libraries expressing
what we refer to as membrane-tethered antibodies (MTA) where
all members of a large library are anchored to the plasma
membrane (1, 2). In the MTA format, each cell in a culture has
approximately 1 of 10 (8) different antibodies on its surface.
When the same cell expresses an antibody and receptor, the
system becomes autocrine and can be used to select for anti-
bodies that bind to and either activate or inhibit the receptor. We
have selected many such antibodies (2, 3), and the overall system
appears to be general in that plasma membrane-bound anti-
bodies and the receptor as an antigen always interact, likely
because the effective molarity is so high.
We reasoned that this system could be used to construct cells
where a plasma membrane-bound Ig binds to a cell surface re-
ceptor that doubles as a virus receptor to interfere with the lat-
ter’s ability to bind virus, thereby rendering the cells nonpermissive
to infection. Further, because one is working with a large library
of antibodies, it should be possible to select those that block
virus interaction with the receptor while preserving the recep-
tor’s physiological function.
Here, we report on the study of two systems, human rhinovirus
and HIV. In the rhinovirus system, we learn the general princi-
ples for protection from infection by a highly aggressive patho-
genic human virus and then apply these teachings to the medical
need of constructing cells resistant to HIV infection where the
immunochemical engineering of cell surfaces is most likely to
find practical application.
Results
Rhinovirus. Ultimately, we wished to study the possibility that
membrane-bound antibodies could completely protect the host
cell from virus infection for both enveloped and nonenveloped
viruses. We first studied rhinovirus as our model system because
it is quite simple and robust and is easily handled without bio-
safety concerns. We targeted the ICAM protein because it is
known to be the rhinovirus A and B receptor (4). Because the
structure of the ICAM protein in complex with membrane-
tethered antibodies is not known, we used a computer simula-
tion to predict the optimum geometry for the interaction of the
two proteins (Fig. 1A). The total length of the antibody plus
linker (Fig. 1B) is approximately 190 Å, which is similar to
the simulated full length of the ICAM protein. According to
their size, three possible interaction models were proposed.
They could both flex and move toward each other, or if
ICAM itself is too rigid to bend, the antibody could bend to
achieve contact because the linker is flexible. Alternatively,
they could be brought into proximity by membrane curvature
in the microdomains or trafficking vesicles (Fig. 1C). Be-
cause rhinovirus uses domain 1 located on the top of the
receptor for docking, one should be able to select a func-
tional anti-ICAM from combinatorial antibody libraries by
using protection from virus induced cell death as the se-
lectable phenotype (5).
Screening for ICAM-1 Binding Antibodies That Prevent Infection. We
initially selected antibodies that simply bind to the ICAM protein
by using a combinatorial human antibody library in phage with a
diversity of >109 members. After two rounds of panning against
the ICAM protein, the antibody encoding genes from the re-
covered phage particles were transferred to lentivirus vectors
that were designed to deliver the gene to mammalian cells and
express the antibody protein tethered to the plasma membrane
(Fig. 1 B and D). The lentiviral vectors harboring the selected
antibody encoding fragments were used to package a pool of
lentivirus as the input library, and HeLa cells were infected at a
MOI = 2 for the functional selection. The ability of lentivirus to
Significance
A method that renders cells resistant to virus infection is
reported. The method is based on anchoring antibodies to cell
surface virus receptors to the plasma membrane. Because of
their effective molarity, the antibodies are much more effective
than if they were free in the circulation. The antibodies interact
with the receptors and block virus attachment. In infections
with viruses such as HIV, cells rendered resistant to infection
will be selected over infected cells, thereby opening the pos-
sibility of curing the infection.
Author contributions: J.X. and R.A.L. designed research; J.X., D.S., N.C.W., T.Z., and
W.Z. performed research; J.X., D.S., D.R.B., and R.A.L. analyzed data; and R.A.L. wrote
the paper.
Reviewers: R.A.D., University of Oxford; D.N., ETH Zurich; and D.I.W., University of Miami
Miller School of Medicine.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: rlerner@scripps.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1702764114/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1702764114
PNAS
|
May 2, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 18
|
4655–4660
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
 express membrane-tethered proteins in this system was con-
firmed by using the florescence tomato protein in the place of
the antibody fragment (Fig. 2A). The key finding is that the
membrane-tethered protein covers the entire cell surface,
indicating that when the MTA is expressed no trajectory for
successful viral infection remains. To give more quantitative
information, we used Western blotting versus antibody standards
to estimate the number of MTA molecules linked to the plasma
membrane of HeLa cells. There are approximately 30,000 MTAs
expressed on the surface of each cell.
Two days after infection with the pool of antibodies in lenti-
virus, rhinovirus was added to the HeLa cell culture at MOI = 1.
The vast majority of cells died after 2 d as is normally seen.
However, some virus-resistant colonies started to form and
Fig. 1.
Schematic representation of selection of Rhinovirus blocking, ICAM-binding antibodies. (A) Predicted structure and dimension of ICAM-1 ectodomain
and the membrane tethered antibody. (B) The construct used to express antibody on the cell surface. (C) Phage displayed followed by the functional selection
to identify the HRV-blocking antibodies. (D) Three models of proposed interactions between ICAM and membrane-tethered antibodies.
Fig. 2.
Selection of the HRV-blocking, ICAM-binding antibodies. (A) Staining of protein expressed in membrane-tethered format. (B) After 2 wk, dead cells
and single colonies are present. (C) Kinetics of cell death. (D) Prevention of cell death by different pools of antibodies. “Input pool” stands for the lentiviral
antibody sublibrary from phage panning, it is used as the first-round library for membrane-tethered lentivirus selection, which contains the antibody se-
quences from survivor cells. (E) Long-term protection.
4656
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1702764114
Xie et al.
 expand even in the presence of a high density of rhinovirus
particles (Fig. 2B). Importantly, these studies showed that a se-
lection based on cell survival can yield cells that are completely
protected from cell death, presumably because of the MTAs
linked to their surface.
All of the resistant colonies were collected for preparation
of genomic DNA. The antibody-encoding fragments were re-
covered by PCR and then cloned again in the lentiviral vector.
Direct comparison between the antibodies selected because they
protect from infection (output pool) and the antibodies that
were only selected for binding (input pool) showed that the
output pool was much more effective in preventing infection. As
a control, it was shown that lentivirus that only expressed tomato
did not protect. (Fig. 2 C and D).
To generate individual antibodies, 100 bacterial clones were
picked from the output library and sequenced. They were in-
dividually packaged into lentivirus, delivered to HeLa cells,
expressed on the surface, and tested for protection from in-
fection. Five different antibodies were identified, Ab03, Ab28,
Ab51, Ab83, and Ab100. When examined 2 and 3 d after rhi-
novirus infection, all of them showed persistent protection, al-
though to slightly different extents (Fig. 3 A and B). Interestingly,
when expressed in the soluble format, the five antibodies dem-
onstrated different abilities to inhibit rhinovirus infection (Fig. 3
C and D), with Ab100 as the strongest and Ab51 the weakest.
Among different antibodies, the relationship between the de-
grees of protection by each soluble antibody at the highest
concentration tested compared with the same antibody in the
MTA format follows an exponential function, indicating the
important role of effective molarity for the MTAs (Fig. 3E).
Thus, the protective effect of a given antibody is vastly improved
when it is used in the MTA format. It is important to note that
the number of cells bearing MTA after an initial decrease in
number actually increase over time, ultimately reaching the vir-
tually 100% survival seen for uninfected cells (Fig. 2E, red cir-
cle). Because this increase in cell number occurs in the presence
of virus, the initial killing followed by emergence of resistance
has all of the features of a process based on selection.
Selecting Antibodies That Preserve Normal Receptor Function by
Paratope Fine-Tuning. ICAM is known to mediate T-cell binding
to endothelial cells by forming a complex with LFA. Because
ICAM binding to LFA and rhinovirus use ICAM domain 1, there
is a possibility that the rhinovirus blocking antibodies may in-
terfere with the normal physiological functions of ICAM. This
interference has been observed in other virus systems. For example,
many of the CD4-binding antibodies block HIV entry efficiently
but also comprise immune function that limits their clinical
utility. Thus, we wished to test whether our antibodies inhibit
normal ICAM1 function. A T-cell attachment assay was conducted
Fig. 3.
Protection by individual antibody clones. (A) Protection by individual clones in MTA format. (B) Representative images of cells protected by isolated
clones in MTA virus format. (C) Protection by different soluble antibodies. (D) Correlation of protection by purified antibody and by antibodies in membrane-
tethered format. Different colored dots stand for different antibody clones. For each antibody, the percentage of protection in soluble format is plotted
versus the percentage of protection in MTA format. The data points fits an exponential growth function with a τ = 9.7.
Xie et al.
PNAS
|
May 2, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 18
|
4657
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
 as previously described except that we used high-content imaging
to get a more accurate absolute count of the interacting T cells. At
high concentration, the antibody that is most potent in protecting
from virus infection (Ab100) is also the most efficient in blocking
T-cell attachment, whereas other antibodies have more variable
effects on T-cell binding (Fig. 4 A and B).
We thought that adjusting the paratope of the ICAM-1 bind-
ing antibodies might fine-tune the recognition mode, thus
influencing retention of normal ICAM function (Fig. S1). Hence,
we selected germ-line hotspots in Ab100 for generating a library
of mutant antibodies. Because CDRH3 generally contributes
more to antigen binding than CDR1 or CDR2, only hotspot
residues in CDR3 of both light and heavy chains were chosen for
mutagenesis. The library was designed to encode 10%∼50% of
the wild-type amino acids. The other 19 amino acids had as many
mutations as possible at each targeted position by the use of
degenerate codons. We generated a library with a diversity of 2 ×
108 in a yeast surface expression vector, pCTcon2. The screening
procedure resembles standard yeast display, combining magnet-
assisted cell sorting (MACS) and five rounds of flow cytometry-
assisted cell sorting (FACS) to select for antibodies with the
highest affinity (Fig. S2A). After five rounds of selection,
20 clones were picked from the output yeast pool and 3 were
selected for further study based on their unique sequences (Fig.
5A). The KD for binding to ICAM by the newly selected anti-
bodies was, 2.50 nM, 2.03 nM, and 3.67 nM, respectively for
HA02, LA03, and LA06 compared with 6.36 nM for the original
Ab100 (Fig. S2B). The antibodies were subsequently assayed for
their ability to protect in vitro against rhinovirus infection.
84H10, a control antibody that is known to block ICAM function
was determined to have an IC50 of 9 nM, whereas Ab100 has an
IC50 of 2.4 nM. The mutant antibodies’ IC50 for blocking in-
fection are 1.7 nM, 0.7 nM, and 0.5 nM for HA02, LA03, and
LA06, respectively (Fig. 5B).
The T cells’ attachment assay of these mutant antibodies using
analysis by high-content imaging showed that HA02 and
LA03 at high concentration only blocked T-cell attachment by
30%, whereas blockage by LA06 was nearly complete (Fig. 5 C
and D). Thus, it appears that one can select antibodies that re-
tain their ability to neutralize virus infectivity, whereas pre-
serving the normal function of the target receptor. For example,
antibody from clone 83 has an IC50 for prevention of virus in-
fection of approximately 10 nM, whereas it completely spares
T-cell attachment at 100 nM.
Blocking HIV Infection by Membrane-Tethered Antibodies. Encour-
aged by the results in the rhinovirus system, we turned to HIV.
The idea was to determine whether MTAs against known HIV
cellular receptors could render the cells resistant to infection. To
test this concept, we studied anti-CD4 antibody, whichis known
to be a receptor for HIV. We engineered TZM-bl cells to express
anti-CD4 ScFv antibodies in a MTA format. These cells are
widely used to evaluate antibody neutralization in standardized
HIV-1 infectivity assays because the degree of virus neutraliza-
tion in this assay correlates well with protection in nonhuman
primates. The anti-CD4 antibody leu3a (converted to scFv) in a
MTA format demonstrated almost complete inhibition of in-
fectivity for four of six viruses (92RW020, 92BR020, JRFL,
BG505) in a cross-clade virus panel and significant protection for
the remaining two viruses (94IN108 and HXB2). Again, by
comparison, the soluble version of the antibody was either
nonneutralizing or poorly neutralizing even at a high concen-
tration of 50 μg/mL (Fig. 6). The results of these studies again
show that expression of antibodies on the cell surface of target
cells results in enhanced neutralization activity compared with
soluble antibody.
Finally, in terms of stoichiometry, the number of expected
MTA molecules per cell is in the range of the number of known
HIV receptors on T cells (6). The absolute concentration of
receptors appears to be critical for HIV infection. For example,
for CCR5, when the receptor threshold falls below 10,000 mol-
ecules per cell, the ability to infect cells falls dramatically (7).
Thus, MTAs can function by simply lowering the number of virus
receptors below a critical density.
Discussion
In this study, we show that plasma membrane-tethered anti-
bodies to virus receptors can inhibit entry of two prototype
viruses, the nonenveloped rhinovirus and the larger enveloped
HIV. Although antibody engineering of cell surfaces appears to
be a promising approach to generating cells that have the po-
tential to render the host resistant to virus infection, attention
will inevitably turn to the most desirable properties of the anti-
body. This selection of antibodies happens in all cases where one
ponders the use of antibodies to contain an infectious process
whether it is by common vaccination or the special case of cell
engineering as studied here. In our case, the most desirable an-
tibody should have high affinity for the receptor and not interfere
with the normal physiological function of the receptor. Toward
this end, a major advantage of our approach is that it is not limited
to receptors without critical functions because antibodies can be
selected that block virus infection while sparing the native func-
tion of the receptor. Although such antibodies might be rare,
nowadays we have technologies to select such rare antibodies from
vast numbers of candidates in combinatorial libraries. Also, one
might simultaneously target multiple receptors and coreceptors.
The choice of the target receptor is, of course, important with
CCR5, CD4, and CXCR4 being obvious choices that could be
used either individually or in combination. Importantly, the effi-
ciency of protection need not be absolute because one relies on
the process of selection when the resistant cells are returned to
the host. Thus, the T cells that are completely resistant to
Fig. 4.
Antibody clones have different effect in blocking T cells attachment.
(A) Representative images (acquired by GE6000 high content imager) of
attached T cells at dish bottom. Top row is at higher antibody concentration
(100 nM); the lower row is at lower concentration (10 pM). (B) Analysis of cell
number attached to the dish bottom.
4658
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1702764114
Xie et al.
 infection should expand because they have a growth advantage
and could thereby lead to sustained resistance to HIV infection.
Initially one expects the host to be a chimera of resistant and
nonresistant cells, but over time the pool of resistant cells should
become the majority.
Thus, while we have proof of concept, the exact antibodies
studied here are unlikely to be the ones ultimately used in clin-
ical trials. This selection of antibodies is similar to what has al-
ready happened in the field with anti-gp120 antibodies because
the community continues to discover ever better antibodies both
in terms of potency and range of neutralization (8). Finally, we
may wish to make the antibody gene inducible so as to be able to
generate resistant cells at will. Indeed, when the fluorescent
protein tomato is integrated into the lentiviral MTA construct
under the control of a tetracycline-inducible promoter, the
fluorescent signal on the surface is absent but can be switched on
by adding doxycycline to the culture media (Fig. S3). Thus, the
next steps toward a therapeutic regimen will involve selection of
the best antibody in terms of specificity and potency followed by
studies in primates.
There are, of course, other approaches to the generation of
cells resistant to HIV infection. One widely discussed approach
is the use of gene editing to eliminate integrated virus(s) or virus
receptors. When it comes to integrated viral genomes, a major
problem with gene editing is that the editing process accelerates
the generation of replication-competent viral escape mutants
that are now resistant to Cas9/sgRNA, thereby greatly limiting its
potential for HIV therapy (9). Because our approach is not
genetic, viral escape would have to involve development of an
alternative route for virus entry into cells that is unlikely and, if it
happened, would be expected to be highly inefficient and se-
lected against at the population level.
Because patients with null mutations in CCR5 (CCR5 Δ32)
may be resistant to HIV infection, another approach is to use
gene editing to disable the CCR5 receptor (10, 11). However, the
long-term consequences of having CCR5 defective alleles is not
known, particularly when it comes to the importance of this
chemokine receptor in combating other virus infections (12).
This potential need to maintain the natural function of the receptor
is one reason that we may wish to have inducible gene expression of
the MTA so as to allow restoration of the receptor in certain clinical
situations. Also, in some cases, chronically infected patients who
received CCR5 Δ32 stem cell transplants suffered virus outbreak
because of selection in vivo of CXCR4-tropic viruses (13). Again,
this need for the receptor is why we may wish to use more than one
MTA, particularly inclusive of an antibody against CXCR4 that
allows retention of its critical physiological function.
Finally, it is of interest to place our work in perspective rela-
tive to approaches using vaccination, passive antibodies, or small
molecule drug therapy. All these approaches are aimed at HIV
itself, whereas MTAs target the host and work in conjunction
with the process of selection. Basically, the goal comes down to
the initiation of a process of real-time Darwinian selection in the
host. Paradoxically, the virus becomes the driving force for se-
lection of a resistant host who no longer harbors virus. For this
selection to happen, one may need intervals such as “drug holidays”
Fig. 5.
Paratope fine-tuning adjusts the antibodies’ function. (A) The mutations identified in the selected antibodies from yeast display output. (B) Protection
from rhinovirus infection by purified and modified versions of Ab100. (C) Representative images acquired by the high content imager. (D) Ab100 and its
derivatives block ICAM-mediated T-cell attachment with different efficiency. 84H10 is used as a negative control because it is known to block T-cell
attachment.
Xie et al.
PNAS
|
May 2, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 18
|
4659
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
 where viral replication is allowed, thereby using the power of se-
lection to help eliminate reservoirs of infected cells.
Materials and Methods
See SI Materials and Methods for detailed description.
Construction of Full-Length ICAM-1 and ScFv-Linker Structure Model. The
structural model of MTA was built-in coot [PMID: 20383002] by using the scFv
domain from PDB ID code 1P4I [PMID: 14754898] and the Fc domain from PDB
ID code 1H3X [PMID: 12527303]. The 18-residue GS linker was added to the
N-terminal of the Fc domain in an extended conformation. The structural
model of ICAM was from PDB ID code 1Z7Z [PMID: 16004874].
Selection of Antibodies Against Human ICAM-1. Recombinant human ICAM-
1 ectodomain (Sino Biological) was biotinylated with EZ-link Sulfo-NHS-SS-
Biotin (Thermo Fisher). The protein was used after removal of excess bi-
otin reagent with a Zeba spin column (Thermo Fisher). The combinatorial
antibody library in phage was incubated with the biotinylated ICAM-1 pro-
tein for 1 h. Streptavidin Dynabeads M-280 were then added into the mixture,
and bound phage was eluted from Dynabeads M-280 by using glycine·HCl
(pH 2.2). ICAM-1 binding phage were propagated by infecting XL1-blue cells.
After two rounds of screening, the pooled scFv antibody library was
subcloned to a lentiviral expression vector.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Dr. Rajesh Grover for helpful discussions.
1. Lerner RA (2016) Combinatorial antibody libraries: New advances, new immunolog-
ical insights. Nat Rev Immunol 16:498–508.
2. Xie J, Zhang H, Yea K, Lerner RA (2013) Autocrine signaling based selection of
combinatorial antibodies that transdifferentiate human stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 110:8099–8104.
3. Zhang H, et al. (2013) Selecting agonists from single cells infected with combinatorial
antibody libraries. Chem Biol 20:734–741.
4. Greve JM, et al. (1989) The major human rhinovirus receptor is ICAM-1. Cell 56:839–847.
5. Xie J, et al. (2014) Prevention of cell death by antibodies selected from intracellular
combinatorial libraries. Chem Biol 21:274–283.
6. Lee B, Sharron M, Montaner LJ, Weissman D, Doms RW (1999) Quantification of CD4,
CCR5, and CXCR4 levels on lymphocyte subsets, dendritic cells, and differentially
conditioned monocyte-derived macrophages. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:5215–5220.
7. Reynes J, et al. (2000) CD4+ T cell surface CCR5 density as a determining factor of virus
load in persons infected with human immunodeficiency virus type 1. J Infect Dis 181:
927–932.
8. Burton DR, Hangartner L (2016) Broadly neutralizing antibodies to HIV and their role
in vaccine design. Annu Rev Immunol 34:635–659.
9. Wang Z, et al. (2016) CRISPR/Cas9-derived mutations both inhibit HIV-1 replication
and accelerate viral escape. Cell Reports 15:481–489.
10. Allers K, et al. (2011) Evidence for the cure of HIV infection by CCR5Δ32/Δ32 stem cell
transplantation. Blood 117:2791–2799.
11. Hütter G, et al. (2009) Long-term control of HIV by CCR5 Delta32/Delta32 stem-cell
transplantation. N Engl J Med 360:692–698.
12. Glass WG, et al. (2006) CCR5 deficiency increases risk of symptomatic West Nile virus
infection. J Exp Med 203:35–40.
13. Kordelas L, et al.; Essen HIV AlloSCT Group (2014) Shift of HIV tropism in stem-cell
transplantation with CCR5 Delta32 mutation. N Engl J Med 371:880–882.
14. Ho M, Pastan I (2009) In vitro antibody affinity maturation targeting germline hot-
spots. Methods Mol Biol 525:293–308– xiv.
15. Chao G, et al. (2006) Isolating and engineering human antibodies using yeast surface
display. Nat Protoc 1:755–768.
16. Li M, et al. (2005) Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 env clones from acute and early
subtype B infections for standardized assessments of vaccine-elicited neutralizing antibodies.
J Virol 79:10108–10125.
Fig. 6.
TZM-bl neutralization assays show that the α-CD4 antibody “Leu3a” was capable of preventing pseudovirus infection when expressed on the cell
surface (blue) than when delivered as soluble antibodies (red). Antibodies were tested on a cross-clade 6 virus panel consisting of isolates 92RW020 (clade A),
92BR020 (clade B), JRFL (clade B), BG505 (clade A), 93IN108 (clade C), and HXB2 (clade B). Neutralization activities were dose-dependent on the amount of
lentivirus added (100 μL, 50 μL, or 25 μL) and on the amount of soluble antibody added (50 μg/mL, 10 μg/mL, and 1 μg/mL).
4660
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1702764114
Xie et al.
