 1
insight.jci.org   doi:10.1172/jci.insight.90558
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
Authorship note: Y. Xu, T. Mizuno, B.R. 
Stripp, and J.A. Whitsett contributed 
equally to this work.
Conflict of interest: The authors have 
declared that no conflict of interest 
exists.
Submitted: September 7, 2016 
Accepted: November 1, 2016 
Published: December 8, 2016
Reference information: 
JCI Insight. 2016;1(20):e90558. 
doi:10.1172/jci.insight.90558.
Single-cell RNA sequencing identifies 
diverse roles of epithelial cells in 
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Yan Xu,1 Takako Mizuno,2 Anusha Sridharan,1 Yina Du,1 Minzhe Guo,1 Jie Tang,2  
Kathryn A. Wikenheiser-Brokamp,1,3 Anne-Karina T. Perl,1 Vincent A. Funari,2 Jason J. Gokey,1  
Barry R. Stripp,2 and Jeffrey A. Whitsett1
1Division of Neonatology, Perinatal and Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC), 
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA. 2Department of Medicine, Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, USA.3Division of 
Pathology, CCHMC, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
Introduction
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a common lethal disorder representing a form of interstitial lung dis-
ease (ILD) resulting from alveolar tissue remodeling and fibrosis leading to respiratory failure (1–3). While 
pulmonary inflammation and loss of lung architecture in IPF involve interactions among multiple cell types, 
recent studies provide increasing support for the concept that injury to the respiratory epithelium plays an 
important role in IPF pathogenesis (4, 5). Loss of normal alveolar architecture in IPF is accompanied by 
fibrotic remodeling, loss of AT1 and AT2 cells, and the presence of atypical epithelial cells expressing differ-
entiated cell markers characteristic of proximal airways and submucosal glands (e.g., basal cell and goblet cell 
markers) in the normal lung (6, 7). Basal cells in conducting airways, and AT2 cells in the alveoli, serve as pro-
genitor cells, with critical roles in regeneration of the respiratory epithelium following both acute and chronic 
injury. In experimental models, severe injury to the respiratory epithelium is associated with pathological 
features of IPF, with alveolar remodeling and the presence of atypical basal-like cells in alveolar regions (8, 9). 
Mutations in genes affecting AT2 cell function or survival, e.g., TEL, TERC, ABCA3, SFTPB, SFTPC, SFTPA, 
RTELI, and PARN are associated with ILD, further implicating alveolar cell injury and abnormal repair pro-
cesses in these disorders (for review, see refs. 10–21). Tissue remodeling seen in peripheral airways supports 
the concept that the pathogenesis of IPF is influenced by complex interactions among multiple cell types, 
including epithelial, stromal, and inflammatory cells, leading to fibrosis and loss of alveolar architecture. The 
contributions and responses of individual cell types to the pathogenesis of IPF are unknown.
Organ formation and homeostasis are dependent on a precise temporal and spatial progression of 
progenitor cells from undifferentiated to differentiated states as individual cell identities are established. 
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a lethal interstitial lung disease characterized by airway 
remodeling, inflammation, alveolar destruction, and fibrosis. We utilized single-cell RNA 
sequencing (scRNA-seq) to identify epithelial cell types and associated biological processes 
involved in the pathogenesis of IPF. Transcriptomic analysis of normal human lung epithelial cells 
defined gene expression patterns associated with highly differentiated alveolar type 2 (AT2) cells, 
indicated by enrichment of RNAs critical for surfactant homeostasis. In contrast, scRNA-seq of IPF 
cells identified 3 distinct subsets of epithelial cell types with characteristics of conducting airway 
basal and goblet cells and an additional atypical transitional cell that contributes to pathological 
processes in IPF. Individual IPF cells frequently coexpressed alveolar type 1 (AT1), AT2, and 
conducting airway selective markers, demonstrating “indeterminate” states of differentiation not 
seen in normal lung development. Pathway analysis predicted aberrant activation of canonical 
signaling via TGF-β, HIPPO/YAP
, P53, WNT, and AKT/PI3K. Immunofluorescence confocal 
microscopy identified the disruption of alveolar structure and loss of the normal proximal-
peripheral differentiation of pulmonary epithelial cells. scRNA-seq analyses identified loss of 
normal epithelial cell identities and unique contributions of epithelial cells to the pathogenesis of 
IPF. The present study provides a rich data source to further explore lung health and disease.
 2
insight.jci.org   doi:10.1172/jci.insight.90558
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
During morphogenesis of the respiratory tract, endodermal progenitors differentiate into distinct epithelial 
cell types that are regionally specified along the proximal-peripheral/cephalocaudal axis of the lung (22). 
At maturity, conducting airways are lined by well-defined basal, ciliated, goblet, neuroendocrine, and other 
secretory cells, while the peripheral alveoli are lined exclusively by AT2 and AT1 cells. At homeostasis, 
each cell maintains unique cell morphologies, gene expression patterns, and functions. Early in lung mor-
phogenesis, epithelial cell type specification is firmly established, and patterns of gene expression and cell 
types are not overlapping in conducting versus alveolar regions of the lung. While histopathological anal-
yses of lung tissue from patients with IPF demonstrate abnormalities in the morphology of epithelial cells 
lining remodeled regions of the peripheral lung parenchyma (6, 7), it is presently unclear what mechanisms 
lead to tissue remodeling and altered epithelial cell fates. Interpretation of proteomic and transcriptomic 
data obtained from lung tissue in IPF is complicated by the complexity and heterogeneity of tissue changes, 
obscuring identification of the roles of individual cell types in disease pathogenesis (23). To overcome these 
limitations, we utilized single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) and high-resolution confocal microscopy 
to identify unique differentiation states and gene expression patterns of epithelial cells isolated from the 
peripheral regions of the normal and IPF lung.
Results
Features of  usual interstitial pneumonia in IPF. Patchy interstitial fibrosis, loss of alveolar structure, and hon-
eycombing, hallmarks of usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP), were present in all IPF explant tissues eval-
uated after transplant (Supplemental Figure 1; supplemental material available online with this article; 
doi:10.1172/jci.insight.90558DS1). Uniformly thin alveolar septae lined by AT2 and AT1 cells were char-
acteristic of normal lungs. IPF tissues consisted of heterogeneous lesions with dense connective tissue, 
fibroblastic foci, and cystic lesions, many containing mucus. “Honeycomb” cysts were lined by diverse epi-
thelial cell types, including cuboidal “hyperplastic” AT2 cells, goblet cells, and ciliated cells, the latter two 
cell types normally primarily restricted to tracheal, bronchial, and bronchiolar epithelium lining cartilagi-
nous airways. Heterogeneous lesions containing disorganized epithelial cells and inflammatory infiltrates 
were present in all IPF samples.
Gene expression patterns in pulmonary epithelial cells obtained by cell sorting. Lung cells were isolated from 
peripheral control and IPF lung tissue after protease digestion and viable cells sorted on the basis of their 
7AAD–, CD45–, CD31–, CD326+ (EPCAM), HTII-280+ phenotype (herein referred to as HTII-280+ epi-
thelial cells); HTII-280 is a selective surface marker of normal AT2 cells (24). Consistent differences were 
observed between distal normal donor lung and distal IPF explant lung tissue in the relative abundance 
of epithelial cell types recognized by anti-CD326 and HTII-280 monoclonal antibodies. Control lung 
tissue consistently yielded >90% HTII-280 surface reactive epithelial cells, indicative of an abundant 
AT2 cell fraction; and relatively few NGFR+ or double negative epithelial cells, indicating few airway 
basal or luminal cell types, respectively. In contrast, distal lung tissue from IPF patients demonstrated 
a remarkable decline in HTII-280+ cells, decreasing to approximately 5% of total epithelial cells, with 
a corresponding increase in the abundance of NGFR+ and double negative epithelial cells. Differences 
in the relative abundance of HTII-280+ cells between control and IPF tissues were associated with dis-
ease-dependent changes in their molecular phenotype. RNA sequencing demonstrated clear separation 
of gene expression between populations of HTII-280+ epithelial cells isolated from IPF and control tis-
sues (Figure 1A). A heatmap illustrates differentially expressed genes based on unsupervised hierarchical 
clustering (Figure 1B). Transcriptome profiles from normal lung HTII-280+ cells were consistent with 
expression profiles of AT2 cells that mediate surfactant protein and lipid homeostasis, with this exten-
sive RNA data providing a useful resource for further investigation of human AT2 cell biology. Tran-
scriptome profiles of HTII-280+ epithelial cells from IPF lungs were surprisingly enriched in transcripts 
normally associated with conducting airway epithelial cells, but also expressed AT2 cell–associated tran-
scripts. Genes related to “cell migration, cell junction/extracellular matrix organization, response to 
wounding, and epithelial cell proliferation” were induced in IPF (Figure 1, C and D). Ingenuity pathway 
analysis (IPA) predicted activation of TGF-β–, PI3K/AKT-, HIPPO/YAP-, p53-, and WNT-mediated 
pathways, whereas those associated with lipid synthesis and metabolism, endosomal protein processing, 
and unfolded protein responses were suppressed in IPF epithelial cells (Figure 1, C and D). TGFB1, 
TP53, IGF1, NFKB, and ETS family transcription factors (ETV5, SPDEF, EHF) were predicted to be 
driving forces in IPF epithelial cells, influencing their transcriptional responses (Supplemental Figure 2). 
 3
insight.jci.org   doi:10.1172/jci.insight.90558
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
The most upregulated or suppressed RNAs in the CD326+HTII-280+ sorted IPF cells are shown in Sup-
plemental Tables 1 and 2. AT2 cell “signature” genes, including surfactant-associated genes, were highly 
expressed in sorted cells from both control and IPF tissue samples; however, their expression levels were 
moderately decreased (P > 0.05) in IPF cells compared with controls. A number of AT1-associated tran-
scripts, on the other hand, were present at relatively high levels in HTII-280+ cells of IPF samples. The 
finding that the HTII-280+ cells from both control and IPF samples expressed AT2 cell gene signatures 
suggests that some IPF cells either maintain or acquire some AT2-like identity despite or possibly as a 
result of extensive tissue remodeling, respectively. AT1 cell–associated transcripts were either absent or 
were present at low levels in epithelial cells sorted from normal lung. Since the transcriptome of epitheli-
al cells within remodeled lung tissue of IPF patients is likely to be impacted by the altered inflammatory 
and stromal milieu, we identified transcripts encoding cytokines, chemokines, growth factors, and asso-
ciated genes that were selectively expressed in IPF epithelial cells. Supplemental Figure 3 demonstrates 
expression of mediators selectively expressed by IPF cells that are known to influence cell migration, 
chemotaxis, and epithelial cell growth, supporting their potential roles in the inflammatory and fibrotic 
processes in IPF.
Figure 1. Heatmap, principal component analysis, and predicted function in sorted normal and IPF epithelial cells. EPCAM+ (CD326+) and HTII-280+ epithe-
lial cells from control and IPF donors were isolated from peripheral lung tissue by FACS and subjected to RNA sequencing (RNA-seq). (A) Principal compo-
nent analysis (PCA) RNA-seq data from IPF and control donors (n = 3 per group) shows the primary separation of samples by disease status. (B) Heatmap 
represents 2D hierarchical clustering of genes and samples and shows differentially expressed genes in IPF versus control samples. (C) Functional enrichment 
of predicted biological processes and genes induced in IPF is shown. (D) Functional enrichment of predicted biological processes and genes suppressed in IPF 
is shown. x axis represents the –log10 transformed enrichment P value
 4
insight.jci.org   doi:10.1172/jci.insight.90558
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
Differential gene expression in normal and IPF HTII-280+ cells. Expression of genes involved in early lung 
morphogenesis (SOX9, CELSR1, SIX1, LGR4) and Wnt signaling PRKX, WNT7B, DKK1, PORCN) were 
largely induced in IPF epithelial cells, being negligibly expressed in normal (CD326/HTII-280) AT2 cells 
(Figure 2A). Expression of genes involved in “ion transport” (SLC26A9, SLCO4C1, CA2, SLC6A14, CFTR) 
were reduced in IPF HTII-280+ cells in comparison with the controls (Figure 2B). Genes associated with 
“fibrosis, pulmonary fibrosis, and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis” were compiled from the disease-centered 
database HuGE Navigator (25) and OMIM (http://www.omim.org/). The overlap among known fibro-
sis-related genes and genes differentially expressed in CD326/HTII-280 cells from IPF tissues are identi-
fied. Relative expression levels of known fibrosis markers in control and IPF CD326/HTII-280 sorted cells 
were calculated and are shown in Figure 2C.
scRNA-seq analysis identifies distinct epithelial cell types in IPF. We utilized scRNA-seq to test whether the 
differences in gene expression between sorted IPF and control epithelial cells were related to admixtures 
of cells from conducting airways and peripheral lung or to fundamental changes in the differentiation state 
of individual epithelial cells. Viable epithelial cells were FACS enriched following lung tissue dissociation 
by virtue of their 7AAD–CD31–CD45–CD326+ phenotype and further separated into single cells using the 
Fluidigm C1 microfluidics system (26). scRNA-seq was obtained from 3 control and 6 IPF patient samples 
Figure 2. Representative genes and their relative expression in Control-CD326/HTII-280 versus IPF CD326/HTII-280 cell populations. Genes 
involved in (A) “branching morphogenesis” and Wnt signaling and (B) “anion transport” were induced and suppressed in IPF epithelial cells, respec-
tively. RNA sequencing data from IPF and control donors (n = 3 per group); data are presented in dot plot with mean ± SEM. (C) Genes associated with 
fibrosis, pulmonary fibrosis, and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis were compiled from the disease-centered database HuGE Navigator (ref. 25) and OMIM 
(http://www.omim.org/). The overlap between the known fibrosis genes and genes induced or suppressed in IPF HTII-280 was identified. Relative 
expression of known fibrosis-associated transcripts in control and IPF CD326/HTII-280–sorted cells was calculated as shown in the bar graph. The 
portion of fibrosis related genes in control is noted in blue, and IPF in red.
 5
insight.jci.org   doi:10.1172/jci.insight.90558
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
(Figure 3A). The average DNA fragment read per cell was greater than 4 million, average alignment 0.7, 
average sequencing quality score 34, and average coverage depth 125. In total, 540 cells from control (n = 
215) and IPF patients (n = 325) passed quality control and were used for further analysis. We applied our 
newly developed analytic pipeline Sincera (27) to the dataset and identified 4 distinct cell clusters that we 
defined as AT2 (C1), “indeterminate” (C2), basal (C3), and goblet/club (C4) cells. The landscape of all 
cells in 3D and 2D space is shown by PCA and hierarchical clustering (Figure 3, A–C). Expression patterns 
of a subset of known lung epithelial cell markers are shown in Figure 3B. Epithelial-specific transcripts 
EPCAM and CDH1 were expressed in virtually all IPF and normal cells, demonstrating successful isolation 
of single epithelial cells and removal of stromal, vascular, and immune cells. Transcripts associated with 
AT2 cells, including SFTPC, SLC34A2, and ABCA3 were highly expressed in all AT2 cells from control 
lungs, consistent with RNA expression profiles in single AT2 cells from the mouse lung (26, 28), as well as 
those from HTII-280+ cells obtained from normal lung (Figure 1).
All 3 IPF predominant cell types expressed increased levels of genes involved in epithelial prolifer-
ation (GO:0050673), genes “response to cytokines” (GO:0034097), and “response to growth factors 
(GO:0034097) (Figure 3C). Heterogeneity and variation among different patients were readily detectable, 
as shown by distribution of the 4 major epithelial cell types from IPF and from control lungs (Supplemental 
Figure 4). The relative abundance of the 4 major cell types varied somewhat among IPF patients, e.g., cells 
from sample 003 selectively expressed RNAs typical of goblet cells and lacked a clear basal cell signature.
Transcripts for signature genes defining normal AT2 cells and IPF-related basal, goblet, and indetermi-
nate cells are shown in Figure 3C. Cluster C1 consisted of 95% of the control cells, sharing gene expres-
sion patterns consistent with AT2 cells. AT2 cells were well defined by expression of known AT2 cell-selec-
tive transcripts, including those encoding surfactant proteins and related proteins (SFTPB, SFTPC, NAPSA, 
LPCAT1, SLC34A2, and ABCA3) known to play critical and cell-selective roles in surfactant homeostasis in the 
alveolus. Potential regulators for cells within the C1 category include FOXA2, NKX2-1, CEBPA, and SREBF1. 
Functional classes selectively enriched in AT2 cells were absent in IPF, including genes mediating cytoprotec-
tion/detoxification and response to oxidative stress (e.g., SRXN1, CAT, FBVLN5, PRDX6, SOD2, SOD3, and 
GPX4) (Figure 3, B and C, and Table 1). We hypothesize that abnormal responses to oxidative stress may play 
a role in IPF pathogenesis. Interestingly, only 9 of 325 IPF epithelial cells clustered with normal epithelial 
cells in the C1 category, a finding that was consistent with dramatic loss of AT2 cells in IPF tissue.
Three distinct cell types were identified in the IPF samples by signature gene expression patterns that 
were consistent with conducting airway epithelial cells, e.g., basal (C3), goblet/club (C4), and indetermi-
nate (C2) cells. Cells belonging to the C3 category harbored transcripts for TP63, KRT5, KRT14, BMP7, 
LAMB3, LAMC2, and ITGB, known markers of human basal cells (Figure 3B). Signature genes of the C3 
cell cluster were involved in “alpha6-beta4 integrin signaling,” “wound healing,” “cell migration,” and 
“laminin interaction,” consistent with an airway origin for these cells (Table 1). Transcripts for SOX2, 
TP63, and TGFB1 were predicted as upstream regulators of cells belonging to the C3 cluster. IPF gob-
let-like cells (C4) selectively expressed SPDEF, a transcription factor regulating goblet cell differentiation 
(29, 30), MUC5AC, MUC5B, PIGR, AQP3, and SCGB1A1, transcripts that are characteristically expressed by 
airway secretory cells. Genes associated with “goblet cell morphology” (e.g., SPDEF, TCF7L2, and ELF3) 
and “O-linked glycosylation of mucins” (e.g., MUC16, MUC20, MUC4, MUC5AC, MUC5B, GALNT6, and 
GALNT5) were enriched in C4 IPF goblet cells (Table 1 and Figure 3, B and C).
Cells belonging to the C2 cluster express CD326 and CDH1 signature genes, but were not typical of 
any known epithelial cell type present in the normal lung. C2 cluster cells generally expressed AT2 cell–
associated markers at higher levels than IPF basal or goblet/club cells and shared “lipid transport” and 
“innate immunity” functions with normal AT2 cells; however, C2 cells also expressed markers normally 
restricted to the proximal airway epithelium. The uniquely enriched functions predicted to be active 
in the C2 cluster included “activation of myofibroblasts,” “flux of anion,” and “T cell proliferation” 
(Table 1). The predicted driving forces (key regulators) for the C2 cluster include CTGF, GF11, and 
FL11) (see below). Although all of the cells expressed CDH1 and EPCAM, the C2 cells did not express 
clear signature genes associated with any known lung epithelial subtypes, and we termed these cells 
“indeterminate” IPF cells.
scRNA-seq analysis reveals “bronchiolization” and novel epithelial cell types in IPF. Through the single-cell analysis, 
we noted that RNAs associated with AT2 cells, including SFTPC, SLC34A2, and ABCA3, were highly expressed 
in all normal AT2 cells present within the C1 cluster (26, 28). Conducting airway epithelial cell–selective marker 
 6
insight.jci.org   doi:10.1172/jci.insight.90558
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
transcripts, including SOX2, PAX9, TP63, KRT5, KRT14, MUC5B, and MUC5AC, were generally absent from 
single cells from normal lung but were present in many IPF cells (Figure 4A). While AT1-associated transcripts 
(e.g., AQP5, AQP3, AGER, CLIC5) were not enriched in control samples, remarkably, these transcripts were 
present in relative higher levels in IPF cells. The distinct, squamous morphology and fragility of AT1 cells likely 
exclude them from the isolation process. Although ciliated cells are readily detected in IPF samples by light and 
confocal microscopy, there was clear absence of multiciliated cell signature genes, indicating their loss in the cell 
isolation process. The presence of AT2 and AT1 transcripts and their coexpression with conducting airway and 
other alveolar markers seen in the single-cell RNA profiles support the hypothesis that the epithelial cells of the 
remodeled distal lung in IPF acquire atypical mixed differentiation states. While conducting airway-associated 
genes (SOX2, MUC5B, and PAX9) were rarely or not expressed in single cells from control tissue, these transcripts 
were frequently expressed in a subset of single IPF cells, even in cells expressing normally AT2-restricted RNAs 
(Figure 4B). Likewise, single cells expressing goblet cell–associated transcripts — e.g., MUC5AC, SPDEF, LTE, 
Figure 3. Single-cell RNA sequencing analysis from human IPF and normal lung epithelial cells. CD326+ epithelial cells were isolated from peripheral 
lung tissues by FACS as described in Methods, followed by single-cell isolation using Fluidigm C1 system and RNA sequencing. (A) Hierarchical clustering 
and principal component analysis (PCA) of 540 single cells from control (n = 3) and IPF patients (n = 6) reveals 4 major cell types (C1–C4), termed as normal 
AT2 (C1, green), indeterminate (C2, yellow), basal (C3, red), and club/goblet (C4, blue) cells. Single cells are colored by cluster on a 3D space. (B) Heatmap 
represents the expression of distinct RNAs that identify each of the 4 cell types. (C) Hierarchical clustering of all IPF and control cells using differentially 
expressed genes involved in epithelial proliferation (GO:0050673), “response to cytokines” (GO:0034097), and “response to growth factors” (GO:0034097) 
is shown. Minimum expression values were set to 0.01 TPM. Genes (n = 9,154) with specificity >0.7 and with TPM >1 in at least 10 cells in at least 6 samples 
were selected for hierarchical clustering using Z score–transformed expression.
 7
insight.jci.org   doi:10.1172/jci.insight.90558
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
DUSP4, and KRT6A, genes normally selectively expressed in conducting airway epithelial cells — were identi-
fied in IPF
, but not in control AT2 cells, consistent with the “bronchiolization” typical of IPF
. Transcriptomes 
seen in individual cells demonstrate (a) the loss of normal regional proximal-peripheral cellular identity and (b) 
coexpression of normally cell type–restricted transcripts in some IPF epithelial cells, indicating loss of normal 
epithelial cell type identity.
scRNA-seq analysis identifies potential biomarkers for IPF based on the distinct IPF epithelial cell subtypes. 
Through the single-cell analysis, we identified signature genes associated with each epithelial cell sub-
type. Upon validation, these genes may serve as new and cell-selective biomarkers to monitor and pre-
dict IPF disease processes that would be useful for diagnosis, prognosis, or therapeutic monitoring. For 
example, MMP-7, a biomarker indicating IPF prognosis and disease activity in IPF (31, 32), was most 
highly expressed in the IPF goblet cells (Figure 5). While SOX2 and SOX9 are normally expressed in 
a mutually exclusive pattern in endoderm of proximal and distal tubules of the developing lung, SOX2 
transcripts were enriched in goblet (C4 cluster) and SOX9 transcripts in basal cells (C3 cluster) in IPF. 
Remarkably, transcripts for SOX2 and SOX9 were frequently coexpressed in indeterminate (C2) cells in 
IPF, perhaps indicating disruption of proximal-distal patterning (Figure 5). Expression of genes regu-
lating epithelial fluid and electrolyte transport was disrupted in IPF. Chloride transporters, including 
Table 1. Enriched functional annotations for cell clusters
Cluster
Category
Functional terms
P value
C1: AT2
GO:0009636
Response to toxic substance/detoxification
1.79E-10
C1: AT2
GO:0055114
Oxidation-reduction process
2.23E-08
C1: AT2
GO:0006629
Lipid metabolic process
1.50E-05
C1: AT2
GO:0006869
Lipid transport
2.16E-05
C1: AT2
GO:0043129
Surfactant homeostasis
6.67E-05
C1: AT2
GO:0042599
Lamellar body
1.62E-07
C1: AT2
TFBS
V$CEBP_Q2_01
3.15E-04
C1: AT2
TFBS
V$GATA6_01
2.64E-03
C2: indeterminate
GO:0006820
Anion transport
3.73E-03
C2: indeterminate
GO:0043409
Negative regulation of MAPK cascade
3.77E-03
C2: indeterminate
GO:0043547
Positive regulation of GTPase activity
6.85E-03
C2: indeterminate
GO:0050709
Negative regulation of protein secretion
9.47E-03
C2: indeterminate
GO:0042098
T cell proliferation
9.52E-03
C2: indeterminate
GO:0045936
Negative regulation of phosphate metabolic process
2.13E-02
C2: indeterminate
GO:0006954
Inflammatory response
2.87E-02
C2: indeterminate
GO:0006869
Lipid transport
3.40E-02
C2: indeterminate
GO:0019752
Carboxylic acid metabolic process
4.48E-02
C3: basal
GO:0031581
Hemidesmosome assembly
2.39E-13
C3: basal
GO:0034330
Cell junction organization
7.07E-12
C3: basal
GO:0016477
Cell migration
2.05E-10
C3: basal
GO:0042060
Wound healing
4.66E-10
C3: basal
GO:0005604
Basement membrane
1.80E-10
C3: basal
Pathway
Laminin interactions
5.48E-08
C3: basal
Pathway
PI3K/Akt signaling pathway
2.37E-05
C3: basal
TFBS
CATTGTYY_V$SOX9_B1
3.94E-03
C4: goblet
GO:0009617
Response to bacterium
1.17E-06
C4: goblet
GO:0009100
Glycoprotein metabolic process
2.18E-05
C4: goblet
GO:0030855
Epithelial cell differentiation
1.14E-04
C4: goblet
GO:0070085
Glycosylation
5.24E-04
C4: goblet
GO:0005902
Microvillus
2.15E-06
C4: goblet
GO:0005794
Golgi apparatus
1.50E-03
C4: goblet
MP:0000511
Abnormal intestinal mucosa morphology
1.02E-04
C4: goblet
MSigDB M5885
ECM-associated proteins including ECM-affiliated proteins, ECM regulators 
and secreted factors
2.36E-05
Gene set enrichment analysis was performed using clustering-specific differentially expressed genes via the ToppGene Suite (https://toppgene.cchmc.org/). 
TFBS, transcription factor binding site 
 8
insight.jci.org   doi:10.1172/jci.insight.90558
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
CLCN2/4/5, SLC26A4, SLC6A14, and CFTR, were significantly decreased in IPF, while the expression 
of amiloride-sensitive sodium transporter subunits SCNN1G and SCNN1B and bicarbonate transporters 
CA14, SLC26A8, SLC4A1, and CA5A was induced. Dramatic alternations in expression of associated 
genes and loss of CFTR are likely to influence mucociliary clearance in a manner similar to that in cystic 
fibrosis (CF). Expression of ABCA3, a gene essential for AT2 cell lipid transport, was decreased in IPF 
C2 indeterminate cells and absent in C3 and C4 IPF cells.
Prediction of  active cell signaling pathways in IPF epithelial cells. To identify signaling pathways involved in 
the pathological changes in IPF, we performed enrichment analysis of the KEGG pathways (http://www.
genome.jp/kegg/) using differentially expressed genes in the AT2 cell cluster (C1) and each of the IPF cell 
clusters (C2, C3, and C4). KEGG pathways enriched or suppressed in IPF epithelium were determined 
by the following criteria: (a) at least 5 genes in the pathway are expressed (transcripts per kilobase million 
[TPM] ≥1); (b) at least 30% of expressed genes were differentially expressed; and (c) the ratio between the 
number of C1 differentially expressed genes and the number of IPF differentially expressed genes in the 
pathway was ≥1.5 or ≤0.67. Pathways were ranked based on the ratios. The average expression of pathway 
genes in each individual cell was calculated for each significantly altered KEGG pathway. A heatmap (Fig-
ure 6A) represents single-cell gene expression profiles of the top 25 ranked KEGG pathways significantly 
altered in IPF epithelial cells. HIPPO/YAP, TGF-β, and PI3K/AKT signaling pathways were induced 
Figure 4. Single-cell RNA analysis identifies altered epithelial gene expression and epithelial cell types in IPF. (A) Single cells from human IPF (n = 6) 
and donor (n = 3) distal lung (CD326+) were prepared using the Fluidigm C1 system. RNA was prepared and analyzed from a total of 325 single cells from 
IPF and 215 cells from donor lungs. Shown are lung epithelial cell markers: EPCAM and CDH1; alveolar type 1 cell markers: AGER and HOPX; alveolar type 2 
cell markers: SFTPC, SLC34A2, and ABCA3; proximal lung epithelial cell markers: SOX2, PAX9, TP63, KRT5, KRT14, MUC5B, and SCGB1A1. Expression values 
were measured in TPM and square root (sqrt) normalized. Cells are shown in solid colors if the expressions of the markers were greater than 1 (TPM). (B) 
MUC5B, PAX9, and SOX2 were selectively expressed in subsets of IPF cells (MUC5B: n = 24, PAX9: n = 65; SOX2: n = 24) but not present in C1 control cells. 
Representative genes clustering with MUC5B, PAX9, and SOX2 in IPF cells are shown in the heatmaps. Equal numbers of control cells were randomly 
selected. IPF cells expressed a diversity of conducting airway epithelial markers not present in control cells, the latter expressing RNAs characteristic of 
AT2 cells. (C) Only 9 of 325 IPF cells clustered with control cells, the heatmap indicating “AT2”-like expression patterns; however, these 9 normal IPF cells 
also coexpressed some of the of IPF-associated disease markers. Expression data (TPM) were log10 transformed.
 9
insight.jci.org   doi:10.1172/jci.insight.90558
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
in single cells in IPF, findings consistent with RNA data from FACS-sorted cells (Figure 1). Likewise, 
processes related to normal AT2 cell functions including lipid synthesis and metabolism were suppressed 
in IPF. Figure 6B shows the relative expression of representative TGF-β signaling pathway genes (BMP1, 
BMPR1B, INHBA, INHBB, TGFBR1, TGFB1, TGFB2, and SMAD3) in control (n = 215) and IPF (n = 316) 
cells, and in the 9 IPF cells that clustered together with control AT2 cells. As shown, even the 9 relatively 
Figure 5. Expression of predicted IPF marker genes in 4 epithelial cell types from IPF and control single-cell samples. Violin plots show the expression 
of the gene markers in all 540 cells from the 4 cell types. Cell types are color coded. Green: AT2 (n = 219); orange: indeterminate (n = 91); red: basal (n = 131); 
blue: club/goblet (n = 101). One-tailed Welch’s t test was used to identify cell type–specific gene markers. **P < 0.05.
 1 0
insight.jci.org   doi:10.1172/jci.insight.90558
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
“normal” IPF AT2-like cells expressed significantly higher levels of TGFBR1 and VIM that may repre-
sent less advanced stages of IPF pathology (Figure 6B and Supplemental Table 3). Although all IPF cells 
maintained epithelial cell identities, vimentin, normally selectively expressed in mesenchymal cells, was 
increased in basal and indeterminate cells in IPF, with highest expression in the relatively “normal” IPF 
AT2-like cells, perhaps indicating epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in the early transitional stage 
of IPF (Supplemental Table 3).
Single-cell transcriptome analysis predicted the activation of EMT from basal to indeterminate cells 
(Supplemental Figure 5). EMT-related signaling molecules (TGFBR1, Wnt/β-catenin, EGFR, PI3K/AKT), 
transcription factors (ZEB1, SNAl2, SMAD2/3), and an mRNA splicing factor involved in EMT (ESRP1) 
were selectively induced in basal cells. While E-cadherin (CDH1) was suppressed in basal cells, mesenchy-
mal markers acquired in EMT including MMPs, vimentin, N-cadherin (CDH12), and fibronectin (FN1) 
were selectively induced in either basal or indeterminate cells, indicating that basal cells may be the pro-
genitor of the indeterminate cell type. A number of genes regulating planar polarity or EMTs, e.g., PRICK-
LE1, VANGL1, SNAI2, and VIM, also were induced in IPF cells, consistent with cell shape alterations, and 
pan-cytokeratin, E-cadherin, and vimentin staining in IPF epithelial cells (Figure 4, Supplemental Figure 
5, Supplemental Figure 6A, and Supplemental Table 3). In spite of the enrichment of transcripts related 
to epithelial cell proliferation in KEGG cells observed in the pathway analysis of IPF cells (Figure 1 and 
3), phospho–histone 3 staining was rarely detected in epithelial cells in either normal or IPF lung tissue 
(Supplemental Figure 6B).
Expression of  conducting airway and alveolar cell markers in IPF epithelial cells. Since single-cell transcriptome 
analysis identified remarkable changes in epithelial cell gene expression patterns, we utilized immunofluo-
rescence confocal microscopy to distinguish epithelial cells in normal and IPF lungs. In normal lung, cuboi-
dal AT2 epithelial cells were identified by coexpression of both HTII-280 (24) and ABCA3. HOPX intensely 
stained the cytoplasm and nuclei of squamous AT1 cells and was detected at lower levels in normal AT2 
cells (Figure 7). Neither ABCA3 nor HTII-280, AT2 cell markers present in normal lungs, was detected in 
conducting airways. In contrast to normal alveolar and bronchial tissue, lesions in the periphery of IPF lungs 
contained epithelial cells of atypical shapes and staining characteristics. Abnormally shaped cells intensely 
costaining for HOPX, ABCA3, and/or HTII-280 were present in all IPF samples, and normal squamous 
AT1 cells were rarely detected (Figure 7). Ciliated, basal, and goblet cell markers were frequently observed in 
IPF lesions, found in close proximity to ABCA3-stained cuboidal cells, indicating a loss of regional specifi-
cation and epithelial cell gene expression (Figure 7A). The epithelial lining of IPF cysts frequently contained 
p63-positive basal cells located in close proximity to cells expressing ABCA3 or HOPX. Clusters of KRT14+ 
“basal” cells were also present in these IPF lesions (Figure 7B). Thus, differentiation-specific cell markers 
that are normally spatially restricted in conducting versus alveolar regions were frequently found in close 
contiguity within the IPF lesions. Similarly, individual IPF cells coexpressing SFTPB and MUC5B, markers 
normally restricted to distinct alveolar and goblet epithelial cell types, were readily identified in IPF tissues, 
findings consistent with the “abnormal” cell differentiation characteristics seen in the single-cell RNA anal-
yses (Supplemental Figure 7). Although α-SMA was not detected in IPF epithelial cells, vimentin, which 
normally stains only mesenchymal cells, was detected in subsets of pan-cytokeratin– and E-cadherin–stained 
epithelial cells, perhaps indicating a partial epithelial to mesenchymal transition, findings consistent with 
Vim and pathway analysis of the single-cell IPF RNA profiles (Supplemental Figure 6A).
Discussion
Formation and repair of the alveolar gas exchange region of the lung requires the precise orchestration of 
interactions among diverse epithelial, stromal, and immune cells. In spite of extensive pathological, cellu-
lar, and genetic studies, the molecular and cellular processes underlying tissue injury and remodeling in IPF 
remain enigmatic. Molecular analyses in IPF have primarily utilized whole tissue and in vitro studies for 
genetic and epigenetic analyses. In the present study, we identify profound changes in epithelial cell gene 
expression at the single-cell level of resolution in IPF. Our findings identified the activation of a number of 
canonical signaling and transcriptional pathways associated with cell injury and repair in IPF and identify 
IPF-related epithelial cells of indeterminate differentiation. The respiratory epithelium is capable of robust 
regeneration from rapid amplifying progenitor cells and various other progenitor cell types, including basal 
cells in conducting airways and AT2 cells in the alveoli (22). Recent studies support the activation and/or 
migration of p63/Sox2-expressing basal cells in the alveoli after severe, chronic epithelial cell injury caused 
 1 1
insight.jci.org   doi:10.1172/jci.insight.90558
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
by bleomycin and influenza viruses (8, 9). Our present single-cell data support the concept that an abnor-
mal differentiation program has been initiated in the tissue microenvironment of IPF in which the proxi-
mal-peripheral patterns of cell differentiation are disrupted, with many respiratory epithelial cells acquiring 
aberrant, multilineage-like states and some individual cells sharing the characteristics of both conducting 
airway and alveolar epithelial cells. As such, these cells represent cell types not previously identified during 
normal lung morphogenesis or at maturity (26, 28).
Present bioinformatics and immunofluorescence evidence strongly supports the concept that the 
multilineage-like state of IPF epithelial cells is related to the tissue microenvironment in IPF. Since the 
capture of more than one cell is possible in the Fluidigm C1 apparatus, we carefully considered this 
possibility in our analyses. Based on our previous single-cell analysis of lung transcript (28), we noted 
capture of doublets of 7%–9% using present 10- to 17-μm settings on the Fluidigm C1 chip. Doublets 
were readily identified by shared expression of marker genes crossing two distinct cell types. In the 
present study, many indeterminate cells (n = 89 cells), coexpressed multilineage markers, including AT2, 
Figure 6. Expression of altered KEGG pathways in human IPF and control single cells. (A) The heatmap shows the top 25 pathways and differen-
tially expressed genes identified using a 1-tailed Welch’s t test of gene expression between the control AT2 cells (C1) and IPF cell clusters (C2, C3, and 
C4) using the following criteria: P < 0.01, expressed (TPM ≥1) in at least 80% of cell type with induced gene expression. KEGG pathways enriched or 
suppressed in IPF epithelium were determined by the following criteria: (a) at least 5 genes in the pathway were expressed (TPM ≥1), (b) at least 30% 
of expressed genes were differentially expressed, and (c) the ratio between the number of C1 differentially expressed genes and the number of IPF 
differentially expressed genes in the pathway was ≥1.5 or ≤0.67. 4). Pathways were ranked based on the ratios. The expression of a pathway in a cell was 
measured by the average expression (TPM + 1, log2 transformed) of differentially expressed genes associated in the pathway. Pathways were clustered 
using hierarchical clustering analysis with Spearman’s correlation–based distance measure and complete linkage. Cancer- or disease-related pathways 
were excluded. (B) Representative TGF-β signaling pathway genes (BMP1, BMPR1B, INHBA, INHBB, TGFBR1, TGFB1, TGFB2, and SMAD3) in control (n = 
215), IPF (n = 316), and relatively normal IPF cells that clustered with control AT2 cells (n = 9). Data are presented as dot plot with mean ± SEM. P values 
were determined by Student’s t test. **P < 0.05.
 1 2
insight.jci.org   doi:10.1172/jci.insight.90558
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
Figure 7. Immunofluorescence confocal microscopy identifies atypical epithelial cell differentiation in IPF. (A) Peripheral samples of normal and 
IPF lung tissue were stained for epithelial cell markers used to identify AT2 (HTII-280 and ABCA3), AT1 (HOPX), ciliated (TUBA4A), goblet (MUC5B) 
cells. Yellow staining indicates coexpression of the proteins. HTII-280 and ABCA3, normally restricted to peripheral/alveolar epithelial cells in normal 
lung, were expressed in IPF lesions; cystic lesions were variably lined by hyperplastic AT2 cells that stained for ABCA3 in close proximity to MUC5B 
(goblet) or TUBA4A (ciliated) stained cells. Abnormally shaped epithelial cells variably staining for HOPX, ABCA3, and HTII-280 were characteristic 
of IPF tissues that generally lacked normal squamous AT1 cells. (B) Epithelial cells expressing conducting airway and alveolar epithelial cell markers 
were found in close proximity in the IPF lesions (e.g., TP63, KRT14 and MUC5B) and (ABCA3 and HOPX) respectively are shown. Figures are represen-
tative of n = 3–5 control and 9 IPF samples, except for KRT14 (n = 3). Images were obtained at ×10 magnification (scale bars: 200 μm). Insets in yellow 
boxes are at ×60 magnification
 1 3
insight.jci.org   doi:10.1172/jci.insight.90558
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
AT1, and conducting airway epithelial and mesenchymal cell (Fn1, Vim, Col1a1) markers, combinations 
of which are not expressed by normal AT2 cells. Likewise, gene signatures of AT2 cells (C1) were highly 
consistent and did not include non-AT2 epithelial or mesenchymal cell markers. This concept is sup-
ported by immunofluorescence studies demonstrating the loss of normal proximal-peripheral patterning 
of epithelial cell types and the presence of individual cells costaining for usually cell type–restricted 
markers. Whether these cells originate from alveolar or conducting airway progenitors or from subpop-
ulations of distinct progenitors is presently unclear. IPF cells are not typical of normal undifferentiated 
lung progenitors related to a block in normal alveolar or airway epithelial cell development, but rather 
represent a failure to suppress multilineage differentiation programs via normal epigenetic mechanisms.
During branching morphogenesis, the proximal-peripheral axis of the lung is demarcated by the mutu-
ally exclusive expression of SOX2 (in conducting) and SOX9 in acinar (peripheral) buds of the embryonic 
lung (22, 26). Consistent with present single-cell RNA studies, we found a paucity of SOX2 and other 
conducting airway markers in the normal alveolar epithelium (Figure 4) (26, 28, 33–36). In sharp contrast, 
SOX2 RNA was coexpressed with many AT2 cell–related gene markers (e.g., SFTPA2, CTSH, LPCAT, 
SCD), including goblet and basal cell–associated RNAs (e.g., P63, KRT5, 6AB, ITGB4, PAX9, MUC5AC, 
and MUC5B) in IPF. Remarkably, cells coexpressing both SOX2 and SOX9 RNAs were seen in some single 
cells (mostly in the indeterminate [C2] cells) (Figure 4 and 5). Present immunofluorescence studies demon-
strated the loss of normal spatial restriction of alveolar versus conducting airway epithelial cell types. Coex-
pression of normally relatively restricted AT1 (HOPX) with AT2 (ABCA3 and HTII-280) marker genes 
and frequent coexpression of SP-B with MUC5B are consistent with loss of region-specific cellular iden-
tities in IPF (Figure 7). Prediction of EZH2 as a candidate regulator of altered fate in IPF epithelial cells 
(Supplemental Figure 2) may reflect changes in epigenetic states associated with widespread and dramatic 
changes in gene expression, a concept previously supported by methylation studies in IPF (37–39).
Activation of  canonical regulatory pathways in IPF epithelial cells. The cellular origins of the abnormal sig-
naling and transcriptional networks are confounded by the complex tissue remodeling seen in IPF, which 
includes recruitment of inflammatory and stromal cells, obscuring the role of individual cell types in its 
pathogenesis. Neutrophilic, lymphocytic, and monocytic infiltrates are prominent in IPF. In the present 
study, expression of a number of cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors was increased in IPF epithelial 
cells, supporting a unique role in the secretion of molecules influencing the activity of myofibroblasts and 
Figure 8. Bioprocesses and gene networks influenced by IPF. Single-cell RNA-sequencing analysis of human IPF and control epithelial cells identified 4 
distinct lung epithelial cell subtypes. Cell-specific gene signatures and associated pathways, bioprocesses, and predicted driving forces (key regulators) 
of each cell type are shown. The analysis predicts crosstalk among individual cell types at the level of upstream regulators, bioprocesses, and genes, as 
illustrated in this summary chart.
 1 4
insight.jci.org   doi:10.1172/jci.insight.90558
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
recruitment of inflammatory cells (Supplemental Figure 3). As such, IPF epithelial cells may not be dissim-
ilar from cancer cells that contribute to a tumorigenic microenvironment. Further similarities between can-
cer and IPF are indicated by the enhancement of RNAs related to cell migration or “metastatic” activities 
(Figure 1 and Supplemental Figure 3). Alternatively, signals from inflammatory cells and fibroblasts may 
activate epithelial cell gene expression in IPF. CD326/HTII-280 (sorted cells and single-cell isolates) IPF 
cells expressed genes associated with activation of canonical TGF-β, HIPPO/YAP, PI3K/AKT, p53, and 
WNT signaling cascades consistent with extensive crosstalk among these canonical pathways that likely 
function in an integrated network (Figure 6 and Supplemental Figures 2 and 3). This abnormal cell signal-
ing signature was most strongly expressed in the basal IPF cells, perhaps indicating their importance in the 
pathogenesis of IPF. The diverse, interacting signaling pathways activated in IPF support the concept that 
strategies for treatment of IPF may require pharmaceutical targeting of multiple molecular pathways. Tak-
en together, the profound changes in gene expression seen in epithelial cells in IPF suggest global epigenetic 
changes in chromatin that may influence diverse cellular functions, including cell differentiation, prolifera-
tion, survival, and the production of effector molecules in the pathogenesis of IPF. The finding that EZH2 
was predicted to be a strong transcriptional driver regulating genes involved in cell growth, migration, and 
chemotaxis in IPF, as shown in Supplemental Figure 2, supports the concept that changes in chromatin 
organization may influence the abnormal gene expression patterns involved in the pathogenesis of IPF.
Dysregulation of  CF-regulated genes in IPF. Analysis of RNAs differentially regulated in IPF epithelial 
cells identified a remarkable loss of CFTR, SLC26A9, SLC6A14, and SLC9A3 (Figure 2B and Figure 5) and 
mutations in genes causing (CFTR) or modifying the severity of CF lung diseases (40, 41). In sharp con-
trast to the loss of CFTR and associated solute carriers, expression of amiloride-sensitive sodium transport-
er subunits SCNN1G and SCNN1B, whose hyperactivity in CF contributes to airway dehydration (42), was 
increased in IPF cells. Taken together, these data strongly suggest that the dysregulation of epithelial ion 
transport properties are shared in CF- and IPF-related pathologies that include pulmonary inflammation 
and goblet cell metaplasia.
Activation of  TGF-β–regulated pathways in IPF epithelia. RNA profiles from both FACS-sorted and sin-
gle-cell isolates demonstrate the strong expression of TGF-β–related gene networks in IPF, findings consis-
tent with the role of TGF-β and its pathogenesis (see ref. 43 for review). Present findings support a role for 
the respiratory epithelium in the activation of pathways that are predicted to interact with fibroblasts and 
myofibroblasts, which are implicated in fibrotic remodeling in IPF. Predicted regulators and biological pro-
cesses in normal AT2 cells were highly distinct from those in IPF basal, goblet, and indeterminate cells, and 
these were most pronounced in the IPF basal cells, which were enriched in genes mediating “cell migra-
tion,” “wound healing,” “EMT,” and “TGF-β signaling” (Figure 8). Increased expression of TGF-βR1, 
SMAD1/2, SNA1/2, EGFR, and PI3K pathways, support the concept that the abnormal activation and 
differentiation of basal progenitor cells play an important role in IPF pathogenesis. The diverse proximal 
airway-like cells in IPF selectively expressed cytokines, chemokines, and genes associated with the distinct 
biological processes, indicating that each cell type likely contributes uniquely to the complex pathological 
microenvironment and cell-cell communications by which epithelial, inflammatory, and stromal cells inter-
act in IPF (Supplemental Figure 3).
Activation of  the HIPPO/YAP pathway in IPF. Present RNA expression data indicate an unrecognized 
role for the HIPPO/YAP pathway in epithelial cells in IPF. Activation of YAP by genetic deletion of the 
genes encoding serine/threonine-specific kinases (STKs) Mst1 and Mst2 or increased expression of YAP 
caused pulmonary lesions with features shared with IPF (44). Increased CTGF and AJUBA (both targets 
of YAP activation) and alterations in epithelial cell shape, planar polarity, and differentiation were seen in 
conducting airways of the mice in which YAP was activated (44). Epithelial shape changes and increased 
expression of SNAI1, VIM, and planar polarity genes indicate a partial EMT-like phenotype in IPF epithe-
lial cells, likely related in part to increased TGF-β and HIPPO/YAP signaling (Figure 6 and Supplemental 
Figures 5 and 6). A recent study implicated a YAP/miR-130/301–mediated pathway in stretch responses 
and fibrotic remodeling, although the cell types involved were not identified (45).
The present study provides what we believe to be the first in-depth transcriptomes from normal human 
AT2 cells and those from IPF epithelial cells at the single-cell level. We identify previously undetected sub-
populations of epithelial cells, revealing relationships between individual cells, the activation of cell-specific 
regulatory processes by cell-specific transcriptional regulators, and potential signaling interactions among 
diverse lung epithelial cell types (Figure 8). As summarized in Figure 8, each of the 4 distinct epithelial cell 
 1 5
insight.jci.org   doi:10.1172/jci.insight.90558
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
types (C1–C4) expresses distinct combinations of regulators and genes mediating their unique contribu-
tions to the complex cellular microenvironment involved in the pathogenesis of IPF.
Conclusions. Rapid advances in RNA/DNA sequencing, cell isolation, imaging, and systems biology 
are enabling ever more detailed insight into the genes and processes controlling cell behaviors and func-
tions. Single-cell transcriptomic analyses are readily applied to small tissue samples and are capable of pro-
viding new insights into the biological processes active within and among specific cells that are obscured in 
analysis of whole tissues. Single-cell transcriptomic analyses revealed a diversity of transcriptional “states” 
of individual IPF cells, blurring present concepts regarding precise epithelial cell identities, and the biolog-
ical processes involved in lung health and disease.
Methods
Study population. Deidentified lung tissue samples were obtained from Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Duke 
University Medical Center, or the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. IPF tissues (n = 3) were 
collected from lung explants of IPF patients undergoing lung transplantation, and lung lobes from adult 
donors that were resected on the basis of size incompatibility or that were deemed unsuitable for transplant 
were utilized as control tissues (n = 3) for cell sorting by FACS. Distinct control (n =3) and IPF (n =6) 
lung samples were used for single-cell isolation and analysis. Diagnostic criteria for IPF established by the 
American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society were used. Additional IPF and control sam-
ples were provided by Andreas Gunther (Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Justus-Liebig-University, 
Giessen, Germany).
Lung histology and immunostaining. Paraffin sections (5 μm) were stained with H&E or deparaffinized 
in xylene and rehydrated in a series of graded alcohols. For immunohistochemical staining, endogenous 
peroxidase activity was blocked in a solution of methanol/3% hydrogen peroxide. Antigen retrieval was 
performed in 0.1 M citrate buffer (pH 6.0) by microwaving. Slides were blocked for 2 hours at room tem-
perature using 4% normal donkey serum in 0.1 M PBS containing 0.1% Triton X-100 (T). Tissue sec-
tions were incubated with primary antibodies diluted in blocking buffer for an extended incubation period, 
approximately 48 hours. Primary antibodies are listed in Supplemental Table 4. Appropriate secondary 
antibodies conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488, Alexa Fluor 555 or 568, or Alexa Fluor 647, were used at a dilu-
tion of 1:200 in blocking buffer. Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (1 μg/ml) (Invitrogen). Sections 
were mounted using ProLong Gold mounting medium and coverslipped.
Confocal microscopy. Tissue sections stained for immunofluorescence were imaged on an inverted Nikon 
A1R confocal microscope (×10, ×20, and ×60 WI) NA 1.27 objective using an 1.2 AU pinhole. Maximum 
intensity projections of multilabeled Z stack images obtained sequentially using channel series across the 
5-μm-thick sections were generated using Nikon NIS-Elements software. Brightfield images were captured 
using an Zeiss Axio ImagerA2 microscope utilizing Axiovision software.
RNA extraction and sequencing. Peripheral human lung tissue with airways no larger than 2 mm in diameter 
and lacking visceral pleura was mechanically minced and enzymatically dissociated to generate a single-cell 
suspension. Briefly, finely minced tissues were washed in Ham’s F12 (Corning) at 4°C for 5 minutes with 
rocking, followed by centrifugation for 5 minutes at 600 g and 4°C. The minced cleaned tissue was then 
incubated in DMEM/F12 (Life Technologies) containing 2 mg/ml Dispase (Corning), incubated at 4°C with 
rocking for 1 hour, and incubated for another 30 minutes at 37°C. Further elastase/trypsin digestion was then 
accomplished by the addition of an equal volume of Ham’s F12 medium containing 5 U/ml elastase (Worth-
ington Biochemical Corp.) and 0.125% trypsin/EDTA (Corning). The reaction was arrested by addition of 
HBSS containing 0.01% HEPES, 0.5 M EDTA, and 0.02% FBS. Triturated tissue solution was subjected to 
a final protease digestion of 1 volume DNase I for 15 minutes at 37°C. Cells were plated overnight on col-
lagen-coated plates in bronchial epithelial growth medium (Lonza) and harvested by mild trypsin digestion.
Epithelial cell FACS. Dissociated single-cell preparations from peripheral lung of IPF patients (n = 3) 
and controls (n = 3) from cohort 2 were enriched for AT2 epithelial cells by FACS for CD326 (CD326) 
double positive, CD45 (hematopoietic) negative, CD31 (endothelial) negative cells, and HTII-280 after dis-
sociation by proteases (Supplemental Figure 8). Cells were plated overnight and sorted. After sorting, cells 
were preserved in either RNAprotect Cell (QIAGEN) or RNAlater RNA stabilization (QIAGEN) reagent. 
Total RNA was isolated using an RNeasy Micro Kit (QIAGEN) by incorporating an on-column DNAsel 
digestion step. Amplified cDNA was generated using the Ovation RNA-Seq System V2 kit (NuGEN) to 
amplify both polyA+ and non-polyadenylated RNA transcripts. Sequencing libraries were prepared using 
 1 6
insight.jci.org   doi:10.1172/jci.insight.90558
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
the Nextera XT DNA Sample Preparation Kit (Illumina). Next-generation sequencing of equimolar pools 
of cDNA libraries was performed using a single read 50 rapid flow cell on a HiSeq 2500 sequencing plat-
form (Illumina), generating greater than 30 million raw reads per sample. Distinct “basal” cell populations 
were prepared by FACS, selecting CD326 (EPCAM) NGFR double positive cells from peripheral lung 
tissue from patients with IPF (n = 3). Due to low abundance of basal cells in normal lung tissue, this proce-
dure failed to extract sufficient RNA from the normal donor lung.
Single-cell isolation. Cells were isolated from 2 normal controls and 6 IPF tissue samples prepared as 
described for FACS, except that cells were sorted initially with CD326 prior to single-cell isolation. For 
single-cell analysis cell capture, lysis, reverse transcription, and cDNA amplification were performed on 
the C1 integrated fluidic circuit (IFC) for mRNA-seq on a Fluidigm C1 Single-Cell Auto Prep System fol-
lowing the manufacturer’s protocol. Medium-sized C1 mRNA-Seq chips (10–17 μm) were used to capture 
each cell cycle fraction. The C1 Auto Prep System captures the dissociated single cells across 96 wells and 
performs cell lysis, cDNA synthesis with reverse transcription, and PCR reaction using the SMARTer Ultra 
Low Input RNA Kit v3 (ClonTech). Cells captured across the 96 wells are manually inspected as a quality 
control measure to remove empty well, doublets, or debris-containing wells. cDNA from several representa-
tive cells are checked by High Sensitivity DNA chips using Fragment Analyzer (Advanced Analytical), and 
all cDNA libraries are quantitated via Qubit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Libraries for each of the 96 cap-
tured cells are prepared using the Illumina Nextera XT DNA sample preparation kit with 96 dual barcoded 
indices. Off-chip controls were prepared in the same manner, except with a standard 96-well thermal cycler 
as opposed to on the C1. Single-cell libraries are multiplexed and sequenced across 4 lanes of a NextSeq 
500 platform (Illumina) using 75-bp single-end sequencing. On average, about 4–5 million reads were gen-
erated from each single-cell library.
RNA-seq analysis on sorted cell populations. The raw sequenced reads were aligned from FASTQ files to the 
human genome build GRCh37/hg19 and the UCSC reference transcriptome (http://ccb.jhu.edu/software/
tophat/index.shtml) using “Cufflinks” (46). Samples were further processed via trimmed mean normaliza-
tion (47). Differentially expressed genes in control CD326/HTII-280 and IPF-CD326/HTII-280 sorted lung 
epithelial cell types were identified using Smyth’s moderated t test and Benjamini-Hochberg procedure for 
adjusted P value (FDR). Genes with FPKM (fragments per kilobase of exon per million fragments mapped) 
of <1 in all samples were removed from further analysis. A gene was considered to be differentially expressed 
when the P value was ≤0.05 (with FDR correction) and expression fold change ≥1.5 was observed in at least 
one condition. Differentially expressed genes were subject to hierarchical clustering using Euclidean dis-
tance and average linkage to measure the cluster similarity/dissimilarity. Gene set enrichment and pathway 
analysis were performed using ToppGene software (https://toppgene.cchmc.org/) and Ingenuity Pathway 
Analysis (http://www.ingenuity.com).
RNA-seq analysis of  single-cell isolates. For single-cell RNA-seq analysis, we developed an analytic pipe-
line to identify major cell types and unique gene expression signatures for individual cells (27). Briefly, the 
analytic pipeline consisted of 4 components that included: gene prefiltering and normalization, reiterative 
cell type mapping (hierarchical clustering followed by PCA), cell-specific signature gene identification, and 
driving force prediction for each cell type. Detailed methods and code for this analytic pipeline are found 
in ref. 27 (https://research.cchmc.org/pbge/sincera.html). Signature genes of each cell type were subject 
to functional enrichment analysis, pathway analysis, and potential upstream regulators prediction using the 
ToppGene Suite and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis.
For scRNA-seq pathway analysis, differentially expressed genes were identified using 1-tailed Welch’s 
t test of gene expression between the AT2 cell cluster (C1) and IPF cell clusters (C2, C3, and C4) using 
the following criteria: P < 0.01 for at least one condition, expression value TPM ≥1 in at least 80% of 
cell type with induced gene expression. KEGG pathways enriched or suppressed in IPF epithelium were 
determined by the following criteria: (a) at least 5 genes in the pathway had expression value of TPM ≥1, 
(b) at least 30% of expressed genes were differentially expressed, and (c) the ratio between the number 
of C1 differentially expressed genes and the number of IPF differentially expressed genes in the pathway 
was ≥1.5 or ≤0.67. (d) Pathways were ranked based on the ratios. The expression of a pathway in a cell 
was measured by the average expression (TPM + 1, log2 transformed) of differentially expressed genes 
of the pathway in the cell. Pathways were clustered using hierarchical clustering analysis with Spear-
man’s correlation–based distance measure and complete linkage. Cancer or disease-related pathways 
were excluded.
 1 7
insight.jci.org   doi:10.1172/jci.insight.90558
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
Statistics. All data are expressed as mean ± SEM. For sorted cell RNA-seq analysis, statistical sig-
nificance was determined using the moderated t statistics by Smyth et al. (48), followed by the Benjami-
ni-Hochberg procedure for adjusted P value (FDR); a P value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically 
significant. For scRNA-seq analysis, 1-tailed Welch’s t test with a P value less than 0.01 was used for cell 
type–specific signature gene selection.
Study approval. Deidentified lung tissue samples were obtained from Cedars Sinai Medical Center, 
Duke University Medical Center, or the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and approved by the 
Human Research Committee at Cedars Sinai Medical Center. Additional IPF and control samples provid-
ed by Andreas Gunther were reviewed and approved by the Ethics Committee of Justus-Liebig-University 
of Giessen, with sample and patient characteristics reported previously (6).
Data availability. The full data set is available in the NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO GSE86618 
and GSE94555). The analytic and interpreted results from this study will be incorporated into LungGENS web-
site and database hosted by our group (https://research-test.cchmc.org/pbge/lunggens/mainportal.html) (28).
Author contributions
YX designed and completed RNA-seq analyses and contributed to writing, editing, and interpretation of 
expression data. TM designed and performed single-cell isolation procedures, FACS sorting, and RNA 
preparations. AS designed and completed confocal microscopy and fluorescence and RNA studies, and 
contributed to writing and editing. YD contributed to RNA-seq analysis, interpretation, and integration 
of data with knowledge bases. MG developed the scRNA-seq analytic pipeline, and performed single-cell 
analysis and interpretation of data. JT contributed to RNA sequencing and analysis. VAF developed RNA 
libraries and DNA sequencing. KAWB reviewed lung pathology and contributed to writing and editing. 
AKTP reviewed data and contributed to writing and editing. JJG contributed to data analysis and writing. 
BRS co-designed cell experiments, supervised cell isolation and RNA preparation, and edited the manu-
script. JAW co-designed experiments, reviewed all data, and wrote the manuscript.
Acknowledgments
We appreciate support from Ann Maher and Joseph Kitzmiller in manuscript preparation, Shawn Grant 
and Gail Macke for tissue sectioning, the CCHMC Gene Expression Core for technical assistance with 
RNA-seq, and Andreas Günther and coworkers of Giessen University, who provided IPF tissues. We are 
grateful to Jordan Brown and Lindsay Spurka of the Cedars-Sinai Genomics Core for technical assistance 
with scRNA-seq, Adrianne Kurkciyan for assistance with human lung tissue procuring and processing, and 
Dr. Scott Randell, UNC-Chapel Hill, for providing normal human lung tissue for isolation of HTII-280 
cells. Supported by: HL122642, HL110967, HL108793, and CIRM LA1-06915.
Address correspondence to: Jeffery A. Whitsett, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Divi-
sion of Pulmonary Biology MLC7029, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA. Phone: 
513.803.2790; E-mail: jeff.whitsett@cchmc.org. Or to: Barry R. Stripp, Lung and Regenerative Medicine 
Institutes, Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 8700 Beverly Boulevard, AHSP Room 
A9401, Los Angeles, California 90048, USA. Phone: 310.423.1427; E-mail: barry.stripp@cshs.org.
 1. Blackwell TS, et al. Future directions in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis research. An NHLBI workshop report. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med. 2014;189(2):214–222.
 2. Goodwin AT, Jenkins G. Molecular endotyping of pulmonary fibrosis. Chest. 2016;149(1):228–237.
 3. Steele MP, Schwartz DA. Molecular mechanisms in progressive idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Annu Rev Med. 2013;64:265–276.
 4. Barkauskas CE, Noble PW
. Cellular mechanisms of tissue fibrosis. 7. New insights into the cellular mechanisms of pulmonary 
fibrosis. Am J Physiol, Cell Physiol. 2014;306(11):C987–C996.
 5. Camelo A, Dunmore R, Sleeman MA, Clarke DL. The epithelium in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: breaking the barrier. Front 
Pharmacol. 2014;4:173.
 6. Plantier L, et al. Ectopic respiratory epithelial cell differentiation in bronchiolised distal airspaces in idiopathic pulmonary fibro-
sis. Thorax. 2011;66(8):651–657.
 7. Seibold MA, et al. The idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis honeycomb cyst contains a mucocilary pseudostratified epithelium. PLoS 
One. 2013;8(3):e58658.
 8. Vaughan AE, et al. Lineage-negative progenitors mobilize to regenerate lung epithelium after major injury. Nature. 
2015;517(7536):621–625.
 9. Zuo W
, et al. p63(+)Krt5(+) distal airway stem cells are essential for lung regeneration. Nature. 2015;517(7536):616–620.
 1 8
insight.jci.org   doi:10.1172/jci.insight.90558
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
 10. Alder JK, et al. Short telomeres are a risk factor for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008;105(35):13051–13056.
 11. Cronkhite JT, et al. Telomere shortening in familial and sporadic pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
2008;178(7):729–737.
 12. d’Adda di Fagagna F
, et al. A DNA damage checkpoint response in telomere-initiated senescence. Nature. 2003;426(6963):194–198.
 13. Fingerlin TE, et al. Genome-wide association study identifies multiple susceptibility loci for pulmonary fibrosis. Nat Genet. 
2013;45(6):613–620.
 14. Kropski JA, Blackwell TS, Loyd JE. The genetic basis of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Eur Respir J. 2015;45(6):1717–1727.
 15. Wang Y
, et al. Genetic defects in surfactant protein A2 are associated with pulmonary fibrosis and lung cancer. Am J Hum Genet. 
2009;84(1):52–59.
 16. Mulugeta S, Maguire JA, Newitt JL, Russo SJ, Kotorashvili A, Beers MF. Misfolded BRICHOS SP-C mutant proteins induce 
apoptosis via caspase-4- and cytochrome c-related mechanisms. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2007;293(3):L720–L729.
 17. Mulugeta S, Nguyen V
, Russo SJ, Muniswamy M, Beers MF. A surfactant protein C precursor protein BRICHOS domain 
mutation causes endoplasmic reticulum stress, proteasome dysfunction, and caspase 3 activation. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 
2005;32(6):521–530.
 18. Nogee LM, Dunbar AE, Wert S, Askin F, Hamvas A, Whitsett JA. Mutations in the surfactant protein C gene associated with 
interstitial lung disease. Chest. 2002;121(3 Suppl):20S–21S.
 19. Nogee LM, Dunbar AE, Wert SE, Askin F, Hamvas A, Whitsett JA. A mutation in the surfactant protein C gene associated 
with familial interstitial lung disease. N Engl J Med. 2001;344(8):573–579.
 20. Stuart BD, et al. Exome sequencing links mutations in PARN and RTEL1 with familial pulmonary fibrosis and telomere short-
ening. Nat Genet. 2015;47(5):512–517.
 21. Whitsett JA, Wert SE, Weaver TE. Diseases of pulmonary surfactant homeostasis. Annu Rev Pathol. 2015;10:371–393.
 22. Hogan BL, et al. Repair and regeneration of the respiratory system: complexity, plasticity, and mechanisms of lung stem cell 
function. Cell Stem Cell. 2014;15(2):123–138.
 23. Kusko RL, et al. Integrated Genomics reveals convergent transcriptomic networks underlying chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2016;194(8):948–960.
 24. Gonzalez RF, Allen L, Gonzales L, Ballard PL, Dobbs LG. HTII-280, a biomarker specific to the apical plasma membrane of 
human lung alveolar type II cells. J Histochem Cytochem. 2010;58(10):891–901.
 25. Yu W
, Gwinn M, Clyne M, Yesupriya A, Khoury MJ. A navigator for human genome epidemiology. Nat Genet. 2008;40(2):124–125.
 26. Treutlein B, et al. Reconstructing lineage hierarchies of the distal lung epithelium using single-cell RNA-seq. Nature. 
2014;509(7500):371–375.
 27. Guo M, Wang H, Potter SS, Whitsett JA, Xu Y
. SINCERA: a pipeline for single-cell RNA-seq profiling analysis. PLoS Comput 
Biol. 2015;11(11):e1004575.
 28. Du Y
, Guo M, Whitsett JA, Xu Y
. ‘LungGENS’: a web-based tool for mapping single-cell gene expression in the developing 
lung. Thorax. 2015;70(11):1092–1094.
 29. Chen G, et al. SPDEF is required for mouse pulmonary goblet cell differentiation and regulates a network of genes associated 
with mucus production. J Clin Invest. 2009;119(10):2914–2924.
 30. Rajavelu P, Chen G, Xu Y
, Kitzmiller JA, Korfhagen TR, Whitsett JA. Airway epithelial SPDEF integrates goblet cell differenti-
ation and pulmonary Th2 inflammation. J Clin Invest. 2015;125(5):2021–2031.
 31. Rosas IO, et al. MMP1 and MMP7 as potential peripheral blood biomarkers in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. PLoS Med. 2008;5(4):e93.
 32. Zhang Y
, Kaminski N. Biomarkers in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2012;18(5):441–446.
 33. Artinian N, Cloninger C, Holmes B, Benavides-Serrato A, Bashir T, Gera J. Phosphorylation of the Hippo pathway component 
AMOTL2 by the mTORC2 kinase promotes YAP signaling, resulting in enhanced glioblastoma growth and invasiveness. J Biol 
Chem. 2015;290(32):19387–19401.
 34. Hackett NR, et al. RNA-Seq quantification of the human small airway epithelium transcriptome. BMC Genomics. 2012;13:82.
 35. Steiling K, et al. A dynamic bronchial airway gene expression signature of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and lung 
function impairment. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2013;187(9):933–942.
 36. Xu Y
, et al. Transcriptional programs controlling perinatal lung maturation. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e37046.
 37. Rabinovich EI, et al. Global methylation patterns in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e33770.
 38. Rabinovich EI, Selman M, Kaminski N. Epigenomics of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: evaluating the first steps. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med. 2012;186(6):473–475.
 39. Sanders YY
, et al. Altered DNA methylation profile in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
2012;186(6):525–535.
 40. Corvol H, et al. Genome-wide association meta-analysis identifies five modifier loci of lung disease severity in cystic fibrosis. 
Nat Commun. 2015;6:8382.
 41. Wright FA, et al. Genome-wide association and linkage identify modifier loci of lung disease severity in cystic fibrosis at 11p13 
and 20q13.2. Nat Genet. 2011;43(6):539–546.
 42. Livraghi-Butrico A, et al. Loss of Cftr function exacerbates the phenotype of Na(+) hyperabsorption in murine airways. Am J 
Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2013;304(7):L469–L480.
 43. Wolters PJ, Collard HR, Jones KD. Pathogenesis of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Annu Rev Pathol. 2014;9:157–179.
 44. Lange AW
, Sridharan A, Xu Y
, Stripp BR, Perl AK, Whitsett JA. Hippo/Yap signaling controls epithelial progenitor cell prolif-
eration and differentiation in the embryonic and adult lung. J Mol Cell Biol. 2015;7(1):35–47.
 45. Bertero T, et al. A YAP/TAZ-miR-130/301 molecular circuit exerts systems-level control of fibrosis in a network of human dis-
eases and physiologic conditions. Sci Rep. 2015;5:18277.
 46. Trapnell C, et al. Transcript assembly and quantification by RNA-Seq reveals unannotated transcripts and isoform switching 
during cell differentiation. Nat Biotechnol. 2010;28(5):511–515.
 47. Garcia-Escudero LA, Gordaliza A. Robustness properties of k means and trimmed k means. J Am Stat Assoc. 1999;94(447):956–969.
 48. Smyth GK. Linear models and empirical bayes methods for assessing differential expression in microarray experiments. Stat 
Appl Genet Mol Biol. 2004;3:Article3.
 1 9
insight.jci.org   doi:10.1172/jci.insight.90558
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
