 An injectable nanoparticle generator enhances delivery of 
cancer therapeutics
Rong Xu1,2,*, Guodong Zhang1,*, Junhua Mai1,*, Xiaoyong Deng1,8,*, Victor Segura-Ibarra1, 
Suhong Wu1, Jianliang Shen1, Haoran Liu1, Zhenhua Hu1, Lingxiao Chen1, Yi Huang1, 
Eugene Koay1,3, Yu Huang1,9, Jun Liu4, Joe E. Ensor5, Elvin Blanco1, Xuewu Liu1, Mauro 
Ferrari1,6,#, and Haifa Shen1,7,#
1Department of Nanomedicine, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, Texas, USA
2Department of Pharmacology, School of Basic Medicine, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
3Division of Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas, USA
4Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Texas-Houston Medical 
School, Houston, Texas, USA
5Houston Methodist Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA
6Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA
7Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New 
York, USA
Abstract
The efficacy of cancer drugs is often limited because only a small fraction of the administered 
dose accumulates in tumors. Here we report an injectable nanoparticle generator (iNPG) that 
overcomes multiple biological barriers to cancer drug delivery. The iNPG is a discoidal 
micrometer-sized particle that can be loaded with chemotherapeutics. We conjugate doxorubicin to 
poly(L-glutamic acid) via a pH-sensitive cleavable linker, and load the polymeric drug (pDox) into 
iNPG to assemble iNPG-pDox. Once released from iNPG, pDox spontaneously forms nanometer-
sized particles in aqueous solution. Intravenously injected iNPG-pDox accumulates at tumors due 
to natural tropism and enhanced vascular dynamics and releases pDox nanoparticles that are 
internalized by tumor cells. Intracellularly, pDox nanoparticles are transported to the perinuclear 
#Correspondence should be addressed to: M.F. (mferrari@HoustonMethodist.org) & H.S. (hshen@HoustonMethodist.org).
8Current address: Institute of Nanochemistry and Nanobiology, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
9Current address: Biomedical Engineering Department, University of South Dakota, Sioux Falls, South Dakota, USA
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
Author contributions
M. F. and H. S. developed the concept, and supervised experiments. H. S., E. B., and M. F. prepared the manuscript with assistance 
from R. X., G. Z., X. D., and J. M., X. L. and Y. H. fabricated porous silicon particles. G. Z. and Z. H. synthesized pDox. G. Z., V. S-
I., S. W., and J. L. characterized iNPG-pDox. R. X., J. M., X. D., Z. H., J. S., Y. H., H. L., L. C. and E. K. performed in vivo biological 
analyses. J. E. E. performed biostatistical analysis.
Competing financial interests
All authors declare no conflict of interest.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Biotechnol. 2016 April ; 34(4): 414–418. doi:10.1038/nbt.3506.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 region and cleaved into Dox, thereby avoiding excretion by drug efflux pumps. Compared to its 
individual components or current therapeutic formulations, iNPG-pDox shows enhanced efficacy 
in MDA-MB-231 and 4T1 mouse models of metastatic breast cancer, including functional cures in 
40–50% of treated mice.
A series of biological barriers hinders the accumulation of drugs in tumors1–3, reducing the 
efficacy of conventional and nanoparticle-based chemotherapeutics, especially in the 
treatment of metastatic disease4, 5. Among these barriers are drug distribution to non-tumor 
tissues6, hemorheological flow limitations and endothelial association/extravasation7, 
impaired delivery across tumor cell membranes and tissue8 and multidrug resistance9. 
Multifunctional nanoparticles have been developed to surmount these barriers10 (e.g., 
addition of moieties for active tumor targeting and pH-sensitive release), but they have 
shown limited success, and none has been adopted in the clinic. An effective solution will 
require a design that addresses all barriers successively, demonstrating substantial tropism to 
tumors, association with and extravasation across tumor- associated vascular endothelium, 
cellular internalization, vesicular transport to perinuclear regions, endosomal escape, and 
avoidance of multidrug resistance (MDR) efflux pumps. Here we describe an iNPG that 
sequentially negotiates these tasks. iNPG-pDox consists of nanoporous silicon particles11 
packaged with pDox that self-assembles into nanoparticles (Fig. 1a). Once iNPG-pDox has 
localized to tumor tissues due to natural tropism and favorable vascular dynamics, pDox 
molecules assemble into nanoparticles and are released intratumorally in a sustained fashion. 
Upon internalization in tumor cells, pDox nanoparticles undergo trafficking to perinuclear 
regions of the cell. There, a pH-sensitive linker12 connecting the polymer to Dox is cleaved 
in the acidic environment of the endosomes13,14, yielding high intracellular concentrations 
of activated Dox in a cellular domain beyond the reach of cell-surface drug efflux pumps.
pDox was synthesized by covalently conjugating Dox to the glutamic acid side chains of 
poly(L-glutamic acid) via a pH-sensitive hydrazone linker (Supplementary Fig. 1a), and 
successful conjugation was confirmed by 1H-NMR (Supplementary Fig. 1b). Physico-
chemical parameters of the construct are summarized in Supplementary Table 1. pDox 
molecules were loaded into the 40–80 nm-sized pores of discoidal silicon-based carrier 
particles measuring 2.5 µm in diameter and 700 nm in thickness (Supplementary Fig. 2), 
with geometry and dimensions previously shown to optimize the concentration of particles 
in metastases, including lung and liver lesions15–17. Confocal microscopy confirmed pDox 
loading in to nanopores of the silicon-carrier, with pDox accounting for 25% of the total 
weight of iNPG-pDox (Supplementary Table 1). Upon loading, pDox distributed 
homogeneously throughout the nanopores, with intense drug-associated fluorescence (red) 
found co-localized (orange) with carrier-associated fluorescence (gray), which in turn 
spanned all levels of the construct from basal to top planes (Fig. 1b). Cross-sectional 
examination of iNPG-pDox with confocal microscopy, with specific emphasis on the region 
of the particles consisting of pore openings, visualized the release of pDox nanoparticles 
(red) from the silicon carrier construct (Fig. 1c). The size range of nanoparticles generated 
and released at physiological pH, as visualized by confocal microscopy, measured via AFM 
and cryogenic TEM (Fig. 1d and 1e), and corroborated by dynamic light scattering (DLS), 
proved to be 30–80 nm. pDox nanoparticles of analogous size were detected at pH 6.6 
Xu et al.
Page 2
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Supplementary Fig. 3a), indicating that pDox remained in nanoparticle form upon release 
under the slightly acidic (pH 6.6–7.0) conditions that are also found in tumor 
microenvironments18. The resulting size range of pDox nanoparticles suggests that pDox 
assembled into nanoparticles upon contact with aqueous environments, and particle size was 
influenced by the pore of the iNPG (Supplementary Fig. 3a–b).
The kinetics of assembly, as well as pH sensitive cleavage of Dox from pDox, resulted in 
sustained release of pDox from iNPG for up to two weeks at pH 7.4 (Fig. 1f). Moreover, 
Dox was effectively cleaved from pDox at pH 5.2, but not at pH 7.4 (Fig. 1g), with release 
of Dox occurring at faster rates in acidic environments. The size of the released particles at 
pH 5.2 was less than 25 nm (Supplementary Fig. 3c), suggesting that pH-dependent cleavage 
of the pDox construct overtook nanoparticle assembly.
Both free pDox and iNPG-pDox proved effective at killing human triple-negative breast 
cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 in vitro (Supplementary Fig. 4a–b), with 
conjugation of Dox to the polymer not substantially reducing the cell-killing activity of the 
active drug, indicating effective cleavage of Dox from pDox inside cells. To determine 
whether pH-dependent drug release from pDox was critical for cell-killing activity, an 
amide-pDox that shared a similar chemical structure as pDox, but lacked a pH-sensitive 
hydrazone linker between poly(L-glutamic acid) and Dox was synthesized (Supplementary 
Fig. 4c). This polymeric drug had only a fraction of the cell killing activity of pDox on 
MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells (Supplementary Fig. 4d), suggesting that effective 
cleavage of Dox from the polymer was essential for maximal tumor cell killing and 
demonstrating the vital role of pH-dependent drug release for overall activity.
Uptake of pDox in MDA-MB-231 cells was effectively blocked by inhibitors of the clathrin- 
and caveolae-mediated pathways including dynasore, chlorpromazine and genistein, but not 
by various inhibitors of phagocytosis or macropinocytosis, indicating that clathrin- and 
caveolae-mediated pathways play important roles in tumor cell internalization of pDox 
(Supplementary Fig. 5a). Compared to free Dox, pDox NP demonstrated a delayed cellular 
entry (Supplementary Fig. 5b). Fluorescence from pDox co-localized with LysoTracker-
positive subcellular organelles 1 hour after treatment and reached a high level at 8 hours, 
indicating vesicular internalization and transport in cancer cells. Based on structural 
properties and pH- dependent cleavage profiles, pDox disassembled into free Dox and poly-
glutamic acid in the acidic environment of endosomes14, with released Dox entering the 
nucleus directly from perinuclear compartments
In vivo, iNPG-pDox showed an effective natural tropism and accumulation to sites of 
metastasis. Biodistribution assays of Dox, pDox NP, and iNPG-pDox carried out in murine 
models of metastatic MDA-MB-231 tumors showed that drug cleared rapidly from 
circulation, regardless of formulation (Fig. 2a). High Dox concentration in the heart was 
detected 1 hour after dosing with free Dox, with accumulation leading to severe damage to 
cardiac myofibers (Supplementary Fig. 6), similar to clinical observations of severe 
cardiomyopathy in patients that imposes a maximum lifetime dosage threshold19, 20. By 
contrast, pDox and iNPG-pDox were not present at high levels in the heart (Fig. 2a), and 
there was no evidence of structural cardiac damage in the iNPG-pDox treatment group 
Xu et al.
Page 3
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Supplementary Fig. 6). Moreover, high Dox concentrations were detected in kidneys of 
mice treated with free Dox and pDox, but not iNPG-pDox (Fig. 2a). Rapid renal clearance 
was most likely the cause of quick drop off levels of drug in the liver and lung in the free 
Dox and pDox treatment groups. Although there was no significant difference in drug 
accumulation in these organs 1 hour post-dosing between free Dox and iNPG-pDox 
treatment groups, higher levels of iNPG-pDox were detected in the liver 1 day and 7 days 
later.
Consistent and prominent contrast in Dox accumulation profiles could be seen in tumor-
bearing lungs. There was a seven- fold enhancement in iNPG-pDox over free Dox 1 day 
after dosing, with high levels maintained in this organ up to 7 days (Fig. 2a), likely due to 
the stability of iNPG in acidic microenvironments of tumor-bearing tissues. Silicon content 
analysis confirmed accumulation and sustained presence of iNPG in livers and tumor-
bearing lungs, and that iNPG particles were cleared from circulation within 1 hour after 
intravenous administration (Supplementary Fig. 7a). Intraperitoneal administration of iNPG-
pDox did not result in comparable drug levels in the lungs of tumor-bearing mice as those 
observed following an intravenous administration of the drug (Supplementary Fig. 7b). This 
observation further corroborated the notion that the innate tropism and tumor tissue 
accumulation depends on intravenous administration of iNPG-pDox. Moreover, tumor-free 
nude mice treated with the same dose of Dox, pDox NP, and iNPG-pDox displayed similar 
drug levels in the heart and liver as those in tumor- bearing mice, but the amount of drug in 
lungs in the disease-free scenario was only a fraction of that found in lungs of tumor-bearing 
mice at all 3 time points examined (Supplementary Fig. 8, Fig. 2a).
Following organ-specific accumulation, we evaluated intratumoral iNPG-pDox distribution 
in the lungs as well as pDox NP uptake by cells. Real-time intravital microscopy revealed 
fluorescent iNPG-pDox particles in tumor nodules (Supplementary Fig. 9a). Histological 
analysis of tumors in the lung demonstrated accumulation of iNPG-pDox particles in tissues 
collected 1 hour and 24 hours after administration (Fig. 2b), with co-localization of the 
silicon carrier constructs and red blood cells in tumor nodules indicative of particle 
attachment to tumor microvascular walls (Fig. 2c–d, Supplementary Fig. 9b–c). TEM 
analysis of tumor tissues collected at the 24 hour time point confirmed tight attachment of 
the silicon carrier construct to tumor microvessels (Fig. 2e). Flow cytometry analysis of 
disseminated single cells from post-treatment tumor-bearing lung tissues corroborated 
microvessel enrichment of iNPG-pDox, with CD31+ endothelial cells associated with the 
highest percentage of Dox (Fig. 2f). A higher percentage of tumor cells than normal lung 
cells were Dox-positive at both 4 hours and 24 hours, indicating that released pDox 
nanoparticles had been effectively taken up by tumor cells. Notably, there were more Dox-
positive tumor cells in the iNPG-pDox treatment group than in Doxil (liposome-
encapsulated Dox) [AU:OK? ok] or free Dox groups (Fig 2f). Tissue sectioning 24 hours 
after administration showed cell apoptotic bodies in tumor tissues from mice treated with 
iNPG-pDox (Supplementary Fig. S10).
Mice bearing metastatic MDA-MB-231 tumors in the lung were used to validate the 
therapeutic efficacy of iNPG-pDox compared to equivalent amounts of clinical formulations 
of Dox (Fig. 3a–b). H&E staining of lung tissues from athymic nude mice sacrificed at the 
Xu et al.
Page 4
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 end of drug treatments (week 7) revealed the presence of smaller and fewer tumor nodules in 
mice treated with Doxil or iNPG-pDox compared to PBS controls (Supplementary Fig. 11a), 
a difference reflected as well by Ki-67 staining for proliferating tumor cells (Supplementary 
Fig. 11b). Treatment with free Dox or pDox offered limited survival benefit compared to 
negative controls (Fig. 3). Mice treated with Doxil extended median survival by 37 days. 
Tumor growth stalled during the 6-week treatment period, but resumed as soon as treatment 
was discontinued. The most efficacious therapeutic effect was observed in mice undergoing 
iNPG-pDox treatment, with 80% of mice remaining alive after 20 weeks when all mice in 
the control groups had succumbed to disease, and 50% achieving long-term survival (Fig. 
3b).
An additional efficacy examination was performed in BALB/c mice bearing 4T1 tumors. 
The primary 4T1 tumors metastasized to the liver and lung in this model. Histological 
analysis corroborated iNPG-pDox accumulation in lung tumor nodules (Supplementary Fig. 
12). PBS and iNPG vehicle control mice began to expire from lung metastases in week 6, 
with all mice succumbing to the disease by week 9 (Supplementary Fig. 13). pDox and free 
Dox again offered limited survival benefit compared to controls, with Doxil treatment 
extending median survival by 19 days. However, little to no traces of metastatic tumor-
associated bioluminescence was detected in mice treated with iNPG-pDox 4 weeks after 
treatment, and approximately 40% of mice survived for over 180 days.
MDA-MB-231/MDR cells overexpressing the drug efflux protein P-gp (Fig. 3c) were used 
to evaluate the ability of the iNPG-pDox particles to overcome multidrug resistance. Cells 
indeed showed resistance to free Dox (Fig. 3c), as drug efflux proteins on cytoplasmic 
membranes were capable of sequestering and expelling drug from the cytosol21. By contrast, 
pDox nanoparticles effectively killed MDA-MB-231/MDR cells to a similar degree as 
parental MDA-MB-231 cells (Supplementary Fig. 4a). In mice bearing lung metastatic 
MDA- MB-231/MDR tumors, no inhibition of tumor growth was observed from Dox 
treatment as compared to the PBS control. Contrastingly, iNPG-pDox treatment inhibited 
tumor growth substantially (Fig. 3d).
Potential toxicity from iNPG-pDox was evaluated in tumor-free athymic nude mice and 
BALB/c mice, with toxicity compared to those observed following Doxil administration. 
Whereas both mouse strains survived treatment at 24 mg/kg of iNPG-pDox (4× therapeutic 
dosage) used in this study, mice were unable to tolerate a dose of 24 mg/kg of Doxil 
(Supplementary Fig. 14). Moreover, Doxil treatment dramatically reduced total white blood 
counts at 12 mg/kg and triggered a surge in plasma LDH level, indicating severe cardiac 
damage. By comparison, iNPG-pDox displayed a mild toxicity profile even at the highest 
dosage level (Supplementary Fig. 14), indicating a desirable toxicity profile of iNPG-pDox 
over Doxil.
By partitioning biological barriers encountered by cancer therapeutics en route to tumors 
into distinct tasks, we have developed a multifunctional construct capable of successively 
overcoming these obstacles. We have demonstrated natural tropism of therapeutic carriers to 
lungs and liver, preferential organs of metastasis, through rational design with regards to 
carrier size and geometry. Once localized, high concentrations of Dox were maintained in 
Xu et al.
Page 5
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 these organs for over 1 week after administration, with the particles effectively serving as 
long-term nanotherapeutic-generating vascular depots.
The pDox molecules were shown to self-assemble in situ into nanoparticles, which could in 
turn extravasate into the tumor interstitium through leaky vasculature22, 23, or alternatively 
through transcytosis. pDox nanoparticles were then internalized into tumor cells via 
endocytotic pathways, followed by vesicular transport to the perinuclear region and pH-
sensitive cleavage of Dox from pDox. This enabled for release of Dox far from the 
sequestering effects of efflux pumps (e.g. P-glycoprotein) and overcoming of cell 
membrane-based multidrug resistance mechanisms (Supplementary Fig. 15).
Notably, individual components of this construct did not yield the degree of efficacy 
observed with the complete particles mainly because deconstructing iNPG-pDox into its 
individual components, including iNPG, pDox nanoparticles, and Dox, negated proper 
negotiation of barriers (Fig. 3e). This dramatically reduced its therapeutic impact while 
significantly increasing adverse side effects. To highlight this, we compared the efficacy of 
iNPG-pDox to clinical formulations of doxorubicin in two metastatic triple-negative breast 
cancer mouse models. Triple-negative breast cancer is a subset of the disease that is 
especially sensitive to anthracycline therapy due to its high proliferative rate, and for which 
there is currently no targeted therapy. However, in the clinic non-specific distribution hinders 
efficacy, increases cardiotoxicity, results in multidrug resistance, and eventually, cessation of 
therapy24.
We have developed an approach that has the potential to improve upon these shortcomings 
by providing a rational material design approach necessary for transport through distinct 
biological barriers. To the best of our knowledge, no other multicomponent material with the 
capability of in situ generation of nanotherapeutics for sustained site-specific release, acting 
as intravascular drug depots for prolonged drug exposure at therapeutically relevant 
concentrations, has been reported before. Although the dimensions and the geometry of 
silicon particles make the strategy best suited for targeting specific anatomical locations that 
include the lung and liver, which in turn are major sites of metastasis, the versatility of the 
silicon-based carrier allows for incorporation of moieties for targeting other organs as well. 
In principle, the strategy is not limited to one single agent such as Dox, or a specific 
biomaterial for that matter. Rather, distinct biomaterials may be used as constituent materials 
of microparticles that encase different drugs and/or multiple drug combinations for 
therapeutic applications in a variety of disease states.
Online Methods
Synthesis and characterization of pDox
Hydrazide groups were conjugated to glutamic acid side chains of poly(L-glutamic acid) via 
an acid anhydride reaction. Briefly, N-morphylmorline (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to 
poly(L-glutamic acid) (Sigma-Aldrich) in anhydrous dimethylformamide (DMF), followed 
by drop-wise addition of isobutyl chloroformate at 4°C under Argon gas. After stirring for 
15 min, carbazic acid tert-butyl ester (Sigma-Aldrich) in DMF was added. The resulting 
solution was allowed to react for 30 min at 4°C followed by 2 h at 25°C. To synthesize the 
Xu et al.
Page 6
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 final product, 100 mg poly(L-glutamic acid hydrizide)-co-poly(L-glutamic acid) was 
dissolved in 200 mL anhydrous methanol, and 100 µL of trifluoro acetic acid was added. 
Dox hydrochloride was then added, and the mixture was stirred at 25°C for 48 h under 
Argon gas. Polymer Dox was concentrated, dialyzed in methanol, and purified with 
Sephadex-LH20 (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech Co.).
Gel permeation chromatography (GPC) was carried out to measure molecular weight and 
polydispersity index of pDox using a Viscotek GPCmax (Houston, TX) equipped with a 7.8 
mm × 30 cm I-MBHMW column (Viscotek, Houston). DMF containing 10 mM LiCl was 
used as the mobile phase (flow rate, 1.0 mL/min). The GPC system was equipped with a 
Viscotek TDA 305, a triple detector array including a differential refractive index, a 
differential viscometer, and a right angle laser light scattering detector. A PEG standard was 
used for calibration of the GPC apparatus. Molecular weight and distribution were 
calculated using Viscotek TriSEC GPC. Absence of free Dox was confirmed by GPC. 
Percentage of Dox in pDox was measured by UV absorbance.
Fabrication and characterization of iNPG-pDox
Discoidal silicon microparticles were fabricated as previously described25. Particles were 
then modified with 2% (v/v) 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) in isopropanol for 48 h 
at 55°C to conjugate primary amines on the particle surface. iNPG-pDox was assembled by 
loading concentrated pDox molecules (>10 mg/mL in methanol) into the APTES-modified 
porous silicon particles followed by vacuum dry. The loading process was repeated to 
completely fill the nanopores with pDox. To monitor pDox nanoparticle release in vitro, 
iNPG-pDox was incubated in acidic or neutral buffers (pH 5.2, 6.6, 7.4) overnight, and 
released pDox nanoparticles in the supernatant were collected by centrifugation. Particles 
sizes were measured with a Multimode 8 AFM system (Bruker Nano). Briefly, a 10 µL 
droplet of released pDox was applied to a freshly-cleaved mica. After incubating for 30 min, 
the substrate was rinsed with water, and left to air dry. Images were acquired using a 
ScanAsyst-Air probe with spring constant of 0.4 N/m and 1 Hz scan rate, and were analyzed 
with the Nanoscope Analysis software (Bruker Nano).
For quantification of Dox release, iNPG-pDox was incubated in acidic or neutral buffers (pH 
5.2, 7.4) with 10% FBS. Aliquots were collected at different timepoints, and Dox in solution 
measured by UV absorbance. Aforementioned GPC was used to measure cleavage of Dox 
from the prodrug. Briefly, pDox was incubated in PBS (pH 7.4) or phosphate buffer (pH 5.2) 
overnight and the solution applied to a gel permeation column, and eluted with PBS.
Dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurement of particle size distribution
DLS was applied to measure size distribution of released pDox nanoparticles. Briefly, 1 
billion iNPG-pDox particles were suspended in 200 µl of PBS (pH7.4 or 6.6), followed by 
shaking at 300 rpm in a thermomixer (Eppendorf, Germany) at 37°C for 12 h. Supernatants 
containing released pDox nanoparticles were collected by centrifugation at 2,000 rpm for 4 
min. iNPG controls were prepared by the same procedure with 1 billion empty iNPG 
particles. pDox NP controls were prepared by direct dispersion of 5 µl pDox DMF solution 
into 2 mL PBS (pH 7.4 or 6.6). Particle size was measured with a Zetasizer Nano-ZS 
Xu et al.
Page 7
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Malvern Instruments Ltd, Worcestershire, UK) with measurements made using intensity 
average.
Cryo-TEM examination of released pDox NP
Released pDox (5 µl) was deposited onto freshly glow-discharged holey carbon grids for 1 
minute. The grids were blotted with What man filter paper and rapidly vitrified in liquid 
ethane using a gravity-driven plunger apparatus. The resulting frozen-hydrated specimens 
were imaged at −170 °C using a Polara G2 electron microscope (FEI Company) equipped 
with a Field Emission Gun and a Direct Detection Camera (Gatan K2 Summit). The 
microscope was operated at an accelerating voltage of 300 kV with a magnification of 
9,400×, resulting the effective pixel size of 4.45 Å. For each area of interest, low dose cryo-
EM images at ~5 defocus were recorded on the Direct Detection Camera. The cumulative 
doses of ~30 e-/A2 were distributed over 30 frames which were subsequently aligned with 
each other to generate the final high-resolution cryo-EM image.
In vitro analysis of iNPG-pDox growth inhibition and intracellular trafficking
To assess cancer cell killing, cells were seeded into 96-well plates at a seeding density of 
5,000 cells/well, and treated with empty iNPG, free Dox, pDox NP, or iNPG- pDox for 96 h. 
Cell growth and viability was evaluated by incubating with CellTiter Aqueous one solution 
cell proliferation assay reagent (Promega). Absorbance from each well was measured at 570 
nm with a Synergy H4 hybrid reader (BioTek). IC50 values were determined with the 
Graphpad PRISM version 5 software.
To test blockade of pDox nanoparticle uptake by tumor cells, MDA-MB-231 cells were 
treated for 30 minutes with 20 µM cytochalasin D, 20 µM amiloride, 20 µM dynasore, 120 
µM chlorpromazine, or 200 µM genistein. Cells were then incubated with 10 µg/mL pDox 
for 2 hours. pDox-positive cells were detected by flow cytometry.
To study intracellular pDox trafficking and Dox accumulation, MDA-MB-231 cells were 
seeded at 1,000 cells/chamber on culture slides (BD Falcon) in DMEM containing 10% 
FBS. Dox or pDox was added 24 h later, and cells were harvested at different timepoints. To 
stain late endosomes/lysosomes, cells were incubated with 75 nM LysoTracker Green 
(Invitrogen) in DMEM for 45 minutes, rinsed with PBS, and fixed with 2.5% formaldehyde 
for 10 minutes at RT. Slides were mounted with ProLong® Gold antifade reagent containing 
DAPI (Invitrogen). Fluorescent images were captured using a confocal microscope (Nikon 
A1 Confocal Imaging system).
Analysis of tissue distribution of Dox and iNPG-pDox
Quantification of doxorubicin was performed using daunorubicin (Dau, Sigma) as an 
internal standard26. Briefly, tissues were homogenized in PBS (100 mg tissue/330 mL PBS), 
and then mixed with 10 µL Dau (50 µg/mL). A 4-fold volume of the extraction solution 
containing chloroform and methanol (3/1, v/v) was subsequently added. The mixture was 
vortexed for 10 minute, and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 10 minutes to separate the 
aqueous and organic phases. The organic phase was collected, and the solvent was vacuum 
Xu et al.
Page 8
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 dried. The extract was dissolved in 200 µL methanol, and a 100 µL aliquot was used for 
HPLC analysis.
Animal studies
All animal studies were performed in accordance with the guidelines of the Animal Welfare 
Act and the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, following protocols 
approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at the Houston 
Methodist Research Institute. Murine metastatic models of MDA-MB-231 or MDA-
MB-231/MDR tumor cells, transfected with a plasmid carrying both luciferase and GFP 
genes, were established in nude mice by tail vein inoculation of 3×105 tumor cells. All mice 
developed tumor metastases to the lungs, and tumor growth in the lung was visualized by 
bioluminescence with a Xenogen IVIS-200 system. Experiments to determine the 
biodistribution and efficacy of iNPG-pDox were carried out in tumor-free athymic nude 
mice and in murine model of lung metastatic MDA-MB-231 triple negative breast cancer 
model27–29, and were determined by measuring disassembled Dox in blood and major 
organs 1 h, 1 d, and 7 d post i.v. or i.p. administration of iNPG-pDox by HPLC, with free 
Dox and pDox serving as controls. Biodistribution of iNPG-pDox by silicon content was 
analyzed as previously described16. Briefly, animal organs including the heart, liver, spleen, 
lung, kidney, brain, blood samples were weighed, homogenized in 3 mL of 1N NaOH 
containing 20% ethanol (v/v), and incubated for 48 h at 20°C. After centrifugation at 4,700 
rpm for 30 min, 0.5 mL supernatant was diluted with 2 mL deionized water, and applied to a 
Varian 720-ES ICP Optical Emission Spectrometer for silicon content measurement.
For examination of iNPG-pDox localization to tumors, mice with metastatic MDA- MB-231 
tumor in the lung were treated i.v. with 6 mg/kg pDox or iNPG-pDox. Intravital microscopic 
imaging was performed at 1 h and 24 h timepoints as previously described17. Briefly, mice 
were sacrificed, and the chest cavity immediately opened to expose lungs to imaging. Three 
mice were imaged per time point. The lung tissues were then processed for histological 
analysis and for transmission electron microscopy following previously published 
methods30.
Flow cytometry was applied to determine cell types associated with iNPG-pDox and pDox 
particles. Briefly, mice with advanced stage MDA-MB-231 tumor metastasis were treated, 
tumor-bearing lungs collected, and tissue samples digested with collagenase to isolate single 
cells followed by flow cytometry analysis, as described above. For efficacy examination, 
mice were divided into 6 treatment groups (n = 10 mice/group) and treated weekly with 3 
mg/kg Dox, or biweekly with 6 mg/kg Doxil, pDox NP, or iNPG-pDox for 6 weeks. Mice 
were maintained after treatments until one of the endpoints was met (loss of 10% body 
weight, fatigue, lethargy, or death).
The orthotopic murine 4T1 tumor model served as the animal model for lung and liver 
metastases. The 4T1 tumor cells were engineered with luciferase expression for tracking of 
tumor metastasis by bioluminescence. To initiate lung metastasis, BALB/c mice were 
inoculated with 4T1 cells (3×104) into the fourth mammary gland fat pad. Primary tumors 
were surgically removed once they reached 250 mm3. Mice were then treated with negative 
controls (PBS and iNPG), or with 6 mg/kg Dox, Doxil, pDox NP, and iNPG-pDox weekly 
Xu et al.
Page 9
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 for 4 weeks, and maintained to assess survival benefit. For histological analysis, mice were 
euthanized at the end of the treatments, and tumor nodules in the lungs were analyzed by 
H&E staining for growth morphology and Ki-67 staining for cell proliferation.
For examination of resistance in vivo, nude mice were inoculated with MDA-MB-231/MDR 
cells engineered with luciferase expression, and were treated with PBS controls, free Dox or 
iNPG-pDox. Tumor growth in the lung was monitored weekly by bioluminescence intensity.
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analyses were performed with the GraphPad Prism 5 (GraphPad Software, Inc., 
CA, USA) and SAS 9.4 (SAS institute Inc., NC, USA) softwares. For all in vivo analysis, 
sample sizes were chosen to ensure adequate power to detect a pre- specified effect size. 
Animals were excluded from analysis based on the absence of tumor growth and these 
criteria were pre-established. Animals were randomized prior to treatment. Blinding was not 
performed. Differences were evaluated by F-tests of the fixed effects of a two-way ANOVA 
model and drill down using F-tests of partitions and contrasts of the interaction term. The 
two-way ANOVA models allowed for the heterogeneous nature of the data and included a 
random subject effect to account for the data’s correlation structure. Hommel’s adjustment 
was applied for multiple comparisons to correct for multiplicity. Survival was estimated by 
the Kaplan-Meier method and differences in survival were evaluated using log-rank tests. To 
establish the validity of a linear models approach, the assumption of normality was assessed 
objectively using a Shapiro-Wilk test and visually by inspecting the normal probability Q-Q 
plots within each treatment by time period. When necessary, log-transformations were 
employed to rescale and normalize the data. Global tests were done to establish that 
significant differences exist, and then pairwise group comparisons were made and adjusted 
for multiplicity using Hommel’s approach. P-values of less than 0.05 and 0.01 were 
considered statistically significant and very significant, respectively. Data are presented as 
means ± SD or SEM.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
M.F. is grateful for the Ernest Cockrell Jr. Distinguished Endowed Chair in the Department of Nanomedicine at the 
Houston Methodist Research Institute. The authors acknowledge financial support from Department of Defense 
grants W81XWH-09-1-0212 and W81XWH-12-1-0414, National Institute of Health grants NIH U54CA143837, 
U54CA151668 (M.F.) and 1R01CA193880-01A1 (H.S.), Welch Foundation grant AU-1714 (J.L.), and National 
Natural Science Foundation of China 81301314 (R.X.). The authors thank the Nanofabrication Core of the Houston 
Methodist Research Institute for porous silicon microparticle fabrication and surface chemical modification. Dr. 
Jianhua Gu is acknowledged for AFM analysis, Dr. Dickson Kirui for intravital microscopy, and Dr. Hanh H. 
Hoang for manuscript proof-reading and editing.
References
1. Blanco E, Shen H, Ferrari M. Principles of nanoparticle design for overcoming biological barriers to 
drug delivery. Nat Biotechnol. 2015; 33:941–951. [PubMed: 26348965] 
Xu et al.
Page 10
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2. Ferrari M. Frontiers in cancer nanomedicine: directing mass transport through biological barriers. 
Trends Biotechnol. 2010; 28:181–188. [PubMed: 20079548] 
3. Michor F, Liphardt J, Ferrari M, Widom J. What does physics have to do with cancer? Nat Rev 
Cancer. 2011; 11:657–670. [PubMed: 21850037] 
4. Lien MY, et al. Safety and efficacy of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin-based adjuvant 
chemotherapy in patients with stage I–III triple-negative breast cancer. Anticancer Res. 2014; 
34:7319–7326. [PubMed: 25503167] 
5. Verma S, Dent S, Chow BJ, Rayson D, Safra T. Metastatic breast cancer: the role of pegylated 
liposomal doxorubicin after conventional anthracyclines. Cancer Treat Rev. 2008; 34:391–406. 
[PubMed: 18358614] 
6. Patel HM, Moghimi SM. Serum-mediated recognition of liposomes by phagocytic cells of the 
reticuloendothelial system - The concept of tissue specificity. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 1998; 32:45–60. 
[PubMed: 10837635] 
7. Decuzzi P, et al. Size and shape effects in the biodistribution of intravascularly injected particles. J 
Control Release. 2010; 141:320–327. [PubMed: 19874859] 
8. Lesniak A, et al. Nanoparticle adhesion to the cell membrane and its effect on nanoparticle uptake 
efficiency. J Am Chem Soc. 2013; 135:1438–1444. [PubMed: 23301582] 
9. Gottesman MM, Fojo T, Bates SE. Multidrug resistance in cancer: role of ATP-dependent 
transporters. Nat Rev Cancer. 2002; 2:48–58. [PubMed: 11902585] 
10. Peer D, et al. Nanocarriers as an emerging platform for cancer therapy. Nat Nanotechnol. 2007; 
2:751–760. [PubMed: 18654426] 
11. Tasciotti E, et al. Mesoporous silicon particles as a multistage delivery system for imaging and 
therapeutic applications. Nat Nanotechnol. 2008; 3:151–157. [PubMed: 18654487] 
12. Bae Y, Fukushima S, Harada A, Kataoka K. Design of environment-sensitive supramolecular 
assemblies for intracellular drug delivery: polymeric micelles that are responsive to intracellular 
pH change. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2003; 42:4640–4643. [PubMed: 14533151] 
13. Demaurex N. pH Homeostasis of cellular organelles. News Physiol Sci. 2002; 17:1–5. [PubMed: 
11821527] 
14. Padilla-Parra S, et al. Quantitative imaging of endosome acidification and single retrovirus fusion 
with distinct pools of early endosomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:17627–17632. 
[PubMed: 23047692] 
15. Decuzzi P, Pasqualini R, Arap W, Ferrari M. Intravascular delivery of particulate systems: does 
geometry really matter? Pharm Res. 2009; 26:235–243. [PubMed: 18712584] 
16. Godin B, et al. Discoidal Porous Silicon Particles: Fabrication and Biodistribution in Breast Cancer 
Bearing Mice. Adv Funct Mater. 2012; 22:4225–4235. [PubMed: 23227000] 
17. van de Ven AL, et al. Rapid tumoritropic accumulation of systemically injected plateloid particles 
and their biodistribution. J Control Release. 2012; 158:148–155. [PubMed: 22062689] 
18. Wike-Hooley JL, Haveman J, Reinhold HS. The relevance of tumour pH to the treatment of 
malignant disease. Radiother Oncol. 1984; 2:343–366. [PubMed: 6097949] 
19. Von Hoff DD, et al. Risk factors for doxorubicin-induced congestive heart failure. Ann Intern Med. 
1979; 91:710–717. [PubMed: 496103] 
20. Zhang S, et al. Identification of the molecular basis of doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity. Nat 
Med. 2012; 18:1639–1642. [PubMed: 23104132] 
21. Fojo T, Menefee M. Mechanisms of multidrug resistance: the potential role of microtubule-
stabilizing agents. Ann Oncol. 2007; 18(Suppl 5):v3–v8. [PubMed: 17656560] 
22. Maeda H. The enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect in tumor vasculature: the key role 
of tumor-selective macromolecular drug targeting. Adv Enzyme Regul. 2001; 41:189–207. 
[PubMed: 11384745] 
23. Maeda H. Toward a full understanding of the EPR effect in primary and metastatic tumors as well 
as issues related to its heterogeneity. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2015; 91:3–6. [PubMed: 25579058] 
24. Liedtke C, et al. Response to neoadjuvant therapy and long-term survival in patients with triple-
negative breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:1275–1281. [PubMed: 18250347] 
Xu et al.
Page 11
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
25. Shen H, et al. Cooperative, nanoparticle-enabled thermal therapy of breast cancer. Adv Healthc 
Mater. 2012; 1:84–89. [PubMed: 23184690] 
26. Alhareth K, Vauthier C, Gueutin C, Ponchel G, Moussa F. HPLC quantification of doxorubicin in 
plasma and tissues of rats treated with doxorubicin loaded poly(alkylcyanoacrylate) nanoparticles. 
J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2012; 887–888:128–132.
27. Hurst DR, et al. Breast cancer metastasis suppressor 1 up-regulates miR-146, which suppresses 
breast cancer metastasis. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:1279–1283. [PubMed: 19190326] 
28. Lu X, Kang Y. Efficient acquisition of dual metastasis organotropism to bone and lung through 
stable spontaneous fusion between MDA-MB-231 variants. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009; 
106:9385–9390. [PubMed: 19458257] 
29. Minn AJ, et al. Genes that mediate breast cancer metastasis to lung. Nature. 2005; 436:518–524. 
[PubMed: 16049480] 
30. McConnell KI, et al. Enhanced gene delivery in porcine vasculature tissue following incorporation 
of adeno-associated virus nanoparticles into porous silicon microparticles. J Control Release. 
2014; 194:113–121. [PubMed: 25180449] 
Xu et al.
Page 12
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. iNPG-pDox characterization and pDox assembly and release from iNPG
(a) Schematic diagram depicting iNPG-pDox composition, pDox prodrug encapsulation, and 
pDox nanoparticle assembly and release from nanopores. (b) Z-series confocal microscopy 
imaging of the iNPG-pDox particles, highlighting the presence of pDox (red) within the 
nanopores of the silicon carrier particle (gray). Scale bar: 1 µm. (c) Three dimensional 
reconstruction following sagittal cross-sectioning of the iNPG-pDox particles, depicting 
pDox (red) within the nanopores of the silicon carrier particle (gray), as well as the presence 
of pDox nanoparticles (red) released from the microparticles. Scale bar: 1 µm. (d) AFM 
Xu et al.
Page 13
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 analysis of size distribution of pDox nanoparticles released from iNPG-pDox at pH 7.4. (e) 
Cryogenic TEM of pDox nanoparticles released from iNPG-pDox at pH 7.4. Scale bar: 150 
nm. (f) Release of pDox or disassembled Dox from iNPG-pDox at pH 7.4 and pH 5.2 in 
10% FBS. (g) Gel permeation chromatography (GPC) analysis on released pDox and 
disseminated Dox from iNPG-pDox. pDox was the predominant form at pH 7.4, whereas 
Dox was released from the polymer at pH 5.2. The inset represents release of Dox in 
different pH conditions following cleavage from pDox.
Xu et al.
Page 14
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Accumulation of iNPG-pDox in metastatic MDA-MB-231 tumors
(a) Time-dependent tissue biodistribution based on Dox content in mice with MDA-MB-231 
lung metastasis after administration of 6 mg/kg Dox, pDox NP, or iNPG-pDox. Differences 
and significance between iNPG-pDox and Dox or pDox NP were estimated by F-tests with 
Hommel’s adjustment of multiplicity. (b) iNPG-pDox accumulation in lung metastatic 
tumors by H&E staining (upper and middle panels). Presence of doxorubicin inside iNPG 
was visualized under fluorescence microscopy (bottom panel). Scale bar: 10 µm. (c) H&E 
histological evaluation of tumor nodules, demonstrating co-localization of iNPG-pDox with 
Xu et al.
Page 15
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 red blood cells and attachment on tumor microvessels. The red arrow points to an iNPG 
particle, and blue arrow points to red blood cells. The scale bar represents 5 µm. (d) CD31 
staining for tumor microvessels (brown). The red arrow points to an iNPG particles. The 
scale bar represents 5 µm. (e) TEM analysis of iNPG attachment to microvessel walls in 
tumor-bearing lung tissues collected 24 h after iNPG-pDox treatment. The red arrow points 
to an iNPG particle, the yellow arrow points to a tumor cell, and the blue arrow points to a 
red blood cell inside the vessel. Scale bar: 2 µm. (f) Flow cytometry analysis of Dox 
distribution in CD31+ endothelial cells, HLA-ABC+ tumor cells, and HLA-ABC−/CD45−/
CD31− normal lung cells isolated from post-treatment mice. *: p<0.05; **: p<0.01
Xu et al.
Page 16
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. In vivo growth inhibition of lung metastatic MDA-MB-231 tumors, as well as a 
multidrug resistant cell line, following iNPG-pDox treatment
(a) Bioluminescence monitoring of MDA-MB-231 tumor metastasis in the lung. Nude mice 
were inoculated with MDA-MB-231 cells carrying a luciferase gene, divided into 6 
treatment groups (n = 10 mice/group), and treated weekly with 3 mg/kg Dox or biweekly 
with 6 mg/kg Doxil, pDox, or iNPG-pDox for 6 weeks. Mice were maintained further 
thereafter to monitor survival. Images of 5 mice/group are shown. (b) Kaplan-Meier plot of 
animal survival with median survival time listed in the table. Differences in survival were 
evaluated by the log-rank test. A global test demonstrated a difference exists among the 
Xu et al.
Page 17
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 groups. Pairwise comparisons were performed to evaluate the advantage of iNPG-pDox 
formulation over the clinical formulations. (c) MTT cell viability assay of MDA-
MB-231/MDR cells treated with Dox or pDox NP for 72 h. The inset represents Western 
blot analysis of P-gp expression in the parental MDA-MB-231 cells and cells transfected 
with a plasmid carrying the MDR1 gene. (d) Tumor growth in the lung, as measured based 
on bioluminescence and compared to that of the PBS control group, of mice inoculated with 
MDA-MB-231/MDR cells carrying a luciferase gene following biweekly administration of 
PBS, Dox, or iNPG-pDox at a dosage of 6 mg/kg. F-tests of the simple effects were applied 
to compare the effects of Dox and iNPG-pDox treatments at each time period. (e) Schematic 
diagram demonstrating the individual components of the iNPG-pDox construct, and the 
distinct biological barriers that each component is capable of overcoming following systemic 
administration.
Xu et al.
Page 18
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
