 1
Yaacob R, et al. BMJ Case Rep 2017. doi:10.1136/bcr-2017-220801
Summary
Fetus-in-fetu (FIF) is a rare entity in which malformed 
parasitic twin grows inside the body of its twin. It is 
most commonly presented with mass in the abdomen. 
We present a case of a 15-year-old boy who presented 
with abdominal mass since infancy. Radiological 
investigations are suggestive of FIF. Intraoperatively, 
malformed fetus in a sac was found and excised. 
Postoperatively the patient recovers well and was put on 
follow-up.
Background
Fetus-in-fetu (FIF) is an uncommon pathology with 
the incidence of 1 per 500 
000 births.1 There are 
many theories proposed with regard to the aetiology 
of FIF. One of the theories which is increasingly 
proposed in the recent literature is that the FIF is a 
diamniotic, monochorionic, monozygotic twin that 
becomes incorporated into the body of the host twin 
after anastomosis of the vitelline circulation.2 Other 
theories include demised multiple pregnancy3 and 
variant of mature teratoma.4 Most common presen-
tation is a mass in the abdomen.5 Other sites include 
intracranial, mediastinum, sacrum, scrotum and 
mouth.6 It can also present with a mass effect. Diag-
nosis can be made via X-ray, ultrasound, CT scan 
and MRI. Some cases were diagnosed after prenatal 
screening.5 Another diagnostic modality (molecular 
analysis) is using an informative genetic marker for 
uniparental isodisomy of chromosomes 14 and 15. 
If there is no genetic difference between the host 
and the fetiform mass, then it is diagnostic of FIF.5 
FIF has to be distinguished from teratoma as the 
latter has the potential to recur though FIF with 
malignant recurrence has been reported. Complete 
excision of the mass is curative and will help in 
ruling out teratoma with malignant elements.
caSe preSentation
A 15-year-old boy presented to our hospital with 
history of abdominal swelling since birth which 
progressively enlarged recently. He also complaints 
of abdominal pain and was unable to tolerate orally 
for 1 
week prior to admission. On examination, 
there was tender, hard mass over central part of 
abdomen.
inveStigationS
CT abdomen and pelvis revealed a huge intra-ab-
dominal mass 14×18.5×23.8 
cm that extends up to 
the subhepatic region with inferior extension into 
anterior pelvis. Components in favour of a fetus 
that were seen within the mass include deformed 
skull, vertebral body and long bones (figure 1). CT 
angiography was done to localise the feeding vessels 
involved. CT angiography shows multiple small 
arteries supplying the wall of the mass. No main 
arterial pedicle detected (figure 2). No tumour 
markers were taken preoperatively.
differential diagnoSiS
The differential diagnosis of this condition would 
be organised teratoma.
treatment
Laparotomy was performed through a midline 
laparotomy incision with findings of a 15×10 cm 
intraperitoneal mass with multiple huge feeding 
vessels densely attached to small bowel mesentery. 
The mass was perforated over pelvic region with 
1000 cc pus aspirated. A gestational sac weighing 
2.5 kg was delivered, and when opened, a 1.6 kg 
non-viable baby noted with shortened and 
malformed upper and lower limbs, hypoplastic 
trunk, long hair, developed male genitalia with 
pubic hair, imperforated anus, fused malformed 
eyes, vertebra and normal baby skin covered with 
vernix caecosa. There was no mouth, umbilical 
cord or placenta (figure 3).
outcome and follow-up
Postoperatively, the baby was returned to the family 
for ritual funeral as requested by family. Histo-
pathological examination (HPE) of the sac envel-
oping the fetus revealed a fibrous cyst wall with 
focal area lining of mature squamous epithelium 
with many hair shafts and some muscle in subep-
ithelial stroma. The postoperative period of the 
patient was uneventful. Alpha-feto protein (AFP) 
taken 3 
months postoperation was normal and 
the patient has no active complaints during subse-
quent follow ups.
diScuSSion
It is still a controversy as to whether FIF is an 
entity on its own or is a highly organised teratoma. 
Teratoma is a true neoplasm composed of multiple 
tissues foreign to the part in which it arises.2 Some 
writers emphasise the presence of vertebral column 
as distinct feature in diagnosing FIF.5 7 However, 
there are reports of FIF with differentiation of 
tissues without vertebral column.8 In our case, 
although only HPE of the sac was obtained as the 
baby was returned to family members after the 
operation for funeral according to local custom, 
Case RePoRt
The entrapped twin: a case of fetus-in-fetu
Rashide Yaacob, annisa Zainal Mokhtar, Dyg Zahratul Hamrak abang Jamari, 
Norliana Jaafar
Rare disease
to cite: Yaacob R, 
Zainal Mokhtar a, 
abang Jamari DZH, et al. BMJ 
Case Rep Published online 
First: [please include Day 
Month Year]. doi:10.1136/
bcr-2017-220801
Department of General surgery, 
sultan abdul Halim Hospital, 
sungai Petani, Malaysia
correspondence to
Dr Rashide Yaacob,  
 
edie14770@ 
yahoo. 
com
accepted 24 august 2017
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://casereports.bmj.com/
BMJ Case Reports: first published as 10.1136/bcr-2017-220801 on 23 September 2017. Downloaded from 
 2
Yaacob R, et al. BMJ Case Rep 2017. doi:10.1136/bcr-2017-220801
rare disease
the diagnosis of FIF was confirmed via the presence of vertebral 
columns in CT abdomen.
Treatment of FIF is surgical. Although benign, complete 
excision of FIF together with the capsule is crucial as there is 
a possibility of malignant recurrence if any of the tissue is not 
completely excised.4 Surgical excision also allows for relieve of 
obstruction and prevention from further compression.9
The operation to remove FIF is a challenging operation as the 
mass is highly vascular with multiple feeding vessels. The big 
size of the FIF has made surgery more difficult as there is high 
possibility of injuring surrounding structures. CT angiography 
can help in identifying obvious vascularity and help in assessing 
the feasibility of doing such cases in the involved centre.10 In 
our case, CT angiography was done as this is a rare case and the 
first one encountered in our centre. With limited experience in 
handling such cases, CT angiography has given a rough idea on 
the possible difficulties that may be encountered by us intraop-
eratively especially with regards to vascular supply of the mass.
learning points
 
► Mass per abdomen with axial skeleton or long bone seen 
during radiological must raise suspicion of fetus-in-fetu (FIF).
 
► Operation to remove the mass must involve careful planning 
as there is high possibility of bleeding intraoperatively as the 
mass is highly vascularised. This involved CT angiography to 
review the feeding vessel.
 
► FIF must be differentiated from teratoma as there is a risk of 
recurrence in teratoma.
 
► Further follow up is needed as although the mass is proven 
to be FIF, there is still a small risk of malignant recurrence 
especially if there is inadequate removal of sac during 
operation.
contributors RY: gave the idea for the article; guarantor. aZM, DZHaJ and 
NJ: performed literature review. all authors: wrote the article and identified and 
managed the case.
competing interests None declared.
patient consent Guardian consent obtained.
provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
open access this is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work 
figure 1 CT abdomen showing an intra-abdominal mass with 
components in favour of a fetus within the mass, including deformed 
skull, vertebra body and long bones. Arrow shows vertebra body.
figure 2 CT angiography of the abdomen and the pelvis showing 
multiple small arterial supplying the wall. No main arterial pedicle 
detected.
figure 3 Malformed fetus with hypoplastic trunk, long hair, 
developed male genitalia, fused eyes and normal baby skin.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://casereports.bmj.com/
BMJ Case Reports: first published as 10.1136/bcr-2017-220801 on 23 September 2017. Downloaded from 
 3
Yaacob R, et al. BMJ Case Rep 2017. doi:10.1136/bcr-2017-220801
Copyright 2017 BMJ Publishing Group. all rights reserved. For permission to reuse any of this content visit
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.
BMJ Case Report Fellows may re-use this article for personal use and teaching without any further permission.
Become a Fellow of BMJ Case Reports today and you can:
 
► submit as many cases as you like
 
► enjoy fast sympathetic peer review and rapid publication of accepted articles
 
► access all the published articles
 
► Re-use any of the published material for personal use and teaching without further permission
For information on Institutional Fellowships contact consortiasales@bmjgroup.com
Visit casereports.bmj.com for more articles like this and to become a Fellow
rare disease
is properly cited and the use is non-commercial. see: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by- 
nc/ 
4. 
0/
© BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (unless otherwise stated in the text of the article) 
2017. all rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise expressly 
granted.
RefeRences
 1 Grant P, Pearn JH. Foetus-in-foetu. Med J Aust 1969;1:1016–20.
 2 Willis Ra. The borderland of embryology and pathology. 2nd edn. Washington, DC: 
Butterworths, 1962:442–62.
 3 Pang KK, Chao Ns, tsang tK, et al. From observation to aetiology: a case report of a 
twin fetus-in-fetu and a revisit of the known rarity. Hong Kong Med J  
2015;21:80–3.
 4 Hopkins KL, Dickson PK, Ball tI, et al. Fetus-in-fetu with malignant recurrence.  
J Pediatr Surg 1997;32:1476–9.
 5 Brand a, alves MC, saraiva C, et al. Fetus in fetu-diagnostic criteria and differential 
diagnosis-a case report and literature review. J Pediatr Surg 2004;39:616–8.
 6 abdulraheem Nt, Nasir aa, abdur-Rahman Lo, et al. oral fetus-in-fetu: a case report. 
J Pediatr Surg Case Rep 2015;3:171–3.
 7 spencer R. Parasitic conjoined twins: external, internal (fetuses in fetu and teratomas), 
and detached (acardiacs). Clin Anat 2001;14:428–44.
 8 Mohta a, shrivastava UK, sodhi P, et al. Fetus-in-fetu. Pediatr Surg Int 
2003;19:499–500.
 9 Ji Y, song B, Chen s, et al. Fetus in fetu in the scrotal sac: case report and literature 
review. Medicine 2015;94:e1322.
 
10 Lindsey M, William J, tyler a. Fetus in fetu: review of the literature over the past 15 
years. J Ped Surg Case Reports 2015;3:554–62.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://casereports.bmj.com/
BMJ Case Reports: first published as 10.1136/bcr-2017-220801 on 23 September 2017. Downloaded from 
