 1
Scientific RepoRts |          (2019) 9:2840  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-39090-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Cavitation dose painting for 
focused ultrasound-induced blood-
brain barrier disruption
Yaoheng Yang1, Xiaohui Zhang2, Dezhuang Ye3, Richard Laforest2, Jeffrey Williamson4, 
Yongjian Liu  
2 & Hong Chen1,4
Focused ultrasound combined with microbubble for blood-brain barrier disruption (FUs-BBBD) is a 
promising technique for noninvasive and localized brain drug delivery. This study demonstrates that 
passive cavitation imaging (pCI) is capable of predicting the location and concentration of nanoclusters 
delivered by FUS-BBBD. During FUS-BBBD treatment of mice, the acoustic emissions from FUS-
activated microbubbles were passively detected by an ultrasound imaging system and processed offline 
using a frequency-domain PCI algorithm. After the FUS treatment, radiolabeled gold nanoclusters, 
64Cu-AuNCs, were intravenously injected into the mice and imaged by positron emission tomography/
computed tomography (PET/CT). The centers of the stable cavitation dose (SCD) maps obtained by 
pCI and the corresponding centers of the 64Cu-AuNCs concentration maps obtained by PET coincided 
within 0.3 ± 0.4 mm and 1.6 ± 1.1 mm in the transverse and axial directions of the FUS beam, 
respectively. The SCD maps were found to be linearly correlated with the 64Cu-AuNCs concentration 
maps on a pixel-by-pixel level. These findings suggest that SCD maps can spatially “paint” the delivered 
nanocluster concentration, a technique that we named as cavitation dose painting. This PCI-based 
cavitation dose painting technique in combination with FUS-BBBD opens new horizons in spatially 
targeted and modulated brain drug delivery.
Focused ultrasound in combination with microbubbles for blood-brain barrier disruption (FUS-BBBD) has 
been established as a promising technique for the delivery of therapeutic agents to a targeted brain location 
without invasive surgery1–3. The blood-brain barrier (BBB) excludes ~100% of large-molecule drugs and 98% 
of small-molecule drugs from entering the brain parenchyma4. FUS-BBBD utilizes the mechanical interactions 
between microbubbles and the surrounding blood vessels to enhance the BBB permeability, allowing various 
therapeutic agents in the systemic circulation to be delivered across the BBB to the brain tissue. Extensive pre-
clinical studies have been performed to develop the FUS-BBBD technique, including evaluation of its feasibility 
and safety in smaller animal models (e.g., mice, rats, and rabbits)3,5–10 and larger animal models (e.g., pigs and 
non-human primates)11,12; optimization of treatment protocols13; assessment of therapeutic efficacy for various 
diseases5,6,9; and revealing its fundamental mechanisms14–16. Recently, a clinical trial successfully demonstrated 
the feasibility and safety of FUS-BBBD in patients with Alzheimer’s disease17. Despite these great advancements 
of the FUS-BBBD technique, there is an unmet need for a treatment monitoring technique that is capable of pre-
dicting the location and concentration of therapeutic agents delivered by FUS-BBBD. This capability is critically 
needed to verify localized drug delivery to the targeted brain location without off-target effects in the brain; assess 
whether the concentrations of the delivered agents reach the desired therapeutic levels; characterize variations 
among repeated treatments; and develop real-time feedback control of the FUS parameters to deliver the desired 
concentrations of drugs to the targeted locations.
Several existing imaging techniques have been used for the assessment of FUS-BBBD treatment outcome. 
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the most commonly used imaging modality for the assessment of 
FUS-mediated BBB permeability changes based on the leakage of MR contrast agents from the blood into the 
1Department of Biomedical Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, Saint Louis, MO, 63130, USA. 
2Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, 63110, USA. 
3Department of Mechanical engineering and Materials Science, Washington University in St. Louis, Saint Louis, 
MO, 63130, USA. 4Department of Radiation Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, 
MO, 63108, USA. Yaoheng Yang and Xiaohui Zhang contributed equally. Correspondence and requests for materials 
should be addressed to H.C. (email: hongchen@wustl.edu)
Received: 17 October 2018
Accepted: 16 January 2019
Published: xx xx xxxx
OPEN
 2
Scientific RepoRts |          (2019) 9:2840  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-39090-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
brain parenchyma. Positron emission tomography (PET) and single photon emission computed tomography 
(SPECT) in combination with radiolabeled therapeutic agents provide noninvasive, sensitive, and quantitative 
methods for directly assessing the spatial distribution of radiolabeled agents18–20. Several studies have used PET 
or SPECT to evaluate the spatial distributions of radiolabeled agents in the brain after FUS-BBBD treatment21–23. 
Our previous study verified that in vivo PET imaging can reliably estimate the concentrations of the 64Cu-labeled 
gold nanoclusters (64Cu-AuNCs) delivered to the brain using ex vivo gamma counting and inductively coupled 
plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)20. The 64Cu radioactivity was found to be linearly correlated with the Au 
concentration quantified using ICP-MS (R2 = 0.94), which confirmed the radiolabel stability of 64Cu for accurate 
measurement of 64Cu-AuNCs distribution20. However, MRI, PET, and SPECT cannot be used to perform intrap-
rocedural monitoring of the FUS treatment.
Among existing techniques, passive cavitation monitoring, including passive cavitation detection (PCD) and 
passive cavitation imaging (PCI), is the most commonly used technology for FUS-BBBD treatment monitor-
ing. The underlying concept is that mechanical oscillations of the microbubbles emit ultrasound waves that can 
be detected using ultrasound sensors to passively “listen” to the secondary acoustic emissions by the micro-
bubbles24 (this differs from active pulse-echo ultrasound imaging). Passive cavitation detection (PCD), using 
a single-element ultrasound sensor, has been broadly used for real-time FUS-BBBD treatment monitoring to 
quantify cavitation levels, differentiate between cavitation modes (i.e., stable cavitation and inertial cavitation), 
investigate bioeffects of cavitation, and develop feedback control algorithms to enhance the FUS treatment safety 
and efficacy25–27. Stable cavitation (SC, small amplitude microbubble oscillation) can be characterized by the 
detection of harmonic emissions in the frequency domain, while inertial cavitation (IC, large amplitude micro-
bubble oscillation followed by violent collapse) can be characterized by broadband emissions28–30. PCD has been 
implemented for real-time monitoring of the FUS-BBBD treatment27,31,32 and controlling FUS exposure param-
eters using a closed-loop control algorithm27. Although PCD has been shown to be a useful tool for FUS-BBBD 
monitoring, it cannot detect the spatial distribution of cavitation.
PCI, integrating multi-element ultrasound arrays with beam-forming techniques, can be used to image the 
spatial distribution of cavitation. Using available ultrasound imaging probes, different 2D PCI algorithms have 
been introduced, for example, time-domain delay-and-sum beamformer33, time-domain robust Capon beam-
former34, frequency domain delay-and-sum beamformer35, robust beamforming by linear programming36, and 
the angular spectrum method37. Moreover, a recent study demonstrated the feasibility of 3D passive cavitation 
imaging using a customized 2D array38. However, to our knowledge, only two studies have been published on 
evaluating the feasibility of using PCI to predict the location of BBBD by correlating PCI with the BBB permeabil-
ity changes evaluated by post-treatment contrast-enhanced MRI39,40. No study has been reported on using PCI to 
estimate the spatial distribution (both location and concentration) of therapeutic agents delivered by FUS-BBBD.
The objective of this study was to evaluate the potential of PCI for estimating the location and concentration of 
therapeutic agents delivered by FUS-BBBD. 64Cu-AuNCs were used as model agents because they are chemically 
stable, biocompatible, easily functionalized by labeling, and constitute a promising theranostic nanomedicine 
in their own right41–43. In vivo PET imaging was used to quantify the spatial distribution of 64Cu-AuNCs in the 
brain after FUS-BBBD treatment and correlate it with the cavitation activity detected by PCI during FUS-BBBD 
treatment. We demonstrated that PCI was capable of pixel-wise estimation of the delivered 64Cu-AuNCs concen-
tration, a technique that we named as cavitation dose painting.
Results
Using an experimental setup illustrated in Fig. 1, PCI successfully recorded the spatiotemporal dynamics of 
microbubble cavitation activity in the mouse brain during FUS treatment. Figure 2A displays representative SC 
level maps (used to quantify the stable cavitation activity at individual time points) acquired at different time 
points (1 s and 60 s) during the treatment. PCI recorded the spatial distribution of the cavitation activity over 
time. Figure 2B shows the corresponding SCD map, which was generated by integrating the SC level over the 
whole FUS treatment duration for each pixel to quantify the total cavitation energy. Figure 2C shows the SC level 
over time at one representative pixel (indicated by the cross in Fig. 2B). The SC level increased immediately after 
bolus injection of the microbubbles and then showed the trend of decrease over time. Figure 2D–F present the 
corresponding IC level map, IC dose (ICD) map, and IC level-time curve, which all showed that the microbubble 
IC activity was at the noise level. PCI data was acquired successfully in eight out of nine mice. The failure to per-
form PCI in one mouse was due to the malfunction of the ultrasound imaging system.
Same as our previous publications19,20, PET was used to quantify the concentrations of 64Cu-AuNCs deliv-
ered by FUS-BBBD in terms of the percent injected dose per gram of tissue (%ID/g). Successful delivery of 
64Cu-AuNCs at the FUS-treated brain region was observed in seven out of the eight mice with successful PCI 
data acquisition, as indicated by higher radioactivity at the targeted brain location compared with surrounding 
untreated brain location (Fig. 3). The failure to deliver 64Cu-AuNCs to one mouse was due to an unsuccessful tail 
vein injection indicated by the accumulation of radioactivity in the mouse tail on the acquired PET image. Results 
obtained from this mouse was discarded in the analysis. Therefore, we have a total of seven mice for analyzing the 
correlation between PCI and PET.
Figure 4 displays representative SCD maps (column 1), 64Cu-AuNCs concentration maps acquired at approx-
imately the same imaging plane as the SCD maps (column 2), and overlay of these two maps (column 3) for three 
representative cases. Although all seven mice showed localized delivery of the 64Cu-AuNCs in the mouse brains 
after FUS-BBBD treatment using the same protocol, variations in the recorded microbubble cavitation activity 
and the delivery outcomes were observed among mice as shown by these representative cases. For the three cases, 
the maximum SCD of each case varied from 108 dB to 116 dB, and the maximum 64Cu-AuNCs concentration of 
each case varied within the range of 1.15–1.95%ID/g.
 3
Scientific RepoRts |          (2019) 9:2840  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-39090-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
For all the treated mice, the offset between the pixel with the maximum SCD (SCDmax) on the PCI maps and 
the pixel with the highest concentration of 64Cu-AuNCs on the PET images were 0.3 ± 0.4 mm and 1.6 ± 1.1 mm 
in the transverse and axial directions of the FUS beam, respectively (Fig. 5B). We then evaluated the pixel-by-pixel 
correlation between the SCD maps and the concentration maps within a region in the brain (the width of this 
region was defined by a lateral line within the brain passing the SCDmax; the height of this region was defined by 
−
1 dB of the SCDmax in the axial direction to ensure this region was inside the brain). A good linear correlation 
was obtained based on segmented linear regression (R2 = 0.61). The segmented linear regression was used to 
model a threshold for BBBD in reference to a previous publication27.
To validate the above correlation between PCI and PET identified in vivo, nine additional mice were treated 
by the same protocol and sacrificed at 24 h after FUS treatment for the ex vivo quantification of the radioactivity 
using gamma counting and measurement of gold concentration using ICP-MS (Fig. 6A). It was found that the 
64Cu-AuNCs concentration quantified ex vivo in the FUS-treated halves and contralateral non-treated halves were 
well correlated (R2 = 0.62 for gamma counting and R2 = 0.53 for ICP-MS) with the spatial-averaged SCD within 
the corresponding brain regions using the segmented linear regression (Fig. 6B,C).
Discussion
This study demonstrated that PCI was capable of predicting the location and concentration of 64Cu-AuNCs delivered 
by FUS-BBBD, a technique that we named as cavitation dose painting. This PCI-based cavitation dose painting tech-
nique can be used in the future to guide FUS-BBBD treatment to achieve conformal delivery of therapeutic agents to 
the targeted brain region and avoid side effects in the non-targeted brain area, and to deliver higher prescribed drug 
concentrations to high-risk subvolumes while treating lower-risk subvolumes by delivering lower prescribed drug 
concentrations. This novel strategy can open new horizons in controlled and precise brain drug delivery.
The capability of PCI to measure the location of FUS-BBBD mediated drug delivery was evaluated by quanti-
fying the offsets between the pixel location of the SCDmax and the pixel location with the highest concentration of 
64Cu-AuNCs. The spatial resolution of PCI is determined by the diffraction pattern of the imaging array. The lateral 
resolution of PCI is at the scale of 10x of the axial resolution, which limits the accuracy of PCI in predicting the agent 
delivery location in the axial direction. Two previous studies evaluated the capability of PCI in estimating the location 
of the BBB disruption by comparing PCI with post-treatment contrast-enhanced MRI39,40. In one study, the mean 
offsets were 0.7 mm and 2.2 mm in the transverse and axial directions, respectively40. In the other study, it was reported 
that the offsets were 0.3 ± 1.5 mm and 0.5 ± 7.5 mm in the transverse and axial directions, respectively39. Although the 
offsets were close to those found in the current study (0.3 ± 0.4 mm in the transverse direction and 1.6 ± 1.1 mm in the 
axial direction), the two previous studies used contrast-enhanced MRI to infer the locations of the delivered agents. 
The physicochemical properties of MR contrast agents are different from the actual agents intended to be delivered 
by FUS-BBBD. Thus, the biodistribution of MR contrast agents may not accurately represent the distribution of the 
delivered agent. The present study directly imaged the 64Cu-AuNCs distribution by PET. PET imaging of radiolabeled 
nanoparticles provides a noninvasive, highly sensitive, and quantitative method for assessing the efficiency of nanopar-
ticle delivery and their spatial distribution. Therapeutic agents beside nanoparticles, e.g., chemotherapy drugs, peptides, 
and proteins, can be radiolabeled for directly evaluating the agent spatial distribution in the brain using PET44, instead 
of inferring its spatial distribution based on the leakage of MR contrast agents.
Figure 1. Illustration of the FUS system, as well as images acquisition and registration methods. PCI was 
acquired during FUS treatment, and PET/CT image was acquired 24 h after FUS treatment. The registration 
between PCI and PET was performed based on the shared anatomic feature of the skull (indicated by the 
asterisks) in both B-mode and CT images.
 4
Scientific RepoRts |          (2019) 9:2840  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-39090-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Our study showed for the first time that a linear relationship exists between SCD quantified using PCI (2D) 
and 64Cu-AuNC concentration quantified using PET at a pixel-by-pixel level. A previous study also found a sim-
ilar linear correlation between SCD quantified using PCD (1D) and the concentration of the delivered agents 
quantified using ex vivo fluorescence imaging. As mentioned earlier, our previous study demonstrated that the 
64Cu radioactivity was linearly correlated with the Au concentration (R2 = 0.94), indicating that the radioactivity 
of 64Cu can accurately measure the concentration of the AuNCs20. In the current study, the linear relationship 
identified using in vivo PET was verified with ex vivo quantification of the radioactivity using gamma counting 
(Fig. 6B) and ex vivo quantification of the gold concentration using ICP-MS (Fig. 6C). As the ex vivo study meas-
ured the average 64Cu-AuNC concentration in each half of the brain slices (Fig. 6A), the values of the measured 
concentrations (Fig. 6B,C) were lower than those obtained using PET (Fig. 5C).
All the mice were treated using the same FUS parameters; however, the cavitation dose maps and 64Cu-AuNCs 
delivery outcomes varied (Fig. 4). This variation among repeated FUS-BBBD treatment has been reported before. 
It can be caused by variation among repeated experiment in parameters that are hard to control, such as the size 
distribution of microbubbles reaching the targeted brain location45, circulating microbubble concentration in 
Figure 2. Representative SC and IC maps. (A) SC level maps obtained during FUS treatment at two different 
time points (1 s and 60 s). (B) SCD map acquired by integrating the SC level for reach pixel through the total 
FUS treatment time. (C) Representative SC level-time curve for the pixel identified by the cross in B. (D–F) 
Corresponding IC level maps, ICD map, and IC level-time curve.
Figure 3. Representative PET images of a mouse in the coronal, sagittal, and horizontal planes.
 5
Scientific RepoRts |          (2019) 9:2840  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-39090-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
blood46, blood vessel density within the treated region of the brain47, and heterogeneous acoustic property of 
skull48. This finding justified the need for treatment monitoring to characterize variation among experiments.
Our finding that PCI can quantitatively measure the location and concentration of 64Cu-AuNCs delivered by 
FUS-BBBD is significant because it suggests that PCI can be used to verify localized drug delivery to the targeted 
brain site without off-target effects in the brain, assess whether the concentration of the delivered agent reaches 
the desired therapeutic level, and characterize variations among repeated treatments. Real-time PCI needs to be 
developed in the future to quantify the cavitation dose during the FUS-BBBD treatment and provide feedback 
control of the FUS parameters during the treatment. This PCI-feedback-controlled FUS-BBBD technique will 
allow controlling drug delivery location and spatially tailoring the delivered drug concentration to match the 
needed drug delivery doses at different subvolumes of the diseased brain region. The cavitation dose painting 
technique is not limited to the delivery of nanoparticles. In future clinical translation, therapeutic agents (e.g., 
chemotherapeutic drugs, peptides, and proteins) can be radiolabeled and injected to the patient at a low dose 
(lower than the therapeutic level) after FUS-BBBD treatment. The relationship between SCD and the delivered 
drug concentration as quantified by PET can be identified to develop the cavitation dose painting technique, 
which can then be used to estimate and control the delivery of the actual drugs without radiolabeling.
This proof-of-concept study demonstrated the concept of cavitation dose painting. Future work is needed 
to address several limitations of this study. First, PCI imaged cavitation activity in one coronal plane while PET 
imaged the radioactivity of the delivered 64Cu-AuNCs in 3D. Future studies are needed to improve the spatial 
co-registration of PCI and PET by developing 3D PCI techniques. Second, the pixel size of the PET images was 
0.8×
0.8 mm2 and the pixel size of the PCI was 0.2 ×
 0.2 mm2. Downsampling of the PCI was performed in order to 
analyze the pixel-by-pixel correlation between PCI and PET. Future studies using larger animal models (e.g., pigs 
and non-human primates) will allow us to better characterize the pixel-wise correlation between these two imag-
ing modalities. Third, although almost the whole brain was included in our pixel-by-pixel analysis (Fig. 5C), we 
did not use the whole brain region as our region of interest because the axial resolution of PCI was low and includ-
ing regions outside the −
1 dB of the SCDmax in the axial direction decreased the correlation coefficient to R2 = 0.45. 
Future studies need to improve the axial resolution of PCI by developing advanced PCI imaging algorithms36.
Materials and Methods
FUS-BBBD treatment. 
All animal procedures were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal 
Care and Use Committee of Washington University in St. Louis, in accordance with the National Institutes of 
Health Guidelines for animal research. C57BL/6 female mice (6–8 weeks, 20–25 g body weight, n = 18 in total) 
were purchased from Charles River Laboratory (Wilmington, MA, USA). Following a procedure described in our 
Figure 4. PCI/B-mode images (left column), PET/CT images (middle column), and PCI and PET overlaid 
images (right column) for three representative cases shown in A, B, and C, respectively.
 6
Scientific RepoRts |          (2019) 9:2840  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-39090-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
previous publication20, the animals were prepared for FUS sonication by removing the fur on the mouse head and 
coupled to a water container using ultrasound gel.
The prepared mice were sonicated using a commercially available ultrasound image-guided FUS system 
(VIFU 2000, Alpinion, Bothell, WA, USA) that integrated a FUS system with a software programmable ultra-
sound imaging system. This system used a FUS transducer with a center frequency of 1.5 MHz, a focal depth of 
60 mm, an aperture of 60 mm, and a circular central opening of 38 mm. A linear array (L8–17, Alpinion, Seoul, 
Korea) with a bandwidth of 8–17 MHz and a center frequency of 12 MHz was inserted into the FUS transducer 
center opening. The ultrasound imaging plane was aligned with the FUS focal plane.
The ultrasound imaging system was used for both treatment planning and PCI. Treatment planning was per-
formed with the assistant of a metal grid using a previously published method to align the FUS transducer focus 
at the left brainstem20. Size-isolated microbubbles with a median diameter of 4–5 μ
m were prepared in-house 
according to a previously described protocol45 and diluted using sterile saline to a final concentration of about 
8 ×
 108 number of microbubbles per ml. The diluted microbubbles (volume = 25 μ
L) were administered by a 
bolus injection via the tail vein. Immediately after injection (~9 s), the mice were treated by the FUS system using 
the following parameters: center frequency = 1.5 MHz, peak negative pressure = 0.61 MPa, pulse length = 6.7 ms, 
pulse repetition frequency = 5 Hz, and sonication duration = 120 s. After treatment, mice were put back into their 
cages for them to recover from anesthesia.
The pressure amplitude and beam dimensions of the FUS transducer were calibrated using a needle hydro-
phone (HGL-0200, Onda, CA, USA) in a degassed water tank before the experiment. The pressures reported 
here were the measured hydrophone peak negative pressures corrected for 18% mouse skull attenuation3. The 
full width at half maximum (FWHM) dimensions of the axial and lateral beams were 6.04 mm and 0.62 mm, 
respectively.
PCI data acquisition and processing. 
The ultrasound imaging system was programmed to first operate 
in the pulse-echo mode to acquire a B-mode image for identifying the location of the mouse skull during PCI 
post-processing. The system was then operated at the passive mode for acquiring two sets of PCI data. The first 
PCI data acquisition was performed with FUS sonication on but before the injection of microbubbles to define 
the background cavitation noise level. The second PCI data acquisition was performed immediately after micro-
bubble injection and in synchronized with the FUS sonication. During the sonication of each FUS pulse, one PCI 
frame was acquired with an acquisition duration of 400 μ
s.
In reference to a PCI method used by Haworth et al.35, a frequency-domain PCI algorithm was written in 
Matlab (Mathworks inc., Natick, MA, USA) to proccess the acquired PCI data offline through the following pro-
cedure: (1) Apply Butterworth bandpass filtering around the imaging probe bandwidth of 8–17 MHz to reduce 
Figure 5. Quantitative analysis of the spatial and dose correlation between SCD maps and 64Cu-AuNC 
concentration maps. (B) The offsets between the pixel with maximum SCD and the pixel with the maximum 
64Cu-AuNC concentration (indicated by crosses in A). (C) A pixel-by-pixel correlation between SCD maps and 
64Cu-AuNC concentration maps within the 2D region in the brain (indicated by the rectangular box in A). Error 
bar in (B) represents standard deviation. Shaded blue region in (C) represents the 95% confidence level.
 7
Scientific RepoRts |          (2019) 9:2840  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-39090-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
contributions from FUS source signals; (2) Apply a phase shift to the signal acquired by each element in the 
frequency domain (equivalent to a time delay in temporal domain) based on the propagation times between the 
receiving element and the spatial location the pixel represents; (3) Sum the phase-shifted waveforms across all the 
elements for each pixel and its energy is computed by calculating the square of the summed waveforms; Parallel 
computation using Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) was integrated into the Matlab code to accelerate the cal-
culation speed; (4) Calculate the mean amplitude of the spectrum within selected harmonic bandwidths (0.3 MHz 
window around all harmonics and superharmonics) for each pixel to generate SC maps; the mean amplitudes of 
braodband signal falling within frequency bands between the harmonic and ultraharmonic bands were used to 
calculate the IC levels and generate the IC maps; (5) The SC and IC maps obtained from each FUS treatment were 
integrated over time to obtain the SCD and ICD maps, respectively.
In vivo MicroPET/CT image acquisition and processing. 
The mice were imaged by the Inveon PET/
CT system (Siemens, Knoxville, TN) at 24 h after intravenous injection of 64Cu-AuNCs at a concentration ~10 
MBq following the FUS-treatment. Details on the 64Cu-AuNCs manufacture and characterization were reported 
in our previous publications49. The 64Cu-AuNCs had a homogeneous size distribution with the hydrodynamic 
diameter = 5.60 ± 0.50 nm and zeta potential = −
0.40 ± 0.11 mV. In our previous study, we performed PET imag-
ing at 1 h, 4 h, and 24 h post treatment and found the 64Cu-AuNCs were almost cleared from the blood circulation 
at the 24 h time point20. Therefore, in the current study, we chose to perform the microPET/CT scans at the 24 h 
time point as it allowed us to more accurately quantify the 64Cu-AuNCs concentrations in the brain tissue com-
pared with earlier time points by eliminating the interference of the 64Cu-AuNCs in the blood.
The acquired PET images were corrected for attenuation, scatter, normalization, and camera dead time and 
co-registered with CT images. The PET images were reconstructed with the maximum a posteriori (MAP) algo-
rithm. Images were analyzed using Inveon Research Workplace (Siemens, Knoxville, TN) and the Matlab pro-
gram. Partial volume correction was performed following an established method to eliminate the spillover of 
signals from tissue outside the brain50. Decay correlation was applied to compensate for the decay of 64Cu over 
time. The pixel intensity of the PET image was quantified as percent injected dose per gram tissue (%ID/g).
Analysis of the correlation between PCI and PET. 
Since the ultrasound imaging probe was co-axially 
aligned with the FUS transducer, the focal point of the FUS transducer was located in the ultrasound imaging 
plane. To investigate the correlation between PCI and PET, we first identified the PET voxel location with the 
highest radioactivity inside the brain, which was considered to be the location of the FUS focus. Then the PET 
images acquired in the coronal plane passing through this voxel was selected and considered to be the corre-
sponding imaging plane for the B-mode/PCI. This selection of the corresponding PET imaging plane was verified 
in all the cases as the same anatomic features of the mouse skulls were observed in the B-mode images and cor-
responding CT images (Fig. 1). Then six controlling points were selected on the B-mode and corresponding CT 
images (Fig. 1). The CT images were translated and rotated to fit the same controlling points on B-mode images. 
Through this process, the transformation matrix was acquired and applied to PET images to register the PET 
images with PCI images.
For each mouse, the capability of SCD in predicting 64Cu-AuNC delivery location was characterized by quan-
tifying the offsets between the pixel location of the SCDmax and the location with the maximum 64Cu-AuNC 
concentration. The offsets of these two locations were decomposed to the lateral direction and axial direction. The 
capability of SCD in predicting 64Cu-AuNCs concentration was determined by evaluating the pixel-by-pixel corre-
lation between the SCD map and the concentration map. The pixel size of the PET scanner was 0.8 mm ×
 0.8 mm, 
 
Figure 6. (A) The ex vivo mouse brains were sliced coronally into 2-mm slices, and the slice containing the 
targeted brainstem was cut into two halves for quantifying the radioactivity in each half (illustrated by the 
rectangle boxes). The SCD was also averaged within each half of the brain for identifying the correlation 
between SCD and radioactivity. (B) The radioactivity of 64Cu-AuNCs quantified using gamma counting and 
(C) the gold concentration of 64Cu-AuNCs quantified using ICP-MS in the FUS-treated halves and contralateral 
non-treated halves were well correlated with the corresponding spatial-averaged SCD within the same brain 
regions using the segmented linear regression (R2 = 0.62 for gamma counting and R2 = 0.53 for ICP-MS).
 8
Scientific RepoRts |          (2019) 9:2840  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-39090-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
corresponding to the intrinsic sampling size of the scanner. The SCD maps had a pixel size of 0.2 mm ×
 0.2 mm. 
To perform a pixel by pixel comparison between these two maps, we first aligned the two images by aligning the 
pixel location of SCDmax and the pixel with the highest concentration. Then we decreased the pixel size of the SCD 
map by downsampling to match that of the PET. The correlations between these two maps within the 2D region 
(Fig. 5A) were evaluated by the segmented linear regression using GraphPad Prism (Version 6.04, La Jolla, CA, 
USA), and the goodness of fit was assessed by the correlation coefficient, R2.
Ex vivo quantification. 
To validate the correlation found between PCI and in vivo PET imaging, nine addi-
tional mice were used to perform ex vivo quantification of 64Cu-AuNCs radioactivity using gamma counting and 
Au concentration by ICP-MS20. These mice were treated using the same FUS treatment protocol as described in 
4.1. After FUS treatment, they were sacrificed by transcardial perfusion at 24 h after FUS treatment; their brains 
were collected and sliced coronally into 2-mm slices. Then the slices containing the brainstem was cut into two 
halves (left and right representing FUS-treated and non-treated samples, respectively) and the radioactivity was 
counted using a Beckman 8000 gamma counter (Beckman, Fullerton, CA). The count rate (counts per minute, 
CPM) for each tissue sample was corrected by automatic background subtraction. Decay correction was applied 
(compensated for the decay of 64Cu radioactivity over time). The corrected CPM from each tissue sample was 
normalized both to the mass of the tissue sample (in grams, g) and to the injected dose (ID). The concentration 
of 64Cu-AuNCs in each tissue sample was then calculated as %ID/g. The correlation between the radioactiv-
ity (%ID/g) of 64Cu-AuNCs in the FUS-treated and contralateral non-treated brainstem and the corresponding 
spatial-averaged SCD within the same regions was evaluated using the segmented linear regression.
After the gamma counting, these samples were then digested using a high-pressure microwave digestion sys-
tem (Milestone Inc. Monroe, CT) and the gold concentrations in the digested brain tissue samples were deter-
mined using ICP-MS (Elan DRC-e, PerkinElmer, Germany). Au standard was used to generate the standard 
curve. The Au concentration was expressed as the percentage of the Au in the brainstem over the total injected Au 
normalized by the tissue weight (%ID/g). The Au concentration (%ID/g) in FUS-treated and non-treated brain-
stem was correlated with the corresponding spatial-averaged SCD within the same regions using the segmented 
linear regression.
Conclusions
This paper has demonstrated the potential of PCI in predicting the spatial location and concentration of thera-
peutic agents delivered by FUS-BBBD. We call this new strategy PCI-based cavitation dose painting. The accuracy 
of this strategy was evaluated by correlating PCI with in vivo PET/CT imaging of radiolabeled nanoparticles 
delivered by FUS-BBBD. This study laid the foundation for the future development of PCI-based real-time feed-
back control of the FUS-BBBD treatment to spatially control and modulate the delivered drug concentrations.
Data Availability
The datasets generated in this study are available from the corresponding author upon request.
References
 1. Burgess, A. & Hynynen, K. Noninvasive and targeted drug delivery to the brain using focused ultrasound. ACS Chem. Neurosci. 4, 
519–526 (2013).
 2. Aryal, M., Arvanitis, C. D., Alexander, P. M. & McDannold, N. Ultrasound-mediated blood-brain barrier disruption for targeted 
drug delivery in the central nervous system. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 72, 94–109 (2014).
 3. Choi, J. J., Pernot, M., Small, S. A. & Konofagou, E. E. Noninvasive, transcranial and localized opening of the blood-brain barrier 
using focused ultrasound in mice. Ultrasound Med. Biol. 33, 95–104 (2007).
 4. Pardridge, W. M. The blood-brain barrier: Bottleneck in brain drug development. NeuroRx 2, 3–14 (2005).
 5. Aryal, M., Vykhodtseva, N., Zhang, Y. Z., Park, J. & McDannold, N. Multiple treatments with liposomal doxorubicin and ultrasound-
induced disruption of blood-tumor and blood-brain barriers improve outcomes in a rat glioma model. J. Control. Release 169, 
103–111 (2013).
 6. Burgess, A. et al. Alzheimer disease in a mouse model: MR imaging–guided focused ultrasound targeted to the hippocampus opens 
the blood-brain barrier and improves pathologic abnormalities and behavior. Radiology 273, 736–745 (2014).
 7. McDannold, N., Zhang, Y. & Vykhodtseva, N. The effects of oxygen on ultrasound-induced blood–brain barrier disruption in mice. 
Ultrasound Med. Biol. 43, 469–475 (2017).
 8. Mead, B. P. et al. Targeted gene transfer to the brain via the delivery of brain-penetrating DNA nanoparticles with focused 
ultrasound. J. Control. Release 223, 109–117 (2016).
 9. Wang, S., Olumolade, O. O., Sun, T., Samiotaki, G. & Konofagou, E. E. Noninvasive, neuron-specific gene therapy can be facilitated 
by focused ultrasound and recombinant adeno-associated virus. Gene Ther. 22, 104–110 (2014).
 
10. Hynynen, K., McDannold, N., Vykhodtseva, N. & Jolesz, F. A. Noninvasive MR imaging–guided focal opening of the blood-brain 
barrier in rabbits. Radiology 220, 640–646 (2001).
 
11. Marquet, F., Tung, Y. S., Teichert, T., Ferrera, V. P. & Konofagou, E. E. Noninvasive, transient and selective blood-brain barrier 
opening in non-human primates in vivo. PLoS One 6, e22598 (2011).
 
12. McDannold, N., Arvanitis, C. D., Vykhodtseva, N. & Livingstone, M. S. Temporary disruption of the blood-brain barrier by use of 
ultrasound and microbubbles: safety and efficacy evaluation in rhesus macaques. Cancer Res. 72, 3652–63 (2012).
 
13. Liu, H. L. et al. Blood-brain barrier disruption with focused ultrasound enhances delivery of chemotherapeutic drugs for 
glioblastoma treatment. Radiology 255, 415–425 (2010).
 
14. Sheikov, N., McDannold, N., Vykhodtseva, N., Jolesz, F. & Hynynen, K. Cellular mechanisms of the blood-brain barrier opening 
induced by ultrasound in presence of microbubbles. Ultrasound Med. Biol. 30, 979–989 (2004).
 
15. Cho, E. E., Drazic, J., Ganguly, M., Stefanovic, B. & Hynynen, K. Two-photon fluorescence microscopy study of cerebrovascular 
dynamics in ultrasound-induced blood-brain barrier opening. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 31, 1852–1862 (2011).
 
16. Tung, Y. S., Vlachos, F., Feshitan, J. A., Borden, M. A. & Konofagou, E. E. The mechanism of interaction between focused ultrasound 
and microbubbles in blood-brain barrier opening in mice. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 130, 3059–3067 (2011).
 
17. Lipsman, N. et al. Blood–brain barrier opening in Alzheimer’s disease using MR-guided focused ultrasound. Nat. Commun. 9, 2336 
(2018).
 9
Scientific RepoRts |          (2019) 9:2840  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-39090-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
 
18. Lee, H. et al. 64Cu-MM-302 positron emission tomography quantifies variability of enhanced permeability and retention of 
nanoparticles in relation to treatment response in patients with metastatic breast cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 23, 4190–4202 (2017).
 
19. Sultan, D. et al. Focused ultrasound enabled trans-blood brain barrier delivery of gold nanoclusters: Effect of surface charges and 
quantification using positron emission tomography. Small 14, 1703115 (2018).
 
20. Ye, D. et al. Focused ultrasound-enabled delivery of radiolabeled nanoclusters to the pons. J. Control. Release 283, 143–150 (2018).
 
21. Kim, H. et al. PET/CT imaging evidence of FUS-mediated (18) F-FDG uptake changes in rat brain. Med. Phys. 40, 33501 (2013).
 
22. Lin, K. J. et al. Quantitative micro-SPECT/CT for detecting focused ultrasound-induced blood-brain barrier opening in the rat. 
Nucl. Med. Biol. 36, 853–61 (2009).
 
23. Yang, F. Y. et al. Pharmacokinetic analysis of 111In-labeled liposomal doxorubicin in murine glioblastoma after blood-brain barrier 
disruption by focused ultrasound. PLoS One 7, 1–7 (2012).
 
24. Hilgenfeldt, S., Lohse, D. & Zomack, M. Response of bubbles to diagnostic ultrasound: A unifying theoretical approach. Eur. Phys. 
J. B 4, 247–255 (1998).
 
25. Chen, H. & Konofagou, E. E. The size of blood-brain barrier opening induced by focused ultrasound is dictated by the acoustic 
pressure. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 34, 1197–204 (2014).
 
26. O’Reilly, M. A. & Hynynen, K. Feedback-controlled focused ultrasound disruption by using an acoustic emissions-based controller. 
Radiology 263, 96–106 (2012).
 
27. Sun, T. et al. Closed-loop control of targeted ultrasound drug delivery across the blood–brain/tumor barriers in a rat glioma model. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 114, E10281–E10290 (2017).
 
28. Sun, T. et al. Acoustic cavitation-based monitoring of the reversibility and permeability of ultrasound-induced blood-brain barrier 
opening. Phys. Med. Biol. 60, 9079–94 (2015).
 
29. Arvanitis, C. D., Livingstone, M. S., Vykhodtseva, N. & McDannold, N. Controlled ultrasound-induced blood-brain barrier 
disruption using passive acoustic emissions monitoring. PLoS One 7, e45783 (2012).
 
30. McDannold, N., Vykhodtseva, N. & Hynynen, K. Targeted disruption of the blood–brain barrier with focused ultrasound: 
Association with cavitation activity. Phys. Med. Biol. 51, 793–807 (2006).
 
31. Tsai, C. H., Zhang, J. W., Liao, Y. Y. & Liu, H. L. Real-time monitoring of focused ultrasound blood-brain barrier opening via 
subharmonic acoustic emission detection: implementation of confocal dual-frequency piezoelectric transducers. Phys. Med. Biol. 
61, 2926–2946 (2016).
 
32. O’Reilly, M. A. & Hynynen, K. Blood-brain barrier: Real-time feedback-controlled focused ultrasound disruption by using an 
acoustic emissions-based controller. Radiology 263, 96–106 (2012).
 
33. Gyöngy, M. & Coussios, C. C. Passive cavitation mapping for localization and tracking of bubble dynamics. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 128, 
EL175–EL180 (2010).
 
34. Coviello, C. et al. Passive acoustic mapping utilizing optimal beamforming in ultrasound therapy monitoring. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 
137, 2573 (2015).
 
35. Haworth, K. J., Bader, K. B., Rich, K. T., Holland, C. K. & Mast, T. D. Quantitative frequency-domain passive cavitation imaging. 
IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control 64, 177–191 (2016).
 
36. Lyka, E., Coviello, C. M., Paverd, C., Gray, M. D. & Coussios, C. C. Passive acoustic mapping using data-adaptive beamforming 
based on higher-order statistics. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging PP, 1–1 (2018).
 
37. Arvanitis, C. D., Crake, C., McDannold, N. & Clement, G. T. Passive acoustic mapping with the angular spectrum method. IEEE 
Trans. Med. Imaging 36, 983–993 (2016).
 
38. Acconcia, C. N., Jones, R. M., Goertz, D. E., O’Reilly, M. A. & Hynynen, K. Megahertz rate, volumetric imaging of bubble clouds in 
sonothrombolysis using a sparse hemispherical receiver array. Phys. Med. Biol. 62, L31–L40 (2017).
 
39. Wu, S. Y. et al. Efficient blood-brain barrier opening in primates with neuronavigation-guided ultrasound and real-time acoustic 
mapping. Sci. Rep. 8, 7978 (2018).
 
40. Arvanitis, C. D., Livingstone, M. S. & McDannold, N. Combined ultrasound and MR imaging to guide focused ultrasound therapies 
in the brain. Phys. Med. Biol. 58, 4749–4761 (2013).
 
41. Zhao, Y. et al. Copper-64-alloyed gold nanoparticles for cancer imaging: Improved radiolabel stability and diagnostic accuracy. 
Angew. Chemie - Int. Ed. 53, 156–159 (2014).
 
42. Zhao, Y. et al. Gold nanoclusters doped with 64Cu for CXCR4 positron emission tomographyimaging of breast cancer and metastasis. 
ACS Nano 10, 5959–5970 (2016).
 
43. Bentzen, S. M. & Gregoire, V. Molecular Imaging-Based Dose Painting: A Novel Paradigm for Radiation Therapy Prescription. 
Semin. Radiat. Oncol. 21, 101–110 (2011).
 
44. Gustafsson, S. et al. Combined PET and microdialysis for in vivo estimation of drug blood-brain barrier transport and brain 
unbound concentrations. Neuroimage 155, 177–186 (2017).
 
45. Choi, J. J. et al. Microbubble-size dependence of focused ultrasound-induced blood-brain barrier opening in mice in vivo. IEEE 
Trans. Biomed. Eng. 57, 145–154 (2010).
 
46. Morel, D. R. et al. Human pharmacokinetics and safety evaluation of SonoVueTM, a new contrast agent for ultrasound imaging. 
Invest. Radiol. 35, 80 (2000).
 
47. Wu, S. Y. et al. Characterizing focused-ultrasound mediated drug delivery to the heterogeneous primate brain in vivo with acoustic 
monitoring. Sci. Rep. 6, 37094 (2016).
 
48. Aldiabat, H., O’Brien, P. D., Liu, D. & Ebbini, E. S. Wideband transskull refocusing of ultrasound beams using dual-mode ultrasound 
arrays: Ex vivo results. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 143, 1731 (2018).
 
49. Ye, D. et al. Focused ultrasound combined with microbubble-mediated intranasal delivery of gold nanoclusters to the brain. J. 
Control. Release 286, 145–153 (2018).
 
50. Izquierdo-Garcia, D. et al. Comparison of methods for magnetic resonance-guided [18-F]fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission 
yomography in human carotid arteries: reproducibility, partial volume correction, and correlation between methods. Stroke 40, 
86–93 (2009).
Acknowledgements
This work was in part supported by the Children’s Discovery Institute of Washington University and St. Louis 
Children’s Hospital (grant number MC-II-2017-661), American Cancer Society (grant number IRG-15-170-58), 
and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant R01MH116981 and R01EB027223. The authors wish to thank 
Dr. Kevin Haworth (PhD, University of Cincinnati) for insightful discussions of passive cavitation imaging.
Author Contributions
H.C. and Y.Y. developed the idea. Y.Y., X.Z., D.Y., Y.L. and H.C. designed and performed the experiment. R.L. and 
G.W. assisted with the data analysis and ideal development. Y.Y. and H.C. wrote the manuscript and analyzed the 
data. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
 10
Scientific RepoRts |          (2019) 9:2840  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-39090-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Additional Information
Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
 
© The Author(s) 2019
