 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 8 2 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 7   July 2017
Introduction
Liver cirrhosis is the 12th leading cause of mortality worldwide (1). 
Approximately 50% of cirrhosis-related deaths are due to alcohol 
abuse (2). Chronic alcoholism can lead to intestinal bacterial over-
growth and dysbiosis, a leaky gut barrier, and increased systemic 
levels of bacterial products (3–7). Although the intestinal microbi-
ome contains bacteria, fungi, and viruses, research in the field of 
alcohol-associated disease has almost exclusively focused on the 
interaction between the host and bacteria. Changes in the compo-
sition of the commensal intestinal fungi, also called the mycobi-
ome, and their interaction with human tissues have been associat-
ed with other diseases (8).
The predominant commensal fungal species in the human 
intestine are Candida species, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and 
Malassezia species (9). Like commensal bacteria in the intestine, 
fungi interact with their host. Although the host immune system 
develops tolerance to colonization with commensal fungi, it must 
contain the spread, and, in particular, invasion, of fungi (10). The 
human intestine can serve as a source of systemic fungal products 
or fungal infection when the gut barrier is disrupted (11). Patients 
with cirrhosis frequently either are exposed to fungal products (12) 
or develop fungal infections, with high mortality (13–15). Sponta-
neous fungal peritonitis is mainly caused by Candida species — in 
particular by Candida albicans in patients with cirrhosis (16).
Chronic liver disease with cirrhosis is the 12th leading cause of death in the United States, and alcoholic liver disease accounts 
for approximately half of all cirrhosis deaths. Chronic alcohol consumption is associated with intestinal bacterial dysbiosis, 
yet we understand little about the contribution of intestinal fungi, or mycobiota, to alcoholic liver disease. Here we have 
demonstrated that chronic alcohol administration increases mycobiota populations and translocation of fungal β-glucan into 
systemic circulation in mice. Treating mice with antifungal agents reduced intestinal fungal overgrowth, decreased β-glucan 
translocation, and ameliorated ethanol-induced liver disease. Using bone marrow chimeric mice, we found that β-glucan 
induces liver inflammation via the C-type lectin–like receptor CLEC7A on Kupffer cells and possibly other bone marrow–
derived cells. Subsequent increases in IL-1β expression and secretion contributed to hepatocyte damage and promoted 
development of ethanol-induced liver disease. We observed that alcohol-dependent patients displayed reduced intestinal 
fungal diversity and Candida overgrowth. Compared with healthy individuals and patients with non–alcohol-related cirrhosis, 
alcoholic cirrhosis patients had increased systemic exposure and immune response to mycobiota. Moreover, the levels of 
extraintestinal exposure and immune response correlated with mortality. Thus, chronic alcohol consumption is associated 
with an altered mycobiota and translocation of fungal products. Manipulating the intestinal mycobiome might be an effective 
strategy for attenuating alcohol-related liver disease.
Intestinal fungi contribute to development  
of alcoholic liver disease
An-Ming Yang,1,2 Tatsuo Inamine,1,3 Katrin Hochrath,1 Peng Chen,1 Lirui Wang,1,4 Cristina Llorente,1,4 Sena Bluemel,1  
Phillipp Hartmann,1 Jun Xu,5 Yukinori Koyama,5 Tatiana Kisseleva,5 Manolito G. Torralba,6 Kelvin Moncera,6 Karen Beeri,6  
Chien-Sheng Chen,7 Kim Freese,8 Claus Hellerbrand,8 Serene M.L. Lee,9 Hal M. Hoffman,1,10 Wajahat Z. Mehal,11,12  
Guadalupe Garcia-Tsao,11,12 Ece A. Mutlu,13 Ali Keshavarzian,13 Gordon D. Brown,14 Samuel B. Ho,1,4 Ramon Bataller,15  
Peter Stärkel,16 Derrick E. Fouts,17 and Bernd Schnabl1,4
1Department of Medicine, UCSD, La Jolla, California, USA. 2Department of Internal Medicine, En Chu Kong Hospital, New Taipei City, Taiwan. 3Department of Pharmacotherapeutics, Nagasaki University Graduate 
School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan. 4Department of Medicine, VA San Diego Healthcare System, San Diego, California, USA. 5Department of Surgery, UCSD, La Jolla, California, USA. 6J. Craig Venter 
Institute, La Jolla, California, USA. 7Institute of Systems Biology and Bioinformatics, National Central University, Taoyuan City, Taiwan. 8Institute of Biochemistry (Emil-Fischer Zentrum), Friedrich-Alexander 
University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany. 9Department of General, Visceral and Transplantation Surgery, Hospital of the LMU Munich, Munich, Germany. 10Department of Pediatrics, UCSD, La Jolla, 
California, USA. 11Section of Digestive Diseases, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA. 12Section of Digestive Diseases, VA Connecticut Healthcare System, West Haven, Connecticut, 
USA. 13Department of Medicine, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois, USA. 14Aberdeen Fungal Group, Medical Research Council Centre for Medical Mycology, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, United 
Kingdom. 15Liver Center, Departments of Medicine and Nutrition, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA. 16Saint Luc University Hospital, Université Catholique de Louvain, 
Brussels, Belgium. 17J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
Authorship note: A.M. Yang and T. Inamine contributed equally to this work.
Note regarding evaluation of this manuscript: Manuscripts authored by scientists 
associated with Duke University, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Duke-NUS, and the Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute are handled not by 
members of the editorial board but rather by the science editors, who consult with 
selected external editors and reviewers.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: September 9, 2016; Accepted: March 30, 2017.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2017;127(7):2829–2841. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI90562.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 8 3 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 7   July 2017
al tight junctions, and increased paracellular permeability (20). The 
mean plasma level of 1,3-β-d-glucan was slightly higher in WT mice 
fed an ethanol diet than in WT mice fed an isocaloric control diet 
for 8 weeks (Figure 1B). A shorter ethanol feeding period of 5 weeks 
did not increase plasma 1,3-β-d-glucan (Supplemental Figure 1C). 
These results indicate that chronic ethanol feeding promotes expan-
sion of intestinal fungi and translocation of fungal cell products to 
the systemic circulation. Future studies are required to assess not 
only the quantity of intestinal fungi, but also compositional changes 
at different time points after ethanol feeding.
Reducing an alcohol-associated increase in intestinal fungi atten-
uates features of ethanol-induced liver disease in mice. To determine 
whether reducing intestinal fungi protects against ethanol-in-
duced liver disease, the commensal mycobiota was decreased 
during ethanol feeding with the nonabsorbable antifungal agent 
amphotericin B. Intestinal fungal overgrowth was observed in 
mice fed ethanol, but not in mice given amphotericin B with the 
ethanol diet (Figure 2A). Reducing the alcohol-associated increase 
in intestinal fungi significantly lowered the mean plasma level of 
1,3-β-d-glucan produced with chronic ethanol feeding (Figure 2B).
Ratios of liver to body weight were similar in mice given 
vehicle versus amphotericin B and fed ethanol for 8 weeks (Sup-
plemental Figure 2A). Mice receiving amphotericin B devel-
oped less severe ethanol-associated liver disease; these mice 
had lower levels of liver injury (based on plasma level of alanine 
aminotransferase) and hepatic steatosis than mice receiving 
vehicle (Figure 2, C and D). This was confirmed by measure-
ment of hepatic triglycerides and staining for hepatic steatosis 
(Figure 2, E and F). Amphotericin B also prevented a hepatic 
increase of the macrophage marker F4/80, indicating a lower 
number of inflammatory Kupffer cells (Figure 2, G and H).
To determine whether treatment with amphotericin B affects 
intestinal absorption and hepatic metabolism of ethanol, we 
measured plasma levels of ethanol and analyzed hepatic ethanol 
metabolism. Plasma levels of ethanol were comparable between 
mice receiving vehicle versus amphotericin B following chronic 
ethanol administration (Supplemental Figure 2B). Alcohol dehy-
drogenase (ADH) and cytochrome P450 enzyme 2E1 (CYP2E1) 
are main hepatic enzymes that metabolize ethanol and convert it 
to acetaldehyde (5). Hepatic ADH activity did not differ signifi-
cantly between groups given vehicle versus amphotericin B while 
fed ethanol (Supplemental Figure 2C). Hepatic levels of CYP2E1 
protein increased to a similar extent following ethanol admin-
istration to mice given vehicle versus amphotericin B (Supple-
mental Figure 2D). These findings suggest that amphotericin B 
prevents liver disease without affecting intestinal absorption or 
hepatic metabolism of ethanol.
C-type lectin domain family 7 member A (CLEC7A; also 
known as DECTIN1) is a pattern recognition receptor. CLEC7A 
recognizes a variety of 1,3-β-glucans (10) — cell wall polysac-
charides found in and released from most fungi, including spe-
cies of Candida, Aspergillus, and Pneumocystis (17). Upon ligand 
binding, CLEC7A activates caspase recruitment domain family 
member 9 (CARD9) and NF-κB, leading to transcription of sev-
eral cytokines, including pro–interleukin-1β (pro–IL-1β) (18). 
The CLEC7A signaling pathway results in cleavage of pro–IL-1β 
and production of mature IL-1β by activating the NLR fami-
ly pyrin domain–containing 3 (NLRP3) and caspase-1 inflam-
masome pathways (19).
We investigated the role of the mycobiota and CLEC7A signal-
ing in development of alcoholic liver disease.
Results
Chronic ethanol administration results in intestinal fungal overgrowth 
and increased plasma levels of β-glucan in mice. Intestinal bacterial 
overgrowth is common in alcohol-dependent patients (3). To deter-
mine whether chronic ethanol administration increases commen-
sal fungi in mice, fecal numbers of fungi were measured by quan-
titative PCR (qPCR). Significantly increased fungal populations 
were observed after 8 weeks of ethanol administration in C57BL/6 
WT mice (Figure 1A); a nonsignificant trend toward increased fun-
gal populations was already seen after 5 weeks of ethanol feeding 
(Supplemental Figure 1A; supplemental material available online 
with this article; https:/
/doi.org/10.1172/JCI90562DS1). Fungal 
dysbiosis was determined in mice fed an ethanol-containing diet 
for 8 weeks using internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequencing. 
Ethanol consumption resulted in an increase in both fungal spe-
cies richness (average of 189.2 ± 94.7 operational taxonomic units 
[OTUs] for ethanol vs. 74.7 ± 17.5 OTUs for control diet) and diver-
sity (average Simpson index of 0.256 ± 0.097 for ethanol vs. 0.664 
± 0.224 for control diet). Compositional changes in the intestinal 
mycobiome were characterized by significantly increased propor-
tions of Humicola species (P = 0.0017), Fusarium (P = 0.0190), 
and Aspergillus (P = 0.0258), while proportions of Candida spe-
cies decreased (P = 0.0007) with ethanol consumption (Supple-
mental Figure 1B). Candida species constitute between 40% and 
nearly 90% of all fungal reads, with the majority being Candida 
parapsilosis and Candida albicans (Supplemental Figure 1B). There 
was a significant decrease in relative abundance of C. parapsilosis 
 
(P = 0.0007) with ethanol consumption. The apparent increase in 
 
C. albicans relative abundance was not significantly different.
Development of alcoholic liver disease involves increased 
translocation of microbial products from the intestinal lumen to the 
systemic circulation, facilitated by dysfunctional intestinal epitheli-
Figure 1. Chronic alcohol feeding increases the number of fungi in the 
intestine and translocation of fungal products. C57BL/6 mice were fed 
an oral control diet (n = 6–8) or ethanol diet (n = 8–14). (A) Total fungi in 
feces were assessed by qPCR. (B) Mean plasma levels of 1,3-β-d-glucan. 
Unpaired Student’s t test. *P < 0.05.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 8 3 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 7   July 2017
To determine whether a reduction of fungi 
in the intestine alters the bacterial composition, 
the fecal microbiota was analyzed by 16S rRNA 
gene sequencing. Chronic ethanol administra-
tion induced bacterial dysbiosis in mice given 
vehicle (4, 21, 22) (Supplemental Figure 2E). 
Antifungal treatment did not produce major 
changes in the bacterial composition in isoca-
loric or ethanol diet–fed mice by comparison of 
bacterial 16S rRNA data sets (Supplemental Fig-
ure 2E). In addition, total numbers of bacteria 
did not differ significantly between mice given 
vehicle versus amphotericin B while fed ethanol 
(Supplemental Figure 2F).
Chronic ethanol administration is associ-
ated with a breach in the gut barrier and lower 
expression of intestinal tight junction proteins 
(23). We confirmed that occludin expression 
decreased in the jejunum after chronic ethanol 
feeding of mice given vehicle, similar to the 
reduced expression in mice receiving ampho-
tericin B (Supplemental Figure 2G). Consistent 
with occludin expression data, paracellular per-
meability, based on systemic levels of translo-
cated lipopolysaccharide (LPS), did not differ 
between vehicle- and amphotericin B–treated 
mice after ethanol feeding (Supplemental Fig-
ure 2H). These findings indicate that a reduc-
tion of ethanol-associated fungal overgrowth 
does not alter bacterial dysbiosis, increased 
intestinal permeability, and translocation of 
LPS. Interestingly, hepatic IL-1R–associated 
kinase 3 (Irak3, also called IRAK-M) expression 
was significantly higher in control and etha-
nol-fed mice after amphotericin B treatment 
(Supplemental Figure 2I). IRAK3 is a negative 
regulator of Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling 
through inhibition of MYD88 signaling (24), 
which might decrease LPS/TLR4 signaling 
during chronic ethanol feeding.
Loss of CLEC7A from bone marrow–derived 
cells decreases ethanol-induced steatohepatitis. CLE-
C7A is primarily expressed on myeloid cells (18, 
25). To determine the expression pattern of CLE-
C7A in liver, parenchymal and nonparenchymal 
hepatic cells were isolated from WT mice. Cle-
c7a mRNA was highly expressed on Kupffer cells 
but not on hepatocytes or hepatic stellate cells 
in mice (Figure 3A). Using immunofluorescence 
analyses, we found that in livers of mice, CLEC7A 
colocalized with F4/80 (Supplemental Figure 
3A). These results were confirmed in human liver 
cells and tissue sections (Supplemental Figure 3, 
B and C). CLEC7A gene expression was not sig-
nificantly different in liver and duodenal biopsies 
of alcohol-dependent patients as compared with 
controls (Supplemental Figure 3, D and E). To 
Figure 2. Decreased ethanol-induced liver disease in mice treated with antifungals. C57BL/6 
mice were fed an oral control diet (n = 4–14) or ethanol diet (n = 10–23), and also given vehicle 
or amphotericin B (Ampho B). (A) Total fungi in feces were assessed by qPCR. (B) Plasma levels 
of 1,3-β-d-glucan. (C) Plasma levels of alanine aminotransferase (ALT). (D) Representative liver 
sections after H&E staining. (E) Hepatic triglyceride content. (F) Representative Oil Red O–
stained liver sections. (G and H) Representative liver sections of F4/80 immunofluorescence 
staining; positively stained area was quantified by image analysis software (n = 2–5). Scale 
bars: 50 μm. Unpaired Student’s t test. *P < 0.05.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 8 3 2
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 7   July 2017
diation, and bone marrow transplantation; WT 
or CLEC7A-deficient bone marrow was trans-
planted into WT recipient mice. This protocol 
achieves full reconstitution of Kupffer cells (26). 
To confirm successful bone marrow transplan-
tation, we measured whole-liver expression of 
Clec7a mRNA; we detected low levels of Clec7a 
mRNA in livers of WT mice that received Cle-
c7a–/– bone marrow (Figure 3B). Chimeric mice 
with bone marrow–derived cells that lacked Cle-
c7a expression had slightly lower ratios of liver 
to body weight (Supplemental Figure 4A) and 
developed less severe ethanol-induced liver 
injury (Figure 3, C and D) and steatosis (Figure 3, 
E and F) than chimeric mice with bone marrow–
derived cells that expressed CLEC7A.
Chimeric mice lacking CLEC7A on bone 
marrow–derived cells also had fewer F4/80-pos-
itive cells in the liver following ethanol feeding 
than mice with WT bone marrow (Figure 3, G and 
H). Plasma levels of ethanol and hepatic ethanol 
metabolism did not differ significantly with etha-
nol feeding in chimeric mice (Supplemental Fig-
ure 4, B–D). Following ethanol administration, 
paracellular intestinal permeability (as quanti-
fied by plasma level of LPS and 1,3-β-d-glucan) 
did not differ between mice with WT versus 
Clec7a–/– bone marrow (Supplemental Figure 4, 
E and F). These findings indicate that CLEC7A 
expression on Kupffer cells and possibly other 
bone marrow–derived cells contributes to liver 
disease following chronic ethanol administration 
without altering ethanol metabolism or affecting 
ethanol-induced gut barrier dysfunction.
In mice fed ethanol, fungal products induce secretion of IL-1β 
from Kupffer cells via CLEC7A signaling. CLEC7A signaling leads 
to upregulation of the inflammatory cytokine IL-1β (19). Develop-
ment of alcoholic liver disease requires IL-1β (27). Blocking IL-1β 
prevents alcoholic steatohepatitis in mice (27). We confirmed 
investigate whether innate immune signaling through CLEC7A on 
bone marrow–derived cells and Kupffer cells mediates the effect 
of translocated fungal products following chronic ethanol adminis-
tration, we generated CLEC7A bone marrow chimeric mice using 
a combination of clodronate-mediated Kupffer cell depletion, irra-
Figure 3. Mice lacking CLEC7A in bone marrow–
derived cells are protected from ethanol-induced 
liver disease. (A) Expression of Clec7a in primary 
mouse hepatocytes (Hep), Kupffer cells (KC), and 
quiescent and activated hepatic stellate cells 
(QuHSC and ActHSC) was measured by qPCR (n = 
2–3 independent experiments). (B–H) C57BL/6 mice 
underwent transplantation of WT or Clec7a–/– bone 
marrow (Clec7aΔBM) and were fed an oral control 
diet (n = 5) or ethanol diet (n = 8–10; 3 technical 
replicates). (B) Hepatic Clec7a mRNA expression. 
(C) Plasma levels of ALT. (D) Representative liver 
sections after H&E staining. (E) Hepatic triglyceride 
content. (F) Representative Oil Red O–stained liver 
sections. (G and H) Representative liver sections 
of F4/80 immunofluorescence staining; positive-
ly stained area was quantified by image analysis 
software (n = 5–7). Scale bars: 50 μm. Unpaired 
Student’s t test. *P < 0.05.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 8 3 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 7   July 2017
nificantly differ between mice lacking CLEC7A on 
bone marrow–derived cells following ethanol feeding 
and mice with WT bone marrow (data not shown). To 
demonstrate that soluble β-glucan can activate CLE-
C7A in vivo, carboxymethyl-β-1,3-d-glucan (CM-cur-
dlan) was injected into WT and Clec7a-deficient mice. 
CM-curdlan significantly induced hepatic Il1b in WT 
but not in Clec7a–/– mice (Supplemental Figure 4G). 
Plasma IL-1β was undetectable in vehicle-treated WT 
mice and in WT mice 2, 8, and 24 hours after CM-cur-
dlan injection (data not shown). These findings suggest 
that alcohol-induced translocation of fungal products, 
such as β-glucans, induces liver rather than system-
ic inflammation because these molecules bind to and 
activate CLEC7A on Kupffer cells. The subsequent 
increase in expression and secretion of IL-1β promotes 
ethanol-induced liver disease.
1,3-β-Glucan–induced secretion of IL-1β from Kupffer 
cells contributes to hepatocyte damage. To further define 
a mechanism by which β-glucan induces an inflam-
matory response that is mediated by Kupffer cells, 
we isolated Kupffer cells from WT and Clec7a–/– mice 
and stimulated them with curdlan, a linear form of 
1,3-β-d-glucan. Curdlan induced Il1b mRNA expres-
sion and IL-1β secretion in WT Kupffer cells, and at 
much lower levels in Clec7a–/– Kupffer cells (Figure 5, 
A and B). Curdlan-stimulated Kupffer cells that lacked 
CLEC7A still expressed higher levels of Il1b mRNA and IL-1β 
protein than unstimulated Clec7a–/– Kupffer cells. This could be 
because β-glucan induces caspase-1 activation and IL-1β pro-
duction through other receptors, such as complement receptor 
3 (CR3) (29). Curdlan-induced expression of chemokine (C-X-C 
motif) ligand 1 (Cxcl1), Cxcl2, and tumor necrosis factor (Tnf) was 
independent of CLEC7A (Supplemental Figure 5A).
Together, our results suggest that curdlan activates the tran-
scription of Il1b and processing of pro–IL-1β into mature IL-1β in 
cultured Kupffer cells. The CLEC7A signaling pathway results in 
cleavage of pro–IL-1β and production of mature IL-1β by activating 
canonical NLRP3 and caspase-1 inflammasome pathways (19). We 
confirmed that curdlan leads to increased levels of cellular NLRP3 
and cleaved caspase-1 in supernatant of Kupffer cells (see immu-
noblot, Figure 5C). Caspase-1–deficient Kupffer cells exposed to 
curdlan secrete lower levels of IL-1β than WT Kupffer cells (Figure 
5D). Consistent with these findings, cleaved caspase-1 was lower 
that levels of Il1b mRNA and IL-1β protein significantly increased 
after chronic administration of ethanol to WT mice (Figure 4, A 
and B). Amphotericin B prevented increases in hepatic Il1b mRNA 
and IL-1β protein following ethanol feeding (Figure 4, A and B). 
Inflammation, mediated by Kupffer cells, is required for etha-
nol-induced liver disease (28). It is therefore possible that CLE-
C7A-mediated signals in Kupffer cells are required for induction 
of IL-1β and liver inflammation.
Using immunofluorescence analysis we found that in livers 
of ethanol-fed mice, F4/80 colocalized with IL-1β (Figure 4C), 
indicating that Kupffer cells are the main liver cell type to express 
and secrete IL-1β during ethanol-induced liver disease. This colo-
calization disappeared from livers of mice given amphotericin B. 
Consistent with our data from mice given amphotericin B, chime-
ric mice lacking Clec7a on Kupffer cells expressed lower levels of 
Il1b mRNA and IL-1β protein (Figure 4, D and E), due to reduced 
expression by Kupffer cells (Figure 4F). Plasma IL-1β did not sig-
Figure 4. Fungal products induce IL-1β in Kupffer cells. (A–C) 
C57BL/6 mice were fed an oral control diet (n = 5–11) or ethanol 
diet (n = 13–15) and given vehicle or amphotericin B (Ampho B). 
(A) Hepatic expression of Il1b mRNA. (B) Hepatic levels of IL
-1β 
protein. (C) Immunofluorescence analysis of F4/80 (red) and 
IL
-1β (green) (representative liver sections); nuclei are blue. (D–F) 
C57BL/6 mice underwent transplantation of WT or Clec7a–/– 
bone marrow (Clec7aΔBM) and were fed an oral control diet (n = 5) 
or ethanol diet (n = 8–10). (D) Hepatic expression of Il1b mRNA. 
(E) Hepatic levels of IL-1β protein. (F) Immunofluorescence 
analysis of F4/80 (red) and IL-1β (green) (representative liver 
sections); nuclei are blue. Arrowheads indicate double-positive 
cells. Scale bars: 50 μm. Unpaired Student’s t test. *P < 0.05.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 8 3 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 7   July 2017
in the liver of chimeric mice that received Clec7a–/– bone marrow 
versus mice with WT bone marrow following ethanol administra-
tion (Supplemental Figure 5B).
We transferred conditioned medium from Kupffer cells 
stimulated with curdlan to cultured primary mouse hepato-
cytes. The supernatant from Kupffer cells stimulated with cur-
dlan significantly increased death of the primary hepatocytes. 
This cytotoxic effect was reduced with a neutralizing antibody 
against IL-1β (Figure 5E).
Oil Red O staining showed marked lipid accumulation in cul-
tured hepatocytes following incubation with conditioned medi-
um from Kupffer cells stimulated with curdlan. Steatosis was also 
blocked when a neutralizing antibody against IL-1β was added 
to the cell culture experiment (Figure 5F). Direct stimulation of 
hepatocytes with curdlan did not induce cell death or steatosis 
(Supplemental Figure 5, C and D). IL-1β alone is not sufficient to 
induce cell death in cultured hepatocytes (Supplemental Figure 
5E). These results suggest that β-glucan–induced IL-1β and oth-
er inflammatory mediators by secreted Kupffer cells synergize to 
promote hepatocyte injury and steatosis.
Immune response to fungi correlates with survival of patients 
with chronic alcohol abuse. We investigated whether patients who 
abuse alcohol have disturbances in their intestinal mycobiome and 
extraintestinal exposure to fungal products. Using ITS sequencing, 
we observed changes in the abundance and composition of the 
fecal mycobiome between alcohol-dependent patients and healthy 
individuals (controls). Fungal species richness (average number of 
OTUs, 5 ± 3 vs. 9 ± 6) and diversity (average Simpson index, 0.74 
± 0.25 vs. 0.42 ± 0.24) were lower in alcoholics compared with 
controls. There was also a dramatic overgrowth of Candida, with 
concomitant decreases in Epicoccum, unclassified fungi, Galac-
tomyces, and Debaryomyces (Figure 6, A and B, and Supplemental 
Figure 6, A and B). Interestingly, overgrowth of Candida was inde-
pendent of the stage of liver disease; patients with nonprogressive 
alcoholic liver disease, alcoholic hepatitis, or alcoholic cirrhosis 
had similar levels of fungal dysbiosis in the intestine. The oppor-
tunistic pathogen Candida albicans was among the most abundant 
Candida species in feces of patients abusing alcohol; however, its 
average relative abundance diminished with increasing severity of 
liver disease. Instead, there was an increase in the average relative 
abundance of Candida dubliniensis (Supplemental Figure 6C).
We next determined systemic exposure and immune response 
to intestinal fungi by measuring serum anti–Saccharomyces cerevisi-
ae IgG antibodies (ASCA). Although S. cerevisiae mannan is used to 
detect ASCA, C. albicans is an important immunogen for ASCA and 
is likely the origin of an aberrant immune response in humans (30). 
Serum samples from patients with cirrhosis due to alcohol abuse 
had significantly higher levels of ASCA compared with controls 
or patients with cirrhosis due to chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) 
infection (Figure 6C). These results indicate fungal dysbiosis and 
Figure 5. Curdlan induction of IL-1β by Kupffer cells contributes to hepatocyte injury and steatosis. (A and B) Primary mouse WT and Clec7a–/– Kupffer 
cells were stimulated with curdlan; graphs show expression of Il1b mRNA (A) and secretion of IL-1β (B) (n = 3–6 independent experiments). (C) Levels of 
cellular NLRP3 and caspase-1 and cleaved caspase-1 in supernatants of Kupffer cells with and without curdlan stimulation. (D) IL-1β secretion by WT or 
caspase-1–deficient Kupffer cells following curdlan stimulation (n = 4–8 independent experiments). (E and F) Conditioned medium from Kupffer cells 
(stimulated or not stimulated with curdlan) was transferred to primary mouse hepatocytes in the presence of control (IgG) or IL-1β neutralizing antibody. 
Hepatocyte cytotoxicity (E) and lipid accumulation, determined by Oil Red O staining (F) (n = 3 independent experiments performed in triplicate). Unpaired 
Student’s t test (A and B); Mann-Whitney U-statistic test (D); 1-way ANOVA with Newman-Keuls post-test (E). *P < 0.05.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 8 3 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 7   July 2017
increased systemic exposure and immune response to intestinal 
fungi in patients with alcohol abuse. Moreover, levels of ASCA 
correlated with mortality in patients with alcoholic cirrhosis. A sig-
nificantly smaller proportion of patients with high levels of ASCA 
survived for 5.5 years than patients with low levels (Figure 6D). The 
2 groups were similar with respect to model for end-stage liver dis-
ease (MELD) score at inclusion (12.9 ± 2 for patients with low ASCA 
levels vs. 11.9 ± 1.2 for patients with high ASCA levels).
Discussion
Commensal fungi have important functions in health, but alter-
ations in the intestinal mycobiota have been associated with dis-
ease (8, 31). Our study links compositional changes of the intestinal 
mycobiota to progression of alcoholic liver disease. Chronic alco-
hol abuse is associated with fungal dysbiosis in mice and humans. 
Fungal cell wall components, mainly β-glucan, translocate from 
the intestinal lumen to extraintestinal spaces that include the liver. 
Binding of β-glucan to CLEC7A on Kupffer cells and possibly oth-
er bone marrow–derived cells promotes alcoholic liver disease by 
inducing hepatic inflammation, ultimately leading to steatosis and 
cell death of hepatocytes. Preventing fungal overgrowth protects 
mice from ethanol-induced liver disease (Figure 7). In our human 
cohort, the degree of exposure to fungal products correlates with 
mortality of patients with cirrhosis from alcohol abuse but not viral 
hepatitis. Although a larger, prospective study is required to confirm 
data from our retrospective analysis of a human cohort with a rel-
atively small number of patients, our findings support the impor-
tance of the mycobiota for patients with alcoholic liver disease.
We confirmed that ethanol-induced liver disease is associated 
with an increase in hepatic F4/80-positive cells (22). CLEC7A is 
primarily expressed on myeloid cells (18). Due to technical exper-
imental limitations, there is a possibility that CLEC7A-positive 
Figure 6. Fungal dysbiosis and immune response in alcohol-dependent patients. (A and B) ITS sequencing of fecal samples from controls (n = 8), alco-
hol-dependent patients with nonprogressive alcoholic liver disease (Nonprog. ALD; n = 10), alcoholic hepatitis (n = 6), or alcoholic cirrhosis (n = 4). (A) The 
graph demonstrates the average relative abundance of sequence reads in each genus for controls and for each of the 3 liver disease stages. (B) Green bars 
indicate the average relative abundance of sequence reads in a combined alcohol-dependent group (independent of liver disease stage, n = 20) that were 
significantly different from the controls (white bars, n = 8). Kruskal-Wallis rank-sum statistical test with YAP. *P < 0.05. (C) Serum level of ASCA in healthy 
individuals (controls, n = 14) or patients with alcohol-related cirrhosis (Alc. cirrhosis; n = 28) or chronic HBV-related cirrhosis (n = 43). One-way ANOVA with 
Newman-Keuls post-test. *P < 0.05. (D) Kaplan-Meier curve of liver-related mortality for patients with alcoholic cirrhosis. Patients were grouped according 
to their serum levels of ASCA. Fourteen patients had serum concentrations of ASCA greater than 8 U/ml (the median value), and 13 had concentrations 
below this value. One patient was lost during the follow-up period. 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 8 3 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 7   July 2017
liver disease. Given these differences between alcohol-associat-
ed changes in the human and mouse mycobiome, our data indi-
cate that compositional changes might not be causatively linked 
to progression of alcoholic liver disease. Rather overgrowth of 
intestinal fungi in combination with a dysfunctional gut barrier 
results in increased systemic levels of β-glucan, eliciting a chronic 
inflammatory response in the liver. Future studies are required to 
determine whether single fungal species contribute to liver dis-
ease progression more than others by possibly generating larger 
amounts of β-glucan. Candida dubliniensis is increasing in patients 
with alcoholic hepatitis and is the most abundant Candida species 
in patients with end-stage liver disease due to alcohol abuse. C. 
dubliniensis is an opportunistic fungal pathogen recently shown to 
cause meningitis in a patient with hepatitis C virus–related cirrho-
sis (37). Chronic liver disease is an independent risk factor for C. 
dubliniensis bloodstream infections (38).
We have identified a cross-talk between bacterial and fungal 
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) during alcoholic 
liver disease. Hepatic IRAK3, a negative regulator of TLR signaling 
(24), was increased after reduction of an alcohol-associated increase 
in intestinal fungi. IRAK3-deficient mice are more susceptible to 
alcohol-induced liver injury (39). This indicates that in the absence 
of fungal PAMPs, bacterial signaling through TLRs and MYD88 is 
inhibited. A synergism between bacterial and fungal PAMPs is nec-
essary for development of ethanol-induced liver disease.
Our study demonstrates an important role of fungal dysbio-
sis in the development of alcoholic liver disease. We found that 
antifungal drugs prevented ethanol-induced steatohepatitis in 
mice. This therapeutic strategy can easily be translated into clin-
ical practice, because oral amphotericin B has no systemic side 
effects and is well tolerated by patients. Alcohol-associated fungal 
dysbiosis in humans is characterized by a large increase in Candi-
da, which is susceptible to amphotericin B. The effects of this drug 
should be tested in patients with alcohol-related liver disease, who 
are in urgent need of new therapeutics. Manipulation of the intes-
tinal mycobiome might be an effective strategy for attenuation of 
alcohol-related liver disease.
bone marrow–derived cells other than Kupffer cells mediate the 
effects of β-glucan in the liver. However, CLEC7A on bone mar-
row–derived cells does not alter gut barrier function and sys-
temic inflammation. Elimination of resident Kupffer cells and 
infiltrating macrophages prevents ethanol-induced liver disease 
in rodents (28), suggesting that these myeloid cells are required 
for progression of alcoholic liver disease. Activation of pathogen 
recognition receptors of the innate immune system induces the 
appropriate host defense response to pathogens. Receptors such 
as CLEC7A detect fungal infections and activate a strong innate 
immune response. Once the infection is cleared, the inflammatory 
response is turned off. However, chronic exposure of CLEC7A to 
fungal products continuously activates the cellular inflammasome 
pathway, causing a continuous inflammatory response and tissue 
damage. Similar processes might contribute to fungus allergies 
following chronic exposure in mice (32).
Alcoholic liver disease is associated with a dysfunctional gut 
barrier that allows translocation of microbial products from the 
intestine to the liver (20, 33, 34). We have previously demonstrated 
that dysbiosis-induced intestinal inflammation increases intestinal 
permeability (23, 35). Reducing bacteria with nonabsorbable anti-
biotics and restoration of bacterial eubiosis abolishes the onset of 
an intestinal barrier dysfunction (23, 36). Interestingly, decreasing 
intestinal fungal overgrowth with nonabsorbable antifungals did 
not alter gut barrier function, and intestinal permeability remained 
increased. These findings suggest that a main pathogenic mech-
anism for mycobiota-associated progression of liver disease is an 
increase in intestinal fungal populations. Overgrowth of fungi pro-
duces more fungal products such as β-glucan, which can escape 
from the intestinal lumen through already dysfunctional enteric 
tight junctions to the liver. Thus, fungal dysbiosis and overgrowth 
do not seem to modulate the intestinal barrier function.
The mycobiome of mice is dominated by Candida parapsilo-
sis; following alcohol feeding its abundance decreased, while oth-
er fungal populations increased. In humans, Candida albicans is 
the most abundant species in nonalcoholics, and its abundance 
is further increasing in alcoholics with nonprogressive alcoholic 
Figure 7. Contribution of the intestinal mycobiota to 
alcoholic liver disease. Chronic consumption of ethanol 
increases the fungal population and causes dysbiosis of 
the mycobiota in the intestine (right). The fungal dysbiosis 
results in higher amounts of β-glucan translocating across 
a damaged gut barrier to the liver (left). Increased β-glucan 
binds to CLEC7A on hepatic Kupffer cells and induces the 
expression and secretion of IL-1β. This cytokine contributes 
to ethanol-induced liver inflammation, hepatocyte injury, 
and steatosis.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 8 3 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 7   July 2017
primers BITS and B58S3 specific for ITS1 (47), by a sequencing dual 
indexing strategy similar to that used for 16S rRNA. Specifically, the 
3 primers used are as follows (pad in regular type, linker in brackets, 
and targeting primer sequence in boldface): read 1 (ITSFWD, contain-
ing BITS), CATTATAGCT[CA]ACCTGCGGARGGATCA; I7 index, 
AACTTTYARCAAYGGATCTC[TG]CTGTATGACT; and read 2 
(ITSREV, containing B58S3), AGTCATACAG[CA]GAGATCCRTTG-
YTRAAAGTT. Index 2 was the standard Illumina Index 2 sequenc-
ing primer. PCR parameters included a 95°C denaturing step followed 
by 35 cycles of 95°C for 30 seconds, 55°C for 30 seconds, and 72°C for 
30 seconds, followed by a final extension step of 72°C for 5 minutes. 
Amplicons were purified using the GeneJet PCR purification system 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific). Purified amplicons were then quantified 
using SYBR Gold (Thermo Fisher Scientific), normalized, and pooled 
to generate a library of equimolar DNA molecules per sample.
To evaluate the mouse intestinal mycobiome, which has a low-
er abundance of fungi than that of humans, we optimized DNA 
extraction, quantitation, and amplification methods. Samples were 
vortexed in Qbiogene lysing matrix B tubes using a Mini-Beadbeater 
instrument (Biospec Products). We then followed a published DNA 
isolation protocol (8). DNA samples were quantified using PicoGreen 
dsDNA assay (Life Technologies); 100 ng DNA was used for PCR with 
Q5 High Fidelity Polymerase (NEB) with BITS and B58S3 primers spe-
cific for ITS1 containing partial dual-indexed Illumina adapters as for 
16S rRNA (47) under the following conditions: 98°C denaturing step 
followed by 39 cycles of 98°C for 10 seconds, 55°C for 20 seconds, 
and 72°C for 30 seconds, followed by a final extension step of 72°C 
for 2 minutes. Amplicons were purified twice with Agencourt AMPure 
beads (Beckman Coulter) at 0.9 beads to DNA ratio. To assess wheth-
er amplicons were free of adapter dimers and to verify insert size, 
amplicons were analyzed and quantified on the Bioanalyzer, using 
the high-sensitivity dsDNA chip (Agilent), and pooled. The final pool 
was quantified with Library Quant kit (Kapa Biosystems). Sequences 
were generated using the MiSeq 2*150 V2 kit (Illumina) with 35% PhiX 
library added and custom primers spiked in. The ITS and index primer 
sequences were the same as those used for the human mycobiome.
Sequence processing and analysis steps were performed by our 
open-access, mothur-based (49) workflow software, YAP (46, 50). 
Mothur version 1.34 was used in this study. To achieve acceptable 
memory and run-time scalability with large MiSeq data sets, the pre-
clustering and clustering stages of the pipeline were implemented 
with CD-HIT (51, 52) sequence clustering software instead of the 
corresponding built-in mothur commands. Taxonomic classification 
of assembled forward and reverse reads was performed by moth-
ur’s implementation of the RDP Naïve Bayesian Classifier (53) using 
version 1.2 of the manually curated targeted host-associated fungi 
(THF) database (54), trimmed to include only the ITS1 region ampli-
fied by the BITS/B58S3 primers, removal of non-ITS sequences, and 
trimmed sequences less than 45 nucleotides in length, and then for-
matted for use with mothur. Fungal species-level OTUs were defined 
at 97% sequence identity (47). Candida species-level classification of 
ITS sequences was performed using STIRRUPS (55) with a custom 
sequence library of 31 nonredundant representative sequences pulled 
from the trimmed THF database. Sequence data were registered 
at NCBI under BioProject PRJNA317653. Sequence reads are avail-
able from the NCBI under the following consecutive BioSample IDs: 
SAMN04874830–SAMN04874861.
Methods
Mice. Clec7a–/– mice have been described (40). Heterozygous (Clec7a+/–) 
mice on a C57BL/6 genetic background were bred to generate mice 
without disruption of Clec7a (WT) and mice with homozygous disrup-
tion (Clec7a–/– mice). Female mice (age, 8 weeks) were fed ethanol for 
8 weeks (the Lieber-DeCarli diet model of chronic alcohol consump-
tion), as previously described (23). The Lieber-DeCarli diet compris-
es Micro-Stabilized Alcohol Rodent Liquid Diet (LD101A, irradiated; 
TestDiet), maltodextrin IRR (9598; TestDiet), and 200-proof ethanol 
(Gold Shield). The caloric intake from ethanol was 0 on day 1, 10% of 
total calories on days 2–4, 20% on days 5–7, 30% from day 8 until the 
end of 6 weeks, and 36% for the last 2 weeks. Control mice received an 
isocaloric amount of isomaltose instead of ethanol.
To produce bone marrow chimeras, mice were given lethal dos-
es of radiation (600 rad) twice, using a 137Cs source. Two weeks after 
bone marrow transplantation, mice were injected i.p. with 200 μl of 
clodronate liposomes (5 mg/ml; Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, Neth-
erlands) to deplete radioresistant Kupffer cells. The Lieber-DeCarli 
diet began 4 weeks after bone marrow transplantation.
To reduce intestinal commensal fungi, nonabsorbable amphoteri-
cin B (60 mg/kg/d) (41) (Medisca) was added to the liquid Lieber-De-
Carli alcohol-containing and control diets. Female C57BL/6 mice 
were purchased from Charles River Laboratories for this experiment.
To prove whether soluble β-glucan can activate CLEC7A in vivo, 
carboxymethyl-β-1,3-d-glucan (2 mg; CM-curdlan, Wako) was inject-
ed i.p. into WT and Clec7a–/– mice. Control animals received a compa-
rable vehicle (0.01 M NaOH, saline; pH 7) treatment. Mice were sac-
rificed 2, 8, and 24 hours after CM-curdlan injection and investigated 
for plasma IL-1β levels and hepatic Il1b expression.
Real-time qPCR. RNA of mouse tissues was extracted using Trizol 
(Invitrogen). DNase treatment of RNA was performed using the DNA-
free Kit (Ambion), and RNA was reverse transcribed using the High 
Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kit (ABI). Real-time qPCR was 
performed with iTaq Universal SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad) using 
primer sequences obtained from NIH qPrimerDepot (mouse and 
human) and a StepOnePlus thermocycler (ABI). The qPCR value was 
normalized to mouse 18S. Gene expression results are expressed rela-
tive to the levels of control (WT) mice or cells. DNA was isolated from 
feces as previously described (4, 21, 42). Published microbial primer 
sequences for 16S rRNA gene (43) and fungal-specific 18S rDNA gene 
were used (44). To quantify the total bacterial or fungal load present 
in feces, the qPCR value of fungal 18S rRNA gene or the bacterial 16S 
rRNA gene, respectively, was multiplied by the total amount of DNA 
(micrograms) per milligram of feces for each sample.
Sequencing and analysis. We performed deep DNA pyrosequencing 
of fecal DNA, targeting the hypervariable V4 region of prokaryotic 16S 
rRNA loci, using a dual indexing strategy on the Illumina MiSeq platform, 
as previously described (45). Microbial community profiles were gener-
ated using species-level (97% similarity) operational taxonomic unit–
based (OTU-based) classification and analysis, as previously described 
by us (22). Sequence data were registered at NCBI under BioProject PRJ-
NA317649. Sequence reads are available at NCBI under the following 
consecutive BioSample IDs: SAMN04874715–SAMN04874755.
To evaluate the human intestinal mycobiome, fungal-specific 
internal transcribed spacer (ITS) amplicon sequencing and anal-
ysis were conducted as previously described (4, 46–48). In brief, 
ITS sequence data were generated with Illumina MiSeq V2 kit using 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 8 3 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 7   July 2017
For conditioned medium and IL-1β neutralization experiments, 
Kupffer cells were cultured with RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% 
FBS for 4 hours and serum starved in RPMI 1640 and Medium 199 
(50% vol/vol) overnight. Kupffer cells were then stimulated with cur-
dlan for 8 hours. Cell supernatants were transferred to hepatocytes, 
and incubated for 24 hours. A neutralizing antibody against IL-1β (10 
ng/ml; ab9722; Abcam) or isotype IgG (10 ng/ml, control) was added 
to the conditioned medium after the transfer. Hepatocyte cytotoxicity 
and intracellular lipid staining experiments were performed.
Isolation of human liver cells. Primary human hepatocytes, Kupffer 
cells, and hepatic stellate cells were isolated as previously described (59, 
60). RNA extraction and quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR were 
performed as previously described (60) using specific primers for human 
CLEC7A (NIH human qPrimerDepot) and 18S RNA (forward: 5′-AAAC-
GGCTACCACATCCAAG-3′; reverse: 5′-CCTCCAATGGATCCTCGT-
TA-3′). 18S was used for normalization. Liver tissues used in this study 
were provided anonymized by the Biobank under the Administration of 
the Human Tissue and Cell Research (HTCR) Foundation at the Hospi-
tal of the LMU Munich (http:/
/www.klinikum.uni-muenchen.de/Chiru-
rgische-Klinik-und-Poliklinik-Grosshadern/de/0800-gewebebank/
index.html). The framework of HTCR Foundation (http:/
/www.htcr.org) 
(61) includes obtaining written informed consent from all donors after 
the nature and possible consequences of the donation were explained. 
This framework has been approved by the ethics commission of the Fac-
ulty of Medicine in the University of Munich (no. 025-12) as well as the 
Bavarian State Medical Association (no. 11142).
Human serum samples. We analyzed data collected from 28 
patients with alcoholic liver cirrhosis from July 1, 2010, through 
October 31, 2010, as previously described (62). In brief, our anal-
ysis excluded patients who tested positive for hepatitis C antibody 
or hepatitis B surface antigen or had any other liver diseases. Liver 
cirrhosis was detected by ultrasonography (based on presence of cir-
rhotic liver parenchyma), presence of esophageal or gastric varices 
(based on upper endoscopy examination), or splenomegaly (based 
on imaging studies). Continuous alcohol drinking was defined as 
ingestion of more than 60 g/d of alcohol for more than 10 years in 
men and more than 20 g/d for more than 10 years in women. We also 
analyzed data from 2 control cohorts of similar age and sex distribu-
tion: 14 healthy individuals and 43 patients with HBV-related liver 
cirrhosis who did not consume alcohol. Patient characteristics are 
presented in Supplemental Table 1.
Patients did not take antibiotics or immunosuppressive agents 
during the 2 months preceding enrollment. Other exclusion criteria 
were diabetes, inflammatory bowel disease, known liver disease of 
any other etiology, and clinically significant cardiovascular, pul-
monary, or renal comorbidities. The study protocol was approved 
by the Ethics Committee of En Chu Kong Hospital, and a written 
informed consent was signed by each participant after the nature 
and possible consequences of the studies were explained. The per-
centages of patients with alcoholic liver cirrhosis surviving for a 
66-month period were determined from chart review. The cutoff 
value (8 U/ml) was the median serum level of ASCA-IgG, and the 
endpoint was liver-related mortality. During the follow-up period 
(5.5 years), 13 of 28 patients died. The cause of death was liver-re-
lated disease in 12 patients, and 1 patient died from metastatic 
nasopharyngeal carcinoma. One patient was lost to follow-up and 
excluded from the survival analysis.
Protein analysis. IL-1β (14-7012, clone B122; eBioscience) and albu-
min (E90-134; Bethyl Labs) were measured by ELISA. Human serum 
samples were assessed for the presence of ASCA-IgG using ELISA 
(KA1270; Abnova). Immunoblot analysis was performed using anti-
bodies against cytochrome P450 family 2 subfamily E polypeptide 1 
(AB1252; CYP2E1; Millipore), β-actin (A5441; Sigma), occludin (71-
1500; Invitrogen), NLRP3 (MAB7578; R&D Systems), and caspase-1 
p20 (AG-20B-0042-C100; AdipoGen). For detection of cleaved 
caspase-1 in culture supernatant, proteins were precipitated using meth-
anol/chloroform, and whole extracts were subjected to immunoblot-
ting. Immunoblots were analyzed by densitometry, using NIH ImageJ.
Biochemical analysis. Plasma levels of alanine aminotransferase 
(ALT) and hepatic levels of triglyceride were measured using the Infini-
ty ALT kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Triglyceride Liquid Reagents 
Kit (Pointe Scientific), respectively. Plasma levels of ethanol were 
measured using the Ethanol Assay Kit (BioVision). Hepatic alcohol 
dehydrogenase (ADH) activity was determined using the ADH Assay 
Kit (BioVision). Plasma LPS (CEB526Ge; Cloud-Clone Corp.) and 
1,3-β-d-glucan (MBS730464; MyBioSource) levels were measured by 
ELISA. Plasma was diluted 1:4 for 1,3-β-d-glucan measurements.
Staining procedures. For immunofluorescence staining, antigens 
of formalin-fixed slides were retrieved with a retrieval solution (Dako) 
containing 1% Triton and blocked using tissue blocking solution (Dako). 
F4/80 antibody (14-4801; eBioscience) and antibody against IL-1β 
(ab9722; Abcam) were used as primary antibodies. Nuclei were stained 
with DAPI (blue). For histologic analysis of liver tissues, formalin-fixed 
liver sections were stained with H&E. Frozen liver sections were ana-
lyzed by Oil Red O staining. Samples were analyzed by densitometry, 
using NIH ImageJ. The results are presented as percentage area posi-
tively stained. Immunofluorescent staining of mouse and human liver 
was performed using frozen sections with primary antibodies against 
CLEC7A (MCA2289FT; conjugated with FITC; Bio-Rad), mouse F4/80 
(14-4801; eBioscience), and human CD68 (IS613; Dako).
Mouse cell culture studies. Primary mouse Kupffer cells, hepatic 
stellate cells, and hepatocytes were isolated as previously described 
(56) with minor modifications. RNA was extracted from hepatic stel-
late cells directly after the isolation. Quiescent hepatic stellate cells 
were isolated from C57BL/6 mice, and activated hepatic stellate cells 
were purified from mice exposed to carbon tetrachloride. C57BL/6 
mice were gavaged with 200 μl carbon tetrachloride (25% vol/vol in 
corn oil) twice weekly for 6 weeks (57). Kupffer cells were isolated 
from C57BL/6, Clec7a–/–, or Casp1–/– mice (which are also Casp11-de-
ficient) (generated by R. Flavell, Yale University, New Haven, CT, 
USA) (58) and selected by magnetic cell sorting using anti-CD11b 
Micro Beads (Miltenyi Biotec). Kupffer cells were cultured with 
RPMI 1640 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing 10% FBS for 4 
hours. After an overnight starvation in medium without FBS, Kupffer 
cells were stimulated with curdlan (100 μg/ml; InvivoGen) for 4 
hours (gene expression) or 8–9 hours (protein secretion experiments, 
immunoblotting experiments).
Primary mouse hepatocytes were cultured with Medium 199 (Ther-
mo Fisher Scientific) containing 10% FBS for 4 hours. After overnight 
starvation in medium without FBS, cells were stimulated with curdlan 
(100 μg/ml) for 8 hours, or IL-1β (10 ng/ml; R&D Systems) for 24 hours. 
Hepatocyte death was quantified using the Pierce LDH Cytotoxicity 
Detection Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Oil Red O staining was used 
to identify lipid accumulation in cultured hepatocytes.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 8 3 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 7   July 2017
appropriate IRB: (a) ethics commission of the Faculty of Medicine in 
the University of Munich (no. 025-12) as well as the Bavarian State 
Medical Association (no. 11142) (human liver cell isolation); (b) Eth-
ics Committee of En Chu Kong Hospital (human serum samples, 
human cohort study); (c) Human Research Protections Program 
of UCSD and of the VA San Diego Healthcare System; IRB at Rush 
University Medical Center; Yale University IRB; University of Wis-
consin–Madison Health Sciences IRBs (Madison, Wisconsin, USA); 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill IRB; Ethics Committee 
of the Université Catholique de Louvain (human fecal samples); (d) 
Ethics Committee of the Université Catholique de Louvain (human 
duodenal and liver biopsies). All subjects provided informed consent 
prior to their participation in the study.
Author contributions
AMY and TI were responsible for acquisition of data, analy-
sis and interpretation of data, and drafting of the manuscript. 
PC, LW, CL, SB, KH, PH, JX, and YK assisted with experiments 
and data analysis. MGT, KM, KB, and DEF were responsible 
for deep sequencing and analysis. TK, CSC, HMH, and GDB 
provided experimental resources. KF, CH, and SMLL analyzed 
human liver cells. WZM, GGT, EAM, AK, SBH, RB, and PS were 
responsible for collection of human samples. BS was responsi-
ble for the study concept and design, writing of the manuscript, 
and study supervision.
Acknowledgments
This study was supported in part by NIH grants R01 AA020703, 
U01 AA24726 and U01 AA021856 and by Award I01BX002213 
from the Biomedical Laboratory Research & Development Ser-
vice of the VA Office of Research and Development (to BS). 
KH was supported by a DFG fellowship (HO/5690/1-1). SB was 
supported by a grant from the Swiss National Science Founda-
tion (P2SKP3_158649). GGT received funding from the Yale 
Liver Center NIH P30 DK34989 and RB from National Insti-
tute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism grant U01 AA021908. 
AK received support from NIH grants RC2 AA019405, R01 
AA020216, and R01 AA023417. GDB is supported by funds 
from the Wellcome Trust. We acknowledge the Human Tissue 
and Cell Research (HTCR) Foundation for making human tissue 
available for research, and Hepacult GmbH (Munich, Germany) 
for providing primary human hepatocytes for in vitro analyses. 
We thank Chien-Yu Lin, Department of Medicine, Fu-Jen Catho-
lic University, Taiwan, for statistical analysis.
Address correspondence to: Bernd Schnabl, Department of Med-
icine, University of California, San Diego, MC0063, 9500 Gil-
man Drive, La Jolla, California 92093, USA. Phone: 858.822.5311; 
Email: beschnabl@ucsd.edu.
Human fecal samples. Healthy individuals without chronic 
disease (controls, n = 8), alcohol-dependent patients without evi-
dence of progressive liver disease (nonprogressive liver disease, 
n = 10), patients with alcoholic hepatitis (alcoholic hepatitis, n = 
6), and patients with alcoholic liver cirrhosis (alcoholic cirrhosis, 
n = 4) were included in the study. Diagnosis of alcoholic hepati-
tis was made by biopsy in 3 of 6 patients. The remaining patients 
with alcoholic hepatitis and all patients with alcoholic cirrhosis 
were diagnosed based on a combination of clinical, biochemical, 
and imaging parameters. All patients included were actively drink-
ing. Baseline features of this cohort are provided in Supplemental 
Table 2. Stool samples were collected, and DNA was extracted from 
fecal samples (21). Written informed consent was signed by each 
participant after the nature and possible consequences of the stud-
ies were explained. The study protocol was approved by the IRB of 
each institution involved.
Human liver and duodenal biopsies. Patients with alcohol depen-
dence and with active alcohol consumption were compared with 
individuals without alcohol dependency (controls). Duodenal 
biopsies were taken and immediately snap-frozen from otherwise 
normal subjects who underwent outpatient upper gastrointestinal 
endoscopy for gastroesophageal reflux symptoms. Only biopsies 
from subjects with endoscopically and histologically normal duo-
denum were finally retained as true controls. Alcohol-dependent 
patients who followed an inpatient alcohol withdrawal program 
underwent routine upper gastrointestinal endoscopy with duode-
nal biopsy on the second day of admission. Patients with disturbed 
liver function tests and suspicion of significant fibrosis determined 
noninvasively by Fibroscan were proposed for a liver biopsy. Liver 
biopsy was performed on the third day of admission in patients. 
Liver specimens from control patients were obtained from surgical 
resections or from size-reduced donor livers before transplantation. 
Written informed consent was signed by each participant after the 
nature and possible consequences of the studies were explained. 
The study protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee of the 
Université Catholique de Louvain.
Statistics. Results are expressed as mean ± SEM. Significance 
was evaluated using the unpaired Student’s t test except when stat-
ed otherwise. For comparison of 3 groups, 1-way ANOVA with New-
man-Keuls post-test was used. Not normally distributed (Shapiro-Wilk 
test) serum levels of ASCA were transformed by taking the logarithm 
to the base of 10. Significance of mouse microbiome data was deter-
mined using the Kruskal-Wallis rank-sum statistical test with YAP. 
Kaplan-Meier curves were used to compare survival between groups; 
significance was assessed using the log-rank test. A P value less than 
0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.
Study approval. All animal studies were reviewed and approved 
by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of UCSD. 
Studies using human materials were reviewed and approved by an 
 1. Lozano R, et al. Global and regional mortality 
from 235 causes of death for 20 age groups in 
1990 and 2010: a systematic analysis for the 
Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet. 
2012;380(9859):2095–2128.
 2. WHO. Global Status Report On Alcohol And 
Health 2014. World Health Organization web-
site. http:/
/www.who.int/substance_abuse/pub-
lications/global_alcohol_report/en/. Accessed 
April 10, 2017.
 3. Bode JC, Bode C, Heidelbach R, Dürr HK, 
Martini GA. Jejunal microflora in patients with 
chronic alcohol abuse. Hepatogastroenterology. 
1984;31(1):30–34.
 4. Yan AW, et al. Enteric dysbiosis associated with a 
mouse model of alcoholic liver disease. Hepatolo-
gy. 2011;53(1):96–105.
 5. Hartmann P, et al. Deficiency of intestinal mucin-
2 ameliorates experimental alcoholic liver dis-
ease in mice. Hepatology. 2013;58(1):108–119.
 6. Keshavarzian A, et al. Evidence that chronic alco-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 8 4 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 7   July 2017
hol exposure promotes intestinal oxidative stress, 
intestinal hyperpermeability and endotoxemia 
prior to development of alcoholic steatohepatitis 
in rats. J Hepatol. 2009;50(3):538–547.
 
7. Mutlu EA, et al. Colonic microbiome is altered in 
alcoholism. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physi-
ol. 2012;302(9):G966–G978.
 8. Iliev ID, et al. Interactions between com-
mensal fungi and the C-type lectin recep-
tor Dectin-1 influence colitis. Science. 
2012;336(6086):1314–1317.
 9. Wang ZK, Yang YS, Stefka AT, Sun G, Peng 
LH. Review article: fungal microbiota and 
digestive diseases. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 
2014;39(8):751–766.
 10. Iliev ID, Underhill DM. Striking a balance: fungal 
commensalism versus pathogenesis. Curr Opin 
Microbiol. 2013;16(3):366–373.
 11. Miranda LN, et al. Candida colonisation 
as a source for candidaemia. J Hosp Infect. 
2009;72(1):9–16.
 12. Papp M, et al. Presence of anti-microbial 
antibodies in liver cirrhosis — a tell-tale 
sign of compromised immunity? PLoS One. 
2010;5(9):e12957.
 13. Park WB, et al. Spontaneous cryptococcal peri-
tonitis in patients with liver cirrhosis. Am J Med. 
2006;119(2):169–171.
 14. Bartoletti M, et al. Epidemiology and outcomes of 
bloodstream infection in patients with cirrhosis.  
J Hepatol. 2014;61(1):51–58.
 15. Gustot T, et al. Invasive aspergillosis in patients 
with severe alcoholic hepatitis. J Hepatol. 
2014;60(2):267–274.
 16. Hwang SY, et al. Spontaneous fungal peritonitis: 
a severe complication in patients with advanced 
liver cirrhosis. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 
2014;33(2):259–264.
 17. Theel ES, Doern CD. β-D-glucan testing is 
important for diagnosis of invasive fungal infec-
tions. J Clin Microbiol. 2013;51(11):3478–3483.
 18. Dambuza IM, Brown GD. C-type lectins in immu-
nity: recent developments. Curr Opin Immunol. 
2015;32:21–27.
 19. Kankkunen P, Teirilä L, Rintahaka J, Alenius 
H, Wolff H, Matikainen S. (1,3)-β-glucans 
activate both dectin-1 and NLRP3 inflam-
masome in human macrophages. J Immunol. 
2010;184(11):6335–6342.
 20. Schnabl B, Brenner DA. Interactions between the 
intestinal microbiome and liver diseases. Gastro-
enterology. 2014;146(6):1513–1524.
 21. Chen P, et al. Supplementation of saturated 
long-chain fatty acids maintains intesti-
nal eubiosis and reduces ethanol-induced 
liver injury in mice. Gastroenterology. 
2015;148(1):203–214.e16.
 22. Wang L, et al. Intestinal REG3 lectins protect 
against alcoholic steatohepatitis by reducing 
mucosa-associated microbiota and prevent-
ing bacterial translocation. Cell Host Microbe. 
2016;19(2):227–239.
 23. Chen P, Stärkel P, Turner JR, Ho SB, Schnabl B. 
Dysbiosis-induced intestinal inflammation acti-
vates tumor necrosis factor receptor I and medi-
ates alcoholic liver disease in mice. Hepatology. 
2015;61(3):883–894.
 24. Kobayashi K, Hernandez LD, Galán JE, Janeway 
CA, Medzhitov R, Flavell RA. IRAK-M is a nega-
tive regulator of Toll-like receptor signaling. Cell. 
2002;110(2):191–202.
 25. Taylor PR, et al. The β-glucan receptor, 
dectin-1, is predominantly expressed on 
the surface of cells of the monocyte/macro-
phage and neutrophil lineages. J Immunol. 
2002;169(7):3876–3882.
 26. Seki E, et al. TLR4 enhances TGF-β sig-
naling and hepatic fibrosis. Nat Med. 
2007;13(11):1324–1332.
 27. Petrasek J, et al. IL-1 receptor antagonist 
ameliorates inflammasome-dependent alco-
holic steatohepatitis in mice. J Clin Invest. 
2012;122(10):3476–3489.
 28. Niemelä O, Parkkila S, Bradford B, Iimuro Y, 
Pasanen M, Thurman RG. Effect of Kupffer 
cell inactivation on ethanol-induced protein 
adducts in the liver. Free Radic Biol Med. 
2002;33(3):350–355.
 29. Ganesan S, et al. Caspase-8 modulates dec-
tin-1 and complement receptor 3-driven IL-1β 
production in response to β-glucans and the 
fungal pathogen, Candida albicans. J Immunol. 
2014;193(5):2519–2530.
 30. Standaert-Vitse A, et al. Candida albicans is an 
immunogen for anti-Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
antibody markers of Crohn’s disease. Gastroen-
terology. 2006;130(6):1764–1775.
 31. Sokol H, et al. Fungal microbiota dysbiosis in 
IBD [published online ahead of print February 
3, 2016]. Gut. https:/
/doi.org/10.1136/gut-
jnl-2015-310746.
 32. Lilly LM, et al. The β-glucan receptor dec-
tin-1 promotes lung immunopathology 
during fungal allergy via IL-22. J Immunol. 
2012;189(7):3653–3660.
 33. Szabo G. Gut-liver axis in alcoholic liver disease. 
Gastroenterology. 2015;148(1):30–36.
 34. Kirpich IA, et al. Saturated and unsaturated 
dietary fats differentially modulate ethanol- 
induced changes in gut microbiome and metabo-
lome in a mouse model of alcoholic liver disease. 
Am J Pathol. 2016;186(4):765–776.
 35. Du Plessis J, et al. Activated intestinal macro-
phages in patients with cirrhosis release NO and 
IL-6 that may disrupt intestinal barrier function. 
J Hepatol. 2013;58(6):1125–1132.
 36. Wang Y, et al. Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG treat-
ment potentiates intestinal hypoxia-inducible 
factor, promotes intestinal integrity and amelio-
rates alcohol-induced liver injury. Am J Pathol. 
2011;179(6):2866–2875.
 37. Yamahiro A, Lau KH, Peaper DR, Villanueva 
M. Meningitis caused by Candida Dublinien-
sis in a patient with cirrhosis: a case report 
and review of the literature. Mycopathologia. 
2016;181(7–8):589–593.
 38. Chen SC, et al. Candidaemia with uncommon 
Candida species: predisposing factors, out-
come, antifungal susceptibility, and implica-
tions for management. Clin Microbiol Infect. 
2009;15(7):662–669.
 39. Wang Y, et al. Role of IRAK-M in alcohol induced 
liver injury. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57085.
 40. Taylor PR, et al. Dectin-1 is required for beta- 
glucan recognition and control of fungal infec-
tion. Nat Immunol. 2007;8(1):31–38.
 41. Wagner M, Srivastava KK. Decontamination 
of gnotobiotic mice experimentally monoas-
sociated with Candida albicans. Infect Immun. 
1975;12(6):1401–1404.
 42. Fouts DE, Torralba M, Nelson KE, Brenner DA, 
Schnabl B. Bacterial translocation and changes 
in the intestinal microbiome in mouse models of 
liver disease. J Hepatol. 2012;56(6):1283–1292.
 43. Maeda H, et al. Quantitative real-time PCR using 
TaqMan and SYBR Green for Actinobacillus 
actinomycetemcomitans, Porphyromonas gin-
givalis, Prevotella intermedia, tetQ gene and 
total bacteria. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 
2003;39(1):81–86.
 44. Liu CM, et al. FungiQuant: a broad-coverage 
fungal quantitative real-time PCR assay. BMC 
Microbiol. 2012;12:255.
 45. Kozich JJ, Westcott SL, Baxter NT, Highlander 
SK, Schloss PD. Development of a dual-index 
sequencing strategy and curation pipeline for 
analyzing amplicon sequence data on the MiSeq 
Illumina sequencing platform. Appl Environ 
Microbiol. 2013;79(17):5112–5120.
 46. Fouts DE, et al. Next generation sequencing to 
define prokaryotic and fungal diversity in the 
bovine rumen. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e48289.
 47. Bokulich NA, Mills DA. Improved selection of 
internal transcribed spacer-specific primers 
enables quantitative, ultra-high-throughput 
profiling of fungal communities. Appl Environ 
Microbiol. 2013;79(8):2519–2526.
 48. Bokulich NA, Thorngate JH, Richardson 
PM, Mills DA. Microbial biogeography of 
wine grapes is conditioned by cultivar, vin-
tage, and climate. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2014;111(1):E139–E148.
 49. Schloss PD, et al. Introducing mothur: open-
source, platform-independent, community-sup-
ported software for describing and comparing 
microbial communities. Appl Environ Microbiol. 
2009;75(23):7537–7541.
 50. Fouts DE, et al. Integrated next-generation 
sequencing of 16S rDNA and metaproteomics 
differentiate the healthy urine microbiome from 
asymptomatic bacteriuria in neuropathic bladder 
associated with spinal cord injury. J Transl Med. 
2012;10:174.
 51. Fu L, Niu B, Zhu Z, Wu S, Li W. CD-HIT: 
accelerated for clustering the next-gen-
eration sequencing data. Bioinformatics. 
2012;28(23):3150–3152.
 52. Li W, Godzik A. Cd-hit: a fast program for 
clustering and comparing large sets of pro-
tein or nucleotide sequences. Bioinformatics. 
2006;22(13):1658–1659.
 53. Wang Q, Garrity GM, Tiedje JM, Cole JR. 
Naive Bayesian classifier for rapid assign-
ment of rRNA sequences into the new 
bacterial taxonomy. Appl Environ Microbiol. 
2007;73(16):5261–5267.
 54. Tang J, Iliev ID, Brown J, Underhill DM, 
Funari VA. Mycobiome: Approaches to anal-
ysis of intestinal fungi. J Immunol Methods. 
2015;421:112–121.
 55. Fettweis JM, et al. Species-level classification 
of the vaginal microbiome. BMC Genomics. 
2012;13(suppl 8):S17.
 56. Iwaisako K, et al. Protection from liver fibro-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 8 4 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 7   July 2017
sis by a peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor δ agonist. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2012;109(21):E1369–E1376.
 57. Kisseleva T, et al. Myofibroblasts revert to 
an inactive phenotype during regression 
of liver fibrosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2012;109(24):9448–9453.
 58. Brydges SD, Broderick L, McGeough MD, 
Pena CA, Mueller JL, Hoffman HM. Diver-
gence of IL-1, IL-18, and cell death in 
NLRP3 inflammasomopathies. J Clin Invest. 
2013;123(11):4695–4705.
 59. Lee SM, Schelcher C, Demmel M, Hauner M, 
Thasler WE. Isolation of human hepatocytes by 
a two-step collagenase perfusion procedure. J Vis 
Exp. 2013;(79):50615.
 60. Steiling H, Mühlbauer M, Bataille F, Schölmerich 
J, Werner S, Hellerbrand C. Activated hepat-
ic stellate cells express keratinocyte growth 
factor in chronic liver disease. Am J Pathol. 
2004;165(4):1233–1241.
 61. Thasler WE, Weiss TS, Schillhorn K, Stoll PT, 
Irrgang B, Jauch KW. Charitable state-controlled 
foundation human tissue and cell research: 
ethic and legal aspects in the supply of surgically 
removed human tissue for research in the aca-
demic and commercial sector in Germany. Cell 
Tissue Bank. 2003;4(1):49–56.
 62. Yang AM, Wen LL, Yang CS, Wang SC, Chen 
CS, Bair MJ. Interleukin 10 promoter haplo-
type is associated with alcoholic liver cirrhosis 
in Taiwanese patients. Kaohsiung J Med Sci. 
2014;30(6):291–298.
