 1
Yang W, et al. BMJ Case Rep 2018. doi:10.1136/bcr-2016-218906
Summary
Spontaneous perforation of the pharynx is an unusual 
condition. Due to its non-specific presentation and 
general lack of awareness, diagnosis and intervention 
may be delayed resulting in potential complications. 
This case reports a rare spontaneous perforation of the 
pyriform sinus after a forceful sneeze, leading to cervical 
subcutaneous emphysema and pneumomediastinum.
Background
Pharyngeal perforation is a condition which often 
derives from trauma, surgery or infection. It can 
result in complications without early recognition 
and treatment. Spontaneous pharyngeal perforation 
with no identified cause is rare. Here, we report a 
case of spontaneous pharyngeal rupture after a 
forceful sneeze, leading to cervical subcutaneous 
emphysema and pneumomediastinum.
caSe preSentation
A previously fit and well 34-year-old man presented 
to the emergency department with an acute onset 
of odynophagia and change of voice after a forceful 
sneeze. He described a popping sensation in his 
neck and some bilateral neck swelling after he tried 
to halt a sneeze by pinching the nose and holding 
his mouth closed. There was no proceeding history 
of recent iatrogenic procedure or cervical trauma 
and he denied having eaten anything sharp.
Patient’s vital signs were stable on admission 
with no fever. There was no stridor or other signs 
of respiratory distress. On physical examination, 
there was swelling and tenderness especially on the 
right side of his cervical region. Crepitus was noted 
in both sides of the anterior neck extending down 
to the sternum. Fibre-optic nasal pharyngoscopy 
showed a normal laryngeal appearance with bilat-
eral functioning vocal cords.
inveStigationS
Lateral soft tissue neck radiograph showed streaks 
of air in the retropharyngeal region and exten-
sive surgical emphysema in the neck anterior to 
the trachea (figure 1). Urgent CT of the neck and 
thorax with contrast confirmed the presence of 
extensive soft tissue emphysema predominantly 
centred within the neck as well as pneumome-
diastinum extending from skull base down to T9 
vertebra (figure 2A,B). There was no pneumo-
thorax or evidence of bronchial injury. Lung paren-
chyma and oesophagus both appeared normal. The 
presence of a subtle relative prominence of the right 
pyriform sinus suggested a possible fistula with the 
cervical subcutaneous tissue. The air collections 
were judged as a result from a pharyngeal tear 
possibly from the right pyriform sinus.
differential diagnoSiS
Boerhaave’s syndrome.
treatment
The patient was admitted due to risk of progres-
sion to deep neck infection or even mediastinitis. 
He was treated conservatively with enteral feeding 
via a nasogastric tube and prophylactic intrave-
nous antibiotics. His symptoms and subcutaneous 
emphysema gradually resolved during the course of 
admission.
outcome and follow-up
A repeat CT neck and thorax with water-soluble 
contrast swallow 7 days later showed markedly 
subsided soft tissue emphysema and no evidence 
of contrast leak. The nasogastric tube was removed 
and a soft diet was introduced without any prob-
lems. The patient was subsequently discharged 
with advice to avoid obstructing both nostrils while 
sneezing. On 2 
months follow-up, patient did not 
present any further recurrence or complications.
diScuSSion
Perforation of the pharynx most commonly result 
from iatrogenic procedures or blunt neck trauma.1 
Spontaneous pharyngeal perforation can also occur 
but is relatively rare. The mechanism is thought 
to involve a sudden rise in intraluminal pressure 
against closed vocal folds often following coughing, 
straining, forceful retching or vomiting.2 Sneezing, 
especially with both nostrils and mouth obstructed, 
is a rare predisposing clinical situation.
In the present case, the rupture site is likely from 
the right pyriform sinus which suggest the patho-
physiology is different from that of Boerhaave’s 
syndrome where the tear tends to involve the 
distal part of the thoracic oesophagus.3 The pyri-
form sinus is at risk of perforation during a sudden 
increase in the pharyngeal pressure due to its lack 
of a reinforcing longitudinal muscle layer.2 In Boer-
haave’s syndrome, the spontaneous transmural 
perforation occurs as a consequence of neuromus-
cular incoordination which leads to failure of the 
cricopharyngeus muscle to relax.2 Although both 
conditions may present in similar ways with cervical 
CaSe reporT
Snap, crackle and pop: when sneezing leads to 
crackling in the neck
Wanding Yang, raguwinder S Sahota, Sudip Das
Rare disease
to cite: Yang W, Sahota rS, 
Das S. BMJ Case Rep 
published online First: 
[please include Day Month 
Year]. doi:10.1136/bcr-2016-
218906
eNT, Head and Neck Surgery, 
University Hospitals of Leicester 
NHS Trust, Leicester, UK
correspondence to
Miss Wanding Yang,  
 
dingyang@ 
doctors. 
org. 
uk
accepted 20 December 2017
 2
Yang W, et al. BMJ Case Rep 2018. doi:10.1136/bcr-2016-218906
rare disease
subcutaneous emphysema and spontaneous pneumomedias-
tinum, Boerhaave’s syndrome carries a much higher morbidity 
and mortality and requires prompt and aggressive surgical treat-
ment.3 As the oesophagus ruptures in Boerhaave’s syndrome, 
the gastric contents transgress into the mediastinum resulting 
in overwhelming mediastinitis, respiratory failure, shock, sepsis 
and potentially death.3 In contrast, pharynx or pyriform sinus 
perforation can usually be managed non-surgically and cured 
without significant morbidity due to its low rate of respiratory 
or intrathoracic complication.4 Patients with well-contained leak 
and no significant complications can be treated conservatively 
with enteral/parenteral feeding and broad spectrum antibiotics. 
However, if patients show signs of sepsis or have large perfora-
tion, surgical drainage of the paracervical space with or without 
primary repair is strongly recommended to control the infection 
and to prevent its expansion into the thorax.4
Early diagnosis is often difficult in pharyngeal perforation. 
Pain is the most common symptoms in perforation of larynx or 
oesophagus and is usually localised to the site of the perforation.2 
In our case, the patient presented with an unusual ‘popping’ 
sensation over the pyriform sinus immediately after sneezing. It 
is followed by odynophagia and dysphonia a few hours later. He 
did not complain of any chest pain which is the most common 
symptom associated with spontaneous pneumomediastinum. 
Cervical emphysema is frequent after cervical perforation and 
can be easily detected with plain X-ray or CT scan. It often 
descends to cause pneumomediastinum which sometimes can 
produce Hamman’s sign (crackling sound synchronous with 
the heart beat) when heart beats against air-filled tissue. Nasal 
endoscopy can occasionally demonstrate the fistula in pharyn-
geal perforation but it is often difficult as shown in our case. CT 
scan of the neck and thorax with water-soluble contrast swallow 
should be used as the gold standard investigation which can 
confirm the diagnosis and defines the exact pathological site.5 
In addition, the normal CT appearance of the lung parenchyma 
and oesophagus helps to exclude more serious causes of pneu-
momediastinum such as tracheobronchial rupture and Boer-
haave’s syndrome.
Halting sneeze via blocking nostrils and mouth is a dangerous 
manoeuvre and should be avoided, as it may lead to numerous 
complications such as pneumomediastinum, perforation of 
tympanic membrane and even rupture of cerebral aneurysm.
In conclusion, spontaneous pharyngeal perforation can rarely 
occur after a forceful sneeze especially against a closed glottis. 
We should maintain a high degree of suspicion and initiate inves-
tigation and treatment early to avoid complication.
learning points
 
► Spontaneous perforation of the pharynx is extremely rare and 
has a non-specific presentation.
 
► The pyriform sinus is at risk of perforation during a sudden 
increase in the pharyngeal pressure due to its lack of a 
reinforcing longitudinal muscle layer.
 
► Patients with well-contained leak and no significant 
complications can be treated conservatively.
 
► CT scan of the neck and thorax with water-soluble contrast 
swallow should be used as the gold standard investigation.
 
► Simultaneously obstructing both nostrils and mouth during 
sneezing should be avoided.
contributors WY and rSS: literature research and cowriter of the manuscript. SD: 
identified the case and cowriter of the manuscript.
competing interests None declared.
patient consent obtained.
provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work 
is properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by- 
nc/ 
4. 
0/
© BMJ publishing Group Ltd (unless otherwise stated in the text of the article) 
2018. all rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise expressly 
granted.
figure 1 Lateral soft tissue neck radiograph with narrow window 
setting shows streaks of air in the retropharyngeal region (black arrow) 
and extensive surgical emphysema in the neck anterior to the trachea 
(white arrow).
figure 2 (A and B) Coronal and sagittal CT scan of the neck 
and thorax showing surgical emphysema within the neck and 
pneumomediastinum extending from skull base up to T9 vertebra (black 
arrow).
 3
Yang W, et al. BMJ Case Rep 2018. doi:10.1136/bcr-2016-218906
Copyright 2017 BMJ publishing Group. all rights reserved. For permission to reuse any of this content visit
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.
BMJ Case report Fellows may re-use this article for personal use and teaching without any further permission.
Become a Fellow of BMJ Case reports today and you can:
 
► Submit as many cases as you like
 
► enjoy fast sympathetic peer review and rapid publication of accepted articles
 
► access all the published articles
 
► re-use any of the published material for personal use and teaching without further permission
For information on Institutional Fellowships contact consortiasales@bmjgroup.com
Visit casereports.bmj.com for more articles like this and to become a Fellow
rare disease
RefeRences
 
1 Younes Z, Johnson Da. The spectrum of spontaneous and iatrogenic esophageal 
injury: perforations, Mallory-Weiss tears, and hematomas. J Clin Gastroenterol 
1999;29:306–17.
 
2 roh JL, park CI. Spontaneous pharyngeal perforation after forceful vomiting: 
the difference from classic Boerhaave’s syndrome. Clin Exp Otorhinolaryngol 
2008;1:174–6.
 
3 pezzetta e, Kokudo T, Uldry e, et al. The surgical management of spontaneous 
esophageal perforation (Boerhaave’s syndrome): 20 years of experience. Biosci Trends 
2016;10:120–4.
 
4 Shaligram a, Dugar N, Capper r. perforation of cervical oesophagus. J Laryngol Otol 
2005;119:51–3.
 
5 Hoskison e, Judd o, Dickinson e, et al. Spontaneous pneumomediastinum: benefits of 
contrast computed tomography imaging. J Laryngol Otol 2010;124:220–2.
