 Research
Serious incidents after death: content analysis of incidents
reported to a national database
Iain E Yardley1,2, Andrew Carson-Stevens3,4,5 and Liam J Donaldson6
1Department of Paediatric Surgery, Evelina London Children’s Hospital, London SE1 7EH, UK
2Kings College London, London WC2R 2LS, UK
3Wales Centre for Primary and Emergency Care Research, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3AT, UK
4Australian Institute of Health Innovation, Macquarie University, Sydney NSW 2109, Australia
5Department of Family Practice, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada
6Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine,
London WC1E 7HT, UK
Corresponding author: Iain E Yardley. Email: iain.yardley@gstt.nhs.uk
Summary
Objectives: To describe serious incidents occurring in the
management of patient remains after their death.
Design: Incidents occurring after patient deaths were ana-
lysed using content analysis to determine what happened,
why it happened and the outcome.
Setting: The Strategic Executive Information System data-
base of serious incidents requiring investigation occurring in
the National Health Service in England.
Participants: All cases describing an incident that occurred
following death, regardless of the age of the patient.
Main outcome measures: The nature of the incident, the
underlying cause or causes of the incident and the outcome
of the incident.
Results: One hundred and thirty-two incidents were
analysed; these related to the storage, management or
disposal of deceased patient remains. Fifty-four incidents
concerned problems with the storage of bodies or body
parts. Forty-three incidents concerned problems with
the management of bodies, including 25 errors in postmor-
tem examination, or postmortems on the wrong body.
Thirty-one incidents related to the disposal of bodies,
25 bodies were released from the mortuary to undertakers
in error; of these, nine were buried or cremated by the
wrong family. The reported underlying causes were similar
to those known to be associated with safety incidents
occurring before death and included weaknesses in or
failures to follow protocol and procedure, poor communi-
cation and informal working practices.
Conclusions: Serious incidents in the management of
deceased patient remains have significant implications for
families, hospitals and the health service more broadly. Safe
mortuary care may be improved by applying lessons
learned from existing patient safety work.
Keywords
Patient safety, deceased, death, mortuary, postmortem,
errors, incident
Received: 20th April 2017; accepted: 6th November 2017
Introduction
Hospitals have a clear responsibility to ensure the
safety of the patients that they care for1 and this
duty of care continues even after death.2,3 Strictly
speaking, a dead person cannot be harmed but civi-
lised society expects that, after death, someone’s body
will be accorded the same dignity and respect as during
life. In the United Kingdom, the societal mores that
guide such expectations have led to public anger when
it was judged that healthcare institutions have failed
to respect the dead. Prominent examples of this are
the removal and retention of children’s organs at
Alder Hey Hospital in Liverpool, keeping patients’
brains in Manchester and the storage of bodies on
the floor of a hospital chapel in Bedford.4–6 Indeed,
mistreatment of bodies has been given media coverage
equal to, or greater than, harm before death in some
instances.7,8 When discovered, these events have led to
extensive enquiries and even changes to the law.2,4,5,9
Patient safety research studies have demonstrated
that the burden of harm caused by unsafe care is sub-
stantial.10,11 Much work has been done in the field of
healthcare
to
improve
patient
safety,
including
attempts to learn from reports of safety incidents to
re-engineer and improve systems.12 The prevention of
incidents following death has, by contrast, received
little or no attention in the scientific literature. We
could find no published systematic study of errors fol-
lowing death, their impact, underlying causes and
potential remedies.
We used a large national database of serious inci-
dents to identify those that occurred after the death
of a patient and determine what happened, underly-
ing causes and the outcomes, using the WHO
International
Classification
for
Patient
Safety
(WHO ICPS)13 to provide a conceptual framework,
Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine; 2018, Vol. 111(2) 57–64
DOI: 10.1177/0141076817744561
! The Royal Society of Medicine 2018
Reprints and permissions: sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
 as has been used previously in both primary and sec-
ondary level care to characterise safety incidents.14,15
Methods
Since 2002, hospitals and other NHS organisations in
England have been required to record, report and
investigate any serious incident requiring investiga-
tion (SIRI). These are defined as
– Unexpected or avoidable death of patients, staff,
visitors or members of the public
– Serious harm to patients, staff, visitors or mem-
bers of the public
– A scenario that prevents or threatens to prevent
a provider organisation’s ability to continue to
deliver healthcare services
– Allegations of abuse
– Adverse media coverage or public concern
about the organisation or the wider NHS
The resulting database, the Strategic Executive
Information System (STEIS), is the source of our
study population. It had accumulated over 120,000
reports of serious incidents by April 2014. The
system is separate from the more widely researched
National Reporting and Learning System (NRLS).
The latter database records incidents of lower degrees
of harm (as well as serious harm) and is therefore a
larger repository of incidents. It has been extensively
used to study the nature of harm reported from front-
line patient care.14,17,18 The STEIS system has the
advantage that reporting of serious incidents is a
requirement placed on all providers of NHS care by
NHS headquarters. Also, the reporting organisation
is required to formally investigate, account for what
happened and set out action taken as a result.
Each recorded incident contains categorical infor-
mation and free-text commentary. The categorical
information (some captured through drop-down
menus) covers the administrative data, the care
sector and clinical area involved, the location of the
incident, the basic demographic data of the patient
involved and the type of incident. Free-text fields
completed at the time of initially reporting the inci-
dent record information on what occurred, what
immediate action was taken and a summary of the
case. The reporting organisation is later required to
complete further free-text fields detailing the investi-
gation carried out, root causes identified and lessons
learned following the incident.
We interrogated the database in October 2014.
The process by which reports are compiled in
STEIS means that it can be many months, often
over a year, before the full details of an incident are
available. To ensure completeness of reports ana-
lysed, the period studied included incidents occurring
between 1 April 2002 and 31 March 2013. Incident
reports where the field ‘location of incident’ was
entered as ‘Mortuary’, the field ‘clinical area’ was
entered as ‘Histopathology’ or ‘General pathology’
and/or the field ‘incident type’ was entered as ‘Post
mortem’ were extracted and the full reports inde-
pendently scrutinised by two authors to ensure they
met the following inclusion and exclusion criteria:
only incidents involving bodies or body parts (regard-
less of age or completed gestation) were included.
Incidents not relating to a deceased patient or invol-
ving events before death were excluded.
The categorical data were used to provide con-
textual variables while the free-text information
within the incident report was subjected to content
analysis. Content analysis19 was used to deconstruct
the narrative content included in reports into a
series of codes which represent and retain the mean-
ing of the report in order to identify, for each inci-
dent, three major concepts from WHO ICPS: the
type of incident (what happened); contributory fac-
tors (the circumstances, actions or influences that
led to the incident) and the outcome. An inductive
approach was taken whereby all reports were
repeatedly
read
and
reread
to
familiarise
the
researchers with the data. During this familiarisa-
tion process, open coding was performed and
themes present in the data noted. These themes
were then collated into a coding framework that
was applied to all reports. New codes were added
in an iterative manner and the new framework reap-
plied to previous cases to ensure the consistency and
completeness of the analysis. At the conclusion of
the analysis, each report was allocated a single code
to describe the type of incident, and either none, one
or multiple contributory factors. Reports were
grouped by outcome and reread to identify themes
common to these groups and potential learning
opportunities from the incidents reported.
Results
The initial search criteria returned 391 cases. Of these
217 were excluded as they did not relate to incidents
involving a deceased patient. A further 42 were
excluded because they described an incident that
occurred before the patient’s death. This left a total
of 132 incidents meeting the inclusion criteria. These
occurred evenly throughout the period study. The
outcome of these incidents fell into three broad
groups relating to storage, management or disposal
of bodies and body parts as shown in Table 1. Three
incidents were reported that led to no harm and so
58
Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 111(2)
 could not be coded with an outcome. These included
two refrigeration failures where action was taken
before decomposition and one incident where the
wrong patient details were allocated to a body
but this was quickly corrected. A further incident
report of thefts from bodies did not fit into any of
the categories.
Outcome of the incidents
Storage
Incidents were grouped under the theme ‘Storage’
where they involved a failure to look after remains
in the custody of the mortuary. This included phys-
ical damage to bodies and failures to monitor storage
Table 1. Outcome of the incidents by incident type (PM, postmortem examination) N ¼ 128 as four incidents were not coded with
an outcome.
Incident type
Incident subtype
Outcome of incident
Number of
occurrences
Storage of body/body
part
Disfigurement of a body
Decomposition
15
Physical injury
7
Hypostasis
2
Loss of a body/body part
Loss of whole body
5
Loss of organ/body part
2
Retention of a body/body part
Whole body retained
10
Tissue retained
7
Organ retained
6
Management of body/
body part
Breach of confidentiality
Inappropriate staff access
4
Wrong body viewed in mortuary
3
Inappropriate public viewing
2
Loss/theft of confidential records
2
Postmortem error
Wrong body had PM
13
PM without consent
9
No PM carried out
3
Error in communication
Wrong cause of death
2
Misunderstanding of the plan for body
1
Error affecting organ/tissue donation
Unable to donate body
2
Unable to donate organs
1
Harvest from wrong body
1
Disposal of
body/body part
Final disposal by mortuary
Remains disposed of incorrectly
6
Wrong body released to third party
Body returned
12
Wrong body buried/cremated
9
Wrong body embalmed
2
Wrong body viewed at funeral director
2
Yardley et al.
59
 leading to the loss, or inadvertent retention, of bodies
or body parts.
Disfiguring of bodies was the adverse outcome
described
in 24
incident
reports.
For
example:
‘Patient’s body was not refrigerated over weekend
rendering body unsuitable for viewing by relatives.’
Decomposition resulting from storing bodies for too
long or at too high a temperature was the commonest
reported cause, occurring in 15 incidents. In two, the
bodies decomposed before postmortem examination,
and in the third, the coroner ordered a second post-
mortem that could not be undertaken due to the state
of the body. The other cases of decomposition caused
distress to bereaved relatives; they were either unable to
view the body or saw it in a mutilated state. Seven
reports described bodies that were disfigured due to
being accidentally dropped or struck while being
moved around the mortuary. Two reports of disfigure-
ment were caused by hypostasis from incorrect storage.
Ten incident reports concerned bodies wrongly kept
in the mortuary for longer than intended. These were
mainly fetuses but two were adults with no known next
of kin. Where there was a family connected to the
body, they were unaware that their relative’s remains
were still in the mortuary. This was because the family
had received and disposed of what they understood
were the complete remains but were later told there
was further tissue (e.g. the placenta being released
instead of the body in the case of neonatal deaths).
In all, 13 incident reports involved retained tissue.
The incidents then necessitated contacting families
and releasing further body parts. None of the incident
reports suggested that the retention of tissue had been
intentional. All had occurred due to separation of the
organs or tissue from the rest of the body for storage
and then a failure to reunite these at the point of
disposal.
Management
Incidents were grouped under the theme ‘Management’
where the required actions to be undertaken on a body
were either not carried out or carried out in a substand-
ard manner.
In 25 cases, the incident occurred during post-
mortem examination. For example:
[A postmortem was commenced] It was quickly recog-
nised that the early findings were not compatible with
the history. The identity of the body was re-checked
and it was then apparent that the body had been mis-
identified and removed from the refrigerator in error.
In 13 cases, the postmortem was performed on the
wrong patient due to misidentification. In a further
nine cases, the postmortem was carried out either
without consent or beyond the limits of the consent
given.
Four incidents related to the donation of organs
or bodies following death. One patient wished to
donate corneas and two patients intended to donate
their whole bodies to medical science but this was not
possible due to mismanagement of their bodies.
In the fourth case, corneas were harvested from the
wrong body.
Disposal
Incidents were grouped under the theme ‘Disposal’
where the outcome involved the way that the body
left the mortuary. In 25 cases, the wrong body was
released to the undertaker and in nine of them
the body was cremated or buried, necessitating
exhumation and a further funeral. For two families,
the mistake was discovered when they were shown
the wrong body at the funeral director’s premises.
A further two bodies were embalmed but not
viewed before rectification. In the remaining 12
cases, the mistake was noticed before either viewing
or a funeral and the deceased was exchanged for the
correct body.
The mortuary disposed of six bodies incorrectly.
All were fetuses where the parents’ requested means
of disposal was not carried out. This was either cre-
mation rather than burial or vice versa, or that the
remains were disposed of without the parents being
made aware, preventing them from attending.
Reaction of relatives
Although not coded as an outcome of incidents, 74 of
the reports referred to the reaction of the next of kin
to these adverse outcomes. Commonly used descrip-
tions
were
‘emotional
upset’
and
‘devastated’.
In almost all incidents reports, the hospital authori-
ties were recorded as having informed the family
of the deceased of the incident. In the remaining
few reports, it was not clear if the family were
informed.
Contributory causes
An overview of the reported contributory factors in
all reports is shown in Table 2.
Misidentification
As might be expected, the commonest contributory
factor
(n ¼ 50)
was
failure
to
follow
standard
identification procedures. In these incidents, the
60
Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 111(2)
 reports stated that a protocol for identification of
bodies was in place but it had not been followed.
For example:
It was common practice for one member of staff to
check the paperwork and one to check the patient,
and at no time did either check the other as per
instructions in the protocol. Both deceased had
names in common.
In 12 of the 50 cases of misidentification, the body in
question had the same or similar name to another
being held in the mortuary. Each mortuary had a pro-
cedure for highlighting same-name bodies, but this
relied on an individual recognising the similarity
and highlighting the issue rather than the danger
being flagged automatically.
In 25 reports, absent or inadequate standard oper-
ating procedures or protocols were described. For
example: ‘The root cause was identified as an absence
of a robust system to ensure that consent forms are
checked thoroughly at the start of each postmortem
investigation.’ These shortcomings resulted in post-
mortem examinations not being carried out, bodies
being retained for prolonged periods and bodies
being disposed of incorrectly. Weak identification
protocols were mentioned in several reports, including
those only requiring one member of staff to check a
body’s identity, or relying on just one patient identifier
(usually their name) instead of the two or three (name
plus date of birth and hospital number or address) that
is standard in clinical practice. Other descriptions in
incident reports of absent standard operating proced-
ures included a lack of instructions to staff on actions
to be taken on discovering refrigerator failure out of
hours, rules for allowing viewings of a body and the
process to be adopted when an obese body will not fit
in the refrigerator.
Failures in cataloguing mortuary content were
described in 40 reports. This was most commonly a
failure to link bodies with body parts that were stored
separately. This led either to the body being released
while organs were retained inappropriately or only
body parts being released, while the body remained
in the mortuary. Other failures of cataloguing pro-
cedures caused processing delays with bodies retained
for unacceptable periods of time.
Infrastructure failure
Infrastructure failures were responsible for 17 inci-
dents, 14 of which involved refrigerator malfunction.
In three, there was no adverse outcome as alarm sys-
tems were triggered and remedial action taken. The
other 11 led to decomposition of bodies. The remaining
three infrastructure failures were of equipment used to
move bodies, causing damage to the body.
Miscommunication
Twenty-six incidents were underlain by failures in com-
munication between the mortuary and other depart-
ments. Handover between the maternity department
and the mortuary for fetal remains was the interdepart-
mental relationship mentioned most frequently. One
report noted that 12 possibilities were routinely con-
sidered when deciding on the handling of the fetus fol-
lowing intrauterine death, depending on gestational
age and parental choices. Failure in the communication
of these options and the lack of a standard operating
procedure for handovers between the two departments
contributed to all seven cases of incorrect disposal of
remains. Errors in communication with the coroner
contributed to a further seven cases, leading to post-
mortem examinations being carried out incorrectly.
Poor written documentation was an element of
causation in 15 incidents. This included consent for
postmortem examinations or disposal being incom-
plete or filed incorrectly, findings of postmortem
examinations being recorded inaccurately or late and
Table 2. Contributory factors identified in incident reports;
each incident could have none, one or several contributory
factors.
Contributory factor
Number
Failure to follow identification procedures
50
Failure in cataloguing mortuary content
40
Patient characteristics
36
Failure of interdepartmental communication
26
Absence of protocol
25
Infrastructure failure
17
Poor written documentation
15
Informal working
11
Misconduct
8
Lack of leadership
8
Fatigue/overwork
5
Out-of-hours working
5
Incorrect storage of body
3
Loss/theft
2
Yardley et al.
61
 decisions or information arrived at during telephone
conversations with other departments (including the
Coroner’s Office) not being recorded. These underly-
ing factors resulted in postmortems not being carried
or being undertaken without consent.
Misconduct and informality of practice
Misconduct of staff was the direct cause of seven con-
fidentiality incidents where hospital workers accessed
bodies in an inappropriate and unauthorised manner.
There was also an isolated case of theft from bodies
by mortuary staff.
The negative influence of informal working practices
within the mortuary was evident in 11 reports. For
example: ‘The undertaker should have been accompa-
nied and supervised at all times by the mortuary tech-
nician while in the mortuary. . .. In this instance,
however, the undertaker was allowed to locate the
body he had come to collect unaccompanied.’ This
most often concerned interactions with funeral dir-
ectors. Reports commonly described mortuaries allow-
ing funeral directors unsupervised access to body
stores, having no appointment or queuing system for
collections, dealing with more than one collection at a
time, overlooking omissions or discrepancies in the
paperwork required to collect bodies. Such informality
contributed to identification errors, leading to incidents
where the wrong body was released.
Patient characteristics
Patient remains at either end of the extreme of body
size were found to be a contributory cause of several
storage incidents. In four incidents, obesity contrib-
uted to adverse outcomes. As the bodies did not fit
into standard refrigerators they were left outside a
temperature-controlled environment contributing to
both decomposition and misidentification in commu-
nal areas. Conversely, physically small fetal remains
lent themselves to storage in communal areas leading
to them being overlooked and retained incorrectly.
Discussion
Serious incidents involving a dead body are uncom-
mon. We found a reported rate of less than one per
month although the true frequency may be higher
because some degree of under-reporting is likely.
However, such occurrences harm families, lead to
loss of clinical and forensic information, and can
damage trust in healthcare organisations. Some high-
profile healthcare incidents involving the living, for
example wrong site surgery, are also uncommon but
considered unacceptable.20 Just as wrong site surgery
should never be acceptable, so the release of the wrong
body to an undertaker should be unacceptable.
We believe that our study is the first to systemat-
ically examine serious incidents of this nature. The
ability to access a national database of serious inci-
dents, governed by mandatory reporting, has enabled
an analysis that goes beyond case reports of isolated
instances and explores underlying patterns of error.
There is the possibility that the mortuaries in which
the incident reports included in our study arose from
are unrepresentative of mortuaries in general and are
only the extreme end of poor practice. However, the
consistency of the types of incidents and the contri-
buting factors underlying them are conspicuous.
We found a systemic pattern of error that tran-
scended individual localities. These involved the man-
agement of bodies, both across the period of the
study and between organisations. Misidentification
of bodies, and failures to catalogue and monitor the
contents of mortuaries, repeatedly led to the retention
or loss of human remains and the wrong bodies
undergoing postmortem examination, being buried
or being cremated. Nearly one-quarter of all reported
incidents in our study involved fetuses. This remains
a deeply sensitive and contentious area that is a rigor-
ous test of the quality of patient-centred care. A hos-
pital board and its senior executives cannot promote
their values in this regard if they fail parents by pre-
siding over incidents in the management of the bodies
of their precious children. The handling of such cases
is complex because of the statutory elements govern-
ing procedures and the importance of observing the
wishes of the parents. It is true that the small size of
the fetuses leads to them often being stored in com-
munal clinical and mortuary areas, predisposing to
misidentification. However, this is the very reason
that a very high standard of procedure is needed.
What is striking in this study of a novel field
of healthcare risk is how the findings resembled
those incidents
occurring
before death. ‘Patient
accident’, ‘Documentation (including identification)’,
‘Infrastructure’, ‘Consent, communication and confi-
dentiality’
and
‘Treatment,
procedure’
are
all
included in the ten most frequent incident types
reported to the NHS.21 If disfigured or decomposing
bodies are considered analogous with ‘patient acci-
dent’, and postmortem examination is equivalent to
a ‘procedure’, then these five incident types account
for well over half of the incidents included in our
study. We also found similarities in causal factors.
Poor communication is a well-known hazard in clin-
ical care, particularly at points of handover between
providers.22,23 We found problems in interdepart-
mental working were a key factor in many of the
incidents in our study, particularly the transfer of
62
Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 111(2)
 fetal remains from maternity departments to the mor-
tuary. Misidentification of patients is a common
cause of wrong site surgery24 and other patient safety
incidents.21 Likewise, misidentification of bodies under-
lay many incidents with well-known risks such as same
or similar names contributing. Misconduct by staff is
generally viewed as an exceptional cause of patient
safety incidents.25 This was reflected in our study with
only eight incidents due to alleged staff misconduct.
These similarities in causation point to the oppor-
tunity for hospitals, their pathologists and their mor-
tuaries to learn from successful solutions in other
fields of patient safety. For example, standardisation
of workflows has been shown to improve outcomes in
other settings12,26–28 and could be applied to the man-
agement
of
bodies
arriving
in
the
mortuary.
Automation of procedures, including a greater use
of information technology, also has the potential to
help prevent errors, for example it could be used to
highlight
same-name
dangers
automatically
and
ensure that bodies are linked to associated body
parts reliably.
Another fundamental aspect of safety in all sec-
tors, not just healthcare, is human factors.12 They
have been shown to form a vital part in both under-
standing incidents and in devising solutions. For
example, we found that working relationships with
funeral directors were important in potentially redu-
cing the risk of harmful events. Good cooperation
can avoid adverse outcomes, shown in willingness
of funeral directors to collect bodies at short notice
following refrigerator failures. On the other hand, we
found undue informality, such as allowing the
unsupervised collection of bodies, can produce mis-
takes. Informality in the management and govern-
ance of the mortuary is a human factors element
that can be detrimental to patient safety. We found
that extensive delegation of tasks to mortuary work-
ers contributed to poor standards of practice and
subsequent errors. A case in point was our finding
of misidentification errors due to processing several
bodies at once or setting bodies out for simultaneous
postmortem examinations.
The findings of our study serve as a warning to
those responsible for the management of mortuary
services of the significant risks inherent in such ser-
vices and the potentially devastating incidents that
can occur if these risks are not mitigated and errors
allowed to go unchecked. It also highlights areas that
system improvement efforts can usefully be targeted
in and approaches that have been shown to be suc-
cessful in other areas of healthcare.
Declarations
Competing Interests: None declared.
Funding: None declared.
Ethical approval: The need for ethical approval was waivered by
the Cardiff University School of Medicine’s Research Ethics
Committee (SMREC Ref 16/59).
Guarantor: IEY
Contributorship: IEY and LJD conceived and designed the
study. IEY carried out the analysis. IEY, LJD and AC-S inter-
preted the results. IEY drafted the manuscript, LJD and AC-S
provided critical revisions.
Acknowledgements: None
Provenance: Not commissioned; peer-reviewed by Elisa Qiulia
Liberati
References
1. Department of Health. The NHS Constitution. The
NHS Belongs to Us All. 2013. See http://www.nhs.uk/
choiceintheNHS/Rightsandpledges/NHSConstitution/
Pages/Overview.aspx (last checked 10 April 2017).
2. Human Tissue Act 2004. See http://www.legislation.gov.
uk/ukpga/2004/30/pdfs/ukpga_20040030_en.pdf
(last
checked 10 April 2017).
3. Human Tissue Authority. Codes of Practice 2017. See
http://www.hta.gov.uk/legislationpoliciesandcodesof-
practice/codesofpractice.cfm
(last
checked
10
April
2017).
4. The Royal Liverpool Children’s Inquiry Report. London:
HM Stationery Office, 2001. See https://www.gov.uk/
government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/250934/0012_ii.pdf (last checked 10 April 2017).
5. Department of Health, HM Inspector of Anatomy.
Isaacs
Report:
The
Investigation
of
Events
That
Followed the Death of Cyril Mark Isaacs. London: HM
Stationery Office, 2003.
6. Hansard 1803-2005, HC Deb 16 January 2001 vol 361
cc201-11. See http://hansard.millbanksystems.com/com-
mons/2001/jan/16/bedford-hospital
(last
checked
10
April 2017).
7. Proctor S, Galloway R, Chaloner R, Jones C and
Thompson D. The Report of the Investigation Into
Matters Relating to Savile at Leeds Teaching Hospitals
NHS Trust. Leeds: Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS
Trust, 2014. See http://www.leedsth.nhs.uk/fileadmin/
Documents/About_us/Trust_Documents/Documents/
40482-LIBRA-main-accessible-v0.3.pdf (last checked 10
April 2017).
8. Kennedy I. Learning from Bristol: The Report of the
Public Inquiry into Children’s Heart Surgery at the
Bristol
Royal
Infirmary
1984–1995.
London:
HM
Stationery Office, 2001. See http://webarchive.nationa-
larchives.gov.uk/20090811143745/http://www.bristol-
inquiry.org.uk/final_report/the_report.pdf (last checked
10 April 2017).
9. Redfern M. The Redfern Inquiry into Human Tissue
Analysis
in
UK
Nuclear
Facilities.
London:
HM
Stationery Office, 2010. See https://www.gov.uk/govern-
ment/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/
229155/0571_i.pdf (last checked 10 April 2017).
Yardley et al.
63
 10. Donaldson L. An organisation with a memory. Clin
Med 2002; 2: 452–457.
11. Kohn LT, Corrigan JM and Donaldson MS. To Err Is
Human: Building a Safer Health System. Washington,
DC: National Academy Press, 1999. See http://www.
nap.edu/openbook.php?isbn¼0309068371
(last
checked 10 April 2017).
12. Woodward HI, Mytton OT, Lemer C, Yardley IE, Ellis
BM, Rutter PD, et al. What have we learned about
interventions to reduce medical errors? Annu Rev
Public Health 2010; 31: 479–497.
13. WHO Patient Safety. More Than Words: Conceptual
Framework for the International Classification for
Patient Safety Version 1.1. Geneva: WHO, 2009. See
http://www.who.int/patientsafety/taxonomy/icps_full_
report.pdf (last checked 11 October 2017).
14. Rees P, Edwards A, Powell C, Evans HP, Carter B,
Hibbert P, et al. Pediatric immunization-related safety
incidents in primary care: a mixed methods analysis of
a national database. Vaccine 2015; 33: 3873–3880.
15. Thomas MJ, Schultz TJ, Hannaford N and Runciman
WB. Failures in transition: learning from incidents
relating to clinical handover in acute care. J Healthc
Qual 2013; 35: 49–56.
16. National Patient Safety Agency. National Framework
for Reporting and Learning from Serious Incidents
Requiring Investigation. London: NPSA, 2010.
17. Rutter PD, Panesar SS, Darzi A and Donaldson LJ.
What is the risk of death or severe harm due to bone
cement
implantation
syndrome
among
patients
undergoing hip hemiarthroplasty for fractured neck
of femur? A patient safety surveillance study. BMJ
Open 2014; 4: e004853.
18. Donaldson LJ, Panesar SS and Darzi A. Patient-safety-
related hospital deaths in England: thematic analysis of
incidents reported to a national database, 2010–2012.
PLoS Med 2014; 11: e1001667.
19. Elo S and Kynga SH. The qualitative content analysis
process. J Adv Nurs 2008; 62: 107–115.
20. DeVine J, Chutkan N and Norvell DC. Avoiding
wrong site surgery: a systematic review. Spine 2010;
35: 528–536.
21. NRLS Quarterly Data Workbook up to December
2013. See http://www.nrls.npsa.nhs.uk/resources/col-
lections/quarterly-data-summaries/?entryid45¼135253
(last checked 10 April 2017).
22. Johner AM, Merchant S, Aslani N, Planting A, Ball
CG, Widder S, et al. Acute general surgery in Canada:
a survey of current handover practices. Can J Surg
2013; 56: E24–E28.
23. Thomas MJ, Schultz TJ, Hannaford N and Runciman
WB. Failures in transition: learning from incidents
relating to clinical handover in acute care. J Healthc
Qual 2013; 35: 49–56.
24. Seiden SC and Barach P. Wrong-side/wrong-site,
wrong-procedure, and wrong-patient adverse events:
are they preventable? Arch Surg 2006; 141: 931–939.
25. Leape LL. When good doctors go bad: a systems prob-
lem. Ann Surg 2006; 244: 649–652.
26. Pronovost P, Needham D, Berenholtz S, Sinopoli D,
Chu H, Cosgrove S, et al. An intervention to decrease
catheter-related bloodstream infections in the ICU. N
Engl J Med 2006; 355: 2725–2732.
27. Romig M, Goeschel C, Pronovost P and Berenholtz
SM. Integrating CUSP and TRIP to improve patient
safety. Hosp Pract 2010; 38: 114–121.
28. Wick EC, Hobson DB, Bennett JL, Demski R,
Maragakis L, Gearhart SL, et al. Implementation of
a surgical comprehensive unit-based safety program
to reduce surgical site infections. J Am Coll Surg
2012; 215: 193–200.
64
Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 111(2)
