 Pamidronate functionalized nanoconjugates for
targeted therapy of focal skeletal malignant osteolysis
Qian Yina,1, Li Tanga,1, Kaimin Caia, Rong Tonga, Rachel Sternbergb, Xujuan Yangc, Lawrence W. Dobruckid,
Luke B. Borste, Debra Kamstockf, Ziyuan Songa, William G. Helferichc, Jianjun Chenga,2, and Timothy M. Fanb,2
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801; bDepartment of Veterinary Clinical
Medicine, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801; cDepartment of Food Science and Human Nutrition, University of Illinois at
Urbana–Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801; dDepartment of Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801; eDepartment of
Population Health and Pathobiology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27606; and fDepartment of Environmental and Radiological Health
Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523
Edited by Omid C. Farokhzad, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, and accepted by Editorial Board Member Mark E. Davis
June 13, 2016 (received for review March 1, 2016)
Malignant osteolysis associated with inoperable primary bone
tumors and multifocal skeletal metastases remains a challenging
clinical problem in cancer patients. Nanomedicine that is able to
target and deliver therapeutic agents to diseased bone sites could
potentially provide an effective treatment option for different
types of skeletal cancers. Here, we report the development of
polylactide nanoparticles (NPs) loaded with doxorubicin (Doxo)
and coated with bone-seeking pamidronate (Pam) for the targeted
treatment of malignant skeletal tumors. In vivo biodistribution of
radiolabeled targeted Pam-NPs demonstrated enhanced bone tumor
accumulation and prolonged retention compared with nontargeted
NPs. In a murine model of focal malignant osteolysis, Pam-function-
alized, Doxo-loaded NPs (Pam-Doxo-NPs) significantly attenuated
localized osteosarcoma (OS) progression compared with nontargeted
Doxo-NPs. Importantly, we report on the first evaluation to our
knowlege of Pam-Doxo-NPs in dogs with OS, which possess tumors
of anatomic size and physiology comparable to those in humans. The
repeat dosing of Pam-Doxo-NPs in dogs with naturally occurring OS
indicated the therapeutic was well tolerated without hematologic,
nonhematologic, and cardiac toxicities. By nuclear scintigraphy, the
biodistribution of Pam-Doxo-NPs demonstrated malignant bone-
targeting capability and exerted measurable anticancer activities as
confirmed with percent tumor necrosis histopathology assessment.
focal skeletal malignant osteolysis | nanoconjugate drug delivery |
large mammalian tumor model | osteosarcoma targeted therapy |
canine comparative oncology
M
alignant osteolysis associated with inoperable primary
bone tumors and multifocal skeletal metastases remains a
clinical challenge in cancer patients (1–3). Due to the progressive
growth of osteotropic solid tumors, patients endure substantial
morbidity consequent to the development of pathologic fracture
and unrelenting bone pain (4–6). Effective therapies for treating
malignant osteolysis include ionizing radiation, which exerts ac-
tivity through the induction of tumor cell and osteoclast apoptosis
within the diseased bone microenvironment (7–10). Additional
adjuvant therapies combined with ionizing radiation can improve
disease control and include systemic chemotherapies, small-
molecule inhibitors, and antiresorptive agents (11, 12). Despite
the clinical institution of aggressive multimodality therapies, the
outgrowth of residual cancer cells within the bone microenvi-
ronment is frequent, resulting in disease progression and treat-
ment failure (13). As such, the discovery and validation of novel
strategies, in particular targeted therapy, for treating osteotropic
solid tumors is clinically warranted and necessary for improving
long-term outcomes and survivorship with reduced side effects in
cancer patients.
Nanomedicine that is able to deliver therapeutic agents to
diseased sites could be an effective and complementary adjuvant
treatment for inoperable focal and multifocal skeletal malignancies
(14, 15). Nanoparticles (NPs) can be engineered to carry various
therapeutic agents, extravasate leaky blood vessels, reach and ac-
cumulate at tumor tissues, target malignant cancer cells, and release
cargos in a controlled manner (16). When combined with active
targeting ligands (e.g., antibodies, peptides, aptamers, or small
molecules) NPs could be selectively targeted to specific tissues to
treat certain types of cancer (17, 18). Targeted NPs hold great
promise for minimizing systemic toxicity and improving thera-
peutic effectiveness against isolated tumor cell populations
within skeletal niches (19–22). However, the clinical evaluation
of promising nanotechnologies has been constrained to their
evaluation in artificial preclinical rodent models systems, and the
clinical advancement of promising nanotechnologies as superior
treatment options for cancer patients suffering from malignant
osteolysis has yet to be realized.
The translation of novel treatment strategies to clinical practice
for improving the management of cancer-associated skeletal pa-
thologies might be accelerated through the use of appropriate large
mammalian tumor models that more closely recapitulate the
processes involved in malignant osteolysis. Osteosarcoma (OS) is
a solid tumor that causes severe focal bone destruction and is the
most common primary bone tumor occurring in children and
adolescents, accounting for ∼60% of primary malignant bone
Significance
Malignant osteolysis associated with inoperable primary bone
tumors and multifocal skeletal metastases remains a challeng-
ing clinical problem in cancer patients. The outgrowth of re-
sidual cancer cells within the bone microenvironment despite
aggressive multimodality therapies necessitates the discovery
and validation of novel strategies for treating osteotropic solid
tumors. We report on pamidronate functionalized polylactide
nanoparticles for the targeted treatment of focal malignant
osteolysis by delivering doxorubicin specifically to the bone
tumor microenvironment. Improved efficacy was demonstrated in
a preclinical orthotopic mouse model of osteosarcoma. Most im-
portantly, through the inclusion of dogs with naturally developing
osteosarcoma, biocompatibility, biodistribution, and anticancer
activities at clinically relevant dosages were demonstrated in a
large mammalian modeling system.
Author contributions: Q.Y., L.T., R.T., J.C., and T.M.F. designed research; Q.Y., L.T., K.C.,
R.T., R.S., X.Y., L.W.D., and Z.S. performed research; X.Y., L.W.D., and W.G.H. contributed
new reagents/analytic tools; Q.Y., L.T., K.C., R.T., R.S., X.Y., L.W.D., L.B.B., D.K., and T.M.F.
analyzed data; and Q.Y., L.T., J.C., and T.M.F. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission. O.C.F. is a guest editor invited by the Editorial
Board.
1Q.Y. and L.T. contributed equally to this work.
2To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: jianjunc@illinois.edu or t-fan@
illinois.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1603316113/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1603316113
PNAS
|
Published online July 25, 2016
|
E4601–E4609
ENGINEERING
MEDICAL SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
 tumors diagnosed in the first two decades of life (23). Dogs
spontaneously develop OS with the highest frequency of all
mammal species; OS commonly affects older dogs of large or
giant skeletal size (24). Biological, histological, and genomic
features of OS in humans and dogs are highly similar and have
provided a basis to evaluate novel therapeutics in dogs with OS
(25–29). In addition, given the comparable anatomic size of
humans and dogs (50 kg or greater) afflicted with OS, dogs might
serve as more predictive models for comparable human pathol-
ogies based upon allometric scale similarities. Given these de-
sirable modeling attributes and as part of the broader field of
comparative oncology, translational drug development studies in
dogs with OS have been used successfully to define dose and
schedule for investigational therapeutic agents intended for de-
velopment and clinical application in humans (30, 31).
Herein, we report a pamidronate (Pam) functionalized, poly-
lactide (PLA)-based NP for the targeted treatment of focal
malignant osteolysis by delivering doxorubicin (Doxo) specifi-
cally to the bone tumor microenvironment. Pam, a commonly
used bisphosphonate, has been recognized for its excellent
osteotropicity due to its exceptionally high affinity toward hy-
droxyapatite (HA), a major inorganic component of bone. The
combination of active bone targeting mediated by Pam and
passive tumor targeting through the enhanced permeation and
retention (EPR) effect of NPs (32, 33) resulted in markedly
enhanced accumulation of Doxo-loaded NPs within bone tumors
in both mice and dogs bearing OS. Improved efficacy of Pam-
functionalized, Doxo-loaded NPs (Pam-Doxo-NPs) was demon-
strated in a preclinical orthotopic mouse model of OS. Most
importantly, through the inclusion of dogs with naturally de-
veloping OS, clinically relevant dosages of Pam-Doxo-NPs could
be evaluated for biocompatibility, biodistribution, and anticancer
activities in a large mammalian modeling system.
Results
Synthesis and Characterization of Pam-Doxo-NPs. The Pam-Doxo-
NPs were constructed through conanoprecipitation of Doxo–
PLA polymer conjugates, poly(ethylene glycol)-b-PLA (PEG-PLA)
and Pam-conjugated PEG-PLA (PLA-PEG-Pam) (Fig. 1A).
Doxo–PLA polymer conjugates were synthesized by using the
Doxo-initiated ring-opening polymerization (ROP) strategy as
described previously (34). This method allowed for quantitative
incorporation of Doxo into PLA polymers and resulted in Doxo–
PLA conjugates with precisely controlled composition and mo-
lecular weights (Fig. 1A). At a monomer/initiator (LA/Doxo)
ratio of 10, Doxo loading was achieved as high as 27.4 wt % with
nearly 100% incorporation efficiency. Pam was covalently con-
jugated to PLA-PEG-COOH polymer via stable amide bond as
evidenced by 1H NMR (Fig. 1A and Fig. S1). The resultant
Doxo–PLA polymer conjugate was mixed with a mixture of PLA-
PEG and PLA-PEG-Pam in dimethylformamide (DMF) followed
by nanoprecipitation into rapidly stirred water as nonsolvent to
prepare Pam-Doxo-NPs with different Pam contents (Fig. 1B). All
of NPs showed similar hydrodynamic sizes (∼100 nm) and relatively
narrow size distributions (polydispersity index ∼0.10) as measured
by dynamic light scattering (DLS) (Fig. 1B). NPs with ∼100 nm size
and narrow size distribution were also evidenced by transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) analysis (Fig. 1C). By labeling NPs
with radioisotope
64Cu [denoted as
64Cu-NP, Pam-64Cu-NP
(10%), and Pam-64Cu-NP (50%), respectively] we evaluated the
effects of Pam ligand densities on the pharmacokinetic profiles
of NPs by monitoring serial blood radioactivity over the course of
24 h. All of the NPs exhibited similar circulation half-lives (Fig.
1D and Fig. S2A).
Doxo was conjugated to PLA polymer through ester linkages
and could be released from NPs subjected to hydrolysis of ester
bonds in the physiological condition. We conducted release
B
Nanoprecipitation
Doxorubicin (Doxo)
(BDI-EI)ZnN(TMS)2
Lactide
Doxo-PLA
PLA-PEG-COOH
Pamidronate (Pam)
PLA-PEG-Pam
Pam-Doxo-NPs
A 
D
0
100 200 300 400 500
Doxo-NP 
0
100 200 300 400 500
Pam-Doxo-NP  (10%)
0
100
200
300
400
500
Size (nm)
Pam-Doxo-NP  (50%)
C 
B 
Group
Doxo-NP
Pam-Doxo-NP (10%)
Pam-Doxo-NP (50%)
Composition (wt/wt)
Doxo-PLA/PLA-
PEG=1/1
Doxo-PLA/PLA-PEG/PLA-
PEG-Pam=1/0.8/0.2
Doxo-PLA/PLA-PEG-
Pam=1/1
Mw of PEG (Da)
5k
5k
5k
Drug loading (wt%)
13.7
13.7
13.7
Size (nm)
109.8
102.0
106.2
PDI
0.164
0.062
0.071
Half-life (h)
7.5
7.7
7.8
HO
O
O
O
O
O
m
n
OH
HO
O
O
O
N
H
OH
O
O
P
OH
OH
O
P O
HO
OH
m
n
Fig. 1.
Preparation and characterization of Pam-Doxo-NPs. (A) Schematic illustration of formulating Pam-Doxo-NPs. (B) Hydrodynamic sizes of NPs analyzed
by DLS analysis. (C) TEM image of Pam-Doxo-NPs (50%) (Scale bar: 100 nm.) (D) Formulation parameters and physicochemical properties of Pam-Doxo-NPs and
Doxo-NPs (Mw of PEG: molecular weight of PEG).
E4602
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1603316113
Yin et al.
 kinetic studies of Pam-Doxo-NPs in PBS buffer at pH 5.0 and
7.4. The release kinetics of Doxo from NPs was controllable in a
sustained manner without burst release effect at both pH values.
The release rate of Doxo from NPs was also pH-dependent,
evidenced by accelerated release kinetics at increased acidities,
likely due to faster hydrolysis at lower pH (Fig. S2B). Moreover,
the Pam-Doxo-NPs could be formulated as a solid form upon
lyophilization with human serum albumin as a lyoprotectant.
Lyophilized Pam-Doxo-NPs, when reconstituted in buffer solu-
tion, maintained original size and narrow particle size distribu-
tion (Fig. S2C).
When incubating Pam-Doxo-NPs in 50% (vol %) FBS buffer,
Pam-Doxo-NPs (50%) showed a slow time-dependent size
increase after 4 d of incubation, whereas Pam-Doxo-NPs (10%)
demonstrated more durable maintenance of size without aggre-
gation (Fig. S2D). Considering the stability of NPs as a critical
determinant for their in vivo biological performance, Pam-Doxo-
NPs (10%) were chosen for further live animal exploration.
In Vitro HA Binding Capability and Cytotoxicity of Pam-Doxo-NPs. To
characterize the potential bone-binding affinity of Pam-modified
NPs, we first performed an in vitro HA adsorption assay using
Cy5-labeled NPs (Cy5-NPs). HA was considered as an ideal
model substrate because it constitutes the major inorganic com-
ponent of bone and undergoes erosive osteolysis secondary to
the growth of invasive osteotropic solid malignancies. As shown
in Fig. 2A, Pam-modified Cy5-NPs (Pam-Cy5-NPs) exhibited
rapid and strong binding with HA, with 10.5 mg of Pam-Cy5-
NP bound per gram of HA during the first 15 min of in-
cubation and gradually reached equilibrium by 4 h. In contrast,
nontargeted Cy5-NPs showed minimal binding capability with
HA (1.6 mg of NP bound per gram of HA) during the first
15 min of incubation and exhibited approximately threefold re-
duced binding capability with HA compared with the Pam-Cy5-
NPs over 4 h of incubation. To determine whether the binding of
Pam-Cy5-NPs to HA exhibits adsorptive characteristics similar to
those of free aminobisphosphonate, we measured the steady-
state binding affinity by titrating the concentrations of NPs. The
results showed that the binding capacity was proportional to the
concentrations of Pam-Cy5-NPs, whereas the Cy5-NPs had a
nonspecific adsorption to HA (Fig. 2B). To confirm the binding
of Pam-Cy5-NPs with HA was a specific effect of Pam targeting,
we conducted a competitive binding experiment in which we
preincubated free Pam with HA for 24 h and then measured the
binding capacity of Pam-Cy5-NPs with HA after 2 h of in-
cubation, while in the presence of free Pam. The pre- and
0
1
2
3
4
0
10
20
30
40
Time (hours)
mg bound per g of HA
Cy5-NP
Pam-Cy5-NP 
5
12.5
25
50
0
10
20
30
40
NP concentration (mg/L)
mg bound per g of HA
Cy5-NP
Pam-Cy5-NP 
100 m 
Pam-Cy5-NP 
Cy5-NP 
Cy5 
Bright Field 
Pam-Cy5-NP 
0
10
20
30
40
mg bound per g of HA
 0 mg/mL Pam
1 mg/mL Pam
*
A
B
C
D
E
Fig. 2.
Binding affinity to HA and cytotoxicity of Pam-Doxo-NPs against GFP-labeled OS cells (K7M2). (A) The kinetics of binding to HA crystals was measured
for Cy5-labeled Pam-NPs (Pam-Cy5-NP, solid square) and Cy5-labeled NPs (Cy5-NPs, solid circle). Measurements were acquired at 15 min, 30 min, and 1, 2, and
4 h after mixing. Data presented as average ± SEM. (B) Steady-state binding to HA crystals was measured for Pam-Cy5-NPs (blue column) and Cy5-NPs (green
column) at 2 h. (C) The binding of Pam-Cy5-NPs to HA crystals was measured at 2 h of incubation with (green column) or without (blue column) the existence
of free Pam (1 mg/mL). Data presented as average ± SEM, and analyzed with two-tailed student t test; significance defined as *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and
***P < 0.001. (D) Direct visualization of Pam-Cy5-NPs and Cy5-NPs binding to HA using fluorescence microscopy. Bright-field (Top) and Cy5 fluorescence
(Bottom) images of HA crystals treated with Pam-Cy5-NPs (50 μg/mL) or Cy5-NPs (50 μg/mL) are shown. (Scale bar: 100 μm.) (E) Differences in K7M2 GFP cell
density after 7 d of incubation following 15-min pulse exposure to blank NPs (no Doxo, Pam modified), Doxo-NPs, and Pam-Doxo-NPs (Doxo equivalent dose:
3,000 ng/mL). Untreated cells served as control. Data presented by average relative fluorescence units (RFU) of GFP and analyzed with one-way ANOVA and
post hoc Tukey test; significance defined as *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001.
Yin et al.
PNAS
|
Published online July 25, 2016
|
E4603
ENGINEERING
MEDICAL SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
 coincubation of HA with free Pam significantly reduced the
binding of Pam-Cy5-NP to HA by 90% (Fig. 2C), indicating that
Pam was principally responsible for HA binding. To further
characterize the binding of NPs to HA, tandem bright field and
fluorescence microscopy were used. With Cy5 fluorescence in-
tensity confirmed to linearly correlate with NP concentration
(Fig. S3), Pam-Cy5-NPs consistently adsorbed to exposed surface
and edges of the HA crystals, whereas Cy5-NPs only minimally
adhered to HA crystals (Fig. 2D).
Given the increased binding capacity of Pam-NPs to HA, we
reasoned that Pam-NPs carrying chemotherapeutic agents may
exert greater cytotoxicity to tumor cells residing within the bone
microenvironment by virtue of their preferential deposition. To
investigate this possibility, we evaluated the effect of Pam-Doxo-
NPs against GFP-labeled K7M2 OS cells grown on HA-coated
culture plates, in which the numbers of viable K7M2 OS cells
were directly proportional to GFP fluorescent intensities (Fig.
S4). After 7 d of growth, GFP-labeled K7M2 OS cells exhibited
the greatest reduction in cell numbers following a 15-min pulse
exposure to Pam-Doxo-NPs (Fig. 2E). The results were consis-
tent with the preferential adherence of Pam-Doxo-NPs to HA
and consequent prolonged exposure of K7M2 cells to cytotoxic
effects of Doxo in vitro.
In Vivo OS Targeting and Efficacy of Pam-Doxo-NPs in Mice. To in-
vestigate the in vivo targeting capability of Pam-NPs for osteo-
tropic solid tumors like OS, we next labeled Pam-NPs and
nontargeted NPs with 64Cu (denoted as Pam-64Cu-NP and 64Cu-
NP, respectively; Fig. S5A), assessed 64Cu labeling stability of
NPs in serum as a function of time (Fig. S5C), and monitored
their biodistribution after i.v. administration into BALB/c mice
bearing firefly luciferase transfected K7M3 OS tumors with
noninvasive micropositron emission tomography/X-ray computed
tomography (micro-PET/CT) imaging (Fig. 3A). In mice, the right
hind leg was inoculated with K7M3 cells whereas the normal con-
tralateral left hind leg served as an internal control. Established
growth of K7M3 cells within the proximal tibial bone was con-
firmed using a bioluminescence imaging (BLI) taken at 14 d post-
inoculation of the K7M3 cells (Fig. S5B). As shown in Fig. 3A,
merged CT and PET images demonstrated noticeable radioac-
tivity in the tumor-bearing right hind leg of a representative
mouse injected with Pam-64Cu-NP (2.8% injected dose per gram
of tissue (%I.D.g−1) as early as 1 h postinjection (p.i.) (Fig. 3B),
whereas in comparison the radioactivity detected in the normal
contralateral left hind leg was ∼50% less (1.6%I.D.g−1). The
increased radioactivity detected in the tumor-bearing leg was
maintained for as long as 24 h p.i. (2.6%I.D.g−1, Fig. 3B), sug-
gesting the Pam-64Cu-NPs were preferentially retained in the
osteolytic tumor microenvironment, presumably due to the high
binding affinity with inorganic bone matrix. In contrast, the ac-
cumulation of nontargeted 64Cu-NPs was much lower than that
of Pam-64Cu-NP (1.7 versus 2.8%I.D.g−1 1 h p.i. and 1.9 versus
2.6%I.D.g−1 24 h p.i.) and showed no difference between tumor-
bearing right hind legs (1.9%I.D.g−1) and normal contralat-
eral left hind legs (1.6%I.D.g−1) (Fig. 3B). Three-dimensional
reconstructed imaging and movies also provide evidence for the
significantly enhanced accumulation of Pam-64Cu- NPs in the
right leg at 5 h p.i. compared with 64Cu-NPs (Fig. 3C and Movies
S1 and S2). These results were further confirmed by ex vivo
measurement of radioactivity 24 h p.i. in surgically resected
tumor-bearing right hind legs with a gamma counter (2.6 and
1.9%I.D.g−1 for Pam-64Cu-NPs and 64Cu-NPs, respectively)
(Fig. 3D). The accumulation of Pam-64Cu-NPs and 64Cu-NPs in the
blood and other organs were also assessed by gamma counter and
demonstrated comparable soft tissue biodistribution profiles in
other organs (Fig. S5D), although Pam-64Cu-NPs accumulated to
a greater extent within reticuloendothelial organs than nontargeted
64Cu-NPs.
Given the preferential accumulation of Pam-NPs to focal re-
gions of skeletal osteolysis demonstrated by micro-PET/CT im-
ages, we reasoned that improved antitumor activity could be
achieved with Pam-NPs loaded with Doxo. To investigate this
therapeutic potential, we evaluated the efficacy of Pam-Doxo-
NPs using the K7M3 OS model and a defined treatment protocol
(Fig. 4A), in which in vivo tumor burden was demonstrated to be
well correlated with the bioluminescent signal intensity (Fig.
S6A). Fourteen days following K7M3 inoculation, mice were
imaged and equally distributed based upon bioluminescent in-
tensities into four i.v. therapeutic groups (n = 6), being saline,
Pam functionalized blank vehicles (Pam-NPs), Doxo-NPs, and
Pam-Doxo-NPs. Following randomization, mice received i.v.
therapy once weekly for two consecutive weeks and were then
5 %I.D.g-1 
5 hour
1 hour
24 hour
tumor 
Pam-64Cu-NPs 
64Cu-NPs 
0
0
1
2
3
 Pam-64Cu-NP
64Cu-NP
1.9
% I.D.g-1
*
2.6
24 hour
Imaging area 
Pam-64Cu-NPs 
64Cu-NPs 
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
1
2
3
4
5
Time (hours)
% I.D. g-1
Pam-64Cu-NP (right) 
64Cu-NP (right) 
Pam-64Cu-NP (left) 
64Cu-NP (left) 
A
B
C
D
Fig. 3.
Radiolabeled Pam-NP improves in vivo intratumoral accumulation in murine orthotropic OS after systemic administration. (A) In vivo whole-body
dynamic micro-PET/CT imaging of mice was performed to assess the accumulation of Pam-64Cu-NPs and 64Cu-NPs in the tumor-residing right hind leg (yellow
box and arrow) at 1, 5, and 24 h p.i. (amplified, Inset in yellow box). (B) The kinetics of the accumulation of Pam-64Cu-NPs and 64Cu-NPs in tumor-residing right
hind leg and normal contralateral left hind leg at 1, 5, and 24 h p.i., evaluated by micro-PET/CT imaging. Data presented as average ± SEM. (C) The cor-
responding 3D micro-PET/CT imaging at 5 h p.i. shows accumulation of Pam-64Cu-NPs or 64Cu-NPs in the tumor-residing right hind leg (amplified, Inset).
(D) The accumulation of Pam-64Cu-NPs and 64Cu-NPs in bone tumor-residing right hind leg, assessed by gamma counter. Data presented as average ± SEM,
and analyzed with two-tailed student t test; significance defined as *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001.
E4604
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1603316113
Yin et al.
 monitored for an additional week before they were killed (Fig.
4A). As expected, mice treated with Pam-Doxo-NPs achieved
the greatest delay in localized tumor growth in comparison with
all other treatment groups (Fig. 4 B–D). Importantly, although
Pam-NPs and Doxo-NPs marginally slowed primary tumor
growth in comparison with saline-treated mice, only mice re-
ceiving Pam-Doxo-NPs had the possibility of achieving macro-
scopic tumor volume regression, whereas all mice receiving other
therapies (saline, Pam-NPs, or Doxo-NPs) uniformly demon-
strated tumor progression between days 14 and 28 of study (Fig.
4 B and C). The median fold increase of bioluminescent signal
from day 14 (pretreatment) following two consecutively weekly
treatments of i.v. Pam-Doxo-NPs was 1.8-fold, whereas treat-
ment with saline, Pam-NPs, or Doxo-NPs produced markedly
higher median fold increases of bioluminescent signal (13.9-,
4.6-, and 4.5-fold, respectively; Fig. 4C). In addition to bio-
luminescent signal changes, histologic analysis of tumor surface
area postmortem also supported increase anticancer activities
exerted by Pam-Doxo-NPs above other treatment groups (Fig. 4
B and D). For mice treated with Pam-Doxo-NPs, the median
tumor surface area was 2.4 × 104 μm2 (P < 0.05, compared with
saline control); however, no difference in tumor surface area was
identified among the remaining three treatment groups (Fig.
4D). To further confirm the enhanced efficacy achieved by Pam-
Doxo-NPs, the extent and degree of bone destruction resultant
from localized OS progression was evaluated by micro-CT. As
illustrated in Fig. 4E, severe pathologic osteolysis associated with
OS progression could be readily identified within the right
proximal tibias of tumor-bearing mice receiving saline, Pam-NPs,
and, to a lesser extent, Doxo-NPs. In contrast, malignant osteolysis
was attenuated in mice receiving Pam-Doxo-NPs and resulted in
a trend toward increased percentage of bone volume (leg with
K7M3 tumor/normal leg × 100%) (Fig. S6B). Collectively the
observations of reduced bioluminescent signal change and tumor
surface area, as well as the trend toward preserved bone volume,
provide strong support for increased antitumor efficacy of Pam-
Doxo-NPs compared with their nontargeted counterparts in an
orthotopic murine model of OS.
Clinical Evaluation of OS Tumor Targeting and Efficacy of Pam-Doxo-
NPs in Dogs. Given the promising results in the preclinical murine
models, we sought to further test the translational application of
Pam-NPs in a large mammalian model system. For these pur-
poses, we chose to use dogs that naturally and spontaneously
develop appendicular OS to serve as a physiologically relevant
model of focal malignant osteolysis similar to what occurs in
human cancer patients. As part of a phase I clinical trial in
pet dogs diagnosed with OS, we studied the dynamic in vivo
biodistribution profile of i.v. administered Pam-NPs labeled with
99mTc in dogs (Fig. S7A). Upon i.v. infusion, Pam-NPs labeled
with 99mTc were rapidly distributed to all major visceral organs
including the heart, kidney, spleen, and liver, with eventual
elimination into the urinary bladder (Fig. 5 A and B). Impor-
tantly, localization and accumulation of 99mTc-labeled Pam-NPs
was observed within the localized bone tumor microenviron-
ment, indicating that Pam surface modification can quickly tar-
get areas of malignant osteolysis in vivo within 1–2 h after
administration (Fig. 5C). Furthermore, 99mTc activity preferen-
tially intensified in a time-dependent manner, suggesting the
dynamic concentration and accumulation of Pam-NPs within
A
B
C
D
E
Fig. 4.
Pam-Doxo-NPs exert anticancer activities in murine orthotropic OS after systemic administration. (A) Experimental procedure of in vivo bone tumor
induction and treatment protocol. (B) Serial changes in K7M3 BLI as a function of time and treatment. Representative bioluminescent signal of mice before
treatment and after different treatments, PBS as control, Pam-NP, Doxo-NP, and Pam-Doxo-NP (Doxo equivalent dose: 50 mg/kg), and representative H&E
images for pathology analysis. (C and D) The relative tumor burden increase of four groups of mice after treatments, evaluated and quantified by (C) BLI and
(D) histopathology. Data expressed as median and interquartile range and compared with Kruskal–Wallis nonparametric ANOVA and post hoc Dunn’s test;
significance defined as *P < 0.05 comparing with PBS as control. (E) Micro-CT images of proximal tibias [tumor (T) versus control (C)] in four representative
mice receiving different i.v. treatments of NPs. White circle indicates the leg with inoculated tumor.
Yin et al.
PNAS
|
Published online July 25, 2016
|
E4605
ENGINEERING
MEDICAL SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
 the bone tumor microenvironment (Fig. 5D). To confirm that the
detection of 99mTc radioactivity by gamma camera in pet dogs
with OS was indeed 99mTc-labeled Pam-NPs and not simply free
99mTc as a consequence of spontaneous dissociation from Pam-NPs
in vivo, we assessed the radiochemical purity of 99mTc labeled
Pam-NPs immediately before i.v. infusion and also the 99mTc signal
that accumulated in the bladder (urine) 2 h postinfusion (Fig. S7B).
The radiochemical purities of 99mTc-labeled Pam-NPs immediately
before i.v. infusion and 2 h postinfusion found within the urine
were greater than 95%, providing evidence that the detected 99mTc
radioactivity in pet dogs with OS was indeed associated with
99mTc-labeled Pam-NPs.
Upon confirming the osteotropic homing properties of Pam-
NPs in dogs with OS, we next sought to explore the tolerability
and anticancer activities of Pam-Doxo-NPs. Through a rapid
dose-escalation protocol (Fig. 6A), nine pet dogs with OS were
treated with a single i.v. infusion of Pam-Doxo-NPs, with each
subsequent pet dog recruited for study progressively receiving a
greater dosage of Doxo equivalent (0–180 mg/m2 dose equiva-
lent). Following i.v. infusion, pet dogs were monitored for he-
matologic and biochemical toxicity weekly for 3 wk and then
underwent amputation of the diseased limb to allow for histo-
logic assessment of anticancer activity (percent tumor necrosis)
within the primary OS lesion. Even at the highest Doxo dosage
equivalent evaluated (180 mg/m2), Pam-Doxo-NPs were safe and
did not cause any hematologic, renal, or persistent hepatic tox-
icity (Fig. 6 B and C). In two dogs, mild to moderate elevations in
liver transaminases were identified 1 wk following Pam-Doxo-NP
administration but trended toward normalization upon subsequent
reevaluations. In addition to hematologic and biochemical tolera-
bility of Pam-Doxo-NP, no evidence of cardiotoxicity was identified
in any dog as determined by circulating cardiac troponin-I con-
centrations (Fig. S8). In addition, Pam-Doxo-NPs exerted mod-
erate anticancer activity as determined by percent tumor necrosis,
which was correlated (r2 = 0.61, P = 0.04) with three factors that
dictated the concentrations of Doxo achieved within the bone
tumor microenvironment: (i) total dosage of Doxo, (ii) magnitude
of 99mTc-labeled Pam-Doxo-NPs accumulation within the tumor
site, and (iii) overall bone tumor volume of distribution (Fig. 7).
Discussion
The past several decades have witnessed the explosive develop-
ment of nanomedicine, and the combination of nanotechnology
Fig. 5.
Biodistribution of 99mTc-labeled Pam-Doxo-NPs in pet dogs with OS.
(A) Dynamic overlay of 180 gamma camera images acquired over 3 min
(1 image per s) of 99mTc-labeled Pam-Doxo-NPs infused i.v. into a pet dog
with OS. Tracking of 99mTc-labeled Pam-Doxo-NPs can be readily observed in
highly perfused visceral tissues [1, site of i.v. infusion (lateral saphenous
vein); 2, descending caudal vena cava; 3, urinary bladder; 4, left kidney; 5, right
kidney; 6, liver; and 7, heart]. (B) Serial images from 5 to 60 min postinfusion of
99mTc-labeled Pam-Doxo-NPs demonstrates prolonged dwell time in highly
vascular visceral organs with ultimate renal elimination into the bladder. (C) In
vivo preferential localization of 99mTc-labeled Pam-Doxo-NPs to regions of focal
malignant osteolysis in two representative dogs with OS (Left, dog 1 with distal
radial OS and Right, dog 2 with distal femoral OS) confirmed by colocalization of
pathologic radiographic changes and 99mTc activity. (D) Representative im-
ages of progressive 99mTc-labeled Pam-Doxo-NPs accumulation within focal
areas of malignant osteolysis as a function of time (1 and 2 h p.i.).
Day -1
Day 0                         Day 7                   Day 14 
Day 21   
Enroll
Blood/Pam-Doxo-NP
Blood                     Blood
Blood/Amputate
A
B
C
D
E
Fig. 6.
Exceptional biocompatibility of Pam-Doxo-NPs following single-dose i.v. infusion. (A) Clinical trial design for pet dogs receiving Pam-Doxo-NPs.
(B) Hematologic and (C) biochemical safety profile of Pam-Doxo-NPs following single-dose, i.v. administration. Complete absence of grade I toxicity (dotted line)
for total neutrophil and platelet counts throughout entirety of study. (D) Complete absence of renal toxicity as assessed by serum creatinine, and (E) mild and
transient elevations in liver transaminases identified 1 wk p.i. of Pam-Doxo-NPs administration in minority of pet dogs treated.
E4606
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1603316113
Yin et al.
 and medicine has brought great promise for the improved
treatment of cancer. Compared with conventional chemother-
apy, the use of NPs to administer therapeutic agents to tumor
tissues could potentially increase targeted drug delivery to tumor
cells and the associated microenvironment while reducing the
likelihood of adverse side effects, and thus enhancing thera-
peutic indices (16, 35). Despite these potential advantages, the
clinical maturation of nanomedicine from bench to bed has
proved very difficult, with fewer than five agents being approved
for the treatment of cancer patients (36). One barrier toward the
translation of nanomedicine discoveries into medical break-
throughs is the difficulty in identifying optimal physicochemical
properties of NPs that will predictably and consistently prolong
the in vivo circulation, facilitate intratumoral accumulation, and
release drugs in a controlled manner yet simultaneously possess
properties that are robustly biocompatible. By uniquely inte-
grating the controlled ROP into the formulation of NPs as
described in the present investigation we demonstrated the fea-
sibility of facile large-scale production (up to gram) of highly
biocompatible NPs with well-controlled properties of distinct
size, narrow size distributions, high drug loading, and sustained
drug release profiles (34). Compared with the conventional en-
capsulation method, this strategy allows for nearly 100% drug
incorporation efficiency, and thus precisely controlled drug load-
ings, only by adjusting monomer/initiator (LA/Doxo) ratios. Fur-
thermore, we successfully demonstrated the developed NPs could
be maintained stably as a solid formulation with absolutely no
aggregation after reconstitution, a property that can be beneficial
for large-scale translational applications.
By taking advantage of the EPR effect, NPs can extravasate
through the leaky blood vasculature, accumulate in the tumor
tissues, and release their payload sustainably (37). This passive
targeting process is largely dependent on the physicochemical
properties of NPs (38), and the addition of active targeting
strategies is expected to improve localized drug delivery (39). In
this study, we sought to actively target NPs to regions of malig-
nant bone resorption through the use of Pam, a potent amino-
bisphosphonate used for the treatment of diverse skeletal
pathologies (40). The bone microenvironment serves as a fertile
“soil” for the dissemination of various solid cancers known as
skeletal metastases (41, 42) and serves as the developmental
origin for primary bone tumors such as OS and Ewing’s sarcoma
(43). As a consequence of osteotropic cancer progression, a large
majority of cancer patients afflicted with focal or multifocal
skeletal tumors will endure excruciating pain and suffering
consequent to uncontrolled malignant bone resorption. As such,
there is clinical justification for developing targeted treatment
strategies aimed at improving the management of malignant
osteolytic syndromes. In the present study, we successfully
demonstrated Pam surface-modified PLA NPs could signifi-
cantly improve their accumulation and retention within the dis-
eased bone tumor microenvironment. Although some data
derived from our study suggested increased reticuloendothelial
cell uptake of Pam surface modified PLA NPs, which could
be the result of Pam serving as a phosphoantigen, no overt
toxicities were associated with this effect. Importantly, by virtue
of preferential anatomic targeting to the bone microenviron-
ment, Pam-Doxo-NPs were capable of minimizing systemic off-
target toxicities and concurrently enhancing localized antitumor
activities in not only a preclinical murine tumor model but also in
a clinically relevant, large mammalian tumor model, pet dogs
with OS.
OS is the most common primary bone tumor diagnosed in
pediatric patients and pet dogs, and clinical symptomology in-
cludes pain and lameness consequent to localized tumor growth
and secondary bone destruction. The clinical presentation, bi-
ologic behavior, and genetics of OS are strongly conserved be-
tween humans and pet dogs (26, 28, 29, 44), and canine OS has
emerged as a powerful comparative tumor model for guiding and
expediting the drug development pathway for pediatric OS pa-
tients (45, 46). One of the critical factors that contribute to the
future clinical translation of nanomedicine is the experimental
models used for evaluating the safety and efficiency of targeted
NP treatment strategies. Uniquely, in our investigation we not
only have incorporated the use of a traditional preclinical murine
tumor model of focal bone cancer but also have extended our
studies into pet dogs with OS. This population of pet dogs, which
develop cancer spontaneously, as do human beings, can serve as
a rich and valuable scientific resource for studying osteotropic
NP therapies given the comparable skeletal size, metabolism,
and physiology shared between pet dogs and people.
The successful safety and anticancer activities reported in the
current study in not only murine but also canine model systems
are highly significant and provide foundational evidence for the
translational impact of the work described. Of noteworthy
mention was the exceptional biocompatibility of our NPs; the
absolute quantities of NPs infused i.v. into pet dogs was in the
gram scale range (up to 2 g), which was over three orders of
magnitude greater than those administered to experimental
mice. The remarkable safety profile of our reported NP formu-
lation, coupled with its demonstrated activity, provides powerful
impetus for its continued development as a novel adjuvant
treatment for improving the management of focal and multifocal
malignant osteolysis encountered in human cancer patients.
Materials and Methods
Detailed materials and methods are provided SI Materials and Methods. The
study protocol was reviewed and approved by the Illinois Institutional Ani-
mal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of the University of Illinois at Urbana
Champaign. Dogs with spontaneously occurring appendicular OS were
recruited to participate in the present investigational trial conducted
at the University of Illinois Veterinary Teaching Hospital to evaluate the
Doxo Dose          Uptake Intensity           Tumor Volume
15 mg/m2
30 mg/m2
50 mg/m2
75 mg/m2
105 mg/m2
135 mg/m2
180 mg/m2
A
B
Fig. 7.
Anticancer activities of Pam-Doxo-NPs following single-dose i.v. in-
fusion in pet dogs. (A) Variables that influence anticancer activities exerted
by Pam-Doxo-NPs include absolute Doxo dose, 99mTc-labeling intensity
(red oval), and absolute tumor volume [calculated by ellipsoid formula
4/3π(length × width × depth)]. Primary tumor measurements denoted by col-
ored lines: blue, length; green, width; and yellow, depth. (B) Percent tumor
necrosis of bone tumors from amputated dog legs evaluated by H&E staining
and linear correlation with the ratio of three variables: (Doxo dose × 99mTc-
labeling intensity)/(absolute tumor volume). Data analyzed with Pearson
correlation; signficance defined as P < 0.05.
Yin et al.
PNAS
|
Published online July 25, 2016
|
E4607
ENGINEERING
MEDICAL SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
 biodistribution, safety, and anticancer activity of Pam-Doxo-NP. Pet owners
were informed of all treatment options available for their pet dogs and
required to sign client consent forms before their dogs were treated with
Pam-Doxo-NP. The study protocol was reviewed and approved by the Illinois
IACUC of the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign.
Preparation and Characterization of Pam-Doxo-NPs. Doxo–PLA conjugates
were synthesized with feeding ratio of lactide/Doxo = 10/1 by following
similar procedures as published (34). PLA-PEG-Pam conjugate was synthe-
sized by covalently conjugating Pam to PLA-PEG5k-COOH polymer via stable
amide bond (Fig. S1). One hundred-microliter DMF solution of Doxo–PLA
(10 mg/mL) was mixed with 100-μL DMF solution of mixture of PLA-PEG5k
(10 mg/mL)/PLA-PEG5k-Pam conjugate (10 mg/mL) at varying ratios and then
added dropwise to rapidly stirred nanopure water (4 mL). The resulting
Doxo-loaded PLA-PEG-Pam NPs (Pam-Doxo-NPs) with different Pam contents
were collected by ultrafiltration [5 min, 3,000 × g, Ultracel membrane with
10,000 nominal molecular weight limit (NMWL); Millipore], washed with
water, and then characterized by DLS for particle sizes and size distributions
and by HPLC for drug loadings by following the reported procedures (34).
Pam-Doxo-NPs (10%) were chosen for the most in vitro and in vivo studies
unless specified.
In Vitro HA Binding Evaluation. To evaluate the binding kinetics of HA with
NPs, 50 μg/mL Pam-Cy5-NPs or Cy5-NPs in 20-mL deionized (DI) water con-
taining HA (0.75 mg/mL) was continuously stirred at 550 rpm at 37 °C. At
different time points, an aliquot of 200 μL was diluted with 1.0 mL DI water
then centrifuged at 1,000 × g for 5 min to remove the HA and bound NPs.
The NP concentration in the supernatant was quantified by measuring the
Cy5 fluorescence intensity (15 min, 30 min, and 1, 2, and 4 h) and calculated
by standard curve. Bound NPs were calculated by subtracting unbound NPs
from the total NPs. To measure the dose-dependent binding, the indicated
concentrations of NPs were incubated in 1-mL DI water containing HA
(0.75 mg/mL). Suspensions were continuously vortexed at 37 °C for 2 h and
the bounded NPs were calculated following the same procedure. In an in-
hibition study, HA (3 mg/mL) was suspended in PBS with/without free Pam
(1 mg/mL) at 37 °C for 24 h. To measure the inhibition effect of free Pam on
Pam-Cy5-NPs binding with HA crystals, the Cy5-NPs and Pam-Cy5-NPs solutions
(40 μg/mL) were incubated in PBS (2 mL) containing HA (0.75 mg/mL). Suspen-
sions were stirred at 37 °C for 2 h. An aliquot of 300 μL was diluted with 900 μL
PBS and then centrifuged at 1,000 × g for 5 min to remove HA crystals and
bound NPs. The NP concentration in the supernatant was quantified by mea-
suring the Cy5 fluorescence intensity and calculated by standard curve. For direct
visualization of NPs binding with HA crystals, 50 μg/mL Pam-Cy5-NPs or Cy5-NPs
in 10 mL DI water containing HA (0.75 mg/mL) was incubated at 37 °C for 30 min
with continuous vortexing. Crystals were collected and washed with DI water
twice, mounted on glass slides, and evaluated using a Zeiss Axiovert 40 CFL
fluorescence microscope equipped with a 10× objective.
In Vitro Cytotoxicity Evaluation. To evaluate whether prolonged retention of
NPs on HA matrix could affect cytotoxicity, K7M2 transfected with GFP,
provided by Chand Khanna, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, were seeded
in BD Biocoat Osteologic 24-well plates at 10,000 cells per 3 mL of complete
media. Upon K7M2 adhesion, cells were exposed to a 15-min pulse of saline
(control), Pam-NP, Doxo-NP, or Pam-Doxo-NP with gentle rocking. Following
treatment exposure, residual media was removed and replaced with fresh
complete media, and K7M2 GPF cells were allowed to grow for an additional
7 d before being lysed and resultant supernatant fluorescent intensities
determined with a fluorometric plate reader.
Orthotopic OS Tumor Model. The tumor model was established in 8-wk-old
female BALB/c mice by injection of 1 × 106 of firefly luciferase transfected
murine OS K7M3 cells, provided by Su Young Kim, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, suspended in 10 μL HBSS into the right proximal tibia using an
insulin syringe with ½-inch, 29-gauge, nondetachable needle. Tumor pro-
gression was evaluated using a BLI system (Stanford Photonics) with a dual
microchannel plate intensified CCD camera. Each mouse was intraperito-
neally injected with a D-luciferin potassium salt solution (0.15 g/kg body
weight) 3 min before imaging and then anesthetized with a constant flow of
isoflurane-containing oxygen. A gray-scale image of the mouse was first
recorded with dimmed light. Photon emission was then integrated for 10 s
using the imaging software Piper Control (Stanford Photonics) and visualized
in pseudocolor. To localize bioluminescent signals that indicated luciferase-
engineered K7M3 tumors, gray-scale images of mouse body and bioluminescent
signals of primary tumors were merged using Image J (NIH) and Photoshop
Elements (Adobe Systems).
Micro-PET/CT Imaging Evaluation. Female BALB/c mice were inoculated with
K7M3-luciferase murine OS cells and primary tumors were allowed to develop
over the course of 21 d. Mice were divided into two groups (n = 4) and were
treated with Pam-64Cu-NPs or 64Cu-NPs at a dose of 75 μCi i.v. Mice were
placed on the micro-CT imaging bed and kept anesthetized with a constant
isoflurane flow. A dynamic PET scan was acquired for 1 h (60-min acquisition
time, reconstructed as 60 frames at 60 s per frame). The micro-CT scan
(80 keV/500 μA X-rays energy, 360 projections, 360°, 75-μm pixel size) was
used for determining the anatomical localization of the tumor. Static micro-
PET scans were acquired at two selected time points (5 and 24 h p.i.) to-
gether with micro-CT scans for anatomical coregistration. The obtained
micro-PET and micro-CT images were constructed using ordered subset
expectation maximization and cone-beam algorithms with existing com-
mercial software (Inveon Acquisition Workspace and Cobra Exxim, re-
spectively). Micro-PET images were processed using 3D median filtering and
fused with micro-CT images. To quantify the radioactivity of 64Cu in the
tumors, complex irregular volumes of interest (VOIs) were drawn on the
micro-CT images and registered with micro-PET images to determine mean
counts in each VOI. The radiotracer activity from each VOI was normalized
by injected dose and expressed at percent of the decay-corrected injected
activity per cubic centimeter of tissue, which can be approximated as per-
centage % I.D. g−1 assuming the density of the tissue is around 1g/cm3. The
initial total injected activity was determined by dose calibrator before
injection.
In Vivo Biodistribution Evaluation with Gamma Counter. Female BALB/c mice
bearing K7M3-luciferase murine OS cells were allowed to develop primary
bone tumors over 21 d and then were divided into two groups (n = 4),
minimizing the weight differences. The two groups of mice were treated
with Pam-64Cu-NPs or 64Cu-NPs at a dose of 75 μCi i.v. Mice were killed
24 h p.i. The blood and major organs (liver, spleen, kidney, heart, lung,
intestine, and bladder) as well as K7M3 tumors containing right leg and
normal left leg were collected, weighed, and measured for radioactivity
(64Cu) with a gamma counter (Wizard2; PerkinElmer) using an appropriate
energy window centered at photo peak of 511 keV. Raw counts were cor-
rected for background, decay, and weight. Corrected counts were converted
to microcurie per gram of tissue with a previously determined calibration
curve by counting the 64Cu standards. The activity in blood and each col-
lected tissue sample was calculated as percentage of the injected dose per
gram of tissue (% I.D. g−1). For this calculation, the tissue radioactivity
was corrected for the 64Cu decay [T(1/2) = 12.7 h] to the time of gamma-
well counting.
In Vivo Anticancer Efficacy Evaluation Using Murine Orthotropic OS Tumor
Model. Female BALB/c mice inoculated with K7M3-luciferase murine OS
cells were divided into four equivalent groups (n = 7) based upon primary
tumor burden (BLI) and body weight. Two groups of mice were treated with
Pam-Doxo-NPs and Doxo-NPs at a dose of 50 mg/kg (Doxo equivalent) i.v.
for two consecutive treatments 1 wk apart. The other two groups of mice
were treated with blank NPs (no Doxo) and saline as controls. Tumor
progression was evaluated using a BLI system (Stanford Photonics) as
mentioned above. At the end of the study, mice were killed by CO2. To
ensure complete collection off the right tibia and fibula, the distal femur
and talus were incubated in the dissected samples, as well as the sur-
rounding soft tissues. Tissues were placed in 10% (vol/vol) formalin and
scanned with micro-CT (80 keV/500 μA X-rays energy, 360 projections, 360°,
75-μm pixel size) to determine the bone destruction. After 48 h in 10%
(vol/vol) formalin, hind limbs were placed in 10% (wt/wt) EDTA for 7 d to
decalcify. All tissues was processed into paraffin and stained with H&E and
then evaluated by an experienced pathologist and tumor surface area was
quantified by ImageJ software.
In Vivo Biodistribution, Biocompatibility, and Anticancer Efficacy Evaluation
Using Spontaneous Canine OS Tumor Model. Treatment naïve dogs with
confirmed appendicular OS were recruited to participate in a rapid dose-
escalation study evaluating the biodistribution, biocompatibility, and
anticancer activities of Pam-Doxo-NPs. For biodistribution studies, Pam-
Doxo-NPs were labeled with 99mTc using a previously reported method
(47) and subsequently infused i.v. as a 30-min constant-rate infusion into
dogs sedated with intramuscular butorphanol and medetomidine. At the
time of infusing 99mTc-labeled Pam-Doxo-NPs, sequential images were
acquired every second for 180 s, every 5 min for 1 h, and at 2 h post-
infusion. Studies determining the radiochemical purity of 99mTc-labeled
Pam-Doxo-NPs pre- and postinfusion (urine) were performed using a
previously described protocol (48). Upon the completion of infusion, the
E4608
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1603316113
Yin et al.
 biocompatibilities of Pam-Doxo-NPs in treated pet dogs were character-
ized weekly for three consecutive weeks through the conductance of
serial physical examination, complete blood count, serum chemistry
profiles, and cardiac troponin concentrations. The direct anticancer ac-
tivities of Pam-Doxo-NPs were evaluated in pet dogs by amputating the
OS-affected leg with consequent percent tumor necrosis assessment by
histopathologic methods (49). Briefly, the bone and associated tumor
were sectioned longitudinally either proximal to distal or lateral to me-
dial dependent on the orientation of the mass lesion. Sections were fixed
in formalin for 24–48 h followed by decalcification in an EDTA/HCL
decalcifying solution (Richard Allen Scientific). Following decalcification,
transverse sections of the longitudinal section were made to allow for
placement into large tissue cassettes and sectioning onto glass slides. The
sections were processed with an extended protocol, paraffin-embedded,
sectioned at 4 μm, and stained with H&E. All slides (microscopic speci-
mens), which cumulatively represent the entire plane in which the gross
specimen was sectioned, were scanned in their entirety using an AxioCam
HRc Carl Zeiss camera coupled to a Carl Zeiss Axioplan 2 microscope with a
mechanical stage and using Carl Zeiss KS 400 analysis software. The
scanned images were viewed in Adobe Photoshop CS3 (Adobe Systems) to
allow image analysis of tumor necrosis, and the original glass slides of the
corresponding section were simultaneously viewed via light microscopy
(Olympus BX41), providing detailed assessment of regions isolated on the
digitally scanned images. Using Adobe Photoshop software and the
scanned images, the total tumor area and regions of tumor necrosis were
outlined in two different outlining colors. Regions outlined on the images
were analyzed with the Carl Zeiss KS 400 image analysis software to
quantitate total tumor area and the area of tumor necrosis. Ultimately,
the overall total tumor area and total area of tumor necrosis for a given
tumor were determined by adding the results (values) of each respective
section. Percent necrosis for individual tumors was calculated as total
area of necrosis/total tumor area.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. This work was supported by Morris Animal Founda-
tion for the conductance of the phase I dose-escalation study in pet dogs with
osteosarcoma, Grant D09CA-083 (to T.M.F.); NIH Director’s New Innovator
Award Program Grant 1DP2OD007246-01, which supported in vitro and in vivo
studies, and National Science Foundation Division of Materials Research Grant
1309525, which supported the synthesis of materials (both to J.C.); and NIH
National Cancer Institute Alliance for Nanotechnology in Cancer “Midwest
Cancer Nanotechnology Training Centre” Grant R25 CA154015A (to Q.Y., L.T.,
and K.C.).
1. Mukherjee D, et al. (2011) Survival of patients with malignant primary osseous spinal
neoplasms: Results from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) da-
tabase from 1973 to 2003. J Neurosurg Spine 14(2):143–150.
2. Hirsh V (2009) Skeletal disease contributes substantially to morbidity and mortality in
patients with lung cancer. Clin Lung Cancer 10(4):223–229.
3. Coleman RE (1997) Skeletal complications of malignancy. Cancer 80(8, Suppl):
1588–1594.
4. Mantyh P (2013) Bone cancer pain: Causes, consequences, and therapeutic opportu-
nities. Pain 154(Suppl 1):S54–S62.
5. Smith HS, Barkin RL (2014) Painful boney metastases. Am J Ther 21(2):106–130.
6. Sabino MA, et al. (2003) Different tumors in bone each give rise to a distinct pattern
of skeletal destruction, bone cancer-related pain behaviors and neurochemical
changes in the central nervous system. Int J Cancer 104(5):550–558.
7. Frassica DA (2003) General principles of external beam radiation therapy for skeletal
metastases. Clin Orthop Relat Res (415, Suppl):S158–S164.
8. Vakaet LA, Boterberg T (2004) Pain control by ionizing radiation of bone metastasis.
Int J Dev Biol 48(5-6):599–606.
9. Goblirsch M, et al. (2005) Radiation treatment decreases bone cancer pain through
direct effect on tumor cells. Radiat Res 164(4 Pt 1):400–408.
10. Goblirsch M, et al. (2004) Radiation treatment decreases bone cancer pain, osteolysis
and tumor size. Radiat Res 161(2):228–234.
11. Coleman RE (2001) Metastatic bone disease: Clinical features, pathophysiology and
treatment strategies. Cancer Treat Rev 27(3):165–176.
12. Clark JC, Dass CR, Choong PF (2008) Current and future treatments of bone metas-
tases. Expert Opin Emerg Drugs 13(4):609–627.
13. Coleman RE (2006) Clinical features of metastatic bone disease and risk of skeletal
morbidity. Clin Cancer Res 12(20 Pt 2):6243s–6249s.
14. Weilbaecher KN, Guise TA, McCauley LK (2011) Cancer to bone: A fatal attraction. Nat
Rev Cancer 11(6):411–425.
15. Wang D, Miller SC, Kopecková P, Kopecek J (2005) Bone-targeting macromolecular
therapeutics. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 57(7):1049–1076.
16. Davis ME, Chen ZG, Shin DM (2008) Nanoparticle therapeutics: An emerging treat-
ment modality for cancer. Nat Rev Drug Discov 7(9):771–782.
17. Choi CHJ, Alabi CA, Webster P, Davis ME (2010) Mechanism of active targeting in solid
tumors with transferrin-containing gold nanoparticles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107(3):
1235–1240.
18. Byrne JD, Betancourt T, Brannon-Peppas L (2008) Active targeting schemes for
nanoparticle systems in cancer therapeutics. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 60(15):1615–1626.
19. Pignatello R, et al. (2009) A novel biomaterial for osteotropic drug nanocarriers:
Synthesis and biocompatibility evaluation of a PLGA-ALE conjugate. Nanomedicine
(Lond) 4(2):161–175.
20. Choi SW, Kim JH (2007) Design of surface-modified poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide)
nanoparticles for targeted drug delivery to bone. J Control Release 122(1):24–30.
21. Morton SW, et al. (2014) Osteotropic therapy via targeted layer-by-layer nano-
particles. Adv Healthc Mater 3(6):867–875.
22. Swami A, et al. (2014) Engineered nanomedicine for myeloma and bone microenvi-
ronment targeting. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111(28):10287–10292.
23. Ottaviani G, Jaffe N (2009) The epidemiology of osteosarcoma. Cancer Treat Res 152:
3–13.
24. Fenger JM, London CA, Kisseberth WC (2014) Canine osteosarcoma: A naturally oc-
curring disease to inform pediatric oncology. ILAR J 55(1):69–85.
25. Withrow SJ, Khanna C (2009) Bridging the gap between experimental animals and
humans in osteosarcoma. Cancer Treat Res 152:439–446.
26. Paoloni M, et al. (2009) Canine tumor cross-species genomics uncovers targets linked
to osteosarcoma progression. BMC Genomics 10:625.
27. Rankin KS, et al. (2012) Of dogs and men: Comparative biology as a tool for the
discovery of novel biomarkers and drug development targets in osteosarcoma.
Pediatr Blood Cancer 58(3):327–333.
28. Angstadt AY, et al. (2011) Characterization of canine osteosarcoma by array comparative
genomic hybridization and RT-qPCR: Signatures of genomic imbalance in canine osteo-
sarcoma parallel the human counterpart. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 50(11):859–874.
29. Angstadt AY, Thayanithy V, Subramanian S, Modiano JF, Breen M (2012) A genome-
wide approach to comparative oncology: High-resolution oligonucleotide aCGH of
canine and human osteosarcoma pinpoints shared microaberrations. Cancer Genet
205(11):572–587.
30. London CA, et al. (2011) Phase I evaluation of STA-1474, a prodrug of the novel HSP90
inhibitor ganetespib, in dogs with spontaneous cancer. PLoS One 6(11):e27018.
31. London CA, et al. (2014) Preclinical evaluation of the novel, orally bioavailable Se-
lective Inhibitor of Nuclear Export (SINE) KPT-335 in spontaneous canine cancer: re-
sults of a phase I study. PLoS One 9(2):e87585.
32. Maeda H, Nakamura H, Fang J (2013) The EPR effect for macromolecular drug de-
livery to solid tumors: Improvement of tumor uptake, lowering of systemic toxicity,
and distinct tumor imaging in vivo. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 65(1):71–79.
33. Prabhakar U, et al. (2013) Challenges and key considerations of the enhanced per-
meability and retention effect for nanomedicine drug delivery in oncology. Cancer
Res 73(8):2412–2417.
34. Tong R, Cheng J (2009) Ring-opening polymerization-mediated controlled formula-
tion of polylactide-drug nanoparticles. J Am Chem Soc 131(13):4744–4754.
35. Egusquiaguirre SP, Igartua M, Hernández RM, Pedraz JL (2012) Nanoparticle delivery
systems for cancer therapy: Advances in clinical and preclinical research. Clin Transl
Oncol 14(2):83–93.
36. Venditto VJ, Szoka FC, Jr (2013) Cancer nanomedicines: So many papers and so few
drugs! Adv Drug Deliv Rev 65(1):80–88.
37. Greish K (2007) Enhanced permeability and retention of macromolecular drugs in solid
tumors: A royal gate for targeted anticancer nanomedicines. J Drug Target 15(7-8):457–464.
38. Tang L, et al. (2014) Investigating the optimal size of anticancer nanomedicine. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 111(43):15344–15349.
39. Bertrand N, Wu J, Xu X, Kamaly N, Farokhzad OC (2014) Cancer nanotechnology: The
impact of passive and active targeting in the era of modern cancer biology. Adv Drug
Deliv Rev 66:2–25.
40. Fitton A, McTavish D (1991) Pamidronate. A review of its pharmacological properties
and therapeutic efficacy in resorptive bone disease. Drugs 41(2):289–318.
41. Mundy GR (2002) Metastasis to bone: Causes, consequences and therapeutic oppor-
tunities. Nat Rev Cancer 2(8):584–593.
42. Suva LJ, Washam C, Nicholas RW, Griffin RJ (2011) Bone metastasis: Mechanisms and
therapeutic opportunities. Nat Rev Endocrinol 7(4):208–218.
43. van Driel M and van Leeuwen JPTM (2014) Cancer and bone: A complex complex.
Arch Biochem Biophys 561:159–166.
44. Withrow SJ, Powers BE, Straw RC, Wilkins RM (1991) Comparative aspects of osteo-
sarcoma. Dog versus man. Clin Orthop Relat Res (270):159–168.
45. Khanna C, et al. (2014) Toward a drug development path that targets metastatic
progression in osteosarcoma. Clin Cancer Res 20(16):4200–4209.
46. Paoloni M, Khanna C (2008) Translation of new cancer treatments from pet dogs to
humans. Nat Rev Cancer 8(2):147–156.
47. Kumar V, Kumar D, Howman-Giles RB, Little DG (2007) Is (99m)Tc-labelled pamidro-
nate a better agent than (99m)Tc-medronate for bone imaging? Nucl Med Commun
28(2):101–107.
48. Sanada S, Ando A, Ando I, Hiraki T, Hisada K (1986) A single-strip mini-paper chro-
matographic method for rapid purity-control of 99mTc-labeled radiopharmaceuticals.
Eur J Nucl Med 12(8):390–393.
49. Powers BE, et al. (1991) Percent tumor necrosis as a predictor of treatment response in
canine osteosarcoma. Cancer 67(1):126–134.
50. Tong R, et al. (2010) Polylactide nanoparticles containing stably incorporated cyanine
dyes for in vitro and in vivo imaging applications. Microsc Res Tech 73(9):901–909.
Yin et al.
PNAS
|
Published online July 25, 2016
|
E4609
ENGINEERING
MEDICAL SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
