 An intestinal organ culture system uncovers a role for the 
nervous system in microbe-immune crosstalk
Nissan Yissachar1, Yan Zhou1, Lloyd Ung2,3, Nicole Y. Lai1, James F. Mohan1, Allen 
Ehrlicher2,3, David A. Weitz2,3, Dennis L. Kasper1, Isaac M. Chiu1,*, Diane Mathis1,*, and 
Christophe Benoist1,*,†
1Division of Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical 
School
2School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University
3Department of Physics, Harvard University
SUMMARY
Investigation of host-environment interactions in the gut would benefit from a culture system that 
maintained tissue architecture yet allowed tight experimental control. We devised a 
microfabricated organ culture system that viably preserves the normal multicellular composition of 
the mouse intestine, with luminal flow to control perturbations (e.g. microbes, drugs). It enables 
studying short-term responses of diverse gut components (immune, neuronal…). We focused on 
the early response to bacteria that induce either Th17 or RORg+ T-regulatory (Treg) cells in vivo. 
Transcriptional responses partially reproduced in vivo signatures, but these microbes elicited 
diametrically opposite changes in expression of a neuronal-specific geneset, notably nociceptive 
neuropeptides. We demonstrated activation of sensory neurons by microbes, correlating with 
RORg+ Treg induction. Colonic RORg+ Treg frequencies increased in mice lacking TAC1 
neuropeptide precursor, and decreased in capsaicin-diet fed mice. Thus, differential engagement of 
the enteric nervous system may partake in bifurcating pro- or anti-inflammatory responses to 
microbes.
eTOC
A 3D organ culture system preserves the intestine architecture and allows modeling the 
interactions between intestinal cells, the immune system, microbes and nutrients.
*Correspondence to: Isaac Chiu, Diane Mathis and Christophe Benoist, Division of Immunology, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue 
Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, isaac_chiu@hms.harvard.edu or cbdm@hms.harvard.edu, Phone: (617) 432-7741.
†Lead Author
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, NY, LU, AE, YZ, CB, DM, IMC; Investigation, NY, LU, AE, YZ, NYL, JFM; Writing-Original draft, NY, CB; 
Writing-Review & Editing, NY, CB, DK, DM, LU, AE, YZ, IMC, DW; Funding Acquisition, CB, DM, DW
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2017 March 09; 168(6): 1135–1148.e12. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.02.009.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 A fundamental design principle of biological tissues is the tight relationship between tissue 
structure and function, where the differentiated cell-types that constitute the tissue are 
carefully arrayed to enable their functional interplay. In the intestines, the spatial 
organization of different cellular systems (epithelial, immune, neural), structural elements 
(mucus layer, tight junctions) and the luminal content (food, microbes), is particularly 
important. A careful balance must be struck between immune tolerance of necessary 
symbiotic microbes and the maintenance of a tight barrier to prevent tissue invasion by 
luminal microbes. In addition, regulatory systems must prevent potent microbial products 
from triggering inflammation and its collateral damage.
With the growing realization that symbiotic microbes help educate and tune the immune 
system (Hooper et al., 2012; Mowat and Agace, 2014), there is a need for experimental 
systems to finely analyze host-microbiota interactions. We know, just for the immune 
system, that the host/microbiome duet engages a bewildering array of cell-types: myeloid 
cells like macrophages and dendritic cells, innate lymphoid cells (ILC), T regulatory and 
effector cells (Treg, Teff), and B lymphocytes (Thaiss et al., 2016; Honda and Littman, 
2016). The research toolbox available for this dissection entails an inherent tradeoff between 
tissue structure and the level of control over the experimental parameters. In vivo animal 
models, e.g. the colonization of gnotobiotic mice or the supplementation of conventional 
mice with bioactive microbes (Hooper et al., 2001), provide physiological tissue structure, 
but offer poor experimental control. Substantial inter-individual variability, relatively slow 
timescale of colonization, and difficulty in manipulating the experimental conditions are 
mostly incompatible with experimental perturbations and real-time readouts. At the other 
end of the spectrum are in vitro culture systems, in which cell lines or explanted mucosa are 
grown in monolayers that can be supplemented with microbes (Haller et al., 2000; Tsilingiri 
et al., 2012), offering tight experimental control but lacking the cellular complexity and 
architecture. Recent advances in intestinal in vitro culture systems include the intestinal 
organoid culture (Sato et al., 2009; Clevers, 2016), which was developed and is ideally 
suited to study epithelial development, but lacks the other components, notably 
immunocytes. An exciting advance is the ‘gut-on-a-chip’ device with separated 
compartments that can be seeded with different components, including microbes, to study 
cross-talk between cell-types during the response to microbes (Kim et al., 2016; Kim et al., 
2012). However, normal architecture and inter-cellular connections are not preserved in such 
systems, which also involve cells other than normal gut-resident cells (e.g. cell lines or 
PBMCs).
Thus, there is a compelling need for an organ culture system that preserves normal 
differentiated cell-types and their intricate connections in the host yet allows the tight control 
over experimental conditions and perturbations characteristic of in vitro systems. Reasoning 
that the intestines, themselves, would provide the best source of relevant cells and micro-
architectures, we developed a microfluidic system that supports organ intestinal tissue 
culture, allowing the dissection of host-microbe interaction in a highly controlled fashion ex-
vivo and with high temporal resolution. The system is multiplexed and enables several 
cultures to be run in parallel, in order to test experimental inputs under comparable 
conditions.
Yissachar et al.
Page 2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Using this system, we demonstrate that intestinal colonization by symbiotic microbes 
triggers a rapid transcriptional response from the local intestinal tissue, which precedes the 
long-term immunologic effects induced by these microbes. Comfortingly, some of these 
effects overlap with previously described response to particular microbes, but others point to 
a highly unexpected involvement of the nervous system in sensing and discriminating 
between intestinal symbionts.
RESULTS
Development of an ex-vivo organ culture system for the gut
We aimed to implement a three-dimensional gut organ culture system with three main 
requirements: (i) include all stromal and hematopoietic components of the normal gut, (ii) 
allow controlled and anatomically valid exposure to microbes, and (iii) allow integrated 
analysis of the cell biological, biochemical and genomic events elicited by these interactions. 
These stipulations differed from the motivations behind the existing organoid (Sato et al., 
2009), monolayer (Haller et al., 2000), or microfluidic (Kim et al., 2016) in vitro systems, 
whose architectures are not ideally suited to these questions.
Our initial attempts were inspired by fetal thymic organ cultures (FTOC) (Jenkinson and 
Anderson, 1994), which have proven invaluable in elucidating T cell differentiation in the 
thymus. Fetal tissue offered a sterile starting point, and culture at the air-liquid interface 
provided improved oxygen delivery. Unfortunately, organ culture of small fragments of the 
small or large intestine from perinatal mice at the air-medium interface resulted in collapse 
of the intestinal lumen, and rapid loss of architecture of the mucosa. We reasoned that 
maintaining some degree of pressure and flow in the lumen was important, and so designed 
the Polydimethylsiloxane (PMDS)-based culture unit schematized in Fig. 1A (full 
description in Fig. S1, Supplementary Methods and Movie S1), which can support the ex-
vivo culture of sizeable intestinal fragments (~3–4 cm length). The basic unit has two paired 
inputs and outputs. The first is connected to the intestinal lumen (the gut fragment being 
threaded and fixed with a surgical thread over the ports) and allows controlled introduction 
of molecules or microbes into the lumen. The second enables the introduction and 
continuous replenishment of medium to support viability of the cultured tissue. This 
configuration maintains the physiologic separation between the two distinct intestinal 
environments – the gut lumen (heavily colonized by the microbiota and mostly anaerobic) 
and the tissue (sterile and well oxygenated). As in FTOC, the tissue is not completely 
submerged in the external medium, which keeps it from collapsing and, by recapitulating the 
air-liquid interface principle, allows oxygenation and pH control from an air/O2/CO2 mix 
injected into the closed chamber. The complete device includes six such chambers for 
parallel comparison of treatments and conditions. Four multiplexed syringe pumps for 
regulate inputs and outputs, and a heating block maintains temperature.
In practice, the system can be used to culture colon or small intestine (SI) segments from 
day18 prenatal to 14 day-old, pre-weaning mice. A number of experiments were performed 
to optimize the operational parameters: medium composition, oxygenation, addition of 
specific growth factors (detailed in Supplementary Procedures), leading to the results 
illustrated for colon cultures in Fig. 1 and Fig. S3, which demonstrate that the tissue 
Yissachar et al.
Page 3
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 remained viable and responsive during the culture period (data for SI cultures in Fig. S2). 
Standard histological analysis revealed that the overall structure of the cultured tissue was 
preserved, and that the intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) layer remained intact (Fig. 1B). 
Although cultures did remain viable for several days, those continued longer than 24 hrs 
exhibited some epithelial degradation. Consequently, we have conservatively used the 
system for experiments lasting < 24 hrs. Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining, as well as anti-
Mucin2 antibodies, detected mucus-filled goblet cells throughout the colon and a mucus 
layer in the lumen, although the amount of mucus inside the goblet cells did decrease by 24 
hrs (Fig. 1B/C; Fig. S3A for 0–24h histology). Immunostaining for E-cadherin and 
Cytokeratin-18 validated the integrity of the intestinal epithelial layer, and Ki-67 staining 
detected continued proliferation of IEC in the colonic crypts (Figs. 1C/D, S3). 
Immunostaining for Chromogranin-A, a marker of enteroendocrine cells, showed that these 
cells remained in proper frequency and location in the colonic epithelium (Fig. 1D, Fig. 
S3C). Similarly, whole-mount tissue staining for the neural markers Tuj1 and nNOS 
demonstrated that the enteric nervous system (ENS) structure and spatial organization were 
maintained in the cultured tissue (Fig. 1E, Fig. S3B, MovieS2). Notably, the cultured tissues 
exhibited spontaneous peristaltic-like contractions, at least during the first 8 hrs, indicating 
viability of the intestinal smooth muscle layer and enteric nervous system (MovieS3 (colon), 
MovieS4 (SI)).
We next verified that the cultures faithfully preserved the immunocyte component of normal 
intestines. Lamina propria cells from fresh or cultured intestinal tissues were stained for 
cellular markers of the major lymphoid and myeloid populations (Fig. 2A). Cells in these 
lineages were readily identified and showed the expected profiles and frequencies 
throughout the first 24h of culture. We observed only a mild decrease in the proportions of 
colonic CD11b+CD103+ dendritic cells (fluctuations in monocyte levels were likely due to 
higher variability in their proportion in input segments). The spatial organization of tissue 
immunocytes was maintained, as revealed by immuohistochemestry for several markers 
(illustrated for CX3CR1 in Fig. 2B).
The system was designed to be compatible with time-lapse microscopy imaging. In pilot 
experiments we cultured gut tissues from (CX3CR1-GFP × CD4-tdTomato) mice ((Jung et 
al., 2000) and JFM, unpublished) and tracked immunocyte movement (Movie S5). Peristaltic 
activity confounded slightly the observation and required immobilization of the segment, but 
typical movement of T cells was observed in lateral segments of the tissue (in the areas less 
compressed by the immobilization). Some T cells exhibited complete arrest, forming stable 
contacts with antigen presenting cells (APCs), while others exhibited active migration 
through the tissue, sampling many APCs through transient contacts. These and the above 
results indicate that this organ culture system correctly maintains during the period the 
structure, cellular composition, and dynamic cell-cell interactions found within the 
complexity of intact tissues.
We then asked whether intestinal symbionts could be introduced and viably maintained in 
the cultured gut lumen. With colonic segments from mice housed in a standard Specific 
Pathogen Free (SPF) facility, the heterogenous bacteria normally present were greatly 
reduced by gently flushing the colon content during fragment preparation (Fig. 2C). 
Yissachar et al.
Page 4
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Bacterial titers remained moderate in the first hours, but grew to physiological 
concentrations (~109CFU/gr) by 24hrs (while the outer medium remained free of 
contamination). Importantly, these microbes included both anaerobic and aerobic microbes, 
indicating that conditions in the cultures were favorable to both. In contrast, organ cultures 
set up from GF donors contained no microbes (Fig. 2D), indicating that contamination was 
not an issue. To expose the cultures to a defined microbe, we added freshly grown microbes 
to the medium flowing through the lumen (usually at 107 CFU/ml). In short-term 
experiments, this introduced microbe represented the exclusive (when in GF gut segments) 
or the main (when in SPF segments) microbial exposure, and persisted through the 
experiment (as illustrated for the strict anaerobe C. ramosum in Fig. 2E). With longer times 
in culture the introduced microbes expanded, and input concentration was adapted 
accordingly.
Taken together, these results indicate that the gut culture system could support the survival 
and growth of anaerobic and aerobic microbiota, and facilitate ex-vivo colonization of the 
cultured intestinal tissues with selected exogenous microbes, in a well controlled fashion.
Colonization with SFB triggers a rapid transcriptional host response
With this system in hand, we analyzed the initial events after exposure to two different 
microbes known to elicit specific responses in the intestinal immune system. The first was 
Segmented Filamentous Bacteria (SFB), which induces Th17 cell differentiation in the small 
intestine (Ivanov et al., 2009; Lecuyer et al., 2014), most likely via multiple steps of 
intercellular communication involving epithelial and myeloid cells, as well as innate-like 
lymphocytes (Sano et al., 2015; Atarashi et al., 2015). SFB is very difficult to grow in vitro 
(Schnupf et al., 2015). It takes some time for SFB to be established by in vivo passage, so in 
vivo colonization cannot be used to examine the initial events in a finely time-resolved 
manner. Thus, we interrogated here the first events of SFB:host interactions in the organ 
culture system, whose broad cell composition is highly valuable. Segments of SI (ileum) 
dissected from SFB-negative SPF mice were connected to the gut culture system; SFB was 
flowed into the lumen as a suspension prepared from fecal pellets of SFB mono-colonized 
mice (Chung et al., 2012) or of GF mice as controls.
A hallmark of SFB colonization in vivo is its adherence to the intestinal epithelium, which is 
important for its Th17-inducing properties (Lecuyer et al., 2014; Ivanov et al., 2009; 
Atarashi et al., 2015). Thus, we first evaluated the spatial localization of SFB early after ex 
vivo colonization of intestinal tissue. As shown in Fig. 3A, fluorescence in-situ hybridization 
(FISH) revealed typical SFB filaments in close association with the SI villi, two hrs after 
SFB introduction. Furthermore, transmission electron microscopy showed SFB within a few 
microns of the SI epithelium brush border (Fig. 3B). We then asked whether the early 
association of SFB with the SI IEC triggered a transcriptional response in the tissue. Gene-
expression profiles of whole-tissue samples were generated, in triplicate, two hrs after 
infusion with SFB. Control cultures were infused with supernatant from feces of GF or B. 
fragilis-colonized mice, the latter serving as a non-Th17-inducing control. As illustrated in 
Fig. 3C, the changes induced by SFB relative to the GF control were mainly of small 
amplitude (none greater than 2-fold). To focus the analysis, we superimposed a 
Yissachar et al.
Page 5
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 transcriptional signature of chronic SFB colonization in vivo (comparing whole-tissue 
profiles of ileum from SFB-colonized SPF vs SFB-negative SPF mice (Tan T. ms 
submitted)). Superimposition of this signature revealed a significant bias in the SFB-infused 
cultures (Fig. 3C), with over-expression of several of the signature transcripts (Duox2, 
Duoxa2, Il2rg), but not all of them (e.g. Saa1/2/3, Cd177, Ly6d). The Il17 family members 
were not biased, but we did not expect them to be, as the differentiation of Th17 cells 
induced by SFB occurs in a matter of days, not hours. Similarly, we noted biased expression 
of many of the transcripts in a related “adhesion signature” induced in epithelial cells by 
binding of SFB and other Th17-inducing microbes (Atarashi et al., 2015) (Fig. 3D). In 
contrast, some of the transcripts induced in our system after SFB colonization were not 
previously found to be biased in vivo (e.g. those encoding the chemokine Ccl7, the gap 
junction protein Gjb2, and the secreted glycoprotein Stc1) (Fig. 3C). These results identify 
elements of the early response to SFB, and suggest that some of the transcripts rapidly 
induced remain elevated during chronic exposure, while others may be more transient.
The early response to the Treg-inducing symbiont C. ramosum
The second microbe/immune-system interaction we analyzed was the induction of a 
particular population of RORg+ Treg cells in the colon by individual bacteria species (Sefik 
et al., 2015; Ohnmacht et al., 2015). This population develops over a matter of days upon 
microbial exposure in vivo, so the culture system promised new insights into the early events 
of Treg induction. The human symbiont C. ramosum, a potent inducer of colonic Tregs in 
vivo (Sefik et al., 2015), was infused into colon cultures from 12-day-old SPF mice, an age 
when RORg+ Tregs are still absent (Sefik et al., 2015). Cultures were harvested at various 
times, and the early transcriptional response determined by gene-expression profiling of 
mRNA extracted from the whole tissue. As in the SFB-colonized SI, responses to C. 
ramosum were mild, with few transcripts altered relative to medium-infused controls (44 at a 
Fold Change of >1.5 and p<0.1 at any one time-point; Table S1). These transcripts were 
induced in sequence (Fig. 4A), with partial overlap between the timepoints. Several of them 
also responded to long-term C. ramosum colonization in vivo (Geva-Zatorsky et al, in 
revision; e.g. Taf1d, Pla2g12b and Naaladl1) or overlapped with the in vivo response to SFB 
(i.e. those encoding the ROS-producers Duoxa2 and Duox2, the anti-microbial lectins Reg3b 
and Reg3g). A very early and transient response was observed for Slfn3, which encodes a 
factor that influences epithelial enterocyte differentiation (Kovalenko et al., 2013) or the 
epithelial tight junction gene Cldn4. Other very suggestive transcripts were Il22, an essential 
mediator of the hematopoietic/epithelial crosstalk (Sano et al., 2015) which likely denotes a 
fast response of the ILC compartment, the Il1rn receptor antagonist of the IL1 family (often 
the initial indicator of an IL1 response) (Gabay et al., 2010), the EGF-family member 
Epiregulin (Ereg), and Il1rl1 which encodes the Il-33-receptor (aka ST2).
The Treg-inducing symbiont C. ramosum triggers a rapid transcriptional response that 
appears to emanate from several immune and non-immune cell compartments. To narrow the 
list of candidates to those that are truly involved in the long-term development of colonic 
RORg+ Tregs, we performed parallel cultures with colons from GF mice in which we 
introduced C. ramosum or another microbe that is unable to induce RORg+ Tregs, P. magnus 
(Sefik et al., 2015). Whole tissue samples were again used for transcriptional profiling, two 
Yissachar et al.
Page 6
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 hrs after colonization. Most of the up- and down-regulated transcripts were shared between 
C. ramosum and P. magnus (Fig. 4B), including the most robustly responsive transcripts like 
the Reg3 family. However, a more subtle part of this early response was unique to C. 
ramosum. Specifically induced transcripts included those encoding the epithelial tight 
junction protein Cldn4, mentioned above, while transcripts specifically repressed by C. 
ramosum encode the cytokine Il6, the chemokine Ccl7, the precursor protein of Neurokinin 
A and Substance P neuropeptides Tac1, and the synaptic regulator of neurotransmitter 
release Snap25. The former is very suggestive, albeit in a paradoxical direction, which 
suggests a complex interplay between Il6 and RORg+ Treg induction: Il6 is actually 
necessary for the full induction of RORg+ Tregs ((Ohnmacht et al., 2015) and Fig. S4), but 
its production is initially shut down by inducing microbes.
Since this approach seemed promising for determining which of the induced transcripts were 
generic and which were more specific to C. ramosum, we tested the response to a broader 
panel of microbes that induce a range of RORg+ Tregs proportions in vivo (representing 
different phyla) (Sefik et al., 2015). Gene expression in colon cultures was again profiled 
after 2 hrs, and we correlated the expression of each transcript across the microbe panel vs 
the frequency of RORg+ Tregs in mice monocolonized with the same symbionts (Fig. 4C, 
data from (Sefik et al., 2015)). The transcripts found at the extreme of the distribution of 
correlation coefficients confirmed several observations from the single C. ramosum / P. 
magnus comparison (Fig. 4C). Fittingly, since C. ramosum is a strong RORg+ Treg inducer, 
these positively and negatively correlated transcriptional signatures were well separated on a 
“volcano plot” comparing control- and C. ramosum-colonized colon cultures (Fig. 4D, left). 
But when highlighted on a similar representation of the early effect of the Th17 inducer, 
SFB, the exact opposite was found: transcripts positively correlated with the microbes’ 
ability to induce RORg+ Tregs were mostly repressed by SFB; and the genes negatively 
correlated with RORg+ Treg induction were induced by SFB (Fig. 4D, right). This mirror-
like image suggests that Treg- and Th17-inducing microbes modulate the same pathways in 
the host gastrointestinal tract, but in an opposite direction during initial encounter, resulting 
in opposite Treg/Th17 outcomes in the longer term.
Another striking observation resulted from Gene Ontology analysis of these correlated 
transcripts: those negatively correlated with in vivo RORg+ Tregs were highly enriched in 
neurobiological processes, including synaptic transmission, neurotransmitter transport and 
secretion, and neuropeptide signaling pathways (Fig. 4E). The positively enriched gene-set 
showed no evocative enrichment. This over-representation is reminiscent of the presence of 
Tac1 and Snap25 among transcripts repressed by C. ramosum in Fig. 4B. Taken together, 
these data suggest that the long-term microbiota-mediated changes in immunocyte activation 
or frequency may be foretold by the early changes in colonic gene expression in the organ 
culture system.
Differential sensing of microbes by the nervous system correlates with immunologic bias
The unexpected discovery of neuron-related genes among those repressed by RORg+-Treg-
inducing microbes suggested that triggering of the enteric nervous system might be an early 
part of this response. This anti-correlation of expression relative to the GF control was not 
Yissachar et al.
Page 7
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 merely driven by a single microbe species, as illustrated for Tac1 and TacR1 (Fig. 5A). As 
the former encodes the pro-inflammatory nociceptive neuropeptide Substance P, we looked 
more generally for correlations in the effects of Treg-inducing microbes on expression of 
both neuropeptides and their receptors (Table S2 based on neuropeptide database 
www.neuropeptide.nl). Indeed, both gene families showed a broadly biased negative 
correlation to colonic RORg+ Treg differentiation (Fig. 5B/C). Nociceptor sensory neurons 
specifically detect noxious/injurious stimuli (heat, reactive chemicals, tissue injury). In the 
gut these include extrinsic nociceptor neurons that innervate from the dorsal root ganglia 
(DRG) and intrinsic primary afferent neurons of the ENS (Mao et al., 2013). Here, 
transcripts with a negative correlation to in vivo RORg+ Treg included some known to be 
enriched in nociceptor neurons (the voltage-gated sodium channels Nav1.7 (Scn9a) and 
Nav1.9 (Scn11a), the mechanosensitive channel Piezo2 (Fam38b), and the heat-sensitive ion 
channels Trpv2, Trpv3 and Trpv4) strongly suggesting a neuronal origin of these 
transcriptional changes (rather than the less abundant enteroendocrine component, which 
can express some neuronal-associated genes). As nociceptors are an important component of 
the intestinal nervous system and can respond to microbial stimulation and regulate 
inflammation (Meseguer et al., 2014; Ochoa-Cortes et al., 2010; Chiu et al., 2013; Riol-
Blanco et al., 2014), we interrogated a shorter list of neuropeptides more specifically 
expressed in nociceptive neurons by mining transcriptional profiling datasets of purified 
DRG nociceptors (Chiu et al., 2014). This 20-gene signature (Table S2) was even more 
biased towards negative correlations than the whole neuropeptide gene-set (Fig. 5D; 
Kolmogorov-Smirnoff D-factor 0.37 vs 0.24). We examined whether this bias in 
neuropeptide expression also occurred in the early intestinal response to SFB. As seen 
earlier for the differential distribution of the globally correlated signature (Fig. 4D), SFB and 
C. ramosum elicited opposite effects on genes encoding these nociceptor-specific 
neuropeptides (Fig. 5E). Indeed, Tac1 had been previously observed in lists of SFB-induced 
transcripts (Tan T. ms submitted) (Ivanov et al., 2009). How might this broad down-
regulation of nociceptive neuropeptides by Treg-inducing microbes actually occur? 
Although several of these neuropeptide genes may be active in non-neuronal cell-types such 
as enteroendocrine cells (Gonzalez-Rey et al., 2007), the breadth of the effects and the panel 
of neuronal signatures that are regulated (Fig. 4–5) suggested the involvement of sensory 
neurons in the early response to microbial gastrointestinal colonization. C. ramosum might 
be directly triggering neurons of the ENS, the only neurons present in the organ cultures as 
connections to ganglia and central neurons are resected, leading to rapid down regulation of 
these mRNAs. We thus asked whether sensory neurons could directly respond to these 
microbes, using action potential generation or increases in intracellular Ca2+ as readouts. 
Because gut intrinsic primary afferent neurons from adult mice are technically challenging 
to isolate and culture, we utilized primary adult DRG sensory neurons as a surrogate, which 
include nociceptor neurons that innervate the colon and SI (T7-L6 DRG neurons) (Robinson 
et al., 2004; Tan et al., 2008). First, we tested the electrophysiological response to bacteria 
by plating primary DRG neuron cultures onto multi-electrode array (MEA) plates (see 
methods), and analyzing the action potential firing of neurons after addition of microbes. 
Addition of C. ramosum resulted in a pronounced increases in the neuronal firing rate 
(illustrated for representative electrodes in Fig. 6A), with waveforms typical of true action 
potentials (Fig. 6A, right). These persisted and even increased throughout the experiment 
Yissachar et al.
Page 8
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Fig. 6B). In contrast, equivalent loads of P. magnus elicited no such response as shown by 
analysis of well-wide firing rate (Fig. 6B). Secondly, ratiometric Ca2+ imaging of neurons 
after addition of the Treg-inducing C. ramosum or the non-inducer P. magnus showed a 
striking difference (Fig. 6C/D). C. ramosum triggered a robust neuronal calcium influx (Fig. 
6C), which initiated at different times of the 900 sec challenge period (Fig. 6D), and 
ultimately involved 68% of neurons (average, Fig. 6D). The responding neurons included 
capsaicin-responding nociceptor neurons as well as other DRG sensory afferents (Fig. 6E). 
Adding P. magnus elicited no such Ca2+ influx (Fig. 6C–D – most neurons remained active, 
as indicated by capsaicin- and KCl-induced Ca2+ influx).
We expanded this analysis to include all Th17/Treg-inducing microbes used above, revealing 
a clear relationship between the microbes’ ability to trigger neuronal activation in-vitro and 
their ability to induce RORg+ Tregs in vivo (Fig. 4C, 6F–G). The correlation held at both 
ends of the spectrum (P. magnus and A. baumanii vs C. ramosum and B. ovatus), while 
intermediate RORg+ Treg inducers B. dorei and F. varium elicited delayed and partial 
neuronal activation. Because SFB is essentially impossible to grow in culture, we used fecal 
suspensions prepared from monocolonized mice (Fig. 6G); here again, SFB-harboring fecal 
suspensions elicited little neuronal activation, compared with suspensions from C. ramosum 
monocolonized feces (Fig. 6G).
Heat killing of the bacteria at 95° C inactivated the activity (not shown), but we found that 
material secreted by C. ramosum potently activated neurons (either as a brief wash of the 
bacteria in neuronal culture medium, or by filtered supernatant after 30’ culture of the 
bacteria in neuronal medium (Fig. 6H). Thus, gut-innervating sensory neurons can directly 
detect and respond to members of the intestinal bacteria and their products, with a species-
specificity that mirrors the transcriptional responses in the organ culture system, and the 
induction of RORg+ Tregs in vivo.
This down-regulation of nociceptor neuron neuropeptides by Treg-inducing microbes 
suggested a possible functional connection between neuronal activation and Treg induction. 
We tested the hypothesis that Substance P (SP) encoded by Tac1 might negatively regulate 
colonic Treg differentiation in two ways: first, we compared the frequency of RORg+ Treg in 
the colonic LP of Tac1−/− mice (Cao et al., 1998) and their Tac1-proficient littermates (all 
housed in SPF conditions that promote high RORg+ Treg frequencies). There was a modest 
but consistent increase in the colonic RORg+ Treg proportions in Tac1−/− mice (Fig. 7A, 
left; paired t-test p=0.005, for a 1.25-fold increase on average). Conversely, because SP and 
related neuropeptides are released from dense-core vesicles upon activation of sensory 
neurons, we fed weanling mice with a diet rich in capsaicin, the active ingredient in chili 
peppers that activates nociceptor neurons (Caterina et al., 1997). The frequency of RORg+ 
Treg in the colonic LP of capsaicin fed mice was significantly lower than siblings fed with 
control diet (Fig. 7B). Overall these results suggest a functional relationship between 
neuronal activation and neuropeptide release and the development of colonic RORg+ Tregs.
Yissachar et al.
Page 9
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 DISCUSSION
We report the development of a three-dimensional organ culture system for gut tissue, that 
has broad applications. It is based on a modification of classic air-liquid interface cultures, 
the key change being the introduction of medium flow that is independently controlled 
outside and inside the lumen, which prevents collapse of the tissue, ensures nutrient access, 
and allows experimental changes in culture conditions. It enables the culture of large, intact 
intestinal tissues for ex-vivo experimentation. This aspect is the main distinction from 
existing in vitro systems, as physiologic cellular populations and their connections are 
maintained. This advantage led us to discover some unexpected links between the 
microbiota and the intestinal immune and nervous systems.
As do simple co-culture systems (Haller et al., 2000), organoid (Sato et al., 2009; Clevers, 
2016) or ‘gut-on-a-chip’ devices (Kim et al., 2016; Kim et al., 2012), this gut organ culture 
system provides full control over the experimental parameters: growth medium composition, 
trophic factors, time-controlled addition of stimulants or perturbagens, etc. It was 
particularly valuable to analyze immediate/early responses to bacterial exposure, which 
cannot be reliably assessed in vivo since intestinal colonization proceeds progressively, 
sometimes on the order of days. These robust and well-defined culture conditions, combined 
with multiplex culture capability, open the door to many investigations in a variety of fields: 
host interactions with other residents of the gut lumen (viruses/fungi/parasites), fecal 
samples of different sources or degree of pathogenicity, effects of drugs, metabolites, food 
antigens, control of intestinal permeability, etc. These can be read out from the integrated 
standpoint of different organ systems (immune, neuronal, epithelial) Finally, we showed in 
preliminary experiments that the system can be combined with time-lapse microscopy to 
track the dynamics of cell-cell interactions in real time, and it should even be compatible 
with application of optogenetic tools.
We should acknowledge the limitations of the system as it stands. One is that it does not 
support experiments that range over several days, as clear problems with tissue structure 
became apparent by 30–40 hrs, particularly for the small intestine. Thus. It is really best 
suited for immediate responses to environmental perturbations. Refinements will likely 
improve the system in the future (physico-chemical conditions, supply of nutrients, growth 
factors, etc) but there will always be a time limit to any in vitro organ culture, as organismal 
factors (cell migration, multi-organ communication) are unavoidably lost. Second, 
experiments with bacteria as input are also limited in time, as overgrowth became clear by 
~24 hrs. Third, the system cannot be used with human organs, although cells in organs from 
humanized mice could be used.
Investigations of the immunological effects of the microbiota are mostly performed in vivo, 
where the development of innate and adaptive immune responses occur over a period of 
days. Here, we utilized the gut culture system to identify and characterize the responses 
triggered by microbes over a timeframe of hours, correlating these early events to the long-
term in vivo effects of the same microbes. Two immune-perturbing microbes were 
investigated, which elicited responses that differ at several levels. SFB, the classic Th17 
inducer, elicited transcriptional responses that overlapped to a large extent with the 
Yissachar et al.
Page 10
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 signatures of long-term in vivo colonization. This suggests that SFB may be constantly “re-
initiating” its activation process, perhaps by repeated burrowing within the epithelium. In 
contrast, the RORg+ Treg inducer, C. ramosum, seemed to evoke a different early response. 
In addition to some generic responses of the epithelium and myeloid compartments shared 
with other microbes, an array of neuronal genes (particularly neuropeptides of nociceptive 
sensory neurons) was repressed, with a distribution across bacterial species that correlated 
with long-term development of RORg+ Tregs. The subsequent experiments with neuronal 
activation by microbes, and with genetic or pharmacologic perturbations in vivo, 
substantiated the relevance of this relationship.
The interest in intestinal neuro-immune interactions and their relations with the microbiota 
is rapidly increasing (Margolis et al., 2016). Yet, little is known about how nociceptor 
neurons sense signals from the gut microbiota (Baral et al., 2016). Nociceptor neurons 
express and can be triggered via Toll-like receptors and formyl peptide receptors (Qi et al., 
2011; Chiu et al., 2013; Xu et al., 2015). Here, we observed a fast response of sensory 
neurons to microbes, cultured or from fecal suspensions. This potential was replicated by 
bacterial washes or supernatants, implying a soluble factor released by some microbes. 
Neuronal activation correlated well with the microbes’ ability to induce RORg+ Tregs in 
vivo, across a range of microbial species and phyla, and we propose that recognition of some 
bacterial products by ENS axonal termini can act as a modulator, or even as an intermediate, 
in this microbiota-immunocyte crosstalk.
One of the transcripts most repressed by RORg+ Treg inducing microbes was Tac1, which 
encodes a precursor protein to four neuropeptides of the tachykinin family, including 
Substance P (SP). SP is secreted mainly upon nociceptor neuron activation, and is involved 
in various neural and neuro-immunologic processes, including nociception and inflammation 
(Steinhoff et al., 2014). SP modulates immune cell proliferation, can diminish IL10 
production (Janelsins et al., 2013), and supports Th17 differentiation by inducing pro-
inflammatory IL-1β and IL-12/IL-23 cytokine production by monocytes (Cunin et al., 2011). 
Accordingly, SP is thought to play a pro-inflammatory role in the GI tract, as inhibition of 
SP signaling ameliorates experimental colitis (Weinstock et al., 2003; Engel et al., 2011). 
The symmetrical findings in mice fed the SP inducer capsaicin, and in SP-deficient Tac1−/− 
knockout mice, which show decreased and increased proportions of RORg+ Tregs, 
respectively, are in line with the transcriptional observations in vitro. They support a 
functional scenario in which SP inhibits RORg+ Treg differentiation: the microbes’ 
differential ability to trigger nociceptor neurons and release SP would be an important 
component in their ability to induce RORg+ Tregs. We can only speculate about the 
mechanism through which this inhibition would take place, but the widespread effects of SP 
on a variety of immunocytes leaves open the possibility of effects on differentiating T cells 
themselves, on their partner APCs, or even indirectly via ILCs. Of note, the phenotypes of 
both Tac1−/− knockout or capsaicin-fed mice were only partial, indicating that SP is 
certainly not the sole effector at play. SP may be modulating signals delivered more directly 
by microbes to immunocytes, e.g. via polysaccharides, or functional redundancy in 
neuromediators may account for the partial effects.
Yissachar et al.
Page 11
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 It is interesting that the Th17-inducer SFB actually stimulated Tac1 expression, here and in 
our earlier in vivo data. Since Treg and Th17 cells are considered divergent paths of T cell 
differentiation, shutting down or inducing SP may be an early event that endows microbes 
with the ability to favor one or the other path of differentiation. It also implies that SFB, and 
perhaps other microbes that fail to induce RORg+ Tregs, are not merely neutral in this 
respect. We interpret the broad repression of the neuropeptide / neuropeptide receptor 
geneset by C. ramosum and consorts as negative feedback in the face of very strong 
activation. In this light, the impact of SFB on this gene module may be due to triggering of 
different pathway(s), for instance by the SAA/IL23R centric pathway (Sano et al., 2015), 
that would happen to crosstalk to SP; or it may result from milder activation of the same 
nociceptors, at a lower level that results in activation rather than in repression. Investigations 
of the molecular and genetic differences between these microbes (C. ramosum and P. 
magnus are both classified in the Clostridiaceae family) will help in elucidating this neural 
sensing mechanism.
Future investigations will also determine if there are specific subtypes of gut-intrinsic and 
extrinsic neurons that detect commensal bacteria through specific receptors. For example, it 
is tempting to speculate that this differential sensing of the microbiota by DRG afferent 
neurons might mediate gut-brain axis communications and modulate other whole-organism 
properties, such as behavior. As investigating the interactions between the enteric nervous 
system and the microbiota in their natural environment are particularly challenging, we 
anticipate that the gut organ culture system may further contribute to this emerging field.
In conclusion, the observations reported here resulted from the ability to manipulate in vitro 
an experimental system in which most of the broad range of cells and their interactions were 
preserved. The wholly unexpected interplay between microbiome, nervous and immune 
systems were revealed by this unbiased approach, and would have been missed with purified 
cell-types. While fascinating strides are made with single-cell biology and genomics, 
integrated approaches still clearly have a place.
STAR Methods
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information may be obtained from the Lead Contact Christophe Benoist (e-mail: 
cbdm@hms.harvard.edu. Address: Division of Immunology, Harvard Medical School, 77 
Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115)
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Mice—C57BL/6J (B6), B6.Cg-Tac1tm1Bbm/J (Tac1−/−) and B6.129S2-Il6tm1Kopf/J 
(IL-6−/−) mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratory (JAX), NOD/LtJ.DOI from our 
colony, and all bred in the specific-pathogen-free (SPF) facility at Harvard Medical School 
(HMS). A germ-free (GF) B6 breeding nucleus was obtained from L. Bry, and maintained in 
germ-free isolators. GF Swiss-Webster mice and SFB mono-colonized Swiss Webster 
colony housed in GF isolators at the Kasper lab GF animal facility. For gut organ cultures 
experiments of SPF housed mice, B6 females were crossed with NOD males, and intestinal 
Yissachar et al.
Page 12
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 tissues were dissected from 12–14 days old F1 littermates. For gut organ cultures of GF 
mice, 14 days old GF B6 were used. For analysis of colonic Tregs in Tac1−/− or IL-6−/− 
mice, B6 female mice were first crossed with Tac1−/− or IL-6−/− males to obtain F1 
heterozygotes, which were intercrossed to generated WT and KO littermates. For capsaicin 
diet experiments, B6xNOD F1 littermates mice, 14d old, were put on Capsaicin-enriched 
chow or a vehicle chow, for 12–14 days. Capsaicin was purchased from Tocris (Catalog 
0462), and the Capsaicin enriched chow (0.01% Capsaicin added) was prepared by 
PhamaServ (Framingham, MA) with Pico Rodent 5053 (catalog 56023). All 
experimentation was performed following animal protocols approved by the HMS 
Institutional Animal Use and Care Committee (protocols 02954 and IS00000054).
Bacteria—Bacteria were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC), 
Biodefense and Emerging Infections Research Resources Repository (BEI Resources), 
Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen (DSMZ). Detailed description 
of bacteria origin and culture conditions are listed in Table S3. Anaerobic bacteria were 
cultured on rich medium (Per liter: 20gr proteose peptone, 5gr yeast extract, 5gr NaCl, 5gr 
glucose, 5gr K2HPO4, 0.5gr L-cysteine, 5mg hemi, and 2.5ml vitamin K1) under strictly 
anaerobic conditions (80% N2, 10% H2, 10% CO2) at 37°c in an anaerobic chamber. For 
SFB experiments, fresh fecal pellets from SFB mono-associated Swiss-Webster (SW) mice 
were collected, as well as pellets from GF SW mice, which served as a control. We also used 
fecal pellets from B. fragilis mono-associated B6 mice and GF B6 mice, as a non-Th17 
inducing control. Fecal pellets (500–1000mg) were resuspended in 10ml of sterile tissue 
culture medium, previously incubated in the anaerobic chamber for 48h (medium 
composition is detailed in the gut culture system methods section). Fecal suspension was left 
to stand for 5 minutes to allow sedimentation of solids, the supernatant was collected into 
the input syringes and loaded on the gut culture syringe pumps.
METHOD DETAILS
Ex-vivo gut organ culture system—Detailed description of the organ gut culture 
system development, operation and device fabrication is in the supplemental information (as 
well as video protocol in MovieS1). Briefly, intact whole colons or small-intestinal tissues 
(ileum) were dissected sterilely from SPF of GF mice (12–14 days old). The solid lumen 
content was gently flushed, and the gut fragment was threaded and fixed over the luminal 
input and output ports using a sterile surgical thread. The culture device was placed on a 
controlled heating block for temperature of 37°c, and tissues were maintained half-soaked in 
a constant flow of sterile medium using a syringe pump. Anaerobic bacterial cultures were 
resuspended in de-gassed tissue culture medium and infused into the gut lumen using a 
syringe pump. Gas outlet in the device lid flow humidified and filtered, medical grade 95% 
O2 / 5% CO2 gas mixture into the device.
Gene expression profiling and bioinformatic analysis—For microarray analysis, a 
small tissue fragment (~3mm) was dissected into Trizol (Invitrogen), homogenized, and 
RNA prepared. Profiling was performed on Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST arrays as 
previously described (Sefik et al., 2015). Microarray data were background- corrected and 
normalized using the robust multi-array average (RMA) algorithm implemented in the 
Yissachar et al.
Page 13
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 GenePattern software package and replicates were averaged. Analysis focused on genes with 
a mean expression value > 120 in at least one sample with a coefficient of variation < 0.3. 
Scatter analysis (MultiplotStudio) and hierarchical clustering were performed in 
GenePattern.
Preparation of mice dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons culture—Primary lumber 
dorsal root ganglia (DRG, segments T7-L6) from adult mice (7–12 weeks) were dissected 
into neurobasal-A medium (Life Technologies), dissociated in 1 mg/ml collagenase A plus 
2.4 U/ml dispase II (enzymes, Roche Applied Sciences) in HEPES-buffered saline (Sigma) 
for 70 min at 37°c. After trituration with glass Pasteur pipettes of decreasing size, DRG cells 
were centrifuged over a 10% BSA gradient, plated on laminin-coated cell culture dishes in 
B27 supplemented neurobasal-A medium plus 50 ng/ml nerve growth factor (NGF) plus 
penicillin/streptomycin (Life Technologies).
Real-time calcium imaging of live DRG neurons and image analysis—DRG 
neurons were used for calcium imaging 16–24h after plating. Cells were loaded with 10 mM 
Fura-2-AM (Life Technologies) at 37°c for 30 min in neurobasal-A medium, washed into 
Krebs Ringer Buffer, and imaged at room temperature. Neuronal calcium imaging was 
performed using an inverted Nikon Ti-S microscope equipped with a Lambda XL light 
source and NIS-elements software (Nikon). Cells were illuminated by an ultraviolet light 
source (Xenon lamp, 75 W, Nikon), 340 nm and 380 nm excitation alternated by a LEP 
MAC 5000 filter wheel (Spectra services), and fluorescence emission captured by Cool 
SNAP ES camera (Princeton Instruments). 340/380 ratiometric images were processed, 
background corrected, and analyzed with NIS Elements (Nikon). Microsoft Excel was used 
for further analyses. Microbes were cultured on Brucella Blood agar plates in an anaerobic 
incubator for 48h prior to experiment, scraped from the plates, resuspended in Krebs Ringer 
solution on ice, and bath applied few seconds after the beginning of imaging at 108±1 
CFU/mL. Microbial density was determined by OD600nm (using a pre-determined OD/CFU 
calibration curve) and validated by microbial growth and colonies counting. For co-culture 
experiments using fecal samples, bacterial suspensions were prepared in Krebs Ringer 
solution, as described above (see ‘Bacteria’ section). For bacterial supernatant experiments, 
neural cultures were supplemented with bacterial supernatant prepared from conditioned or 
unconditioned medium (bacterial ‘wash’). For preparation of bacterial conditioned 
supernatant, bacteria were cultured on rich medium in anaerobic conditions, spin down and 
transferred to Krebs Ringer Buffer, and cultured for 30minues in anaerobic incubator. The 
medium was then centrifuged at 12,000rpm for 10 minutes, and the supernatant was filtered 
through a 0.22um filter, and added to the neurons cultures during imaging. For preparation 
of bacterial unconditioned supernatant (‘wash’), microbes were scraped from the Brucella 
Blood agar plates and resuspended in Krebs Ringer Buffer. The medium was then 
centrifuged and the supernatant was filtered, and added to the neuron cultures. 1 mM 
capsaicin (Tocris) and or 40mM KCl (Sigma) were applied after bacterial ligands to control 
for responsiveness of the neurons. Neuronal responses to each type of stimuli were counted 
for each field of cells by a blinded observer.
Yissachar et al.
Page 14
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Electrophysiology using Micro-Electrode Array (MEA) and data analysis—For 
multi-electrode arrays, DRG neurons were isolated as described above and plated on MEA 
64-electrode probes plates at 30,000 cells/plate (Axion BioSystems). Cells were grown in 
Neurobasal-A medium plus B27, 50 ng/mL NGF (Life Technologies), and 1 μM Ara-C 
(Sigma). 7 days after plating, the Axion Muse device was used to record neuronal activity. 
Neurons were recorded in Neurobasal medium at 37°C. Microbes were centrifuged, 
resuspended in Neurobasal medium, and added at 108±1 CFU/mL to neurons. Spikes were 
identified using thresholding by Axion’s Integrated Studio (AsIS) software across all 
electrodes, and spike files exported for further data analysis in Excel (Microsoft). Action 
potential waveforms were extracted using neuroexplorer (Neuroexplorer).
Lymphocytes and flow cytometry—Intestinal tissues were treated with RPMI 
containing 1 mM DTT, 20 mM EDTA and 2% FBS at 37°c for 10 min to remove epithelial 
cells, minced and dissociated in collagenase solution (1.5mg/ml collagenase II (Gibco), 
0.5mg/ml dispase and 1% FBS in RPMI) with constant stirring at 37°c for 30min. Single 
cell suspensions were then filtered and washed with 4% RPMI solution. Spleens were 
mechanically disrupted. Single-cell suspensions were stained with antibodies against mouse 
CD4, CD8, TCR-β, TCR-γδ, CD45, CD19, CD11b, CD11c, Ly6c, F4/80, CD103, Helios 
(Biolegend), RORγ and FoxP3 (eBioscience). For intracellular staining of transcription 
factors, cells were stained for surface markers and fixed in eBioscience Fix/Perm buffer 
overnight, followed by permeabilization in eBioscience permeabilization buffer for 45 min 
in the presence of antibodies. Cells were analyzed with a BD LSRII flow cytometer, and 
data processed with FlowJo (Tree Star) software.
Histology, immune-fluorescence staining and confocal microscopy—For 
histological analysis, tissues were fixed in Carnoy’s fixative (Electron Microscopy Sciences) 
to preserve the mucus layer. Tissues were embedded in paraffin, sectioned and stained with 
Hematoxylin and Eosin or Periodic Acid-Schiff.
For immune-fluorescence, intestinal tissues were embedded in OCT, fresh frozen and stored 
in −80°c. Frozen tissues were sliced using microtome to 7μm thick sections and fixed in cold 
acetone for 10 minutes. Tissues were washed twice in PBS (20min) and blocked with serum 
(10% in PBS) of the same species as the secondary antibody for 1h at room temperature. 
Tissue sections were then rinsed in staining buffer (1% BSA, 0.3% Tween-20 in PBS), and 
incubated with primary antibody, diluted 1:100 in blocking solution, for 1h at room 
temperature or over night at 4°c (anti-Mucin2 sc-15334 and anti-Cyt-18 sc-51582; Santa-
Cruz Biotechnology); anti-Ecadherin (CD324, cat:147302, BioLegend); anti-Ki-67 (cat:
556003, BD Biosciences); anti-CX3CR1 (cat:824001, BioLegend); anti-Chromogranin-A 
(cat: ab15160, AbCam). Tissue sections were then wash 3 times with staining buffer and 
incubated with secondary antibody (Cy3 or Cy5-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit/rat/mouse, 
Jackson Laboratories) for 1h at room temperature. After washing, sections were 
counterstained with DAPI (1ug/ml) for nuclear visualization, and mounted with 
Fluoromount-G mounting medium (SouthernBiotech, Cat No. 0100-01). Images were 
acquired on an Olympus Fluoview Confocal microscope.
Yissachar et al.
Page 15
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For whole-mount staining of the enteric nervous system, freshly-dissected or cultured colons 
were immersed on ice for 20mins in 1uM nicardipine hydrochloride (calcium channel 
blocker) to maximize smooth muscle relaxation. Tissues were cut open longitudinally, and 
stretched out and pin flat on Sylgard-lined plates. Tissues were fixed with 4% PFA for 1 
hour on ice, and permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 in DPBS for 2 hours with gentle 
shaking at room temperature. Samples were blocked with 10% donkey serum / 0.1% Triton 
X-100 / DPBS for 1 hour with gentle shaking at room temperature, and then incubated with 
1:100 goat anti-nNOS (Abcam 1376, final 5ug/ml) and 1:1000 rabbit anti-Tubulin beta-3 
(Biolegend 802001, final 1ug/ml) in blocking buffer (10% donkey serum / 0.1% Triton 
X-100 / DPBS) overnight at 4°C. Samples were washed in DPBS for 10 minutes at room 
temperature, 3 times, and incubated with 1:200 secondary antibodies (Jackson, donkey anti-
goat Cy5, and donkey anti-rabbit Cy3, final 7.5ug/ml) in blocking buffer for 1 hour at room 
temperature. Samples were washed 3 times, incubated in 1:2000 Hoechsct in DPBS (final 
5ug/ml) for 15 minutes at room temperature, washed again and then mounted on slides with 
mounting media. Z-stack images were acquired on an Olympus Fluoview Confocal 
microscope (1um intervals), and 3D images were reconstructed using Imaris.
For live imaging experiments, we made two change to the standard gut culture protocol: 1- 
the culture medium was free of phenol red, to improve imaging. 2- the PDMS slabs were 
bonded to a thin cover glass slide (no. 1 thickness, 75 mm × 50 mm, Brain Research 
Laboratories), instead of the regular 1mm thick glass slide. Colons were dissected from 
CX3CR1-GFP × CD4-RFP double transgenic mice, and connected to the gut organ culture 
device. The device was then placed on a heated microscope stage (medium temperature of 
37c), and supplemented with gas mixture of 5% CO2 and 95% O2. A 20x objective was 
used for imaging. To minimize peristalsis, colon tissues were held against the coverslip 
during acquisition, using a small piece of Tputty material (Laird Technologies) and slight 
pressure. To create time-lapse sequences, we scanned individual Z-stacks at a 40 second 
interval, containing 11 optical sections with step size of 3 um between sections, on an 
Olympus FV1000 confocal microscope. Image acquisition was initiated after a 5 hour period 
of ex-vivo organ culture and each individual imaging run was typically 30–45 minutes in 
duration. 3D reconstructions of raw imaging data were generated using Imaris software 
(Bitplane) to evaluate cellular migration patterns and interactions between individual cells.
Bacterial Fluorescence In-Situ Hybridization (FISH)—Intestinal tissues were fixed 
with Carnoy’s fixative (Electron Microscopy Sciences, cat:64130-50) at room temperature. 
Tissues were embedded in paraffin, sectioned, dewaxed using EZ-DeWax solution 
(BioGenex), 3 times for 5 minutes at room temperature, and washed with reagent-grade 
ethanol (Sigma) between incubations. Tissue sections were then washed with pre-warmed 
(50°c) hybridization solution (20 mM Tri s-HCl, pH 7.4, 0.9M NaCl, 0.1% SDS)). The 
hybridization step was performed at 50°C overnight with a Cy-5 or Alexa-568 conjugated 
EUB338 probe (5′-GCTGCCTCCCGTAGGAGT-3′), and Alexa-488 conjugated SFB probe 
(5′-GGGTACTTATTGCGTTTGCGACGGCAC-3′), diluted to a final concentration of 
10μg/ml in hybridization buffer. Sectioned were washed 3 times with pre-warmed 
hybridization buffer, stained by standard DAPI staining and mounted with Fluoromount-G.
Yissachar et al.
Page 16
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Transmission electron microscopy—For transmission electron microscopy analysis, 
tissues were fixed in 2.5% Glutaraldehyde 1.25% Paraformaldehyde and 0.03% picric acid 
in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer (pH 7.4). Small tissue pieces (1–2mm cubes) were fixed 
for at least 2 hours at RT in the above fixative, washed in 0.1M cacodylate buffer and 
postfixed with 1% Osmium tetroxide (OsO4)/1.5% Potassium ferrocyanide (KFeCN6) for 1 
hour, washed in water 3x and incubated in 1% aqueous uranyl acetate for 1hr followed by 2 
washes in water and subsequent dehydration in grades of alcohol (10min each; 50%, 70%, 
90%, 20×10min 100%). The samples were then put in propyleneoxide for 1 hr and infiltrated 
ON in a 1:1 mixture of propyleneoxide and TAAB Epon (Marivac Canada Inc. St. Laurent, 
Canada). The following day the samples were embedded in TAAB Epon and polymerized at 
60°c for 48 hrs. Ultrathin sections (~60nm) were cut on a Reichert Ultracut-S microtome, 
picked up on to copper grids stained with lead citrate and examined in a JEOL 1200EX 
Transmission electron microscope or a TecnaiG2 Spirit BioTWIN and images were recorded 
with an AMT 2k CCD camera.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Statistical parameters including the definition and exact values of n, distribution and 
deviation are reported in the figures and corresponding legends. Most data are represented as 
mean ± SEM using Student’s t tests. Statistical analyses were performed in Microsoft Excel 
and GraphPad Prism.
DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
The accession number for the microarray data reported in this paper is NCBI GEO: 
GSE92471.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
Detailed description of the Gut Organ Culture device
Gut culture fluidic system, design and fabrication: We created a device for three-
dimensional intestinal organ culture and experimentation, whose use is detailed in the 
accompanying protocol and video (Movie S1). The custom-fabricated fluidic chip holds up 
to six individual gut tissue fragments in isolated chambers. Each chamber is 8 mm wide and 
25 mm long to accommodate mouse gut fragments of varying sizes and to provide a bath of 
nutrients (Fig. S1). The nutrient rich environment created by sealing the fluidic chip with a 
lid to maintain an O2/CO2-rich atmosphere and to prevent outside contaminants from 
entering the system. The lid is patterned so that it precisely matches the outer dimensions of 
the fluidic chip (75 mm by 33 mm; Fig. S1). Both the chip and the lid are made from 
poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS; Sylgard 184, Dow Corning, Midland, MI) by replica 
molding of a 3D printed master (Xia & Whitesides, 1998). The masters were designed using 
AutoCAD (AutoDesk, Inc., San Rafael, CA) and printed using veroBlue on an Object 30 3D 
printer (Stratasys Ltd., Eden Prairie, MN; the AutoCad design file and 3D printing 
instructions were deposit at GitHub.com). The masters are baked overnight in an oven at 
90°C to fully cure the material. Each master consists of a patterned base and a frame. The 
frame is assembled around the base prior to molding, then PDMS base and cross-linker are 
mixed together in a 10:1 ratio and poured into the mold. The PDMS is de-gassed in a 
Yissachar et al.
Page 17
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 vacuum chamber for 30 minutes to remove air bubbles, then the filled molds are placed in 
the oven overnight at 55°C until the PDMS is fully cured. The solid PDMS slabs can be 
removed from the molds by lifting out the frame, then gently removing the PDMS from the 
mold by the edges. The PDMS slabs are bonded to a glass slide (Corning, 75 mm × 50 mm) 
using all-purpose sealant (100% silicone sealant, DAP Products, Inc., Baltimore, MD) and 
cured overnight at room temperature. These slides form the top and bottom of the device. 
Four fluidic connections are made to each chamber (two inputs, two outputs) at the 
appropriate locations with a needle (input/output ports were aligned to the middle section of 
each channel described in Fig. S1, ~3mm high). Holes blunt needles (1.5″ long) threaded 
through holes previously punched: 22G needles (McMaster-Carr, Cleveland, OH) are used to 
provide flow to the intestinal lumen, and 18G needles (McMaster-Carr) are used to connect 
to the outer medium chamber. The area around each needle is also sealed with silicone 
sealant and left to cure overnight. Surgical thread, which will be used later to secure the gut 
segments in place, is knotted around the luminal input and output ports. The entire system is 
sterilized by dry-cycle autoclaving at 121°C for 20 minutes.
Gut culture fluidic system, set up: To control the flow inside the lumen and in the external 
medium for each chamber on the device, the input and output ports are connected to a set of 
four multiplex syringe pumps capable of infusion and aspiration of fluid from six syringes in 
parallel (NE-1600, New Era Pump Systems, Inc., Farmingdale, NY). Thus, the first pump is 
loaded with six syringes, each for every gut fragment, and flows the lumen content into the 
input ports. Similarly, the second pump flows the external growth medium, and the last two 
pumps drain these inputs, respectively (Fig. 1A). Each syringe is connected to the device 
with Tygon PVC tubing (ID: 1/16″, OD: 1/8″; McMaster-Carr) and a Luer lock to barbed 
tubing adaptor (1/16″ sockets; McMaster-Carr). Prior to use, the tubing and adaptors were 
also sterilized using an autoclave.
During a culture experiment, the temperature of the device is maintained at 37°c using a 
standard lab hot plate, set to 43°c (for 37°c inside the culture device, see optimization 
experiments below). A heat spreader was made using 1/8″ copper and placed on the hot 
plate. The copper heat spreader serve as an adapter between the hot plate and the culture 
device, and allows fixing the culture device in place by screwing a plastic lid over the device 
(see Movie S1). The fluidic device is placed directly onto the copper heat spreader with a 
layer of heat-sink silicon compound (Chemplex 1381 DE, Lubritech), to ensure optimal heat 
transfer.
A medical grade mixture of 5% CO2 and 95% O2 is provided to the device from a 
compressed gas cylinder connected to a regulator. The flow from the regulator is connected 
to the device lid through a 14G flat-end needle and Luer lock tubing adaptor. Additional 20G 
needle was added in the opposite side of the lid, for pressure release. The gases are 
humidified (using standard oxygen humidifier) and filtered through a 0.22um syringe filter 
(EMD Millipore).
Gut culture fluidic system, operation: All culture preparations and tissue dissections were 
done in a biological hood to maintain sterility. Prior to dissection, input/output ports were 
flushed using sterile culture medium, and the gut culture device was washed and filled with 
Yissachar et al.
Page 18
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 culture medium. Intact whole colons or small-intestine (ileum) were dissected sterilely from 
SPF or GF mice (commonly from 12–14 day-old mice). The solid lumen content was gently 
flushed, the gut fragment was washed in sterile medium, and then threaded and fixed over 
the luminal input and output ports using the pre-positioned surgical thread (Fig. 1A, see 
video tutorial at Movie S1). The culture device (sealed using the fabricated lid) is placed on 
the heat-conducting copper adaptor, on a layer of heat-sink silicon compound (CHEMPLEX 
1381 DE, Lubritech). The serum-free tissue culture medium contains Iscove’s Modified 
Dulbecco’s Medium (IMDM, Gibco) supplemented with 20% KnockOut serum replacement 
(Gibco), 2% B-27 and 1% of N-2 supplements (Gibco), 1% L-glutamine, 1% non-essential 
amino acids, 1% HEPES. The tissue culture medium was loaded into 10ml syringe (for 
short-term experiments, or 30ml syringes for 24h experiments) and infused into the device 
input ports by a syringe pump (flow rate of 1ml/h). To infuse bacteria, bacterial cultures 
were resuspended in de-gassed tissue culture medium (incubated for 48h in the anaerobic 
chamber, in a filtered bottle), loaded into 5ml syringes and infused into the colon lumen by a 
syringe pump (flow rate of 30μl/h).
Testing and Optimization of the Gut Organ Culture device—We performed 
numerous development and optimization experiments that precede the finalized gut organ 
culture protocol presented in the main text. Detailed below are many of these trial and error 
experiments, which might be useful for future adaptations and modifications of the system.
Gut culture device: We tested a protocol for culture of intestinal sphere-like organoids in a 
collagen gel with an air-liquid interface, previously reported by Ootani et al (2009). While 
recapitulating this protocol was successful, we could not utilize the same approach to culture 
large, intact, intestinal fragments dissected form embryonic (E19) or newborn (day 1–2) 
mice. Culture of these large tissue fragments embedded in the collagen gel matrix resulted in 
tissue damage and loss of tissue shape, color and integrity.
We performed preliminary experiments aiming to culture intestinal tissues inside a glass 
capillary, with medium flow around the tissue and lumen connection into the lumen. 
However, we could not properly separate the inside luminal flow from the outside medium. 
Also we could not supply proper oxygen diffusion to the tissue.
We tested the classical air-liquid interface approach, as recently utilized by Sato et al (2011) 
to culture neonatal mouse testes. We followed this protocol for culture of embryonic (E19) 
and newborn (day 1–2) intestinal tissue fragments (2–3cm long). Surprisingly, most of the 
intestinal tissues seemed viable, and showed spontaneous peristalsis-like contractions lasting 
for days and in few occasions up to 3 weeks. Additionally, these tissues showed positive 
CD45 staining when tested during the first 3 days in culture. However, this simple air-liquid 
interface approach of intestinal organ cultures resulted in collapse of the intestinal lumen, 
and rapid loss of architecture of the mucosa. We made few improvements to address these 
issues. First, we created a channel-like structure in the agarose bedding that is filled with 
culture medium and enables the tissue to ‘float’ during cultures and prevent tissue collapse. 
Second, we connected the gut fragments to a micro-tube and a syringe pump, to maintain 
flow and positive luminal pressure. These improvements resulted in an improved 
maintenance of the cultured gut tissue structure, as evaluated by standard histology. Yet, 
Yissachar et al.
Page 19
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 additional requirements led us to further develop the current gut culture device: 1- establish 
the organ cultures outside of the standard tissue culture incubator, to support convenient 
connections to pumps, real-time readout and manipulation, and oxygen enrichment. 2 – 
robust culturing platform that allows precise control over the medium flow, and multiplexing 
capability of multiple gut cultures in the same experiment. 3- support the culture of larger 
tissues dissected from older mice (in addition to the embryonic tissue cultures tested in the 
air-liquid interface method). We addressed these issues by developing the PDMS-based gut 
organ culture device described in the main text.
Medium composition: Preliminary experiments were performed according to previously 
published protocols, mostly using fetal calf serum based medium, supplemented with growth 
factors (i.e., Ootani et. al., 2009). To increase experiments reproducibility and support 
standardization, we developed a serum-free culture medium, based on the KnockOut serum 
replacement (KSR, Invitrogen) and supplements to support the different cellular populations 
in the tissue (stem cells, neurons, immune cells, etc… See above full description of medium 
composition). Additional growth factors tested during the optimization phase, but were not 
included in the final medium formulation, include EGF (50–500ng/ml), R-spondin1 (500ng–
5ug/ml), Amphiregulin (5ug/ml). We also tested AlboMAX (Invitrogen), Prostaglandin E2, 
Nicotinamide, Dexamethasone, Sodium pyruvate and beta-mercaptoethanol. These factors 
were eventually not used in this study, as we did not observe any visible change to overall 
tissue structure or viability.
Gas flow: Preliminary experiments were performed in a standard tissue culture incubator, 
with 5% CO2 and no additional oxygen. In the gut culture device, we tested the effect of 
oxygen enrichment on tissue structure using standard histology. We found that oxygen 
enrichment improve tissue viability, and facilitate the culture of larger intestinal fragments. 
Thus, the final settings include a constant flow of medical grade mixture of 95% O2 and 5% 
CO2 (to maintain pH of the culture medium) into the device. The gas mixture was 
humidified (using standard oxygen humidifier) and filtered through a 0.22um syringe filter 
(EMD Millipore).
Tissue source: The classical air liquid interface method described above supported the 
culture of intestinal fragments dissected from mice embryos of neonates (E19 to P1-2). The 
current gut culture device, however, also enables the culture of larger intestinal fragments, 
dissected from mice at pre-weaning stage (14 days old), as described in the main text. 
Culture of embryonic tissues in the gut culture device supplies a sterile starting point for 
microbial colonization. This requires adapting the input and output port size to this smaller 
tissue size, thus replacing the 22G flat-end needles with 30G ones.
Fluid control and medium flow rate: We compared medium flow by gravity, from a 
reservoir placed above the tissues, to flow infusion controlled by syringe pump. Although 
gravity-based flow did not require purchase of special equipment, it was very difficult to 
control the input flow rate and output draining. We also tested medium infusion to multiple 
gut fragments using pump with one syringe, where the tubing is then split to multiple 
tissues. We found that the luminal flow resistance in one tissue affected the flow rate in the 
Yissachar et al.
Page 20
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 other tissues. We thus used syringe pumps capable of controlling multiple syringes (one 
syringe per one tissue), for both input (infusion) and output (withdrawal). This create a 
‘closed system’ which allows individual control of luminal flow of each tissue fragment, and 
allows the collection of the culture medium in real-time for individual gut cultures.
We tested different flow rates of the external and internal culture medium. For the external 
medium, flow rate should be high enough to replenish nutrients, maintain pH and 
compensate for mild evaporation. We found that flow rate of 200–500ul/h was too slow to 
fill these requirements, thus the external flow rate was set to 1ml/h. For internal lumen 
content flow rate, we estimated that the lumen volume of a 2w old mouse colon is about 
15ul. Flow rates of 1 to 60ul/h had no visible effect on colonic viability. We set up the lumen 
flow rate in our experiments to 30ul/h. The volume of the embryonic colon is much smaller, 
thus flow rate should be adjusted accordingly.
Lumen medium: The luminal medium flow needs to enable bacterial growth, yet it should 
fit with the physiological requirements of the gut epithelial layer. Indeed, infusion of 
microbes resuspended in their basal microbial growth medium to the gut cultures damaged 
the IEC integrity. Thus, microbial cultures were resuspended in the same tissue culture 
growth medium used for external flow, which we found to fit with microbial growth as well. 
To enable the growth of anaerobic microbes, the medium was incubated in the anaerobic 
chamber for 48h prior to the experiment. We titrated the microbial growth rate and found 
that these conditions allow growth of anaerobic microbes used in this study.
In a set of preliminary experiments, we aimed to mimic the physiologic consistency of the 
lumen content, while preserving proper flow through the gut. Supplementing the medium 
with thickening agents as pectin or cornstarch resulted in dehydration of the cultured tissue, 
and cause clogging of the output ports. Therefore these supplements were not included in the 
final experimentations setup.
Temperature in the chamber: We set up the temperature in the gut culture device to 37°c. 
We used standard lab heat block, and placed an adapter copper plate on top. To improve heat 
transfer to the device, the copper plate was topped with a layer of heat-sink silicon 
compound (Chemplex 1381 DE, Lubritech). In our lab environment, setting the heat block to 
43°c ensured a medium temperature of 37°c inside the device (temperature was measured by 
a digital thermometer and by a temperature-sensitive paper placed inside the chamber).
Bacterial cultures for ex-vivo colonization: We evaluated the bacterial growth rate 
throughout the experiment. For the bacteria C.ramosum, loading the input syringe with 
microbial concentration of higher than 5×107 CFU/ml resulted in decrease in the bacterial 
medium pH within 2h, due to bacterial growth (pH=6.5, compare with pH=7.1 at the sterile 
medium control). Thus, for all microbes used in microbial colonization assays (2h culture), 
the microbial load was between 1 to 3×107 CFU/ml.
Culture duration: Most of the preliminary experiments performed using the air-liquid 
interface method involved culture of embryonic or neonatal small and large intestinal 
fragments for several days (usually 1 to 5 days). The external tissue structure was mostly 
Yissachar et al.
Page 21
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 maintained, as well as spontaneous peristalsis and most of the mucosa and sub-mucosal 
layers (evaluated by standard H&E histology and immune-staining of immunological 
markers). However, the fine structure of the intestinal epithelium was damaged in long-term 
cultures (we noticed that the small intestine villi were more sensitive to long-term culture 
than the colonic IEC). Using the gut culture device improved tissue structure and viability, 
and allowed culture of larger, and more developed, intestinal fragments. Conservatively, the 
experiments described in the main text lasted no longer than 24 hrs for colons (and mostly 
between 2 to 6h).
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank Drs. N. Surana, E. Sefik, T. Tan and W. Ebina for microbial strains or insightful discussions, AT. Sherpa, 
J. Ramos, K. Hattori for help with mice; A. Rhoads, L. Yang, G. Gopalan for help with expression profiling; G. 
Buruzula, C. Araneo for help with sorting, K. Mills for multi-electrode array, P. Ma for help with whole mount 
staining, C. Gerard and B. Lu for NK1R-KO mice and C. Laplace for help with graphics. This work was supported 
by a Sponsored Research Agreement from UCB, the JPB Foundation, a gift from the Howalt family and by NIH 
grants R37-AI051530 to CB and DM, NIH DP2AT009499 and a Harvard Digestive Disease Center pilot grant to 
IMC. NY was supported by a Schuyler Pierce Memorial Fellowship. JFM was supported by JDRF Post-Doctoral 
Fellowship 3-2014-216.
References
Atarashi K, Tanoue T, Ando M, Kamada N, Nagano Y, Narushima S, Suda W, Imaoka A, Setoyama H, 
Nagamori T, et al. Th17 Cell Induction by Adhesion of Microbes to Intestinal Epithelial Cells. Cell. 
2015; 163:367–380. [PubMed: 26411289] 
Baral P, Mills K, Pinho-Ribeiro FA, Chiu IM. Pain and Itch: Beneficial or Harmful to Antimicrobial 
Defense? Cell Host Microbe. 2016; 19:755–759. [PubMed: 27281567] 
Cao YQ, Mantyh PW, Carlson EJ, Gillespie AM, Epstein CJ, Basbaum AI. Primary afferent 
tachykinins are required to experience moderate to intense pain. Nature. 1998; 392:390–394. 
[PubMed: 9537322] 
Caterina MJ, Schumacher MA, Tominaga M, Rosen TA, Levine JD, Julius D. The capsaicin receptor: a 
heat-activated ion channel in the pain pathway. Nature. 1997; 389:816–824. [PubMed: 9349813] 
Chiu IM, Barrett LB, Williams EK, Strochlic DE, Lee S, Weyer AD, Lou S, Bryman GS, Roberson 
DP, Ghasemlou N, et al. Transcriptional profiling at whole population and single cell levels reveals 
somatosensory neuron molecular diversity. Elife. 2014:3.
Chiu IM, Heesters BA, Ghasemlou N, Von Hehn CA, Zhao F, Tran J, Wainger B, Strominger A, 
Muralidharan S, Horswill AR, et al. Bacteria activate sensory neurons that modulate pain and 
inflammation. Nature. 2013; 501:52–57. [PubMed: 23965627] 
Chung H, Pamp SJ, Hill JA, Surana NK, Edelman SM, Troy EB, Reading NC, Villablanca EJ, Wang S, 
Mora JR, et al. Gut immune maturation depends on colonization with a host-specific microbiota. 
Cell. 2012; 149:1578–1593. [PubMed: 22726443] 
Clevers H. Modeling Development and Disease with Organoids. Cell. 2016; 165:1586–1597. 
[PubMed: 27315476] 
Cunin P, Caillon A, Corvaisier M, Garo E, Scotet M, Blanchard S, Delneste Y, Jeannin P. The 
tachykinins substance P and hemokinin-1 favor the generation of human memory Th17 cells by 
inducing IL-1beta, IL-23, and TNF-like 1A expression by monocytes. J Immunol. 2011; 186:4175–
4182. [PubMed: 21368235] 
Yissachar et al.
Page 22
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Engel MA, Leffler A, Niedermirtl F, Babes A, Zimmermann K, Filipovic MR, Izydorczyk I, Eberhardt 
M, Kichko TI, Mueller-Tribbensee SM, et al. TRPA1 and substance P mediate colitis in mice. 
Gastroenterology. 2011; 141:1346–1358. [PubMed: 21763243] 
Gabay C, Lamacchia C, Palmer G. IL-1 pathways in inflammation and human diseases. Nat Rev 
Rheumatol. 2010; 6:232–241. [PubMed: 20177398] 
Gonzalez-Rey E, Chorny A, Delgado M. Regulation of immune tolerance by anti-inflammatory 
neuropeptides. Nat Rev Immunol. 2007; 7:52–63. [PubMed: 17186031] 
Haller D, Bode C, Hammes WP, Pfeifer AM, Schiffrin EJ, Blum S. Non-pathogenic bacteria elicit a 
differential cytokine response by intestinal epithelial cell/leucocyte co-cultures. Gut. 2000; 47:79–
87. [PubMed: 10861268] 
Honda K, Littman DR. The microbiota in adaptive immune homeostasis and disease. Nature. 2016; 
535:75–84. [PubMed: 27383982] 
Hooper LV, Littman DR, Macpherson AJ. Interactions between the microbiota and the immune system. 
Science. 2012; 336:1268–1273. [PubMed: 22674334] 
Hooper LV, Wong MH, Thelin A, Hansson L, Falk PG, Gordon JI. Molecular analysis of commensal 
host-microbial relationships in the intestine. Science. 2001; 291:881–884. [PubMed: 11157169] 
Ivanov II, Atarashi K, Manel N, Brodie EL, Shima T, Karaoz U, Wei D, Goldfarb KC, Santee CA, 
Lynch SV, et al. Induction of intestinal Th17 cells by segmented filamentous bacteria. Cell. 2009; 
139:485–498. [PubMed: 19836068] 
Janelsins BM, Sumpter TL, Tkacheva OA, Rojas-Canales DM, Erdos G, Mathers AR, Shufesky WJ, 
Storkus WJ, Falo LD Jr, Morelli AE, et al. Neurokinin-1 receptor agonists bias therapeutic 
dendritic cells to induce type 1 immunity by licensing host dendritic cells to produce IL-12. Blood. 
2013; 121:2923–2933. [PubMed: 23365459] 
Jenkinson EJ, Anderson G. Fetal thymic organ cultures. Curr Opin Immunol. 1994; 6:293–297. 
[PubMed: 8011212] 
Jung S, Aliberti J, Graemmel P, Sunshine MJ, Kreutzberg GW, Sher A, Littman DR. Analysis of 
fractalkine receptor CX(3)CR1 function by targeted deletion and green fluorescent protein reporter 
gene insertion. Mol Cell Biol. 2000; 20:4106–4114. [PubMed: 10805752] 
Kim HJ, Huh D, Hamilton G, Ingber DE. Human gut-on-a-chip inhabited by microbial flora that 
experiences intestinal peristalsis-like motions and flow. Lab Chip. 2012; 12:2165–2174. [PubMed: 
22434367] 
Kim HJ, Li H, Collins JJ, Ingber DE. Contributions of microbiome and mechanical deformation to 
intestinal bacterial overgrowth and inflammation in a human gut-on-a-chip. Proc Natl Acad Sci U 
S A. 2016; 113:E7–15. [PubMed: 26668389] 
Kovalenko PL, Yuan L, Sun K, Kunovska L, Seregin S, Amalfitano A, Basson MD. Regulation of 
epithelial differentiation in rat intestine by intraluminal delivery of an adenoviral vector or 
silencing RNA coding for Schlafen 3. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e79745. [PubMed: 24244554] 
Lecuyer E, Rakotobe S, Lengline-Garnier H, Lebreton C, Picard M, Juste C, Fritzen R, Eberl G, 
McCoy KD, Macpherson AJ, et al. Segmented filamentous bacterium uses secondary and tertiary 
lymphoid tissues to induce gut IgA and specific T helper 17 cell responses. Immunity. 2014; 
40:608–620. [PubMed: 24745335] 
Mao YK, Kasper DL, Wang B, Forsythe P, Bienenstock J, Kunze WA. Bacteroides fragilis 
polysaccharide A is necessary and sufficient for acute activation of intestinal sensory neurons. Nat 
Commun. 2013; 4:1465. [PubMed: 23403566] 
Margolis KG, Gershon MD, Bogunovic M. Cellular Organization of Neuroimmune Interactions in the 
Gastrointestinal Tract. Trends Immunol. 2016; 37:487–501. [PubMed: 27289177] 
Meseguer V, Alpizar YA, Luis E, Tajada S, Denlinger B, Fajardo O, Manenschijn JA, Fernandez-Pena 
C, Talavera A, Kichko T, et al. TRPA1 channels mediate acute neurogenic inflammation and pain 
produced by bacterial endotoxins. Nat Commun. 2014; 5:3125. [PubMed: 24445575] 
Mowat AM, Agace WW. Regional specialization within the intestinal immune system. Nat Rev 
Immunol. 2014; 14:667–685. [PubMed: 25234148] 
Ochoa-Cortes F, Ramos-Lomas T, Miranda-Morales M, Spreadbury I, Ibeakanma C, Barajas-Lopez C, 
Vanner S. Bacterial cell products signal to mouse colonic nociceptive dorsal root ganglia neurons. 
Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2010; 299:G723–G732. [PubMed: 20576919] 
Yissachar et al.
Page 23
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Ohnmacht C, Park JH, Cording S, Wing JB, Atarashi K, Obata Y, Gaboriau-Routhiau V, Marques R, 
Dulauroy S, Fedoseeva M, et al. The microbiota regulates type 2 immunity through RORγ+ T 
cells. Science. 2015; 349:989–993. [PubMed: 26160380] 
Ootani A, Li X, Sangiorgi E, Ho QT, Ueno H, Toda S, Sugihara H, Fujimoto K, Weissman IL, 
Capecchi MR, Kuo CJ. Sustained in vitro intestinal epithelial culture within a Wnt-dependent stem 
cell niche. Nat Med. 2009; 15:701–706. [PubMed: 19398967] 
Qi J, Buzas K, Fan H, Cohen JI, Wang K, Mont E, Klinman D, Oppenheim JJ, Howard OM. Painful 
pathways induced by TLR stimulation of dorsal root ganglion neurons. J Immunol. 2011; 
186:6417–6426. [PubMed: 21515789] 
Riol-Blanco L, Ordovas-Montanes J, Perro M, Naval E, Thiriot A, Alvarez D, Paust S, Wood JN, von 
Andrian UH. Nociceptive sensory neurons drive interleukin-23-mediated psoriasiform skin 
inflammation. Nature. 2014; 510:157–161. [PubMed: 24759321] 
Robinson DR, McNaughton PA, Evans ML, Hicks GA. Characterization of the primary spinal afferent 
innervation of the mouse colon using retrograde labelling. Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2004; 
16:113–124. [PubMed: 14764211] 
Sano T, Huang W, Hall JA, Yang Y, Chen A, Gavzy SJ, Lee JY, Ziel JW, Miraldi ER, Domingos AI, et 
al. An IL-23R/IL-22 Circuit Regulates Epithelial Serum Amyloid A to Promote Local Effector 
Th17 Responses. Cell. 2015; 163:381–393. [PubMed: 26411290] 
Sato T, Vries RG, Snippert HJ, van de Wetering M, Barker N, Stange DE, van Es JH, Abo A, Kujala P, 
Peters PJ, et al. Single Lgr5 stem cells build crypt-villus structures in vitro without a mesenchymal 
niche. Nature. 2009; 459:262–265. [PubMed: 19329995] 
Sato T, Katagiri K, Gohbara A, Inoue K, Ogonuki N, Ogura A, Kubota Y, Ogawa T. In vitro 
production of functional sperm in cultured neonatal mouse testes. Nature. 2011; 471:504–507. 
[PubMed: 21430778] 
Schnupf P, Gaboriau-Routhiau V, Gros M, Friedman R, Moya-Nilges M, Nigro G, Cerf-Bensussan N, 
Sansonetti PJ. Growth and host interaction of mouse segmented filamentous bacteria in vitro. 
Nature. 2015; 520:99–103. [PubMed: 25600271] 
Sefik E, Geva-Zatorsky N, Oh S, Konnikova L, Zemmour D, McGuire AM, Burzyn D, Ortiz-Lopez A, 
Lobera M, Yang J, et al. Individual intestinal symbionts induce a distinct population of RORγ+ 
regulatory T cells. Science. 2015; 349:993–997. [PubMed: 26272906] 
Steinhoff MS, von MB, Geppetti P, Pothoulakis C, Bunnett NW. Tachykinins and their receptors: 
contributions to physiological control and the mechanisms of disease. Physiol Rev. 2014; 94:265–
301. [PubMed: 24382888] 
Tan LL, Bornstein JC, Anderson CR. Distinct chemical classes of medium-sized transient receptor 
potential channel vanilloid 1-immunoreactive dorsal root ganglion neurons innervate the adult 
mouse jejunum and colon. Neuroscience. 2008; 156:334–343. [PubMed: 18706490] 
Thaiss CA, Zmora N, Levy M, Elinav E. The microbiome and innate immunity. Nature. 2016; 535:65–
74. [PubMed: 27383981] 
Tsilingiri K, Barbosa T, Penna G, Caprioli F, Sonzogni A, Viale G, Rescigno M. Probiotic and 
postbiotic activity in health and disease: comparison on a novel polarised ex-vivo organ culture 
model. Gut. 2012; 61:1007–1015. [PubMed: 22301383] 
Weinstock JV, Blum A, Metwali A, Elliott D, Bunnett N, Arsenescu R. Substance P regulates Th1-type 
colitis in IL-10 knockout mice. J Immunol. 2003; 171:3762–3767. [PubMed: 14500676] 
Xu ZZ, Kim YH, Bang S, Zhang Y, Berta T, Wang F, Oh SB, Ji RR. Inhibition of mechanical allodynia 
in neuropathic pain by TLR5-mediated A-fiber blockade. Nat Med. 2015; 21:1326–1331. 
[PubMed: 26479925] 
Yissachar et al.
Page 24
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Highlights
•
A novel organ culture system for the mouse intestine
•
Rapid modulation of neuronal gene expression by Th17/ RORg+ Treg-
inducing microbes
•
Differential direct activation of neurons by immune-modulating microbes
•
The nervous system influences the microbiome/immune system crosstalk
Yissachar et al.
Page 25
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Development of an intestinal organ culture system
(A) Schematics of the system design. Intact intestinal tissue is connected to input and output 
ports of the chamber (top), pumps controlling medium flow inside the lumen and in the 
external medium chamber. The entire device (bottom) contains six such chambers. (B) 
Histological analysis of colon tissue structure (H&E staining), and mucus production (PAS 
staining), of colon fragments cultured for different times. Data representative of >3 
independent experiments. (C–D) Confocal imaging of colon segments cultured for 12h, 
immunostained for several intestinal differentiation or proliferation (Ki-67) markers. 
Representative of >3 independent experiments (additional time points in Fig. S3). (E) 
Whole-mount staining of the enteric nervous system in colon segments cultured for 8h 
(additional time points in Fig. S3 and MovieS2).
Yissachar et al.
Page 26
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Intestinal immunocytes and microbiota are maintained in culture
(A) Representative flow cytometry profiles of colonic LP immunocytes isolated from colon 
segments from 12–14 days old SPF mice, quantitated below for 4–6 segments at each time 
point from two independent experiments. (B) Confocal imaging of colon cultures 
immunostained for the myeloid marker CX3CR1 (see MovieS5 for real time immunocyte 
dynamics) (C) Bacterial concentration (aerobic and anaerobic) in colon segments (as in A) 
cultured for different times (gray shading is the range observed in normal colon of SPF 
mice). (D) Bacterial concentration in cultured colon segments originating from GF mice. (E) 
C. ramosum bacterial concentration in SPF segments infused with C. ramosum.
Yissachar et al.
Page 27
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Mucosal association and rapid transcriptional triggering of typical signature by SFB
(A–B) SFB associates with the intestinal epithelium after 2 hrs in cultured SI segment 
visualized by (A) FISH with an SFB-specific probe (red) or (B) electron microscopy. (C–D) 
Induction of intestinal gene expression by SFB. SI organ cultures were infused with 
bacteria-containing supernatant of feces from SFB- or B. fragilis-monocolonized mice or GF 
controls, and cultured for 2 hrs before microarray profiling of gene expression in the entire 
tissue. (C) Changes in gene expression on a “volcano plot” comparing SFB or GF infused 
cultures. Transcripts up- or down-regulated by SFB in whole SI in vivo are highlighted (red 
and blue, respectively). (D) Bar plot comparing the induction by SFB or B. fragilis (log2 
FoldChange) of adhesion-mediated IEC activation signature genes (from (Atarashi et al., 
2015)).
Yissachar et al.
Page 28
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Early colonic response to Treg inducing microbes is enriched in neural genes
(A) Time course heatmap of changes in whole-tissue gene expression in response to C. 
ramosum in SPF colon cultures (log2 of FoldChange relative to the mean of medium-infused 
controls; each column an individual sample). Squares: genes observed as responding to SFB 
in vivo [Tan T. ms submitted and (Atarashi et al., 2015)] or to long-term colonization with C. 
ramosum in vivo (from N. Geva-Zatorsky et al, in revision). (B–E) Gene expression was 
profiled in colon segments from GF mice cultured and infused with different microbes. (B) 
Comparison of the 2 hr response to C. ramosum or P. magnus (FoldChange relative to 
medium control cultures, mean of triplicates). Common responses are labeled in black, those 
unique to C. ramosum in red or blue. (C) Correlation between transcriptional changes 
elicited in vitro by a panel of microbes and their ability to induce RORg+ Tregs in vivo. Top 
Yissachar et al.
Page 29
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 left: frequency of colonic RORg+ Tregs in monocolonized mice (data from (Sefik et al., 
2015)); top right: ranked Pearson correlation coefficients, highlighting the 300 transcripts 
most positively or negatively correlated with colonic RORg+ Tregs (orange and green, 
respectively); bottom: heatmap representation of the row-normalized expression of these 
most-correlated transcripts (D) Volcano plot comparing C. ramosum-infused to control colon 
cultures (top) or SFB-infused to control SI cultures (bottom; data from Fig. 3), both 
highlighted with the 300 transcripts most positively or negatively correlated to RORg+ Treg 
frequencies, as defined in C (E) GeneOntology (biological process) enriched in these most 
correlated transcripts.
Yissachar et al.
Page 30
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Treg-inducing microbes modulate colonic expression of neuropeptides and their 
receptors
Further analysis of gene expression in microbe-infused colon segments from Fig. 5. (A) 
Frequency of RORg+ Tregs in monocolonized mice (x-axis) vs mean expression of Tac1 
(top) and TacR1 (bottom; encode Substance P and its receptor, respectively) in GF colon 
segments after 2 hr infusion with the same symbionts (y axis). (B–D) Ranked correlation to 
RORg+ Treg frequency (per Fig. 4C) highlighted for transcripts encoding neuropeptide 
receptors (B), neuropeptides (C) or neuropeptides most expressed in nociceptor neurons (D); 
Kolmogorov-Smirnoff test p-value and D-factor. (E) Log2 of FoldChanges vs control for C. 
ramosum-infused colon (red) or SFB-infused SI (blue) for neuropeptides most enriched in 
nociceptor neurons.
Yissachar et al.
Page 31
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Differential activation of sensory neurons by RORg+ Treg inducing microbes compared 
to non-inducers via soluble mediators
(A–B) Multi-electrode array recordings of cultured dorsal root ganglia (T7-L6 DRG) 
sensory neurons. (A) Individual raster plots of recorded action potentials over time for C. 
ramosum or P. magnus; average action potential waveform for each electrode is shown at 
right. (B) Average spike rate comparison following stimulation by C. ramosum or P. magnus 
across MEA plates (n=6 per strain; two-way ANOVA p.value). (C–H) Mouse dorsal root 
ganglia (T7-L6 DRG) neurons were analyzed by Fura-2 ratiometric imaging for bacterial 
responses. Microbes were applied to cultured neurons (107–108 CFU/mL), followed by 
capsaicin (Cap) to mark nociceptor neurons, and KCl to activate all sensory neurons in the 
Yissachar et al.
Page 32
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 imaging field. (C) Representative fields showing calcium flux in neurons responding to C. 
ramosum (white arrows) but none to P. magnus. (D) Individual Fura-2 ratiometric traces of 
neurons showing calcium influx following application of bacteria, capsaicin, and KCl. 
Right: quantitation of the frequency of neurons responding to the two bacterial strains 
(response scored if the fold-change increase vs. basal state was >=1.2; student’s t-test p 
value<10−4). (E) Venn diagram of neuronal subsets responding to C. ramosum, capsaicin, or 
both. (F–H) Representative Fura-2 ratiometric traces of neurons (F, left) and quantitation of 
the frequency of neurons responding (F, right) to 6 different cultured microbes or to fecal 
suspensions from GF, SFB or C.ramosum mono-colonized mice (G). (H) Neurons respond 
to bacterial washoff and supernatant from C. ramosum but not from P. magnus. Bacterial 
cultures were washed into neuronal imaging medium for preparation of unconditioned 
supernatant (left) or incubated for 30min for conditioned supernatant (right).
Yissachar et al.
Page 33
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. Tgac1 deficiency and neuronal activation by capsaicin feeding alters colonic RORg+ 
Tregs levels in-vivo
(A) Frequency of RORg+ Tregs among colonic FoxP3+ Tregs in Tac1-deficient mice or 
control littermates (paired Student’s t-test); middle: KO/WT ratio of RORg+ Treg 
frequencies in each littermate pair; right: frequency of total colonic FoxP3+ Tregs. (B) 
Frequency of RORg+ Tregs among colonic FoxP3+ Tregs (left) and total colonic FoxP3+ 
Tregs (right) in mice fed with a capsaicin enriched diet vs. control diet (unpaired Student’s t-
test).
Yissachar et al.
Page 34
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
