 OPEN
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Hippocampal encoding of interoceptive context during fear
conditioning
S-W Yoo1,3, M Bae1,3, LB Tovar-y-Romo1 and NJ Haughey1,2
Rodent models of auditory fear conditioning are often used to understand the molecular mechanisms regulating fear- and anxiety-
related behaviors. Conditioning and extinction memories are influenced by contextual cues, and the reinstatement of conditioned
fear occurs when the conditioning stimulus is presented in a context different from the extinction context. Although it has been
proposed that internal state is a feature of context that could influence extinction, contributions of interoception to conditioning
have not been experimentally addressed. Here we use ethanol (EtOH) to show that interoceptive cues are encoded through the
hippocampus by mechanisms that involve increased phosphorylation of GluR1 on serine 845, and biophysical alterations in
neuronal membranes that facilitate stabilization of surface-located calcium-permeable N-2-amino-3-(5-methyl-3-oxo-1,2-oxazol-4-yl)
propanoic acid (AMPA) receptor (AMPAR) into membrane microdomains. Conflicting interoceptive cues during extinction and fear
relapse testing resulted in a failure to consolidate extinction that was reversed by the administration of AMPAR antagonists
immediately following the retrieval cue.
Translational Psychiatry (2017) 7, e991; doi:10.1038/tp.2016.254; published online 3 January 2017
INTRODUCTION
Rodent models of auditory fear conditioning have proven to
be useful tools for understanding the molecular mechanisms
underlying fear-related behaviors including posttraumatic stress
disorders (PTSD). Fear conditioning involves the pairing of a
conditioned stimulus (CS; tone) with an unconditioned stimulus
(US; mild electric shock) to produce a conditioned response
(freezing). Conditioned fear is said to occur when repeated CS–US
pairing results in the CS, eliciting the conditioned response in the
absence of the US. Repetitive CS in the absence of US results in
progressive reductions of the conditioned response through a
process known as extinction (the rodent equivalent of desensitiza-
tion). Roles for the medial prefrontal cortex, amygdala and
hippocampus in fear conditioning and extinction have been
extensively described, with contributions for each structure
determined by the circumstances of conditioning.1–4
The process of extinction does not appear to erase the
conditioning memory, but is thought to generate a new memory
that competes with the conditioning memory.1 This extinction
memory is less robust than the conditioning memory, and the
permanence of extinction is influenced by context and the
amount of time that has elapsed since extinction. It is well
established that the extinction of fear conditioning is more
durable when conducted in a novel environment, and renewal of
conditioned fear can occur when the CS is presented outside of
the extinction context.5 Contextual cues are typically thought to
include spatial and sensory components that are encoded
through hippocampal circuitry;6 however, it has also been
proposed that the internal state of an organism could contribute
to the perception of context. Roles for this interoception in
regulating contextual aspects of extinction have not been
experimentally tested. As alcohol impairs both the perception of
environmental cues, and internal perceptions (how one feels), we
reasoned that alcohol-associated impairment of extinction could
involve modifications of internal context. Here we provide
evidence that alcohol interferes with behavioral extinction by
modifying the perception of context, and that these interoceptive
cues are encoded through modifications in the phosphorylation
and surface expression of calcium-permeable
N-2-amino-3-(5-
methyl-3-oxo-1,2-oxazol-4-yl) propanoic acid (AMPA) receptors
(CP-AMPAR) in the hippocampus. The effects of conflicting
internal context on the permanence of extinction can be rescued
when AMPA receptors (AMPAR) are blocked immediately follow-
ing the retrieval cue, and before extinction training.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
Male C3-C57B1/6 J mice (8–12 weeks of age) were obtained from the
Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME, USA). Animals were single-housed in a
temperature- and humidity-controlled room under a 12-h light cycle with
food and water available ad libitum, except during self-administration of
ethanol (EtOH) when water was withheld. Animals were allowed to
acclimate to the colony room for at least 7 days after arrival and all
behavioral experiments were carried out during the dark cycle. All animal
procedures were approved by the Johns Hopkins University Animal Care
and Use Committee.
EtOH self-administration
Binge drinking of EtOH was conducted using a previously published
method7 modified from Rhodes.8 EtOH (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA;
1Department of Neurology, Richard T. Johnson Division of Neuroimmunology and Neurological Infections, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
and 2Department of Psychiatry, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. Correspondence: Professor NJ Haughey, Department of Neurology, Richard
T. Johnson Division of Neuroimmunology and Neurological Infections, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Meyer 6-109, 600 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD
21287, USA.
E-mail: nhaughe1@jhmi.edu
3These authors contributed equally to this work.
Received 27 September 2016; accepted 4 October 2016
Citation: Transl Psychiatry (2017) 7, e991; doi:10.1038/tp.2016.254
www.nature.com/tp
 200 proof, ⩾ 99.5%) was diluted to 20% (v/v) in sterile water and
administered in water bottles for 2 h beginning 2 h into the animals' dark
cycle. Water bottles were pre-tested to ensure they did not leak, and
consumption
was
determined
by
water
weight
before
and
after
administration. The amount of EtOH intake was recorded for each day
after the 2 h drinking period. Vehicle controls were given water in the
similar containers as mice who received EtOH, and they were handled in
same manner as mice exposed to EtOH. Blood EtOH was measured three
times during behavioral training: immediately following binge EtOH intake,
following extinction training and following fear relapse training using an
Ethanol assay (Sigma) that uses a coupled enzyme reaction to oxidize EtOH
and measure hydrogen peroxide as a fluorometric product.
Fear conditioning reconsolidation, recovery and measurement of
fearing behavior
Fear conditioning, reconsolidation and fear relapse testing were performed
using methods similar to previous reports with slight modifications.9
Customized sound isolation boxes containing a modular test cage with an
electrifiable floor grid and ambient light supply were used for conditioning
(Coulbourn Instruments, Whitehall, PA, USA). On the first day of
conditioning (Day 0), mice were presented with six auditory tones (CS)
each paired with electric shock (US). Before the fear conditioning, a period
of acclimation lasting 240 s preceded the presentation of cues. The CS
consisting of an 80-dB 2-KHz pure tone lasting 10 s and the US consisting
of scrambled 1.0-mA foot shock lasting 2 s were terminated after the
paired conditioning. Following conditioning, mice were returned to their
home cages until preparation of brain slices or further behavioral
examination. On the day of reconsolidation update (Day 1), mice were
divided into two groups as control (normal sterile water) and ethanol (20%
in sterile water). Mice were depleted of water for 6 h and then were
provided water or ethanol for 2 h at beginning of 2 h into their dark cycle.8
Reconsolidation was performed in a context distinct from that in which
conditioning took place, and consisted of a textured polymer box with
scents removed with 70% ethanol. A single CS was presented during the
30-s retrieval period, and animals were returned to their homecages.
Extinction training was conducted within 15 min of reconsolidation and
consisted of two different blocks of 18 exposures to the CS alone (80-dB 2-
KHz pure tones lasting 10 s) separated by 10-s intervals. After reconsolida-
tion update, mice were returned to their homecages. On day 2, mice were
returned to the same chambers that were used for extinction training and
presented with four CS to measure fear relapse. Fear behavior measured as
the percent time freezing during CS was quantified using an automated
motion-sensitive software (Clever system, Reston, VA, USA).
Drug treatments
Mice
were
intraperitoneally
injected
with Talamapanel (5 mg kg − 1;
Medkoo Bioscience, Chapel Hill, NC, USA) once or three times (6 h interval)
following fear condition, or once following exposure to the retrieval cue.
Perampanel (5 mg kg − 1, Medchem Express, Monmouth Junction, NJ, USA)
was administered in a separate group of mice once following the retrieval
cue. Control mice and EtOH-only mice were injected with Vehicle (2.5%
dimethylsulphoxide in 0.9% NaCl). Immediately following fear relapse
testing, open field testing was conducted to measure locomotion activity
following the administration of Talampanel. The open field consisted of a
square acrylic box incorporating an automated activity monitor (Cage Rack
Flex-Field Photobeam Activity System, San Diego Instruments, San Diego,
CA, USA), which provides horizontal and vertical grids of 16 × 16 infrared
beams. The total number of beam breaks in both horizontal and vertical
planes over a period of 10 min (120 s, five times, averaged) was recorded
and analyzed. For direct hippocampal infusions of the CP-AMPAR
antagonist
Naspm
trihydrochloride
(Naspm),
mice
were
implanted
bilaterally with 26-gauge stainless steel external cannulas (model C235G,
Plastics One, Roanoke, VA, USA) into CA1 region of the hippocampus
(anterior/posterior,
− 2.0 mm;
medial/lateral,
± 1.5 mm;
dorsal/ventral,
1.5 mm from bregma) 7 days before fear conditioning. Naspm (4 μg per
0.5 μl per hippocampus) was infused into a 33-gauge internal cannula
(model C235I, Plastics One) using a 10 μl Hamilton syringe at a rate of
0.5 μl min − 1 in freely moving animals. Internal cannulas were left in place
for an additional 1 min to allow for drug to diffuse into parenchyma before
returning animals to the testing chamber.
Cell culture and experimental treatments
Hippocampal neuronal cultures were prepared from embryonic day 18
Sprague–Dawley
rats
using
methods
that
have
been
described
previously.10 In brief, hippocampi were isolated, trypsinized and cells were
dissociated by gentle trituration in a calcium-free Hank’s balanced salt
solution (Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA). Neurons were plated at a density
of
150 000
cells
per
ml
on
15 mm
diameter
with
or
without
polyethylenimine-coated glass coverslips depending on purpose in
Neurobasal media (Gibco) supplemented with B27 (Gibco) and 1%
antibiotic solution (104 U ml − 1 of penicillin, 10 mg ml − 1 of streptomycin
and 25 μg ml − 1 of amphotericin B (Gibco)). Three hours after plating,
media was completely replaced, and thereafter supplemented with
Neurobasal media containing B27 every 7 days. Hippocampal cultures
are routinely 498% MAP-2+ neurons, with the remainder of cells
predominantly
GFAP+
astrocytes.
Hippocampal
cultures
were
used
between 14 and 21 days in vitro. Ethanol was diluted from stock
concentrations just before experiments and was used at final concentra-
tions ranging from 20 to 100 mM for indicated time.
Immunofluorescence, confocal microscopy and quantification
Membrane microdomains were identified using a cholera toxin subunit B
conjugated to Alexa Fluor 555 (CTB-555; Invitrogen/Molecular Probes,
Carlsbad, CA, USA) that binds the ganglioside GM1.10 CTB-555 (1 ng ml − 1)
was incubated with neurons for 10 min at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere.
Media was rapidly removed and cells were fixed with an ice-cold 4%
paraformaldehyde solution prepared in Tris-buffered saline (TBS, 25 mM
Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM KCl; pH 7.4). Membranes were permeabilized and
nonspecific
binding
was
blocked
by
incubation
for
1 h
at
room
temperature in TBS containing 0.1% Triton X-100 and 5% normal goat
serum. Cells were then incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C
that included anti-GluR1 antibodies (clone C3T; 1:100, Millipore, Bedford,
MA, USA) and GluR2 (clone 6C4, 1:100, Millipore). Slides were washed with
TBS and incubated for 2 h at room temperature with secondary antibodies
tagged with AlexaFluor 488 (1:1000 dilution; Invitrogen/Molecular Probes).
Immunopositive puncta on dendritic branches were imaged with a × 100
objective lens using a Zeiss Axiovert microscope equipped with an
ApoTome and Axiocam MRm camera and Axiovision (4.8.2) imaging
software (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany). For figures, images were
deconvoluted with module with Axiovision (4.8.2) imaging software (Carl
Zeiss). Quantification of immunofluorescence was conducted using
methods similar to those previously described.10 All images for quantifica-
tion were taken with identical settings under the same conditions. For each
image the threshold was adjusted manually so that the immune-labeled
regions corresponded to puncta with intensities that were at least twofold
above the diffuse fluorescence on the dendritic branch. Quantifications
were conducted on single-plane images through the brightest point, and
criteria for a positive identification were that the puncta must be clear and
distinguishable. Lipid raft size was determined by tracing the boarder of
each CTB-555-immunopositive region within a defined region of the
dendrite. The numbers of GluR1 and GluR2 were determined by counting
the number of immunopositive puncta in defined areas of dendrites by an
investigator blinded to the experimental condition. Within 100 μm of the
soma, the area was calculated for each region of interest by tracing the
outline of the dendrites. Calibrations of pixels to μm2 were accomplished
with the Open Lab software (Improvision; Perk and Elmer, Waltham, MA,
USA). Each species of GluR1 or GluR2 was considered to be microdomain-
located if there was any pixel overlap between CTB-555 and the secondary
antibody AlexaFluor 488. To account for treatment-induced increases in
the size of CTB-555+ regions, the number of co-localized puncta were
normalized to the interested area for each experiment. A minimum of 21
dendrites in at least three separate cultures were quantified for each
experimental condition.
Isolation of detergent-resistant membrane raft and
immunoblotting
Membrane rafts were isolated according to the previous report with slight
modification.11 Briefly, detergent-resistant membrane rafts were isolated
from primary neurons using ice-cold lysis buffer, MBS buffer (25 mM MES,
150 mM NaCl, pH 6.5), containing 10 mM MgCl2, 10 mM NaF, 2 mM Na3VO4;
1 mM EGTA, 0.2 mM phenylmethyl sulphonyl fluoride pH 8.0 and 1.0% w/v
CHAPSO (Sigma) as the detergent. Lysates were incubated on ice for
30 min and sonicated. Following sonication, 1 ml from the total homo-
genate was mixed with 1 ml of 90% (w/v) sucrose in MBS buffer and placed
Alcohol disrupts the extinction by modifying interoceptive context
S-W Yoo et al
2
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 11
 in a 5 ml ultracentrifuge tube. A 5-35-45% sucrose gradient was formed by
layering 2 ml of 35% sucrose in MBS buffer on top of 2 ml 45% sucrose
containing homogenate, followed by 5% (1 ml) sucrose. The gradient was
centrifuged at 47 000 r.p.m. for 18 h at 4 °C in a Beckman MLS-50 Swinging
bucket rotor (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA). A light-scattering band
located at the 25–30% interface was identified indicating the presence of
lipid rafts. Ten 0.5 ml fractions were collected from the top of the
ultracentrifuge tube and proteins were analyzed by immunoblotting. For
immunoblotting of the fractions, equal volumes of each fraction were
resolved
by
10%
sodium
dodecyl
sulphate-polyacrylamide
gel
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride
membranes (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Nonspecific binding sites were
blocked with 5% (w/v) milk in TBS containing 0.1% Tween 20 (TBS-T). After
blocking, blots were incubated overnight with the primary polyclonal
antibody Flotillin 1 (1:1000, Abcam, San Francisco, CA, USA), or monoclonal
antibodies GluR1 (clone RH95, 1:1000, Millipore) and transferrin receptor
(1:1000, Invitrogen). Following washes with TBS-T, blots were incubated for
2 h with the appropriate IgG horseradish peroxidase-linked antibody
(1:1000; Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA), and developed by
enhanced chemiluminescence. Image analysis was performed using a G:
BOX Imaging system (Syngene, Frederick, MD, USA).
Calcium imaging
Cytosolic calcium levels ([Ca2+]c) were measured using the Ca2+-specific
fluorescent probe Fura-2AM. Rat hippocampal neurons were incubated for
20 min with Fura-2AM (2 μM) at 37 °C in Neurobasal media containing B27
supplement. Neurons were washed with Locke’s buffer (154 mM NaCl,
3.6 mM NaHCO3, 5.6 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 5 mM HEPES, 2.3 mM CaCl2 and
10 mM glucose; pH 7.4) to remove extracellular Fura-2 and incubated at
37 °C for an additional 10 min to allow complete deesterification of the
probe. Coverslips containing Fura-2-loaded cells were mounted in an
RC-26 imaging chamber (Warner Instruments, Hamden, CT, USA) and
maintained at 37 °C (TC344B Automatic Temperature Controller; Warner
Instruments). Neurons were perfused at the rate of 2 ml min − 1 with Lockes
buffer using a V8 channel controller (Warner Instruments). Rapid switching
from Lockes buffer to N-2-amino-3-(5-methyl-3-oxo-1,2-oxazol-4-yl) propa-
noic acid (AMPA; 10 μM, Tocris, Ellisville, MS, USA) containing ethanol or
Naspm trihydrochloride (Naspm, 50 μM, Sigma) was accomplished by
placing the perfusion tube and suction apparatus close to the cells to be
imaged (with an ~ 0.05 cm gap) so that a thin film of perfusate rapidly
passed over the cells. Cells were excited at 340 and 380 nm, and emission
was recorded at 510 nm with a video-based intracellular imaging system
(Photon Technology, Edison, NJ, USA) equipped with a QuantEM 512-sc
electron-multiplying gain camera (Photometrics, Tuscon, AZ, USA). Images
were acquired at the rate of 200 ms per image pair from 10 to 15 regions
(~1 μM2) along dendritic branches. The fluorescent intensities of ratio
images were converted to nM [Ca2+]c by curve fitting using reference
standards as previously described.10 Ethanol (60 mM) was pretreated at
2 min before AMPA (20 μM) and retreated with AMPA or washed out
depending on the experimental paradigm. To induce surface expression of
AMPA by increasing cAMP, 50 μM of 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (Sigma)
and 20 μM of forskolin (Tocris, Bristol, UK) were used. For direct comparisons
of focal AMPA-evoked calcium responses with the location of GluR1 to lipid
raft or non-raft microdomains, cells were fixed following calcium recordings,
and immunostained as described with CTB-555 and GluR1.
Biotinylation of surface receptors
Surface expression of receptors was determined in cultured cells using a
biotin-labeling kit (Pierce Chemical, Rockford, IL, USA) as described by the
manufacturer. Cerebral cortical cells were cultured on polyethylenimine
(PEI)-coated 60 mm dishes for 14 days. On day 15, cells were incubated
with ethanol and/or protein kinase A (PKA) and protein kinase C (PKC)
modulators, forskolin+3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine and AMPA or vehicle.
The
cells
were
gently
mixed
with
EZ
Link
Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin
(0.5 mg ml − 1, Pierce Chemical) in phosphate-buffered saline (1 mM MgCl2,
1 mM CaCl2, 137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl 10 mM Na2HPO4 and 0.2 mM KH2PO4)
reagent on a rocker for 30 min in 5% CO incubator on ice. The cells were
washed twice with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline containing 192 mM
Glycine to remove unbound biotin. The cells were then lysed with 600 μl
lysis buffer (50 Mm Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100 0.5%
deoxycholate, 30 mM NaF 1 mM ortho-vanadate and protease inhibitor),
scraped and transferred to a tube, sonicated on ice for 10 s and
centrifuged at 500 g for 5 min. Biotin-labeled proteins and flow-through
(cytosolic proteins) were separated with 30 μl 50% NeutrAvidin slurry
(Pierce Chemical) as described by the manufacturer. The biotinylated
(surface) proteins were eluted from the beads by incubation for overnight
at 4 °C and washed twice. An equal volume of SDS-PAGE sample buffer
(6.25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 15% glycerol, 2% SDS, 1% β-mercaptoethanol,
2 mM dithiothreitol and 0.02% bromophenol blue) at 95 °C 20 min was
used. The samples were then subjected to gel electrophoresis and western
blotting as described above with primary antibodies recognizing GluR1
(clone C3T; 1:1000, Millipore), GluR2 (clone 6C4, 1:1000, Millipore) and
phosphor-GluR1 on serine 831 (clone N453; 1:1000, Millipore). To see
specific kinase-dependent phosphorylation of GluR1, PKA inhibitor, KT5720
(Tocris, 1 μM) and PKC inhibitor, chelerythrine (Tocris, 1 μM) were
pretreated. All comparisons were made within blots.
Statistics
All of the results were analyzed using one-way analysis of variance
followed by Tukey post hoc analyses when group differences were
significant. Results are expressed as mean ± s.d. or mean ± s.e. where
indicated.
RESULTS
EtOH creates conflicting interoceptive cues that result in a failure
to consolidate behavioral extinction
We first determined whether the self-administration of EtOH after
auditory fear conditioning interfered with extinction training using
an ABB model in which conditioning was conducted in context A,
followed by extinction, and fear relapse testing in context B. Fear
conditioning was established using an auditory CS paired with
foot shock (US; Figure 1a). Establishment of CS–US behavior was
demonstrated by a linear increase, and plateau in freezing
behavior over six
paired CS–US
presentations
(Figure
1b).
Twenty-four hours following establishment of auditory fear
conditioning, mice were given free access to 20% EtOH for 2 h,
beginning 2 h into their dark cycle. This method of EtOH self-
administration produces spontaneous binge intake without prior
training.7,8 EtOH intake was slightly higher than water intake over
this time period, and produced a blood EtOH concentration of
9.6 ± 1.1 ng μl − 1 after 2 h of EtOH drinking (Supplementary Figure
1a, b). Two hours after drinking, we introduced an extinction
protocol of reconsolidation update previously shown to perma-
nently attenuate fear memory.9,12 The CS was presented once to
retrieve a consolidated memory that is labile to modification for
several hours after its retrieval.13 Freezing behavior during the last
30 s of this retrieval cue was similar to freezing recorded during
the last trials of CS–US training, suggesting that EtOH did not
impair the consolidation, or retrieval of auditory fear conditioning
(Figure 1c). The retrieval cue was followed by extinction training
(two rounds of 18 trails each), in which the CS was presented
without the US. The extinction protocol resulted in a progressive
reduction of freezing behavior that was similar in both water and
EtOH groups (blood EtOH was 7.9 ± 1.1 ng μl − 1; Supplementary
Figure 1b), suggesting that EtOH did not interfere with extinction
training (Figure 1d). However, EtOH-exposed mice exhibited
renewal of conditioned fear evidenced by increased freezing
behavior during fear relapse tests (Figure 1e; blood EtOH was
undetectable at this time point; Supplementary Figure 1b). We
interpret these findings to suggest that the binge drinking of EtOH
before extinction produced an internal context that was different
from the internal state of the animal during fear relapse testing.
These
conflicting
interoceptive
cues
impaired
behavioral
extinction.
Failure to consolidate behavioral extinction following EtOH binge
drinking is associated with modifications in the phosphorylation of
hippocampal GluR1
We next sought to determine the molecular mechanisms by which
EtOH impairs behavioral extinction. Fear conditioning and its
Alcohol disrupts the extinction by modifying interoceptive context
S-W Yoo et al
3
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 11
 maintenance are associated with a potentiation of glutamatergic
synaptic transmission that involves modifications in the surface
trafficking of AMPA receptors (AMPARs).5,9 Surface localization of
AMPARs is regulated by protein–protein interactions, posttransla-
tional
modifications
and
transient
alterations
in
the
lipid
composition of plasma membranes.14,15 As EtOH is known to
modify kinase and phosphatase activity,16,17 and the fluidity of
lipid bilayers,18 we reasoned that failure to consolidate behavioral
extinction following self-administration of EtOH may be related to
modification of AMPAR expression and/or plasma membrane
trafficking. We used GluR1 phosphorylated on serine 845 and
serine 831 as surrogate measures for surface localization of
AMPAR in brain tissue homogenates,15 from animals exposed to
fear conditioning and extinction. Fear conditioning did not modify
levels of total GluR1 in the lateral amygdala or hippocampus
(Figures 2a and d), but resulted in increased levels of pGluR1S845
in the hippocampus and lateral amygdala (Figures 2a and e), and
increased pGluR1S831 in the hippocampus (Figures 2a and f).
Binge EtOH intake after fear conditioning did not alter total GluR1
in the lateral amygdala or hippocampus (Figures 2b and d),
increased pGluR1S845 in the hippocampus and lateral amygdala
(Figures 2b and e) and selectively increased pGluR1S831 in the
hippocampus (Figures 2b and f). Following the retrieval cue, there
was a further and selective increase of pGluR1S845 in the
hippocampus (Figures 2c and e). These data demonstrate that
the phosphorylation of GluR1 in hippocampus and amygdala
during fear conditioning is modified by EtOH, and that retrieval of
the fear association is accompanied by a selective increase in the
phosphorylation of GluR1S845 in hippocampus (Figures 2k and l).
Following extinction training, levels of total GluR1, pGluR1S831
and pGluR1S835 were similar in control and binge EtOH-exposed
mice (Figures 2g and i). However, the next day following fear
relapse testing, mice previously exposed to binge EtOH consump-
tion exhibited reduced levels of total GluR1 and increased levels of
pGluR1S845 in the hippocampus compared with control mice
(Figures 2h and j). Thus, a failure to consolidate the behavioral
extinction of fear memory in mice exposed to binge EtOH
consumption was associated with a hippocampal-specific GluR1
phosphorylation known to regulate the surface expression of
AMPARs (Figures 2k and l). A single binge exposure to EtOH was
not sufficient to alter synaptic density in the medial prefrontal
cortex (Supplementary Figure 2a, b), as has been previously
reported following chronic intermittent EtOH.19 These data
suggest that EtOH modifies the internal state of the animal, and
that
these
interoceptive
cues
are
processed
through
the
hippocampus by mechanisms that involve modifications in the
surface expression of AMPAR.
EtOH modifies plasma membrane structure and redistributes
GluR1 to membrane microdomains
We next determined whether EtOH modified plasma membrane
structure and localization of GluR1 in primary hippocampal
neurons.
Membrane
microdomains
were
identified
using
CTX555, a fluorescent-conjugated inactive cholera toxin subunit
B that preferentially binds the lipid raft-enriched ganglioside
GM1.20 EtOH rapidly (within 2 min) re-distributed GM1 along
neuronal
dendrites
into
clusters
that
were
1.9-fold
larger
compared with GM1+ domains in vehicle-treated control cultures
(Figures 3a and b). GM1+ clusters in EtOH-treated neurons
gradually dispersed and were similar to control within 6 h
(Figure 3b). As AMPARs are known to be localized to regions of
synaptic membranes enriched with GM1,21 we next determined
whether EtOH modified the distribution of GluR1. In control
Figure 1.
EtOH interferes with the consolidation of behavioral extinction. (a) Schematic illustration of the fear conditioning paradigm. (b)
Freezing (% time) for each of the CS–US pairing trails during day 0 of fear conditioning, demonstrating an establishment of the CS–US pairing.
(c) Freezing during the first and last 30 s of the retrieval period showing that EtOH did not interfere with the reconsolidation of fear
conditioning. (d) Repeated CS exposure during extinction trials resulted in a gradual decrease in the CR that was similar in mice previously
exposed to EtOH or water. (e) Fear relapse trials showing reinstatement of the CR in mice exposed to EtOH. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.
m. of n = 20 per condition; significant differences between first 30 s and last 30 s in retrieval; between water and EtOH were determined by
one-way ANOVA. *Po0.05, **Po0.01 compared with water. ANOVA, analysis of variance; CR, conditioned response; CS, conditioned stimulus;
EtOH, ethanol; FC, fear conditioning; US, unconditioned stimulus.
Alcohol disrupts the extinction by modifying interoceptive context
S-W Yoo et al
4
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 11
 cultures, 19.0 ± 7.6% of GluR1 was located into GM1+ regions and
often appeared as small clusters. A 2 min exposure of neurons to
EtOH increased GM1 localized GluR1 to 44.2 ± 17.4% (2.3-fold
increase; Figures 3a and c). The amount of GluR1 localized with
GM1 returned to control levels within 6 h of EtOH treatment
(Figure 3c). We confirmed that EtOH treatment promoted a
redistribution of GluR1 to lipid rafts using density centrifugation to
isolate
a
detergent-resistant
membrane
fraction.
In control
conditions, GluR1 was primarily distributed to non-lipid raft
fractions identified by transferrin, with a smaller portion of GluR1
localized to more buoyant fractions identified by flotillin, a protein
known to localize to lipid rafts (Figure 3d). EtOH exposure
promoted a rapid redistribution of GluR1 to lipid raft fractions
(Figure 3d). We next used biotin-labeling of surface proteins and
immunoblotting to determine whether EtOH modified the surface
expression of GluR1 and GluR2. EtOH did not alter total levels of
GluR1 or GluR2, but did increase surface expression of GluR1 by
2.7-fold without altering surface expression of the calcium-
impermeable AMPAR subunit GluR2 (Figures 3e and f). These
data suggest that EtOH redistributes CP-AMPARs into stabilized
GM1+ membrane microdomains.
AMPA-evoked calcium influx is amplified in membrane
microdomains
We next determined whether EtOH modified focal AMPA-evoked
calcium bursts acquired at the rate of 10 images per second in
Figure 2.
EtOH enhances phosphorylation of GluR1 at serine 845 in hippocampus. Representative immunoblots of GluR1, GluR1S845,
GluR1S831 and quantitative analysis of band density from HIP and LA following the indicated treatment conditions. (a, d) Twenty-four hours
after FC (lanes indicated+are fear conditioned, and lanes indicated − are sham control). (b,e) Twenty-four hours after FC including 2 h of
exposure to binge EtOH intake (ETOH) or water. (c,f) Twenty-four hours after FC including 2 h of exposure to binge EtOH intake or water, and
following the retrieval cue (Ret; tone). (g,i) Immediately following extinction for the indicated treatment groups. (h, j) Twenty-four hours
following extinction and immediately following the fear relapse test. Representative traces show relative changes in protein expression of
GluR1, GluR1S831 and GluR1S845 for the indicated treatment conditions in HIP (k) and LA (l). Data are mean ± s.d. *Po0.05, **Po0.01
compared with the indicated treatment condition. EtOH, ethanol; FC, fear conditioning; HIP, hippocampus; LA, lateral amygdala.
Alcohol disrupts the extinction by modifying interoceptive context
S-W Yoo et al
5
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 11
 multiple 1 μm diameter regions along the length of dendritic
branches. Perfusion of neurons with AMPA evoked calcium bursts
with
average
amplitudes
of
532.1 ± 116.7 nM
that
did
not
desensitize
during
60 s
of
continuous
AMPA
treatment
(Figures 4a and d). A 2 min pretreatment with EtOH followed by
continuous EtOH exposure during AMPA treatment produced a
rapid desensitization of calcium responses with average ampli-
tudes of 273.3 ± 91.0 nM (Figures 4b and d). Surprisingly, when we
pre-exposed neurons to EtOH for 2 min and then perfused cells
with AMPA during EtOH washout, calcium bursts were enhanced
with average amplitudes of 702.7 ± 196.5 nM (Figures 4c and d).
Labeling neurons with CTX555 to identify GM1+ microdomains
and immunostaining for GluR1 immediately following calcium
measurements revealed that focal AMPA-evoked calcium bursts
were similar when GluR1 was located inside or outside of GM1+
membrane microdomains in control conditions, and were similarly
blunted in the presence of EtOH (Figures 4e and f). In contrast,
AMPA-evoked calcium responses were enhanced only in GM1+
membrane microdomains during EtOH washout (Figure 4g).
Although we conducted AMPA-evoked calcium response experi-
ments in the presence of antagonists to NMDA receptors, voltage-
operated calcium channels and sodium channels, we confirmed
that EtOH modified the response of CP-AMPARs using Naspm
trihydrochloride (Naspm), a selective CP-AMPAR inhibitor. AMPA-
evoked calcium responses were generally diminished in the
presence of Naspm compared with untreated control cultures, and
EtOH did not modify the amplitude of AMPA-evoked calcium
responses in the presence of Naspm (Figures 4h–l). These findings
suggest that EtOH promotes an increase in the surface expression
of CP-AMPARs, and blocks calcium conductance through these
channels. During EtOH washout, surface-located CP-AMPARs
remained clustered in GM1+ membrane microdomains where
calcium
bursts
are
enhanced.
To
confirm
that
EtOH
blocked calcium conductance, we artificially induced surface
expression of GluR1 by treatment with forskolin to activate cAMP
and PKA-mediated phosphorylation of GluR1,22 and measured
AMPA-evoked calcium bursts in neuronal dendrites. Forskolin
treatment rapidly increased surface expression of GluR1 5.7-fold
without altering total GluR1 (Figures 4m and n), and enhanced
AMPA-evoked calcium bursts from baseline in control conditions
to 1514.7 ± 485.8 nM (Figures 4o and p) in forskolin-treated
cultures. Acute exposure of neurons to EtOH following forskolin
treatment
reduced
AMPA-evoked
calcium
bursts
to
516.8 ± 160.3 nM (Figures 4o and p). These results demonstrate
that agonist-evoked activity of CP-AMPARs is blunted in the
presence of EtOH. The removal of EtOH results in a preferential
increase in activity for CP-AMPARs clustered into GM1+ mem-
brane microdomains.
Figure 3.
EtOH modifies the biophysical properties of cellular membranes and redistributes GluR1 to microdomains. (a) Representative
immunofluorescent images showing EtOH facilitated a rapid (2 min) redistribution of the microdomains (GM1+, red) into enlarged clusters
along dendrites, simultaneously resulted in redistributions of GluR1 (green) with clusters located to GM1+ microdomains (arrowheads indicate
GM1/GluR1-co-localized microdomains). (b) Size of individual GM1+ microdomains, and (c) number of GluR1 located to GM1+ microdomains
(n = 276–440 microdomains from a minimum of 21 dendrites and 3 separate cultures per condition). (d) Representative immunoblots showing
detergent-resistant membrane microdomains isolated by density centrifugation containing a membrane microdomain-enriched protein
Flotillin (largely located to the more buoyant lipid-rich fractions, 1–3), a non-microdomain protein Transferrin (largely located outside of
membrane microdomains, fractions 7–9) and GluR1. EtOH (2 min) induced a redistribution of GluR1 to membrane microdomains. (e)
Representative immunoblots of surface biotin protein labeling and immunoprecipitation with subsequent immunoblotting for GluR1 or
GluR2. (f) Quantitative analysis of immunoblots showing that EtOH specifically increased surface GluR1 but not total GluR1. Data are presented
as mean ± s.d. EtOH, ethanol. *Po0.05, ***Po0.001 compared with vehicle; #Po0.05, ###Po0.001 compared with EtOH. Scale bar, 20 μm.
Alcohol disrupts the extinction by modifying interoceptive context
S-W Yoo et al
6
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 11
 EtOH promotes PKC- and PKA-mediated phosphorylations of
GluR1
Surface expression of AMPARs is regulated through PKA- and PKC-
mediated phosphorylation of AMPAR subunits.15 We found that
EtOH increased surface localization of GluR1 by 1.6-fold as
determined by biotin-labeling of surface proteins followed by
immunoblot (Supplementary Figure 3a, b). This increase in
surface-located GluR1 was accompanied by a similar 1.5-fold
increase in the phosphorylation of GluR1 on serine 845 and 831
(Supplementary Figure 3a, b). Inhibition of PKA resulted in a 22%
Alcohol disrupts the extinction by modifying interoceptive context
S-W Yoo et al
7
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 11
 Figure 4.
Sensitization of focal AMPA-evoked calcium responses in membrane microdomains. AMPA-evoked calcium transients were
measured along dendritic branches using the ratiometric calcium probe Fura-2 at the rate of 10 image pairs per second. Focal calcium bursts
evoked by (a) AMPA (20 μM) were (b) suppressed when EtOH remained present in the bathing media, and (c) enhanced during EtOH WD. (d)
Quantitation of AMPA-evoked calcium transients showing the median amplitudes of calcium responses for the indicated conditions. (e–g)
Representative images for the indicated conditions showing (from top to bottom) pseudocolor images of baseline and AMPA-evoked calcium
transients, immunofluorescent staining of the same dendrite for GM1, GluR1 and the merged images. Lower tracings show baseline and
AMPA-evoked calcium responses for the indicated regions. (h–k) Representative traces of AMPA-evoked calcium transients evoked after a
2 min pre-exposure to vehicle or EtOH were inhibited by the selective calcium-permeable AMPAR antagonist, Naspm trihydrochloride (Naspm,
50 μM). (l) Quantification of AMPA-evoked calcium transients showing the median amplitudes of calcium currents evoked under the indicated
conditions. (m) Representative immunoblots of rat hippocampal neurons treated with forskolin (Forsk, 20 μM) and IBMX (50 μM). (n)
Quantification of surface GluR1 and total GluR1 after treatment of forskolin and IBMX. (o) Representative traces of AMPA-evoked calcium
responses in neurons pretreated with forskolin and IBMX and then continuously exposed to EtOH. (p) Quantification of AMPA-evoked calcium
responses for the indicated conditions. Data are median ± s.d. ***Po0.001; ##Po0.01; ###Po0.001. AMPA, N-2-amino-3-(5-methyl-3-oxo-1,2-
oxazol-4-yl) propanoic acid; AMPAR, AMPA receptor; EtOH, ethanol; IBMX, 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine; WD, withdrawal.
Figure 5.
AMPAR antagonists rescue EtOH-associated impairment in the consolidation of extinction. (a) Schematic illustration of therapeutic
time windows for Talampanel administration. Talampanel was intraperitoneally injected immediately following fear conditioning (i,
5 mg kg − 1), three times over 18 h (ii, 6 h interval, 5 mg kg − 1), or a single dose after retrieval (iii, 5 mg kg − 1). Blue arrows depict dosing time
and intervals. (b) Quantitative data showing freezing (% time) during fear relapse testing for the indicated treatment conditions. (c) Schematic
illustration of timing for Peramapanel treatment. A single dose of Perampanel was intraperitoneally injected after retrieval (blue arrow,
5 mg kg − 1). (d) Quantitative analysis of freezing behavior (% time) for the indicated treatment conditions. (e) Schematic illustration of timing
for Naspm treatment. Mice received bilateral injections of Naspm into hippocampi (4 μg per 0.5 μl per min) after exposure to the retrieval cue.
(f) Quantitative analysis of freezing behavior (% time) for the indicated treatment conditions. Data are mean ± s.d. of n = 10–14 animals per
condition. *Po0.05, **Po0.01, #Po0.05 and ###Po0.001. ANOVA with Tukey post hoc comparisons. ANOVA, analysis of variance; AMPA, N-2-
amino-3-(5-methyl-3-oxo-1,2-oxazol-4-yl) propanoic acid; AMPAR, AMPA receptor; EtOH, ethanol; FC, fear conditioning.
Alcohol disrupts the extinction by modifying interoceptive context
S-W Yoo et al
8
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 11
 reduction in total surface expression, a 58% reduction in
phosphorylation of GluR1S845 and no effect on GluR1S831
(Supplementary Figure 3a, b). Inhibition of PKC resulted in a
72% reduction in surface expression of total GluR1, with no effect
on GluR1S845 and a 69% reduction in the phosphorylation of
GluR1S831 (Supplementary Figure 3a, b). Total GluR1 was not
affected by EtOH, or by inhibition of PKA, or PKC (Supplementary
Figure 3a, b). These data suggest that EtOH regulates the activity
or accessibility of GluR1 to PKC- and PKA-mediated phosphoryla-
tion, and increases the surface localization of AMPARs.
AMPAR antagonists rescue the impairment in extinction
Our in vivo and tissue culture findings suggest that a failure to
consolidate behavioral extinction following binge drinking of
EtOH is associated with alterations in neural membranes that trap
CP-AMPARs at the cell surface. On the basis of previous reports
that synaptic removal of CP-AMPARs is required for behavioral
extinction,9 we reasoned that blocking AMPARs may facilitate
behavioral extinction. To test this hypothesis we first administered
a single dose (5 mg kg − 1), or three doses of the non-competitive
AMPAR antagonist Talampanel (6 h interval, 15 mg kg − 1) after fear
conditioning, but before binge EtOH intake (Figure 5a). The next
day, a retrieval cue was followed by extinction training, and by a
fear relapse test 24 h later. Treatment with Talampanel before
binge
drinking
(single
or
multiple
doses)
did
not
rescue
impairments in behavioral extinction, as evidenced by freezing
behavior that was similar to drug-naive mice exposed to binge
EtOH intake (Figure 5b). As pGluR1S845 was greatest in mice
exposed to EtOH following the retrieval cue, we next administered
a single dose of Talampanel (5 mg kg − 1) following the retrieval
cue. This timing of drug administration rescued behavioral
extinction in mice following binge EtOH intake as demonstrated
by freezing behavior in the fear relapse test that was similar to
water-fed mice (Figure 5b). The dose of Talampanel used in these
studies
did
not
have
an
impact
on
locomotor
activity
(Supplementary Figure 4), which can occur at higher doses of
Talampanel.23 A similar effect to rescue behavioral extinction in
mice following binge EtOH drinking was produced with Peram-
panel
(2-(2-oxo-1-phenyl-5-pyridin-2-yl-1,2
dihydropyridin-3-yl)
benzonitrile hydrate (4:3; 5 mg kg − 1, i.p.; Figures 5c and d), a
second-generation non-competitive AMPAR antagonist.24 Finally,
to demonstrate that CP-AMPARs in the hippocampus were critical
to process interoceptive context, we directly infused Naspm into
the CA1 region of the hippocampus immediately following the
retrieval cue in mice pre-exposed to binge EtOH (Figure 5e,
Supplementary Figure 5). This procedure restored extinction in
mice pre-exposed to EtOH, but had no effect on extinction in
water-fed mice (Figure 5f).
DISCUSSION
Fear conditioning and the extinction of conditioned fear involves
alterations in the strength of neural circuits that connect the
amygdala, prefrontal cortex and hippocampus. Conditioning-
induced plasticity of the basolateral amygdala precedes, and is
thought to drive the conditioned fear response.25,26 Prefrontal
cortical regions have critical roles in the expression of conditioned
fear,27 and extinction,28 through competing circuits that connect
the prefrontal regions to the basolateral amygdala and prelimbic
cortex, respectively. The hippocampus encodes contextual aspects
of conditioned fear, and has major projections to both the
prefrontal cortex and the basolateral amygdala.29 Contextual
aspects of fear conditioning and extinction are thought to include
the internal state of the organism; however, roles for this
interoception in fear conditioning or extinction have not been
experimentally tested. Our findings demonstrate that EtOH
interferes with extinction by modifying the internal context of
extinction training. Temporal modifications in the phosphorylation
of GluR1 during fear conditioning and extinction suggested that
changes in the surface expression of CP-AMPARs underlie this
behavioral phenomenon. Mechanistic studies supported this
notion, demonstrating that EtOH rapidly modifies the biophysical
structure of neuronal membranes with a collapse of GM1 into
microdomains enriched for surface-located CP-AMPARs. AMPA-
evoked calcium responses were blocked in the presence of EtOH,
and enhanced during washout of EtOH, suggesting that EtOH also
directly interacted with AMPARs.
Extinction of the conditioned fear response is largely regarded
as a new learning event that results in the formation of an
extinction network that inhibits the fear network.30 The effects of
extinction are highly dependent on the hippocampal encoding of
context,31 and are more durable when extinction is conducted in a
context that is novel from the conditioning context.5 When fear
relapse testing is conducted in the same context as extinction, the
hippocampus drives prefrontal activation of an extinction circuit in
the amygdala that suppresses the expression of fear.32,33 When
the context of fear relapse testing is novel from the extinction
context, prefrontal activation is reduced, and the hippocampus is
thought to enhance activity of a fear circuit in amygdala, leading
to
renewed
fear.2,34,35
Chronic
intermittent
EtOH
exposure
produces reductions in infralimbic prefrontal cortical dendritic
density, and declines in NMDAR-mediated currents that are
associated with impairments in extinction,36 suggesting that
chronic EtOH interferes with the ability of hippocampus to drive
prefrontal
circuitry
that
normally
suppress
fear
when
the
extinction and fear relapse testing contexts are identical. In this
study we used a single round of EtOH self-administration to
determine whether EtOH modified the hippocampal encoding of
context. In our paradigm, extinction and fear relapse testing were
conducted in the same environmental context, and the only
experimental difference was in the internal state of the animal at
the time of extinction training (2 h after EtOH or water intake). This
paradigm did not impair the process of extinction, but interfered
with extinction as evidenced by fear renewal (freezing) during fear
relapse trials. We interpret these findings to suggest that the
internal state of an animal at the time of extinction influences the
perception of context. Biochemical studies of brain tissues from
these animals, and mechanistic studies in cultured neurons
implicated hippocampal AMPARs in this behavioral phenomenon.
Extinguishment of conditioned fear involves the retrieval
(reconsolidation) of a fear memory that is liable to modification
for several hours after retrieval.13 This process is thought to allow
for the incorporation of new information into an updated memory
trace.37 During memory reconsolidation, calcium-impermeable
AMPARs in the amygdala are replaced by CP-AMPARs that
internalize during the process of extinction.9,38 We observed a
similar pattern of phosphorylation on GluR1S845 and GluR1S831
in the amygdala of animals in this study. We also found that this
pattern GluR1 phosphorylation was mirrored in the hippocampus.
The self-administration of binge EtOH intake 2 h before extinction
training
produced
a
robust
and
selective
increase
in
the
phosphorylation of GluR1S45 only in the hippocampus. We
recapitulated this effect in cultured hippocampal neurons, and
observed that EtOH induced a rapid re-organization of the plasma
membrane, with clustering of GluR1S845 into GM1+ membrane
microdomains. AMPA-evoked calcium flux was inhibited in the
presence of EtOH, and exaggerated during the washout of EtOH.
These findings suggest that EtOH modified the timing of CP-
AMPAR internalization, and that this perturbation interfered with
permanence of extinction encoding. Indeed, blockade of AMPARs
with talampanel or parampanel restored the permanence of
extinction, but only when the drug was given after the retrieval
cue and before extinction training.
These findings suggest that cognitive/behavioral desensitiza-
tion therapies for the treatment of PTSD in humans could be
Alcohol disrupts the extinction by modifying interoceptive context
S-W Yoo et al
9
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 11
 complicated by EtOH use, and potentially by other prescribed
and/or illicit substances that modify internal state and perception.
PTSD can occur following traumatic life events such as combat
exposure, abuse, a natural disaster or serious accident that
involves threat of injury or death. Typical PTSD symptoms include
flashbacks, affective disorders, hyperarousal and avoidance of
situations and/or people that remind the individual of the
traumatic event. Cognitive-behavioral therapies including eye
movement desensitization and reprocessing therapies, cognitive
approaches and desensitization treatments attempt to modify the
association of these trigger events with the feelings of arousal and
fear. The positive effects of psychotherapy can be circumvented
by binge alcohol abuse,39–41 which is more common in individuals
with PTSD compared with the general population (60–80% of
PTSD patients).42–44 It may be possible to improve the efficiency of
desensitization through the use of selective AMPAR antagonists
provided during critical intervals of desensitization therapy.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the National Institute of Health grants AG023471,
MH077542 and AA017408 to NJH. We thank Jackie Lovett for expert technical
assistance.
REFERENCES
1 Lee JL. Memory reconsolidation mediates the strengthening of memories by
additional learning. Nat Neurosci 2008; 11: 1264–1266.
2 Maren S. Seeking a spotless mind: extinction, deconsolidation, and erasure of
fear memory. Neuron 2011; 70: 830–845.
3 Maren S, Phan KL, Liberzon I. The contextual brain: implications for fear con-
ditioning, extinction and psychopathology. Nat Rev Neurosci 2013; 14: 417–428.
4 Johansen JP, Cain CK, Ostroff LE, LeDoux JE. Molecular mechanisms of fear
learning and memory. Cell 2011; 147: 509–524.
5 Lee S, Song B, Kim J, Park K, Hong I, An B et al. GluA1 phosphorylation at serine
831 in the lateral amygdala is required for fear renewal. Nat Neurosci 2013; 16:
1436–1444.
6 Bannerman DM, Sprengel R, Sanderson DJ, McHugh SB, Rawlins JN, Monyer H
et al. Hippocampal synaptic plasticity, spatial memory and anxiety. Nat Rev
Neurosci 2014; 15: 181–192.
7 Bae M, Bandaru VV, Patel N, Haughey NJ. Ceramide metabolism analysis in a
model of binge drinking reveals both neuroprotective and toxic effects of etha-
nol. J Neurochem 2014; 131: 645–654.
8 Rhodes JS, Best K, Belknap JK, Finn DA, Crabbe JC. Evaluation of a simple model of
ethanol drinking to intoxication in C57BL/6J mice. Physiol Behav 2005; 84: 53–63.
9 Clem RL, Huganir RL. Calcium-permeable AMPA receptor dynamics mediate fear
memory erasure. Science 2010; 330: 1108–1112.
10 Wheeler D, Knapp E, Bandaru VV, Wang Y, Knorr D, Poirier C et al. Tumor necrosis
factor-alpha-induced neutral sphingomyelinase-2 modulates synaptic plasticity
by controlling the membrane insertion of NMDA receptors. J Neurochem 2009;
109: 1237–1249.
11 Williamson R, Thompson AJ, Abu M, Hye A, Usardi A, Lynham S et al. Isolation of
detergent resistant microdomains from cultured neurons: detergent dependent
alterations in protein composition. BMC Neurosci 2010; 11: 120.
12 Monfils MH, Cowansage KK, Klann E, LeDoux JE. Extinction-reconsolidation
boundaries: key to persistent attenuation of fear memories. Science 2009; 324:
951–955.
13 Duvarci S, Nader K. Characterization of fear memory reconsolidation. J Neurosci
2004; 24: 9269–9275.
14 Lee HK, Barbarosie M, Kameyama K, Bear MF, Huganir RL. Regulation of distinct
AMPA receptor phosphorylation sites during bidirectional synaptic plasticity.
Nature 2000; 405: 955–959.
15 Lee HK, Takamiya K, Han JS, Man H, Kim CH, Rumbaugh G et al. Phosphorylation
of the AMPA receptor GluR1 subunit is required for synaptic plasticity and
retention of spatial memory. Cell 2003; 112: 631–643.
16 Maas JW Jr., Vogt SK, Chan GC, Pineda VV, Storm DR, Muglia LJ. Calcium-
stimulated adenylyl cyclases are critical modulators of neuronal ethanol sensi-
tivity. J Neurosci 2005; 25: 4118–4126.
17 Wang J, Ben Hamida S, Darcq E, Zhu W, Gibb SL, Lanfranco MF et al.
Ethanol-mediated facilitation of AMPA receptor function in the dorsomedial
striatum: implications for alcohol drinking behavior. J Neurosci 2012; 32:
15124–15132.
18 Patra M, Salonen E, Terama E, Vattulainen I, Faller R, Lee BW et al. Under the
influence of alcohol: the effect of ethanol and methanol on lipid bilayers. Biophys
J 2006; 90: 1121–1135.
19 Holmes A, Fitzgerald PJ, MacPherson KP, DeBrouse L, Colacicco G, Flynn SM et al.
Chronic alcohol remodels prefrontal neurons and disrupts NMDAR-mediated fear
extinction encoding. Nat Neurosci 2012; 15: 1359–1361.
20 Bae M, Patel N, Xu H, Lee M, Tominaga-Yamanaka K, Nath A et al. Activation
of TRPML1 clears intraneuronal Abeta in preclinical models of HIV infection.
J Neurosci 2014; 34: 11485–11503.
21 Cole AA, Dosemeci A, Reese TS. Co-segregation of AMPA receptors with G(M1)
ganglioside in synaptosomal membrane subfractions. Biochem J 2010; 427:
535–540.
22 Kameyama K, Lee HK, Bear MF, Huganir RL. Involvement of a postsynaptic protein
kinase A substrate in the expression of homosynaptic long-term depression.
Neuron 1998; 21: 1163–1175.
23 Iwamoto FM, Kreisl TN, Kim L, Duic JP, Butman JA, Albert PS et al. Phase 2 trial of
talampanel, a glutamate receptor inhibitor, for adults with recurrent malignant
gliomas. Cancer 2010; 116: 1776–1782.
24 Hanada T, Hashizume Y, Tokuhara N, Takenaka O, Kohmura N, Ogasawara A et al.
Perampanel: a novel, orally active, noncompetitive AMPA-receptor antagonist
that reduces seizure activity in rodent models of epilepsy. Epilepsia 2011; 52:
1331–1340.
25 Quirk GJ, Armony JL, LeDoux JE. Fear conditioning enhances different temporal
components of tone-evoked spike trains in auditory cortex and lateral amygdala.
Neuron 1997; 19: 613–624.
26 Repa JC, Muller J, Apergis J, Desrochers TM, Zhou Y, LeDoux JE. Two different
lateral amygdala cell populations contribute to the initiation and storage
of memory. Nat Neurosci 2001; 4: 724–731.
27 Corcoran KA, Quirk GJ. Activity in prelimbic cortex is necessary for the expression
of learned, but not innate, fears. J Neurosci 2007; 27: 840–844.
28 Quirk GJ, Mueller D. Neural mechanisms of extinction learning and retrieval.
Neuropsychopharmacology 2008; 33: 56–72.
29 Liu X, Ramirez S, Pang PT, Puryear CB, Govindarajan A, Deisseroth K et al. Opto-
genetic stimulation of a hippocampal engram activates fear memory recall.
Nature 2012; 484: 381–385.
30 Myers KM, Davis M. Mechanisms of fear extinction. Mol Psychiatry 2007; 12:
120–150.
31 Bissiere S, Zelikowsky M, Ponnusamy R, Jacobs NS, Blair HT, Fanselow MS. Elec-
trical synapses control hippocampal contributions to fear learning and memory.
Science 2011; 331: 87–91.
32 Abumaria N, Yin B, Zhang L, Li XY, Chen T, Descalzi G et al. Effects of elevation of
brain magnesium on fear conditioning, fear extinction, and synaptic plasticity in
the infralimbic prefrontal cortex and lateral amygdala. J Neurosci 2011; 31:
14871–14881.
33 Herry C, Ciocchi S, Senn V, Demmou L, Muller C, Luthi A. Switching on and off fear
by distinct neuronal circuits. Nature 2008; 454: 600–606.
34 Orsini CA, Kim JH, Knapska E, Maren S. Hippocampal and prefrontal projections to
the basal amygdala mediate contextual regulation of fear after extinction.
J Neurosci 2011; 31: 17269–17277.
35 Jin J, Maren S. Fear renewal preferentially activates ventral hippocampal
neurons projecting to both amygdala and prefrontal cortex in rats. Sci Rep 2015;
5: 8388.
36 Holmes A, Fitzgerald PJ, MacPherson KP, DeBrouse L, Colacicco G, Flynn SM et al.
Chronic alcohol remodels prefrontal neurons and disrupts NMDAR-mediated fear
extinction encoding. Nat Neurosci 2014; 15: 1359–1361.
37 Nader K, Schafe GE, LeDoux JE. The labile nature of consolidation theory. Nat Rev
Neurosci 2000; 1: 216–219.
38 Hong I, Kim J, Kim J, Lee S, Ko HG, Nader K et al. AMPA receptor exchange
underlies transient memory destabilization on retrieval. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2013; 110: 8218–8223.
39 Foa EB, Yusko DA, McLean CP, Suvak MK, Bux DA Jr., Oslin D et al.
Concurrent naltrexone and prolonged exposure therapy for patients with
comorbid alcohol dependence and PTSD: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2013;
310: 488–495.
40 Meyer EM, Long V, Fanselow MS, Spigelman I. Stress increases voluntary alcohol
intake, but does not alter established drinking habits in a rat model of post-
traumatic stress disorder. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2013; 37: 566–574.
41 Dedert
EA,
Green
KT,
Calhoun
PS,
Yoash-Gantz
R,
Taber
KH,
Mumford MM et al. Association of trauma exposure with psychiatric morbidity in
military veterans who have served since September 11, 2001. J Psychiatr Res 2009;
43: 830–836.
Alcohol disrupts the extinction by modifying interoceptive context
S-W Yoo et al
10
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 11
 42 Calhoun PS, Schry AR, Wagner HR, Kimbrel NA, Dennis P, McDonald SD et al. The
prevalence of binge drinking and receipt of provider drinking advice among US
veterans with military service in Iraq or Afghanistan. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse
2015; 42: 1–9.
43 Kelley ML, Brancu M, Robbins AT, D'Lima GM, Strauss JL, Curry JF et al. Drug use
and childhood-, military- and post-military trauma exposure among women and
men veterans. Drug Alcohol Depend 2015; 152: 201–208.
44 McCauley JL, Calhoun KS, Gidycz CA. Binge drinking and rape: a prospective
examination of college women with a history of previous sexual victimization.
J Interpers Violence 2010; 25: 1655–1668.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated
otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons
license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the
material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/
© The Author(s) 2017
Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the Translational Psychiatry website (http://www.nature.com/tp)
Alcohol disrupts the extinction by modifying interoceptive context
S-W Yoo et al
11
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 11
