 Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ineg20
Journal of Neurogenetics
ISSN: 0167-7063 (Print) 1563-5260 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ineg20
‘Necessary and sufficient’ in biology is not
necessarily necessary – confusions and erroneous
conclusions resulting from misapplied logic in the
field of biology, especially neuroscience
Motojiro Yoshihara & Motoyuki Yoshihara
To cite this article: Motojiro Yoshihara & Motoyuki Yoshihara (2018) ‘Necessary and sufficient’
in biology is not necessarily necessary – confusions and erroneous conclusions resulting from
misapplied logic in the field of biology, especially neuroscience, Journal of Neurogenetics, 32:2,
53-64, DOI: 10.1080/01677063.2018.1468443
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/01677063.2018.1468443
© 2018 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group
Published online: 14 May 2018.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 13532
View Crossmark data
 COMMENTARY
‘Necessary and sufficient’ in biology is not necessarily necessary – confusions
and erroneous conclusions resulting from misapplied logic in the field of
biology, especially neuroscience
Motojiro Yoshiharaa,b and Motoyuki Yoshiharac�
aMemory Neurobiology Project, National Institute of Information and Communications Technology, Kobe, Japan; bPicower Institute for
Learning and Memory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA; cDepartment of Economics, University of California,
San Diego, CA, USA
ABSTRACT
In this article, we describe an incorrect use of logic which involves the careless application of the
‘necessary and sufficient’ condition originally used in formal logic. This logical fallacy is causing frequent
confusion in current biology, especially in neuroscience. In order to clarify this problem, we first dissect
the structure of this incorrect logic (which we refer to as ‘misapplied-N&S’) to show how necessity and
sufficiency in misapplied-N&S are not matching each other. Potential pitfalls of utilizing misapplied-N&S
are exemplified by cases such as the discrediting of command neurons and other potentially key neu-
rons, the distorting of truth in optogenetic studies, and the wrongful justification of studies with little
meaning. In particular, the use of the word ‘sufficient’ in optogenetics tends to generate misunder-
standings by opening up multiple interpretations. To avoid the confusion caused by the misleading
logic, we now recommend using ‘indispensable and inducing’ instead of using ‘necessary and
sufficient.’ However, we ultimately recommend fully articulating the limits of what our experiments sug-
gest, not relying on such simple phrases. Only after this problem is fully understood and more rigorous
language is demanded, can we finally interpret experimental results in an accurate way.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 27 November 2017
Accepted 19 April 2018
KEYWORDS
Logic; command neurons;
necessary and sufficient;
optogenetics; memory;
Feeding neuron;
indispensable and
inducing; Drosophila
Introduction
Needless to say, life sciences, particularly those involving
genetic techniques, have substantially increased in import-
ance during the last few decades. Naturally, the number of
publications in the field has also increased dramatically com-
pared to most other scientific fields. However, history of sci-
ence suggests that while such a surge of research promises
significant advancements, it can also lead researchers to
become careless: Seemingly trivial issues in the heat of rapid
discovery may actually lead the entire research field towards
invalid conclusions. A fundamental issue that can cause
researchers to misinterpret their data is the incorrect use of
logic, which often leads to outright erroneous conclusions.
One such problem involves the careless use of the
‘Necessary and Sufficient’ (N&S) conditions used as a tech-
nical expression in formal logic, which is a field of study deal-
ing with abstract reasoning. A property of true N&S is that it
implies equivalence between the two statements, allowing one
to be a definition of the other (for introductory reading, see
White, 2008). However, many biologists use N&S in a manner
that does not satisfy formal logic criteria; true equivalence is
not present in their statements. For the purpose of this essay,
we will define this biology-specific misuse of N&S as
‘misapplied-N&S’. It is commonly argued that N&S has a
special meaning in biology that differs from that in formal
logic, and they conclude that its deviation from the formal
definition is just a trivial issue of wording. However, inappro-
priate use of such logic can misrepresent the truth, as it has in
the past, and we will show with detailed examples. It is
universally agreed upon that we must not inappropriately use
math, the basis of our quantitative analysis, so why not logic,
which lies at the basis of science, as well? Such misuse creates
similar repercussions. For a quick and simple example,
observe the claim ‘Gene X is necessary and sufficient for a
biological phenomenon’, a format we often encounter. It liter-
ally means that no other gene is required for the biological
phenomenon. This is simply untrue, as multiple molecules
function together to execute the whole process in any bio-
logical phenomenon. While perhaps a simplified example,
instances similar to this are rampant in current biology, and
they are equally erroneous. Given that misapplied-N&S is
distorting researchers’ way of thinking, as we will discuss
below, this issue cannot be addressed by simply placing the
blame on wording or semantics.
In this essay, we explain the structure of misapplied-N&S,
its
potential
pitfalls,
and
the
grave
consequences
of
CONTACT Motojiro Yoshihara
motojiro@nict.go.jp
Memory Neurobiology Project, National Institute of Information and Communications Technology,
Kobe, Japan
�Present address: U.S. Army, Fort Campbell, KY, USA
This article was originally published with errors. This version has been corrected. Please see corrigendum (http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01677063.2018.1480339).
� 2018 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/
4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed, or built upon in
any way.
JOURNAL OF NEUROGENETICS
2018, VOL. 32, NO. 2, 53–64
https://doi.org/10.1080/01677063.2018.1468443
 inappropriately utilizing N&S logic. First, we clarify what N&S
exactly is in formal logic, where it is used as a method to
define a concept. Then, we explain the misapplied-N&S fre-
quently used in biology, followed by a typical example of it in
neuroethology that is causing serious problems in the field. In
this example, we will explain how a key concept, the
‘command neuron,’ was inappropriately defined using misap-
plied-N&S, which led to long-lasting confusion that stagnated
the research field. With additional analysis of other possible
pitfalls frequently encountered in optogenetic studies, we will
conclude that avoiding the use of necessary and sufficient in
biology will allow researchers to circumvent many problems
and confusions, thus enhancing our research community.
True ‘necessary and sufficient’ in formal logic
A simple example of the conditions that true N&S logic must
satisfy can be given in the definition of a square (Figure
1(A)). As a square is also a rectangle, it must be a quadrilat-
eral with four equal angles. In this case, we can say that being
a quadrilateral with four equal angles (rectangle) is a neces-
sary condition for being a square. Yet, it is not sufficient for
defining a square, as there are countless rectangles that are
not squares. The sufficiency is fulfilled, however, when the
condition of having equal sides is added to this property of
being a quadrilateral with four equal angles. Let us suppose a
case where if statement A (being a square in Figure 1(A)) is
true, then statement B (being a rectangle) is also true
(A ! B). In this case, we can say that A is a sufficient condi-
tion for B and that B is necessary condition for A. This rela-
tionship can be understood through the Venn diagram in
Figure 1(A), where all the cases fulfilling statement A
(squares) are included in the cases fulfilling statement B (rec-
tangles). Only in special cases where both directions (A ! B
and B ! A) are true, A and B are deemed to be necessary
and sufficient for each other. In a Venn diagram of such a
case, the set fulfilling condition A (a quadrilateral with equal
angles and equal sides) should be exactly the same as the set
fulfilling condition B (square). As both sets are identical, A
and B are logically equivalent. Therefore, A can be said to be
a definition of B, and this is ultimately what true N&S must
conclude. With this in mind, we will now explain how misap-
plied-N&S, frequently used in current biology, does not fit
the framework of the real N&S illustrated above.
‘Misapplied-necessary and sufficient’ in biology
One of the more common sources of misapplied-N&S is gen-
etic studies. As shown in the upper half of Figure 1(B), two
representative methods of genetic manipulation are (1) gene
knockout (mutation) and (2) artificial expression of a gene.
Some journal articles and scientific talks first propose that
‘Gene X is necessary for a phenomenon’ when a knockout of
Gene X leads to a disruption of the normally occurring phe-
nomenon. Then, they propose that ‘Gene X is sufficient for the
biological phenomenon’ when artificial expression of Gene X
Equal angles
Equal angles
& equal sides 
Necessary and sufficient
Equivalent (≡)
Necessary
Sufficient
Squares
Rectangles
“Misapplied-N&S” in biology
[Gene]
Artificial expression
No retinal development
Induction of retinal development
[Cell]
“eyeless is sufficient for retinal development.”
“eyeless is necessary for retinal development.”
Activation
“Feeding neuron is sufficient for feeding.”
Cell ablation
“Feeding neuron is necessary for feeding.”
Gene knockout
Induction of feeding behavior
No feeding behavior
Venn diagram
   (The converse of either
case is false, thus, not N&S)
    Retinal development
Artificial expression of eyeless
Inducing retinal development
  Activation of Feeding neuron
Inducing feedng behavior
Feeding
  Existence of Feeding neuron
Feeding command neuron
N&S in the formal logic
eyeless
(“Feeding neuron”)
 Existence of eyeless
(B)
(C)
(A)
Figure 1. Schematic diagrams to compare the real necessary and sufficient in formal logic and ‘misapplied-necessary and sufficient’ commonly used in biology. (A)
The relationship between squares and rectangles as a typical example of true necessary (being a rectangle; pale green) and sufficient condition (being a square;
magenta) in formal logic (see text). (B) Two representative examples in biology to show misapplied-necessary and sufficient commonly used in biology experiments.
Top two schemes: experiments of retinal formation in developmental biology. Bottom two schemes: experiments of command neurons for feeding behavior (Flood,
Iguchi, et al., 2013) in neuroethology (see text). (C) Interpretations of each experiment in (B) according to formal logic. Consistent with the example of the rectangle/
square, sets corresponding to the necessary conditions are represented as the circle in pale green while sets corresponding to the sufficient conditions are repre-
sented as the smaller circle in magenta. Note that converses to each example are false. Thus, there is no real necessary and sufficient condition in any of the cases.
54
M. YOSHIHARA AND M. YOSHIHARA
 artificially ‘induces’ the phenomenon. From these observa-
tions, the claim is ultimately made that Gene X is necessary
and sufficient for the phenomenon. The gene eyeless in a fruit
fly, Drosophila, is a prime example of the Gene X in such state-
ments, with a clear phenotype of retinal development, and will
be used to illustrate our point. One paper made a statement
that ‘Pax6/eyeless genes are necessary and sufficient for retinal
development.’ (Davis, Tavsanli, Dittrich, Walldorf, & Mardon,
2003),1 as shown in the upper half of Figure 1(B).
Understanding true N&S allows one to easily recognize that
this framework of thinking is nothing more than misapplied-
N&S. To claim that eyeless is necessary for retinal development
(Davis et al., 2003), they first show disruption of naturally
occurring retinal development through the knockout of eyeless
(e.g. by deleting the eyeless gene), thus concluding that:
If there is no eyeless, then there is no retinal develop-
ment2 (i)
Formal logic guarantees that the contrapositive (non
B ! non A) is always true when the original proposition
(A ! B) is true. Therefore, one can conclude:
If retinal development occurs, then eyeless exists (ii)
Thus, we can at least say that the existence of eyeless is
necessary for retinal development, in a similar way that being
a rectangle was necessary for being a square in Figure 1(A).
In the Venn diagram, the set of cases where a retina is
developed is included in the other set, where eyeless is pre-
sent (2nd Venn diagram in Figure 1(C)).
A problem is encountered when the sufficient condition is
then added. Following the format of the square example
above, a proposition to claim that eyeless is sufficient for ret-
inal development (Davis et al., 2003) should be the opposite
direction (converse) to (ii), which is:
If eyeless exists, then a retina is developed (iii)
However, proposition (iii) is clearly false as other genes
and factors are required for complete retinal development:
eyeless’s existence alone is obviously not enough to form a
retina. It is evident that the set of cases where ‘eyeless exists’
is larger than the set with cases of ‘retinal development,’
which requires more factors such as genes at the down-
stream of eyeless and genes cooperatively functioning with it
(Jusiak et al., 2014). This is analogous to how squares have
more requirements and form a smaller set, which is then
included in the larger set of rectangles that has less require-
ments. The statement is represented pictorially by the 2nd
Venn diagram in Figure 1(C). Thus, ‘eyeless exists’ cannot be
a sufficient condition for natural retinal development.
This problem arises because the sufficient condition used
in the misapplied-N&S experiment (artificial expression of
eyeless causing artificial retinal development) is different
from the logically appropriate sufficiency statement (iii) and
does not match its respective necessary condition. To match
the true N&S conditions in formal logic, the sufficient condi-
tion must include all of the requirements for retinal develop-
ment (White, 2008). However, the sufficient condition in
misapplied-N&S deals with only one such factor– eyeless in
this case. The statement ‘artificial expression of eyeless is
capable of promoting a series of events that culminates in
retinal development,’ suggested by the above misapplied-
N&S experiment, is not identical to the statement ‘eyeless
alone is “sufficient” for retinal development.’
Alternatively, one could also analyze a misapplied-N&S
statement from the other way around. Instead of starting
with a valid necessary condition, it could start with a legitim-
ate sufficient condition and attempt to construct an appro-
priate necessary condition. This is actually how another
publication stated, ‘Eyeless/Pax6 is necessary and in some
circumstances sufficient to induce eye development’ (Kumar
& Moses, 2001). While adding the word ‘induce’ may make
it sound more plausible than the previous case this statement
still fails to match true N&S conditions.
The second half of the statement is actually true, in that acti-
vation of eyeless signaling by its artificial expression is indeed
sufficient for manipulating retinal development. No other
method of manipulation is required for retinal development.
If eyeless is artificially expressed, then retinal development
is induced3 (iv)
As the opposite direction (converse) to (iv), a proposition
to claim the necessity of eyeless expression for promotion of
retinal development should logically be:
If retinal development is being induced, then eyeless should
have been artificially expressed (v)
However, we cannot test (v) because it would require the
unfeasible task of trying every possible method of manipula-
tion to check for any induction of retinal development. For
example, since it is not realistic to express each gene in the
whole genome one by one, concluding the absolute necessity
of eyeless expression for the induction of retinal development
is nearly impossible. In the case of eyeless, it is reported that
artificial expression of other genes also promotes retinal
development (Jusiak et al., 2014), and thus (v) is indeed
false. As represented pictorially by the 1st Venn diagram in
Figure 1(C), the set fulfilling ‘retinal development is induced’
is
larger
than
the
set
fulfilling
‘eyeless
is
artificially
expressed.’
Thus,
the
condition,
‘eyeless
is
artificially
expressed,’ is sufficient, but is not necessary for the condition,
‘retinal development is induced.’ And so, the statement that
eyeless is necessary and sufficient for inducing retinal develop-
ment is also faulty. People are tempted to claim necessity by
simply
demonstrating
failed
retinal
development
when
1Pax6 is a mammalian homolog (ortholog) of eyeless.
2Strictly speaking, we cannot even state (i) just through the evidence from the
knockout of eyeless alone. There is still the possibility that some unknown
experimental manipulation may be able to cause retinal development without
eyeless, and it would be impossible to test all hypothetical cases in order to
disprove it. However, since such a possibility is rather unusual in biology, let
us
assume
that
proposition
(i)
is
true
for
the
sake
of
simplicity
in
our discussion.
3We cannot even state (iv) in a strict manner as well, because we again
cannot test all hypothetical cases. But like the case of (i), we can claim (iv) if
restricted to the experimental condition, where other factors for inducing
retinal development already exist. Thus, we can assume that proposition (iv) is
true for the sake of simplicity as well.
JOURNAL OF NEUROGENETICS
55
 eyeless is knocked out (Davis et al., 2003; Kumar & Moses,
2001). However, it does not actually match the sufficiency
statement (iv), as (v) is the logically legitimate necessity state-
ment that should accompany (iv).
The sufficient condition in this misapplied-N&S is based
on experiments where we suggest causality by spatiotemporal
manipulation of gene expression to actively correlate it to a
biological phenomenon. On the other hand, the necessary
condition is based on experiments where gene expression is
shut down to check if it is definitely an essential requirement
for the whole biological phenomenon. This means that there
is little evidence to suggest causality, as the necessary condi-
tion can also be fulfilled in cases where, for example, it is a
prerequisite such as a housekeeping molecule or even a sup-
porting structure. Therefore, the two parts (necessary and
sufficient) of misapplied-N&S are dealing with completely
different issues based on completely different kinds of
experiments: There is no logical rationale to suggest that
they should be associated together like this. However, they
tend to be paired in such a way simply because they are two
representative kinds of manipulations in current biology
(artificial expression and shutting down expression). While
people may be tempted to place them together, the fact
remains that these statements are not actually matching
logically. We can see the same logical structure in neurosci-
ence, where people tend to claim that a certain neuron is
N&S for a certain pattern of behavior based on two repre-
sentative kinds of manipulations in current neurobiology,
activation of the neuron and shutting down activity of the
neuron. This is further explained in A ‘Witch Hunt’ of
Command Neurons section (the lower half of Figure 1(B,C)).
In conclusion, we should avoid the careless use of the
phrase ‘necessary and sufficient.’ Some may try to rationalize
its use by suggesting that there is perhaps a ‘biological’ inter-
pretation of misapplied-N&S, a simple figure of speech that
does not have to follow the standards of formal logic. This
may seem attractive to use because it seemingly imparts an
air of formal logic to incorrectly enhance the importance of
a gene/neuron.4 In the following sections, we introduce spe-
cific examples where such careless use of misapplied-N&S
has indeed led to serious misunderstanding of experimental
results. The grave repercussions of its use will make clear
that one should refrain from using the phrase, no matter
what the intent.
A ‘witch-hunt’ of command neurons
We would like to pick a particularly troubling example where
such misapplied-logic has led to great confusion on the key
concept of ‘command neurons’ in the neuroethology field, so
much so that it nearly resulted in the mistaken loss of the con-
cept entirely. This is a serious issue because neuronal network
analysis through optogenetics5 (see Pitfalls II section for
details) has been explosively popular in recent years, and thus
the problem will only exacerbate if left unchecked. The con-
cept of the command neuron was originally conceived through
neuroethological experiments by K. Ikeda on crayfish behavior
in the lab of C.A.G. Wiersma at CalTech (Ikeda & Wiersma,
1964; Wiersma & Ikeda, 1964). Ikeda recorded repeated bursts
of neural activity (Ikeda & Wiersma, 1964), which is associated
with oscillatory movement of crayfish swimmerets. He also
found neurons that could turn this activity on or off.
Consequently, Wiersma and Ikeda (1964) established the con-
cept of ‘command neurons’ to vividly characterize the role of
these ‘switch’ neurons. Fourteen years after the above report, a
‘formal’ definition of command neurons was proposed not by
Wiersma and Ikeda themselves, but by Kupfermann and
Weiss (1978): ‘We suggest that a command neuron be defined
as a neuron that is both necessary and sufficient for the initi-
ation of a given behavior. Three criteria can be tested by: (1)
establishing the response pattern of the putative command
neuron during presentation of a given stimulus and execution
of a well specified behavior; (2) removing the neuron and
showing that the response is no longer elicited by the stimulus
(necessary condition); and (3) firing the neuron in its normal
pattern and showing that the complete behavioral response
occurs (sufficient condition).’ After understanding our above
discussion, one could see that this new definition is based on
the same, typical misapplied-N&S (the lower half of Figure
1(B)). Since the ‘necessary and sufficient’ used here does not
correspond to each other (bottom two Venn diagrams in
Figure 1(C)), their ‘definition’ does not follow any formal
logic. But because they arrogated the terminology from formal
logic which sounded very careful, strict, and thoughtful, their
‘rigid’ definition (Marder & Calabrese, 1996) has unfortu-
nately become widely accepted in the neuroethology field.
Understanding the flaw with their reasoning requires
some further examination. The first demonstration of a com-
mand neuron by Wiersma and Ikeda (1964) was done by
triggering a certain pattern of behavior by activating neurons
with a certain pattern of electrical activity, which fulfilled the
sufficient condition of Kupfermann and Weiss. However, the
true necessary condition to meet this sufficient condition is
not based on the removal of neurons as Kupfermann and
Weiss suggested. Rather, the appropriate necessary condition
should be that induction of the pattern of behavior occurs
only
through
the
electrical
activation
of
the
neuron
4In some cases, the term ‘necessary and sufficient’ is used in an even less
meaningful manner. Such cases include interpreting the loss of a function in a
mutant of a gene as suggesting its ‘necessity’ and the rescue of the function
through expression of the gene as ‘sufficiency.’ Rescuing a mutant of a gene
with its transgene is a critical confirmation of the requirement of the gene for
the biological function (necessity), but is not related to sufficiency at all.
Restoring expression of a gene to that of its natural state would obviously
return the phenotype if the gene is really responsible for it (confirming this is
the purpose of rescue experiments). Thus, it is unable to suggest anything
about its sufficiency. As it is just restoring a lost function caused by a lost
gene and not inducing an ectopic biological function, we may refer to such a
statement as ‘further-misapplied-N&S.’ Taking this further-misapplied-N&S even
further, some researchers designed an experiment stating that an expression
of an effector transgene to suppress synaptic transmission in a certain group
of neurons indicates ‘necessity’ of the neurons. Then, they suppressed the
expression of the very same transgene to restore synaptic transmission and
supposedly justify ‘sufficiency’ of the neurons (Liu et al., 2012). We shall not
discuss these cases any further because such ‘further-misapplied-N&S’ are just
selling words; they are pure rhetoric without any positive biological insight or
logical meaning.
5Optogenetics
is
a
method
to
activate
or
inactivate
neurons
through
expression of ion channels or transporters, which can be activated by
illuminating the neurons as explained in the Pitfall II section.
56
M. YOSHIHARA AND M. YOSHIHARA
 (initiating the behavior ! the electrical activation of the
neuron). As explained with the example of induction of ret-
inal development, this condition is simply impossible to test
because it is rather unrealistic to test every kind of manipu-
lation, for example, by stimulating every neuron in the brain
one by one. Thus, it is unfeasible to fulfill the true N&S con-
dition in any way. Kupfermann and Weiss’s necessary condi-
tion through the removal of some neurons is not matching
the sufficient condition, and thus does not have any logical
reason to be tied together (see Pitfalls I section to see how
their necessary condition is unnecessary).
The
unnecessarily
‘rigid’
requirement
incurred
by
Kupfermann and Weiss’s misapplied-N&S logic has led to an
awkward situation resembling a ‘witch-hunt’ in the neuroe-
thology field. For example, the necessary condition in misap-
plied-N&S has mistakenly led to the exclusion of the
Mauthner cell from being classified as a command neuron
(Eaton, Lee, & Foreman, 2001) although its unique and
insightful properties make it an exemplary model system of
the sort (Korn & Faber, 2005). Indeed, failure to fulfill the
necessary condition of misapplied-N&S has excluded many
appropriate command neurons in a similar fashion. Even
among animals with simple nervous systems, only two pairs of
command neurons (one in a lobster, the other in a sea slug)
had been able to fulfill Kupfermann and Weiss’s unnecessarily
strict criteria (Frost & Katz, 1996; Meyrand, Simmers, &
Moulins, 1991). The feeding command neuron, which we have
recently discovered in the brain of fruit flies (Flood, Iguchi,
et al., 2013) (see What is the ‘merit’ section) has become only
the third one in the world to meet Kupfermann and Weiss’s
criteria. While a few pairs of neurons may have passed these
unnecessarily rigid criteria, this situation has placed the com-
mand neuron concept itself in danger, as the term and its
strictness was often avoided altogether. Marder and Calabrese
(1996) commented, ‘these criteria were so rigid that the con-
cept has largely been abandoned, and the term command neu-
ron has virtually disappeared from the literature on control of
rhythmic motor systems.’ People have started to use other
phrases such as ‘higher-order neurons’ (Kupfermann & Weiss,
2001; Marder, Bucher, Schulz, & Taylor, 2005) or ‘command-
like neurons’ (Eaton et al., 2001) in order to circumvent the
strict definition, but they lack the intuitive diction of the ori-
ginal term. In reality, it was the wrong logic of misapplied-
N&S, introduced by Kupfermann and Weiss, that distorted
the command neuron concept, which does not have any fault
in and of itself.
What is the ‘merit’ of misapplied-N&S in
neuroscience? – suggesting a natural function and
no redundancy through misapplied-N&S
Before we discuss the complications of using the term specif-
ically, let us start by laying out one possible positive side of
misapplied-N&S, taking an example from the feeding com-
mand neuron in fruit flies (Flood, Iguchi, et al., 2013).
As mentioned above, we have discovered a pair of com-
mand neurons that direct the whole feeding behavior, and it
happens to meet Kupfermann and Weiss’s misapplied-logic
criteria to qualify as the third ‘certified’ command neuron.
The feeding command neuron (‘Feeding neuron’) is located
at the pivot of the feeding circuit in the downstream of gus-
tatory signals and upstream of motor neurons, thus control-
ling feeding behavior. Genetic activation of the Feeding
neuron by opening heat-activated channels induces the feed-
ing behavior, fulfilling the sufficient condition in misapplied-
N&S (condition (2) of Kupfermann & Weiss’s definition).
The Feeding neuron also satisfies Kupfermann and Weiss’s
necessary condition in misapplied-N&S, in that its inactiva-
tion or ablation can suppress the natural feeding behavior of
a fly (condition (3) of Kupfermann & Weiss’s definition).
This necessary condition in misapplied-N&S reflects two
facts: it supports the assumption that (1) the Feeding neuron
functions in natural feeding behavior (it is a natural func-
tion; the misapplied-sufficiency result was not an unnatural
phenomenon, which occurs only by artificial activation) and
(2) there are no other cells that can substitute the Feeding
neuron in triggering feeding behavior (there is no redun-
dancy). Therefore, as shown in Figure 2(A), we can gather
that the Feeding neuron is at the ‘pivot’ of the signaling
pathway that controls fly feeding behavior. This incidental
case of a pivotal role without redundancy enables the
Feeding neuron to coincidentally fulfill the misapplied-N&S
condition, since a loss of a pivotal neuron would lead to a
loss of the whole behavior and activation of the pivotal neu-
ron would induce it. This is how, through a similar consid-
eration, the gene eyeless (the upper half of Figure 1(B)) is
believed to function as a master regulator on the only signal-
ing pathway for natural retinal development. The experimen-
tal results which fulfill misapplied-N&S help us identify
possible key neurons in this way, and thus we guess this is
why some researchers feel some merit of misapplied-N&S.6
If someone wants to use some term to specify misapplied-
N&S condition because of this kind of merit, we recommend
using another phrase such as ‘indispensable and inducing’
(see
So,
what
should
we
do
instead?
section
for
detailed reasoning).
6Experimentally speaking, this special state fulfilling misapplied-N&S is exactly
what may make the system quite easy to analyze. We deliberately sought the
feeding command neuron in the Drosophila brain (Flood, Gorczyca, White, Ito,
& Yoshihara, 2013) for simple circuit analyses of Pavlovian conditioning with
this in mind (Yoshihara, 2012; Yoshihara & Ito, 2012) to connect synaptic
plasticity (Yoshihara, Adolfsen, Galle, & Littleton, 2005) to memory. As Pavlov’s
dogs associated the stimulus of sound and food in order to induce automatic
salivation through the sound by itself, we are trying a similar conditioning
paradigm to associate a sensory stimulus like sound to observable feeding
behavior such as proboscis extension (Sakurai and Yoshihara, in preparation). If
the stimulus were integrated into the Feeding neuron, we could perform a
single cell analysis of the association in such a simple system. We hope we
can connect synaptic plasticity on the Feeding neuron to memory as
behavioral change. If there were any redundancy, which breaks misapplied-
N&S, such analysis would be much more complicated and encounter difficulty
in making clear-cut conclusions.
JOURNAL OF NEUROGENETICS
57
 Pitfalls of N&S in neuroscience I – failing the
necessary condition in misapplied-N&S does not
mean ‘unimportant’ (a better definition of the
command neuron)
Some researchers may want to claim the practical advantage
of
utilizing
misapplied-N&S
from
this
aforementioned
‘merit.’ Thus, they attempt to justify the use of ‘necessary
and sufficient’ by claiming it is a biology-specific figure of
speech. By using it in such a way supposedly unrelated to
formal logic, they may claim that ‘necessary and sufficient’
points to a neuron/gene having a pivotal role, or even that it
is simply important for whatever other reason. While seem-
ingly innocuous upon first inspection, this kind of thinking
is still quite troublesome.
First of all, the misapplied-N&S test is not a reliable test
for
indicating
the
importance
of
a
neuron:
Despite
Kupfermann and Weiss’s criteria (Kupfermann & Weiss,
1978) on command neurons, failure in fulfilling the necessary
condition of misapplied-N&S does not automatically mean
that the neuron is unimportant. As a simple metaphor to
illustrate the nature of this misunderstanding, let us imagine
a soccer game. Suppose that one great soccer player A is
leading the team as a playmaker. If the team becomes dys-
functional whenever player A is gone, perhaps due to a red
card, it would be clear that player A is a real playmaker.
However, there could also be a case where another player B
is good enough that he can essentially substitute that role of
a playmaker. If the team can still operate without him, could
we automatically say that player A is neither important nor
functional? Does this suggest that player A is not playing the
playmaker role in the games he does indeed play? Of course
not: he is still playing that essential role regardless of
whether another player can substitute him or not. Like this
soccer metaphor, failing the necessary condition of misap-
plied-N&S by retaining behavior even after a neuron is
ablated or inactivated should not necessarily discourage peo-
ple who are working on the neuron, as it may just indicate
redundancy such as the instance depicted in Figure 2(B).
Such redundancy can be expected in many important mam-
malian functions, especially in the nervous system, in the
same way that a loss of one kidney still allows for waste fil-
tration.7 The nervous system also has incredible flexibility,
where loss of important neurons can be substituted by other
circuits originally for another function, as widely observed in
rehabilitation. It is still entirely possible that the neuron is
playing a pivotal role even after failing the necessity test as
shown in Figure 2(B). Despite this fact, some researchers are
misled into believing that their neurons are unimportant for
a given function if inactivation or ablation of their neuron
does not lose the function because the misapplied-N&S is so
wide spread and accepted as an authentic ‘logic’ in cur-
rent biology.
As we stated earlier, the necessary condition in misapplied-
N&S may suggest the possibility of a natural role of the neu-
ron, but since it does not guarantee this,8 the natural role is
(A)
(B)
(C)
Feeding neuron
Starvation
“Feeding 1” 
Sweet
Bitter
Feeding behavior
“Feeding 2” 
(D)
Aggression behavior
Feeding behavior
Bitter
Sweet
Starvation
Pump
Proboscis
Leg
Pump
Proboscis
Leg
    (AGRP neurons
 for mice)
Aggression behavior
(food)
(food)
Figure 2. Schematic diagrams of neuroscience experiments that address commanding or ‘misapplied-sufficient’ function of neurons. (A) An example of a feeding
command neuron in a fly brain (Flood, Iguchi, et al., 2013). Various signals such as food or starvation flow into a pair of feeding command neurons (Feeding neuron),
and the Feeding neuron makes the decision to trigger the whole feeding behavior. The Feeding neuron fulfills the ‘rigid’ requirements of misapplied-N&S (see text).
(B) A hypothetical case with redundancy, where a second imaginary feeding command neuron (Feeding 2) can substitute the first command neuron (Feeding 1).
Feeding 1 fulfills the sufficient condition in misapplied-N&S, but it does not fulfill the necessary condition in misapplied-N&S. (C) A group of neurons are triggering a
whole pattern of behavior such as aggression (Lin et al., 2011). The group of neurons fulfills requirements of misapplied-N&S (pale magenta represents the area
tested for ‘sufficiency’ and pale green represents ‘necessity’). However, it is possible that only a fraction of the cells (circles with deep colors) are responsible for the
behavior. The deep magenta represents ‘sufficiency’ and deep green for ‘necessity’. (D) Another possible scenario: the group of neurons fulfills requirements of mis-
applied-N&S, but the cells responsible for ‘necessity’ might be different from the cells responsible for ‘sufficiency’. Color code is the same as that of (C). This situation
allows a group of redundant cells (right) to have a potential to be ‘sufficient’ for triggering the behavior as well. The ‘necessity’ experiment does not check if it is a
natural function or not either. It is far from the true N&S shown in Figure 1(A) and the words ‘necessary and sufficient’ are misleading here (see text).
7Since relatively simple animals such as C. elegans and Drosophila have limited
redundancy in their genomes, genes in worms (Chalfie, Horvitz, & Sulston,
1981; Horvitz & Sulston, 1980) and flies (Nusslein-Volhard & Wieschaus, 1980)
are often irreplaceable for their given function. Such limited redundancy is not
present between neurons in the mammalian brain, perhaps not even in many
cases in nervous systems of simple model animals, where many neurons
function together for one purpose. The Drosophila Feeding neuron, which is
‘indispensable and inducing’ for feeding behavior as a pair of neurons, might
be fairly exceptional.
8Fulfilling the necessary condition in misapplied-N&S by itself cannot guarantee
the natural role. Suppose glial cells surround a command neuron, which
trigger a pattern of behavior. Since glial cells are playing a supporting role to
maintain excitability of neurons, ablation of the glial cells could inhibit
excitability of the command neuron, resulting in the loss of the behavior and
‘indicating’ its necessity. Like this putative example from glial cells, the
necessary condition in misapplied-N&S may even be fulfilled by cells that have
a supporting role as the prerequisite for the behavior. Thus, we cannot
automatically conclude a natural triggering function with only the necessary
condition in misapplied-N&S. To make a decisive statement, we have to
58
M. YOSHIHARA AND M. YOSHIHARA
 more clearly identified by directly observing neuronal activity.
The best method for confirming command neuron we can
conduct in current biology is (1) recording an electrophysio-
logical response to a key stimulus from a neuron and then (2)
mimicking the firing pattern of the same neuron to induce
the behavior pattern.9 Once electrophysiological recording/
stimulation has been conducted, the necessary condition in
misapplied-N&S experiments is only a means of checking
redundancy; since the command function has already been
established, the necessary condition in misapplied-N&S is not
required to prove it. Thus, the necessary condition from mis-
applied-N&S
should
never
have
been
included
in
Kupfermann and Weiss’s ‘definition’ of the command neuron.
However, many people in current neuroscience are confused
by this misapplied-logic into believing that the test for the
necessary condition in misapplied-N&S is a decisive experi-
ment for confirming the importance of the neuron(s). This
belief forced them to discredit potentially important neurons
such as the Mauthner cell, as we explained in the ‘witch-hunt’
section. The Drosophila P1 neuron that triggers courtship
behavior
(Kimura,
Hachiya,
Koganezawa,
Tazawa,
&
Yamamoto, 2008) also does not fulfill Kupfermann and
Weiss’s criteria (Yamamoto & Koganezawa, 2013), but it does
fit our two criteria stated above (Kohatsu, Koganezawa, &
Yamamoto, 2011; von Philipsborn et al., 2011). Thus, both
the Mauthner cell and the P1 neuron should be credited as
command neurons. We have to stray away from Kupfermann
and Weiss’s misleading definition, rooted in misapplied logic.
Instead, we propose the definition of a command neuron to
be ‘an interneuron(s), the natural activity of which triggers a
specific motor program (Flood, Iguchi, et al., 2013),’ modified
from Edwards, Heitler, and Krasne (1999).
Pitfalls of N&S in neuroscience II – misapplied-N&S
simplifies the truth too much, skewing our
understanding
Optogenetic techniques first demonstrated in Drosophila
(Lima & Miesenbock, 2005) sparked a surge of studies in
modern neuroscience where animal behavior is controlled by
acute activation of neurons through photo-manipulation.
Photo-activatable ion channels were exogenously introduced
into animals such as mice. Then, they were illuminated to
induce behavior. Their acute induction of behavior helped
revive the command neuron concept, and optogenetic stud-
ies often use the term ‘sufficient’ to express their exciting
observations of behavior induced by photo-activating only a
small group of neurons. But because the word ‘sufficient’ is
often used in the likes of misapplied-N&S by Kupfermann
and Weiss, we frequently see confusion and misunderstand-
ing surrounding these studies. We will illustrate this by tak-
ing examples of feeding circuits. As shown in Figure 2(A),
the starvation signal is incorporated into the Feeding neuron
in the fly brain (Flood, Iguchi, et al., 2013) (see What is the
‘merit’ section). Detailed optogenetic studies on starvation
have been conducted in the brain of mice, and some groups
of neurons (AGRP neurons) were found to be involved in a
motivating process for feeding (Aponte, Atasoy, & Sternson,
2011). In those studies, they observed a motivated state of
feeding through the activation of the neurons and stated
‘AGRP neurons are sufficient to orchestrate feeding behav-
ior.’ This sounds as if AGRP neurons function like the
Feeding neurons by commanding the behavior. In fact, the
AGRP neurons are playing another important but completely
different role as a motivator for the feeding behavior. The
Feeding neuron in the Drosophila brain is naturally activated
by the presence of food, and its artificial activation can trig-
ger
feeding
behavior
even
in
the
absence
of
food.
Meanwhile, it is the absence of food that activates AGRP
neurons (Yang, Atasoy, Su, & Sternson, 2011), and the artifi-
cial activation of AGRP neurons sets the motivated state, but
the starting of feeding behavior still requires the existence of
food. Thus, these neurons behave quite differently, but the
roles of these completely different types of neurons have
been blurred from the meaning behind the word ‘sufficient.’
Optogenetic induction of behavior after the stimulation of
AGRP neurons simply suggests that other forms of manipu-
lation are not needed for inducing the behavior. It does not
imply that activity of other neurons, nor other signals such
as food, are not needed. However, the statement about the
AGRP neuron being ‘sufficient to orchestrate’ sounds as if
AGRP
neurons
are
commanding
the
feeding
behavior
because the word ‘sufficient’ implies that the induction of
the behavior does not need other factors, such as the very
food that is directly triggering the behavior. Thus, a state-
ment with ‘sufficient’ is confusing because it tends to gener-
ate overstatements. The title of the AGRP neuron paper is
obviously
an
overstatement
because
other
neurons
are
required for orchestrating the feeding behavior as recently
shown in mice by another group (Han et al., 2017). Instead
of conducting optogenetic experiments, monitoring the acti-
vation of neurons would be more helpful in finding the
exact function of the cells because it can differentiate
between these two types of functions, ‘commanding’ and
‘motivating.’ Command neurons such as the Feeding neuron
are activated by key stimuli such as the food signal (Flood,
Iguchi, et al., 2013) while motivating neurons such as the
AGRP neurons are activated by metabolic states such as the
starvation signal (Yang et al., 2011). Since the food signal
triggers feeding behavior without passing through the AGRP
neurons, AGRP neurons cannot be said to ‘orchestrate’ the
feeding behavior: It only monitors the metabolic state to set
the probability of the behavior occurring. Such sufficiency
monitor how the signals actually flow. We have to be careful on this issue
especially in studies on a group of manipulated neurons, where necessary cells
such as glial cells and sufficient neurons such as one of groups of neurons
with commanding function are different within an optically manipulated group
of neurons (see Pitfall III section and Figure 2(D)).
9To substitute electrophysiology, which is technically intricate, we have visually
recorded the activity through calcium imaging and optically induced the firing
of the Feeding neuron in a fruit fly. We developed this experimental system to
record brain activity in a fly performing feeding behavior (Yoshihara, 2012).
Even though the time resolution of such imaging/optical stimulation is not as
good as electrophysiological recording/stimulation so far, it still provided fairly
convincing evidence for the commanding function of the Feeding neuron
(Flood, Iguchi, et al., 2013). We still have to make it completely certain
through
electrophysiological
recording/stimulation
with
an
identical
firing pattern.
JOURNAL OF NEUROGENETICS
59
 statements produce overstatements akin to an important
supporting actor being made to look like the lead actor.
Let’s see another example; ‘Previous studies have demon-
strated the important role of DA (dopamine) in the process-
ing of salient signals and goal-directed behaviors. However,
it has been unclear whether other circuits and neurotrans-
mitter systems are required at the same time and whether
specific patterns of activity in distinct neuron types are suffi-
cient
to
effect
place
preference’
(Tsai
et
al.,
2009).
Optogenetic experiments are not enough to address this
question since spontaneous activity of neurons (unrelated to
the stimulus) in other circuits may be contributing to affect-
ing place preference. However, people are often confused
between the two possibilities of (1) the activity of the neuron
is truly sufficient (other factors, such as coupled spontaneous
activity of other neurons, are not required at all for specify-
ing the place preference) and (2) the optogenetic activation
of the neuron by itself is only sufficient as manipulation
when observing the behavior (other forms of manipulation
are not required for specifying the place preference). As the
authors’ statement conveys, most readers would assume it
means that other neuronal activity is not needed (1). This is
not addressed by the optogenetic experiment, which only
confirms (2). Thus, we recommend avoiding the use of
‘sufficient’ to explain results from any optogenetic experi-
ment at all. Otherwise, demonstrating the sufficient condition
in misapplied-N&S may inaccurately suggest there is abso-
lutely no need of other factors, such as other neuronal cir-
cuits which are often needed. It seems that some researchers
may be unaware that the ‘logic’ at the basis of their study is
ambiguous. Instead of carelessly borrowing such strong and
determining words from formal logic, which actually make
things vaguer rather than precise, we must maintain the dis-
cipline to actually describe what physiological truth we can
read out from each experiment.
Pitfalls of N&S in neuroscience III – in studies of a
group of neurons, misapplied-N&S can falsely make
insignificant neurons look important as well
In the vertebrate brain, multiple neurons often synergistically
cooperate to perform one function. Therefore, activation of a
single neuron may not bring about a readily apparent func-
tion, and alternatively a loss of a single neuron may not
cause an obvious loss of that function. This can be problem-
atic for experimental purposes, as it would be hard to clearly
identify a cause-and-effect relationship when synergistic/
redundant characteristics of brains mitigate or negate the
effects of the control. To counteract this issue, some experi-
ments activate and ablate/inactivate an entire group of neu-
rons. The explosive popularity of optogenetics is making
misapplied-N&S analysis regarding population of cells quite
common. Some neurons were concluded to be ‘necessary
and sufficient’ for aggression behavior in this way, as they
connected the activation of VMHvl neurons in a mouse to
its increased aggression and their silencing to its decreased
aggression towards another mouse (Lin et al., 2011). The
potential ‘merit’ of misapplied-N&S, exemplified by the case
of the Feeding neuron (see What is the ‘merit’ section),
allowed this experiment to give an intriguing insight for
brain function (Lin et al., 2011). It supported the possibility
that this group of neurons is the only one that triggers
aggression behavior in the natural condition. This suggests
the possibility that the group of neurons may be located at
the pivot of the aggression circuit. Despite such promising
prospects, we have to be even more careful in cases involv-
ing multiple neurons such as this because the strong nuance
of misapplied-N&S opens up additional issues that were
absent in single neuron analysis.
As depicted in Figure 2(C), misapplied-N&S can be ful-
filled even in a case where only a small number of neurons
are actually responsible for executing the behavior. However,
the strong nuance of the word necessary in misapplied-N&S
gives the impression that every single cell in the whole group
is important and essential. We have to bear in mind that
misapplied-N&S experiments only confirm that the group of
cells includes the essential cells, although ‘necessary and
sufficient’ makes it sound as if this entire group of cells is
the minimum requirement for the function. Moreover, it is
even possible that the cells in the tested group responsible
for the necessary condition of misapplied-N&S and those
responsible for the sufficient condition are completely differ-
ent cells altogether (Figure 2(D)). In the aggression example,
some cells in the group may induce the aggression behavior
(sufficient), while another part of the cells may be a pre-
requisite for the natural aggression behavior (necessary) as
we explained in footnote 8 in the Pitfalls I section. It is pos-
sible that a loss of the latter cells, such as those regulating
leg movements, might make the animal less energetic, lead-
ing to loss of aggression behavior. The possibility of different
subgroups playing different roles in the given group would
undermine the two possible insights of misapplied-N&S,
checking if it is a natural function and that there is no
redundancy (see What is the ‘merit’ section). This problem
is depicted in Figure 2(D). Thus, we have to bear in mind
that the use of misapplied-N&S for a group of cells has the
substantial possibility of misleading us away from the truth.
This confusion results from the fact that misapplied-N&S
sounds ‘logical’, despite the lack of basis in any proper logic,
and thus nobody has questioned its resulting conclusion.
The
necessary
condition
in
misapplied-N&S
gives
the
impression that all of those cells are really necessary, when it
is entirely possible that some in the group do not serve any
purpose in the function.
Pitfalls of N&S in neuroscience IV – the most
extreme and concerning example: an inappropriate
framework of thinking based on misapplied-N&S
generating studies lacking scientific insight
The strong sound of misapplied-N&S is not only leading to
the distortion of understanding or definitions, but it also
tempts some researchers into conducting unproductive or
even misleading studies. For example, one group published a
paper claiming that Calcium is N&S for inducing long-term
memory formation, measuring an association between an
olfactory
stimulus
and
sucrose
stimulus
in
honeybees
(Perisse et al., 2009). The original question of the study,
60
M. YOSHIHARA AND M. YOSHIHARA
 ‘whether Ca2þ is necessary and sufficient for inducing long-
term memory formation,’ is based on misapplied-N&S;
because the question itself does not have a logical founda-
tion, the design of the experiments (injection of calcium che-
lator to reduce free calcium for the necessary condition and
artificial increase of calcium for the sufficient condition) as a
whole unfortunately does not offer scientific insight, and the
final conclusion itself is another typical instance of misap-
plied-N&S. In the animal brain, the calcium ions play an
essential or ‘pivotal’ role in chemical synaptic transmission,
which is a major synaptic transmission in the animal brain
(Katz & Miledi, 1967). Thus, it is quite obvious that the cal-
cium ion is necessary for memory formation. Then, we also
know that there are other factors in memory formation, and
so we know that the calcium ion is definitely not sufficient
for memory formation. Therefore, we do not even need to
ask the question of whether calcium is N&S for long-term
memory formation, and we definitely do not need any
experiment to find this out. Their necessity experiment sup-
presses synaptic transmission at many synapses, so it is quite
obvious that it will compromise proper memory formation.
Then, their sufficiency experiments abnormally increase syn-
aptic transmission at many synapses, which should change
the behavioral output in an unpredictable manner. If neur-
onal activities induced from the olfactory and sucrose stimu-
lus, which are supposed to be associated in the experiment,
change due to an increase of the calcium ion at previous
steps in memory formation, it would result in a change of
the behavioral output. However, this does not imply that
there was a change in the fundamental property or potential
of memory. Here we should note a serious pitfall underlying
memory studies, where some researchers are tempted to
claim that there is a change in the property of memory
when only the neuronal activities to be associated for
remembering had changed, leading to change in behavioral
output.10 However, we cannot address property of memory
based on such experiments showing changes in behavioral
output alone. As a representative example of the pitfall, we
cannot receive any insight on the memory mechanism from
experiments that manipulate the calcium ion, as it changes
neuronal activity in general, and not just the memory forma-
tion in question. While it is possible that the property of
memory may also be changed by the level of Ca2þ, we can-
not address it through manipulation of overall Ca2þ level as
everything in neurophysiology is calcium-dependent.
A serious problem arose as a misleading study sounded
meaningful due to misapplied-N&S. A case that is as clearly
faulty as this calcium/memory example may be somewhat
rare, but so many other reported experiments have the same
structure. Some deal with the effect of expression/knockout
(Xu et al., 2015) or pharmacological activation/inactivation
(Pagnussat et al., 2015) of various molecules on memory. If
a biological phenomenon is based on a complex system, it is
difficult to pinpoint where certain molecular and cellular
processes constitute the phenomenon, such as memory for-
mation. The common problem underlining these experi-
ments is that misapplied-N&S can be fulfilled even if the
molecule is not functioning for memory per se, and so
the strong nuance of misapplied-N&S makes it sound as if
the molecule is critical for memory. This problem derives
from the fact that molecules such as Ca2þ function at so
many aspects for biological phenomena based on complex
systems (at all chemical synapses in the case of Ca2þ, for
example). In a similar manner, we should be careful in cases
where a group of neuromodulatory neurons such as dopa-
mine neuron, serotonin neurons, etc. may influence on mul-
tiple sites in the neuronal network. We may be misled by
experiments fulfilling the misapplied-N&S through manipu-
lation of such neurons because behavioral change may be
caused from the outside of the focused point such as parts
carrying memory.
The take home message from this example is that we
should truly understand the physiological processes underly-
ing each experiment, rather than giving a sloppy summary
that utilizes misapplied-N&S. But because misapplied-N&S
evokes an implication of importance, reviewers and editors
of some journals usually do not notice the lack of meaning
in such studies. As a result, such studies are appearing in
prestigious journals, while most readers do not even notice
how unproductive and misleading those studies are. Our sci-
entific
community
must
cease
this
spread
of
misap-
plied-N&S!
So, what should we do instead?
More often than in published papers, we encounter misap-
plied-N&S in academic talks. One principal investigator
repeated more than 10 times in a talk that a certain molecule
10For example, flies change behavior patterns when they are starved, reflecting
that neuronal activity in a fly’s brain changes in the starved state. One group
associated an odor to escape behavior from an electric shock before and after
starvation (Hirano et al., 2013). They reported somewhat of a difference
between the starved and satiated flies in their odor-induced escaping
behavior, and they concluded that ‘fasting facilitated long-term memory.’
However, it does not imply that the property of associative memory itself was
changed in the brain due to starvation. It is well known that general
locomotive activity (Linford, Ro, Chung, & Pletcher, 2015) and response to
olfactory signals change (Farhan et al., 2013; Root, Ko, Jafari, & Wang, 2011)
when flies are starved. It is quite likely that both the neuronal activity for the
escaping locomotion and neuronal activity in response to odors changed
before association when starved. Therefore, mechanism of memory at the
association cannot be addressed by simply measuring the whole escaping
locomotion.
This kind of starvation-induced increase in the whole escaping locomotion
from the odor has given rise to an opportunity for another misapplied-N&S.
Expressing a constitutive active form of a protein, CRTC, in mushroom bodies
(MBs) increased the escaping locomotion from the odor. This apparent
‘memory alteration’ in a similar manner to the effect of starvation was
recognized as sufficiency. As necessity, they showed that RNAi knockdown of
the protein ceased the starvation-induced increase of the apparent ‘memory.’
Then, they concluded that ‘CRTC activity in MBs is necessary and sufficient to
form the fasting-dependent long-term memory’ (Hirano et al., 2013). These
experiments are like a ‘house built on sand,’ where their very foundation itself
is rather vacant. Thus, it is difficult for them to ever be meaningful in
expanding our understanding of memory mechanism. It is very likely that
manipulating CRTC activity just resulted in altered escaping locomotion in
general, not particularly memory mechanism. But the misapplied-N&S makes
CRTC activity sound ‘equivalent to,’ or very important for, the ‘fasting-
dependent long-term memory’. Both the MB study (Hirano et al., 2013) and
the calcium study (Perisse et al., 2009) doubly violated proper logic both in
the misapplied-N&S pitfall and in the memory pitfall, leading to a lack of
scientific insight for memory mechanism.
JOURNAL OF NEUROGENETICS
61
 is N&S for Long-Term Potentiation (LTP), a representative
phenomenon (Bliss & Lømo, 1973) for an experimental
model of memory formation. As is obvious from our discus-
sion above, a molecule can never be truly N&S for the whole
phenomenon. Such careless statements from established, pro-
fessional scientists are having quite a bad influence on young
researchers, and we frequently see students ‘proudly’ claim-
ing something is ‘necessary and sufficient’ in their thesis
defense or qualifying exam. We must stop this foolish and
worrying situation before many young scientists start mis-
leading experiments like the study of whether calcium is
N&S for memory formation (Perisse et al., 2009) or fasting-
dependent long-term memory (Hirano et al., 2013). Thus, let
us propose the following solution.
First of all, our overall discussion reveals that we must be
careful not to misuse the N&S conditions, so that we can
correct past confusions while preventing future ones. The
main problem comes from the word ‘sufficient,’ which is
often used to emphasize that artificial expression of only a
single gene or activation of only a single neuron can cause a
substantial and presumably relevant effect on the whole pro-
cess of interest. Although it may be sufficient as an experi-
mental manipulation for triggering the effect, it is not
actually sufficient for executing the whole effect itself (Figure
1(C)). Therefore, this term is only erroneous when it is
coupled with the word ‘necessary,’ and it could be said that
its use would not be wrong if the context is restricted to
artificial manipulation. However, it often leads into mixing
up the three following possibilities (taking the command
neuron/optogenetic study for simplicity):
1.
the activity of the neurons is truly sufficient for a pat-
tern of behavior (activity of any other neuron is not
required for executing the whole behavior)
2.
the activity of the neurons is sufficient for triggering a
pattern of behavior (spontaneous activity of any other
neuron or any other extrinsic factors are not required
for triggering the behavior)
3.
the artificial activation of the neurons is sufficient for
triggering a pattern of behavior (any other form of
manipulation is not required for triggering the behavior)
The first sufficiency matches the necessary condition of
misapplied-N&S, although it is rather unrealistic as we
explained in the Misapplied-N&S in biology section. Their
downstream neurons should also be activated to realize any
pattern of behavior. The second one is what people often
believe to be the case, due to the confusion behind the use
of the word ‘sufficient,’ although it is not supported by neur-
onal stimulation/optogenetic experiments. The nuance of
‘sufficient’ causes people to ignore not only spontaneous
activity, but also extrinsic key stimuli such as food as
explained in Pitfall II. But within these three options, opto-
genetic analysis only addresses and supports the third possi-
bility. Thus, we should be careful when using the term in
our statements, but it would certainly be better to simply
avoid using the word ‘sufficient’ entirely for studies on the
artificial activation of neurons.
In the past, the word ‘sufficient’ was not used in the mis-
leading way as it often is nowadays because the word
‘sufficient’ by itself does not evoke the meaning that it is sin-
gle-handedly causing the whole process. Only fairly recently
has sufficient become common in biology literature, even
more frequently in talks. We guess that the main impetus
behind this verbal change is to tie it with the word
‘necessary’ for claiming misapplied-N&S, although it does
not make sense to use the word ‘sufficient’ if they are not
examining factors that are the minimum requirements for
that function. Rather, the importance of ‘sufficiency’ experi-
ments lies in demonstrating a causal link through optoge-
netic activation of neurons (or misexpression of a gene).
Thus, words such as triggers, promotes, induces, switches, or
initiates may better reflect or express the desired nuance
without creating such confusion.
The term ‘necessary’ may be appropriate in terms of the
formal logic if it is not tied with the word ‘sufficient’.
However, we recommend against using ‘necessary’ because
its contrary, ‘not necessary,’ gives the nuance of unimport-
ance in ordinary conversation as discussed in Pitfall I. Thus,
we
propose
use
of
a
word,
‘indispensable’
instead
of
‘necessary’ because its antonym, ‘dispensable,’ sounds not
only unimportant, but also substitutable.
Let us give an example that describes a pair of experi-
ments which fits misapplied-N&S. Suppose:
i.
Artificial activation of a Feeding neuron pair induced
feeding behavior.
ii.
When a Feeding neuron pair was inactivated or ablated,
natural feeding behavior ceased.
To interpret these experiments, an appropriate statement
for a conclusion may be ‘activity of a Feeding neuron indu-
ces feeding behavior at probably only one pivot of the nat-
ural feeding circuit (but, it is recommended to monitor
activity of Feeding neuron to confirm natural activity).’
If you prefer to use a simple sentence like N&S, we rec-
ommend you to say something akin to, ‘the Feeding neuron
is indispensable and inducing for feeding behavior.’ However,
rather than simply stating the conclusion using a short sen-
tence, we must carefully consider what is going on in our
experiments and what our results suggest in each experi-
ment: fulfilling the indispensable and inducing criteria does
not necessarily suggest the pivotal role of the neuron.11
11‘Indispensable and inducing condition ! only one pivot’ is not true whereas
‘only one pivot ! indispensable and inducing condition’ is true. Thus, fulfilling
the indispensable and inducing condition does suggest the possibility of a
pivotal role, but does not guarantee it, while failing the indispensable and
inducing condition does not prove against a pivotal role either, as explained in
the Pitfall I section. We should be especially careful in neuroscience, where so
many neurons are forming complex networks, making experimental results
hard
to
interpret.
In
developmental
genetics,
however,
fulfilling
the
indispensable and inducing criteria tends to lead to the pivotal role of a gene
in many cases such as eyeless. This is due to hierarchical gene cascade being
fairly common during development. Thus, we rarely see this logic issue being
a serious problem in developmental genetics as much as in neuroscience.
62
M. YOSHIHARA AND M. YOSHIHARA
 Conclusions
Even if there happened to be a few instances where real
necessity and sufficiency can be validated, we have never
seen a single case where the use of N&S has helped our
understanding of biology because its use would require too
many
premises
to
offer
any
actual
additional
insight.
However, we have encountered far too many cases where
misapplied-N&S has misled the interpretation of experimen-
tal results. It is more worthwhile to carefully examine what
we can learn from each experiment, rather than superficially
borrowing terminology from formal logic without adhering
to the actual definitions of the terms. To avoid subsequent
confusions, it may be more sensible to simply abolish the
use of N&S entirely. Alternatively, indispensable and induc-
ing would work better to make it clear that the two manipu-
lations
are
not
logically
converse
in
order
to
avoid
overstatements. Fulfilling the indispensable and inducing con-
dition should not be the end goal of our research: that alone
suggests very little for our understanding. We need more
experiments such as activity monitoring to truly understand
brain function.
The words ‘necessary and sufficient’ are not only mislead-
ing, but the way of thinking by researchers when they use
misapplied-N&S is often incorrect. We must stress that the
problem we have addressed here is far deeper than simply
an issue of semantics. The incorrect use of logic undermines
perfectly executed research with misleading conclusions that
misunderstand nature. Thus, we conclude that ‘necessary
and sufficient’ in biology is not necessarily necessary.
Acknowledgements
We thank Prof. Ryushi Goto at Department of Mathematics, Osaka
University
and
Prof.
Yoshinori
Namikawa
at
Department
of
Mathematics, Kyoto University for advice on logic, Ms. Nobuko
Yoshihara and Christina Kingman for their kind support and advice,
Dr. Takeo Watanabe, Mr. Louis Watanabe, Drs. Masahiro J. Go, Nao
Uchida, Benjamin White, Daisuke Yamamoto, Soh Kohatsu and mem-
bers of Yoshihara lab such as Akira Sakurai for their comments,
Kazuhiro Oiwa, Hiroaki Kojima and Iwao Hosako for generous sup-
ports at Kobe. This article is dedicated to Motojiro Y’s mentor, Dr.
Kazuo Ikeda, who is the founder of the command neuron concept and
passed away on 3 May 2016 at the age of 89.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
Funding
This work was supported by National Institute of Health Grant, U.S.A.
[MH859858 to Motojiro Y] and KAKENHI [26891030 to Motojiro Y]
from JSPS, Japan.
References
Aponte, Y., Atasoy, D., & Sternson, S.M. (2011). AGRP neurons are
sufficient to orchestrate feeding behavior rapidly and without train-
ing. Nature Neuroscience, 14, 351–355. doi: 10.1038/nn.2739
Bliss, T.V., & Lømo, T. (1973). Long-lasting potentiation of synaptic
transmission in the dentate area of the anaesthetized rabbit following
stimulation of the perforant path. Journal of Physiology, 232,
331–356. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1973.sp010273
Chalfie, M., Horvitz, H.R., & Sulston, J.E. (1981). Mutations that lead
to reiterations in the cell lineages of C. elegans. Cell, 24, 59–69. doi:
10.1016/0092-8674(81)90501-8
Davis, R.J., Tavsanli, B.C., Dittrich, C., Walldorf, U., & Mardon, G.
(2003). Drosophila retinal homeobox (drx) is not required for estab-
lishment of the visual system, but is required for brain and clypeus
development. Developmental Biology, 259, 272–287. doi: 10.1016/
S0012-1606(03)00201-X
Eaton, R.C., Lee, R.K., & Foreman, M.B. (2001). The Mauthner cell and
other identified neurons of the brainstem escape network of fish.
Progress
in
Neurobiology,
63,
467–485.
doi:
10.1016/S0301-
0082(00)00047-2
Edwards, D.H., Heitler, W.J., & Krasne, F.B. (1999). Fifty years of a
command neuron: The neurobiology of escape behavior in the cray-
fish. Trends in Neurosciences, 22, 153–161. doi: 10.1016/S0166-
2236(98)01340-X
Farhan, A., Gulati, J., Grobetae-Wilde, E., Vogel, H., Hansson, B.S., &
Knaden, M. (2013). The CCHamide 1 receptor modulates sensory
perception and olfactory behavior in starved Drosophila. Scientific
Reports, 3, 2765. doi: 10.1038/srep02765
Flood, T.F., Gorczyca, M., White, B.H., Ito, K., & Yoshihara, M. (2013).
A large-scale behavioral screen to identify neurons controlling motor
programs in the Drosophila brain. G3, 3, 1629–1637. doi: 10.1534/
g3.113.006205
Flood, T.F., Iguchi, S., Gorczyca, M., White, B., Ito, K., & Yoshihara,
M. (2013). A single pair of interneurons commands the Drosophila
feeding
motor
program.
Nature,
499,
83–87.
doi:
10.1038/
nature12208
Frost, W.N., & Katz, P.S. (1996). Single neuron control over a complex
motor program. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, 93, 422–426. doi: 10.1073/pnas.93.1.422
Han, W., Tellez, L.A., Rangel, M.J., Jr., Motta, S.C., Zhang, X., Perez,
I.O., … de Araujo, I.E. (2017). Integrated control of predatory hunt-
ing by the central nucleus of the amygdala. Cell, 168, 311–324.e318.
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.12.027
Hirano, Y., Masuda, T., Naganos, S., Matsuno, M., Ueno, K., Miyashita,
T., … Saitoe, M. (2013). Fasting launches CRTC to facilitate long-
term memory formation in Drosophila. Science, 339, 443–446. doi:
10.1126/science.1227170
Horvitz, H.R., & Sulston, J.E. (1980). Isolation and genetic characteriza-
tion of cell-lineage mutants of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.
Genetics, 96, 435–454.
Ikeda, K., & Wiersma, C.A. (1964). Autogenic rhythmicity in the
abdominal ganglia of the crayfish: The control of swimmeret move-
ments. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology, 12, 107–115. doi:
10.1016/0010-406X(64)90053-2
Jusiak, B., Karandikar, U.C., Kwak, S.J., Wang, F., Wang, H., Chen, R.,
& Mardon, G. (2014). Regulation of Drosophila eye development by
the transcription factor Sine oculis. PLoS One, 9, e89695. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0089695
Katz, B., & Miledi, R. (1967). The timing of calcium action during
neuromuscular transmission. Journal of Physiology, 189, 535–544.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1967.sp008183
Kimura, K., Hachiya, T., Koganezawa, M., Tazawa, T., & Yamamoto, D.
(2008). Fruitless and doublesex coordinate to generate male-specific
neurons that can initiate courtship. Neuron, 59, 759–769. doi:
10.1016/j.neuron.2008.06.007
Kohatsu, S., Koganezawa, M., & Yamamoto, D. (2011). Female contact
activates male-specific interneurons that trigger stereotypic courtship
behavior
in
Drosophila.
Neuron,
69,
498–508.
doi:
10.1016/
j.neuron.2010.12.017
Korn, H., & Faber, D.S. (2005). The Mauthner cell half a century later:
A neurobiological model for decision-making? Neuron, 47, 13–28.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.05.019
Kumar, J.P., & Moses, K. (2001). Eye specification in Drosophila:
Perspectives and implications. Seminars in Cell and Developmental
Biology, 12, 469–474. doi: 10.1006/scdb.2001.0270
JOURNAL OF NEUROGENETICS
63
 Kupfermann, I., & Weiss, K.R. (1978). The command neuron concept.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1, 3–39. doi: 10.1017/S0140525
X00059057
Kupfermann, I., & Weiss, K.R. (2001). Motor program selection in sim-
ple model systems. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 11, 673–677.
doi: 10.1016/S0959-4388(01)00267-7
Lima, S.Q., & Miesenbock, G. (2005). Remote control of behavior
through genetically targeted photostimulation of neurons. Cell, 121,
141–152. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.02.004
Lin, D., Boyle, M.P., Dollar, P., Lee, H., Lein, E.S., Perona, P., &
Anderson, D.J. (2011). Functional identification of an aggression
locus in the mouse hypothalamus. Nature, 470, 221–226.
doi: 10.
1038/nature09736
Linford, N.J., Ro, J., Chung, B.Y., & Pletcher, S.D. (2015). Gustatory
and
metabolic
perception
of
nutrient
stress
in
Drosophila.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America, 112, 2587–2592. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1401501112
Liu, C., Placais, P.Y., Yamagata, N., Pfeiffer, B.D., Aso, Y., Friedrich,
A.B., … Tanimoto, H. (2012). A subset of dopamine neurons sig-
nals reward for odour memory in Drosophila. Nature, 488, 512–516.
doi: 10.1038/nature11304
Marder, E., Bucher, D., Schulz, D.J., & Taylor, A.L. (2005). Invertebrate
central
pattern
generation
moves
along.
Current
Biology,
15,
R685–R699. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2005.08.022
Marder, E., & Calabrese, R.L. (1996). Principles of rhythmic motor pat-
tern generation. Physiological Reviews, 76, 687–717.
doi: 10.1152/
physrev.1996.76.3.687
Meyrand, P., Simmers, J., & Moulins, M. (1991). Construction of a pat-
tern-generating circuit with neurons of different networks. Nature,
351, 60–63. doi: 10.1038/351060a0
Nusslein-Volhard, C., & Wieschaus, E. (1980). Mutations affecting seg-
ment number and polarity in Drosophila. Nature, 287, 795–801. doi:
10.1038/287795a0
Pagnussat, N., Almeida, A.S., Marques, D.M., Nunes, F., Chenet, G.C.,
Botton, P.H., … Porciuncula, L.O. (2015). Adenosine A receptors
are necessary and sufficient to trigger memory impairment in adult
mice. British Journal of Pharmacology, 172, 3831–3845. doi: 10.1111/
bph.13180
Perisse, E., Raymond-Delpech, V., Neant, I., Matsumoto, Y., Leclerc, C.,
Moreau, M., & Sandoz, J.C. (2009). Early calcium increase triggers
the formation of olfactory long-term memory in honeybees. BMC
Biology, 7, 30. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-7-30
Root, C.M., Ko, K.I., Jafari, A., & Wang, J.W. (2011). Presynaptic facili-
tation by neuropeptide signaling mediates odor-driven food search.
Cell, 145, 133–144. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.02.008
Tsai, H.C., Zhang, F., Adamantidis, A., Stuber, G.D., Bonci, A., de
Lecea, L., & Deisseroth, K. (2009). Phasic firing in dopaminergic
neurons is sufficient for behavioral conditioning. Science, 324,
1080–1084. doi: 10.1126/science.1168878
von Philipsborn, A.C., Liu, T., Yu, J.Y., Masser, C., Bidaye, S.S., &
Dickson, B.J. (2011). Neuronal control of Drosophila courtship song.
Neuron, 69, 509–522. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.01.011
White, H.I. (2008). Discovering philosophy. 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice Hall.
Wiersma, C.A., & Ikeda, K. (1964). Interneurons commanding swim-
meret movements in the crayfish, Procambarus clarkii (Girard).
Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology, 12, 509–525.
doi: 10.
1016/0010-406X(64)90153-7
Xu, N., Zhou, W.J., Wang, Y., Huang, S.H., Li, X., & Chen, Z.Y. (2015).
Hippocampal Wnt3a is necessary and sufficient for contextual fear
memory
acquisition
and
consolidation.
Cerebral
Cortex,
25,
4062–4075. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhu121
Yamamoto, D., & Koganezawa, M. (2013). Genes and circuits of court-
ship behaviour in Drosophila males. Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
14, 681–692. doi: 10.1038/nrn3567
Yang, Y., Atasoy, D., Su, H.H., & Sternson, S.M. (2011). Hunger states
switch a flip-flop memory circuit via a synaptic AMPK-dependent
positive feedback loop. Cell, 146, 992–1003. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.
07.039
Yoshihara, M. (2012). Simultaneous recording of calcium signals from
identified neurons and feeding behavior of Drosophila melanogaster.
Journal of Visualized Experiments, 62, e3625. doi: 10.3791/3625
Yoshihara, M., Adolfsen, B., Galle, K.T., & Littleton, J.T. (2005).
Retrograde signaling by Syt 4 induces presynaptic release and syn-
apse-specific growth. Science, 310, 858–863.
doi: 10.1126/science.
1117541
Yoshihara, M., & Ito, K. (2012). Acute genetic manipulation of neur-
onal activity for the functional dissection of neural circuits – a
dream come true for the pioneers of behavioral genetics. Journal of
Neurogenetics, 26, 43–52. doi: 10.3109/01677063.2012.663429
64
M. YOSHIHARA AND M. YOSHIHARA
