 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 7 8 3
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
Introduction
Formation of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) may be an 
important component in the defensive armamentarium of neutro-
phils (polymorphonuclear leukocytes [PMNs]) that allows them to 
capture, immobilize, and putatively kill microbes in the extracel-
lular space (1–4). NET formation occurs by a novel cell death pro-
cess often called NETosis, although “vital” NETosis, in which the 
neutrophils do not immediately die, has also been described (3, 5). 
The molecular mechanisms leading to NET formation have not 
been completely dissected and may depend in part on the stimulus 
(1–3, 6). Nevertheless, decondensation of chromatin and extrusion 
of DNA together with histones and granule contents, are central 
events (1–3, 5, 6). Deimination of histones mediated by peptidyl 
arginine deiminase 4 (PAD4) (7–9) is thought to be a sine qua non 
for nuclear decondensation and NET formation (1).
NET-mediated capture and elimination of pathogens may 
complement traditional PMN antimicrobial activities including 
phagocytosis and intracellular killing (2, 10). Clinical observations 
indicate that defects in NET formation contribute to intractable 
infections in some instances (2, 11), but the importance of NETs 
in pathogen killing in vivo remains unclear and controversial (1–3). 
Conversely, there is substantial evidence that NETs and NET- 
associated factors, including histones and granule proteases, 
mediate vascular and tissue injury and that NET-mediated injury 
is a previously unrecognized mechanism of innate immune col-
lateral damage to the host (1–3, 9, 12). Experimental models and 
limited clinical observations suggest that intra- or extravascular 
NET formation contributes to tissue injury in bacteremia (9, 13, 
14), transfusion-related acute lung injury (15), primary graft dys-
function after lung transplantation (16), sterile vasculopathies 
and immune inflammation (17, 18), thrombosis (19), and influen-
za (20). Thus, NET formation may be an important maladaptive 
activity of neutrophils (1) if it is triggered inappropriately or is 
unregulated in infection and inflammation.
Human neonates have unique and complicated immune reg-
ulation, susceptibility to infection, and inflammatory pathology. 
Although the infant is in a sterile environment in utero, it can be 
challenged by pathogens and their products before or during labor 
(21). Furthermore, newborns are rapidly colonized with bacteria 
after delivery, a process associated with increases in circulat-
ing and bone marrow neutrophils (22–24). Complex adaptations 
appear to have evolved that prevent excessive, injurious inflamma-
tion in the perinatal period and in the abrupt neonatal transition 
from the protected intrauterine environment to continuous micro-
bial colonization and exposure (25–27). These adaptations may, 
however, be accompanied by increased susceptibility to infection 
(26, 27). Earlier, we found that PMNs isolated from umbilical cord 
blood of preterm and term infants do not form NETs when stim-
ulated and have a defect in NET-mediated bacterial killing, sug-
gesting such an adaptation (28). Other investigators subsequently 
reported temporally delayed NET formation when isolated neo-
natal neutrophils were stimulated in vitro (29). In exploring the 
Neutrophil granulocytes, also called polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs), extrude molecular lattices of decondensed 
chromatin studded with histones, granule enzymes, and antimicrobial peptides that are referred to as neutrophil extracellular 
traps (NETs). NETs capture and contain bacteria, viruses, and other pathogens. Nevertheless, experimental evidence indicates 
that NETs also cause inflammatory vascular and tissue damage, suggesting that identifying pathways that inhibit NET 
formation may have therapeutic implications. Here, we determined that neonatal NET-inhibitory factor (nNIF) is an inhibitor 
of NET formation in umbilical cord blood. In human neonatal and adult neutrophils, nNIF inhibits key terminal events in NET 
formation, including peptidyl arginine deiminase 4 (PAD4) activity, neutrophil nuclear histone citrullination, and nuclear 
decondensation. We also identified additional nNIF-related peptides (NRPs) that inhibit NET formation. nNIFs and NRPs 
blocked NET formation induced by pathogens, microbial toxins, and pharmacologic agonists in vitro and in mouse models of 
infection and systemic inflammation, and they improved mortality in murine models of systemic inflammation, which are 
associated with NET-induced collateral tissue injury. The identification of NRPs as neutrophil modulators that selectively 
interrupt NET generation at critical steps suggests their potential as therapeutic agents. Furthermore, our results indicate that 
nNIF may be an important regulator of NET formation in fetal and neonatal inflammation.
Neonatal NET-inhibitory factor and related peptides 
inhibit neutrophil extracellular trap formation
Christian C. Yost,1,2 Hansjörg Schwertz,2,3 Mark J. Cody,1,2 Jared A. Wallace,4 Robert A. Campbell,2,5 Adriana Vieira-de-Abreu,2,5 
Claudia V. Araujo,2,5 Sebastian Schubert,2,5,6 Estelle S. Harris,2,5 Jesse W. Rowley,2,5 Matthew T. Rondina,2,5 James M. Fulcher,7 
Curry L. Koening,5 Andrew S. Weyrich,2,5 and Guy A. Zimmerman2,5
1Department of Pediatrics/Neonatology, 2Program in Molecular Medicine, 3Division of Vascular Surgery, 4Department of Pathology, and 5Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, 
Utah, USA. 6Center for Thrombosis and Hemostasis, University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany. 7Department of Biochemistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA. 
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: July 22, 2015; Accepted: July 28, 2016.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2016;126(10):3783–3798. doi:10.1172/JCI83873.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 7 8 4
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
and from peripheral blood of infants collected at later days of life. 
NET formation was assessed qualitatively using live cell imag-
ing with SYTO Green (cell permeable) and SYTOX Orange (cell 
impermeable) DNA stains and quantitatively by supernatant 
NET-associated histone H3 measurement (30). PMNs isolated 
from cord blood (day 0), whether from preterm (n = 8) or healthy 
term infants (n = 2), did not form NETs when stimulated (Figure 
1, A and B), consistent with our earlier observations (28). Never-
theless, term and preterm neonates rapidly developed durable 
capacity to form NETs (Figure 1, A and B). We serially assessed 
NET formation over the first 60 days of extrauterine life for 7 pre-
mature neonates. Stimulated NET formation was demonstrable 
by day 3 ex utero for even the most prematurely born infants (Sup-
mechanism(s) for blunted neonatal NET deployment, we discov-
ered a peptide in umbilical cord blood that inhibits NET formation 
in vitro and in vivo and that appears to be an endogenous regulator 
of NET generation. We also identified related peptides that inhibit 
NETosis. These previously unrecognized modulators of NET for-
mation may have potential as selective antiinflammatory agents in 
addition to regulatory activities in specific inflammatory settings 
or tissue compartments.
Results
NET formation by human neonatal neutrophils is regulated by a pep-
tide in umbilical cord blood. We examined in vitro NET deployment 
by neutrophils from umbilical cord blood on the day of delivery 
Figure 1. A NET- inhibitory factor is present in human umbilical cord blood. (A) Neutrophils from 7 preterm neonates were longitudinally examined over 
the first 28 days after birth for NET formation in response to LPS (100 ng/ml, 1 hour) assessed by live cell imaging (NETs, red fluorescence, yellow arrows; 
nuclear DNA, gray) and release of NET-associated histone H3 (fold change over baseline; mean ± SEM). Original magnification, ×20. Scale bar: 100 μm. 
One-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc testing. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01, compared with control histone H3 release arbitrarily set at 1 (red dashed line). (B) 
Neutrophils isolated from cord blood of a healthy term neonate on the day of delivery (left panel) or from venous blood on day 2 after birth (right panel) 
were stimulated with LPS (100 ng/ml, 1 hour) and imaged as in A. Analysis of NET formation by neutrophils from a second-term neonate yielded the same 
pattern. (C) Neutrophils isolated from venous blood of a healthy pregnant woman on the day of delivery were incubated in medium alone or stimulated 
with LPS (100 ng/ml) for 1 hour and imaged as in A. Neutrophils from a second healthy term mother also robustly formed NETs in response to LPS. Original 
magnification, ×60. Scale bar: 100 μm. (D) Neutrophils were isolated from venous blood of 60-day-old preterm neonates (n = 5), preincubated for 1 hour 
with day-60 autologous plasma or with stored autologous cord blood plasma, stimulated with LPS, and assessed for NET formation as in A. Original mag-
nification, ×60. Scale bar: 100 μm. Neutrophils isolated from venous blood of healthy adults and preincubated in autologous or stored cord blood plasma 
were studied in parallel. One-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc testing. *P < 0.05, LPS/adult vs. LPS/neonatal; **P < 0.01, neonatal PMNs in autologous 
plasma vs. cord blood plasma; †P < 0.001, adult PMNs in autologous plasma vs. cord blood plasma.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 7 8 5
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
PMNs isolated from healthy pregnant women immediately before 
delivery robustly formed NETs (Figure 1C).
Rapid development of NET competency (Figure 1A) suggested 
that a factor in umbilical cord blood modulates NET formation. To 
plemental Table 1; supplemental material available online with 
this article; doi:10.1172/JCI83873DS1), and maximal NET-form-
ing capacity was achieved between day 3 and day 14 (Figure 1A). 
Impaired perinatal NET formation is a feature of the neonate: 
Figure 2. nNIF and related NRPs represent a family of NET-inhibitory peptides. (A) Provisional partial sequence of nNIF from mass spectroscopy and pub-
lished sequences of CRISPP (35) and A1AT. (B, left panel) Samples of healthy term neonate cord blood plasma (n = 4) and adult venous plasma (n = 4) were 
analyzed by Western blotting using a polyclonal antibody against the carboxy terminus of A1AT (full gel shown in Supplemental Figure 1). (B, right panel) 
Size exclusion of full-length A1AT, quantitative Western blotting with the same polyclonal antibody against the A1AT carboxy terminus, and a standard 
curve generated using synthetic nNIF (Supplemental Table 2) were used to measure nNIF concentrations in cord blood plasma from preterm neonates and 
venous plasma from healthy adults (n = 8 in each group). Student’s t test, **P < 0.01. CB, cord blood plasma; A, adult peripheral blood plasma. (C) NET for-
mation by LPS-stimulated (100 ng/ml, 1 hour) adult neutrophils was assessed as in Figure 1A after preincubation of the PMNs in control medium, cord blood 
plasma, cord blood plasma depleted of nNIF using a polyclonal carboxy terminus A1AT antibody coupled to affinity beads or eluate from the affinity beads. 
This result was consistent in 3 experiments with neutrophils from different donors. Original magnification, ×60. Scale bar: 50 μm. (D) Full-length A1AT, 
synthetic nNIF, and samples of depleted cord blood plasma and eluate studied in C were subjected to Western blotting using the carboxy terminus A1AT 
antibody. Full-length A1AT (52 kDa) was not detected on this 16.5% Tris-tricine gel due to its size. (E) NET formation (red fluorescence, yellow arrows; scale 
bar: 50 µm) by LPS-activated adult PMNs was assessed as in Figure 1A after preincubation for 1 hour in control medium (second panel), or with full-length 
A1AT (2 μM) or synthetic nNIF (1 nM) (n = 3). One-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test. *P < 0.05, nNIF versus both control medium/LPS and A1AT/LPS.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 7 8 6
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 7 8 7
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
plasma and peptides eluted from the affinity beads were exam-
ined for NET-inhibitory activity. Unaltered cord blood plasma 
inhibited NET formation by LPS-stimulated adult PMNs, as in 
previous experiments (Figure 1C), as did peptides eluted from the 
immunoaffinity beads, whereas immunodepleted plasma did not 
(Figure 2C). A 4- to 6-kDa candidate nNIF peptide was found in 
much higher quantity in the affinity purification eluate compared 
with the depleted plasma (Figure 2D). In parallel, we synthesized 
the 29–amino acid peptide detected in cord blood plasma (Figure 
2A) and found that this synthetic nNIF had potent NET-inhibito-
ry activity (Figure 2E). A scrambled control peptide (nNIF-SCR; 
Supplemental Table 2) did not. These results demonstrate that 
nNIF, or a larger protein that encompasses it, is an endogenous 
inhibitor of NET formation in cord blood plasma from preterm 
and term neonates (Figure 2B). Commercially available, active, 
full-length A1AT purified from human plasma and recombinant 
A1AT did not inhibit NET formation (Figure 2E), consistent with 
previous reports (33, 34), indicating that intact A1AT does not 
contribute to NET-inhibitory activity.
With an assay utilizing quantitative Western blotting with 
the anti-A1AT carboxy terminus antibody and a standard curve 
constructed with different concentrations of synthetic nNIF, we 
detected nNIF in preterm cord blood plasma samples, whereas 
it was undetectable, or detectable in only trace levels, in plasma 
from healthy adults (Figure 2B). Using the same assay, we did not 
detect a peptide of appropriate molecular mass in plasma samples 
from adult subjects (n = 10) with chronic inflammatory syndromes 
(granulomatosis with polyangiitis, giant cell arteritis, or rheu-
matoid arthritis) that might conceivably induce NET regulatory 
factors (our unpublished data). Thus, nNIF may be restricted to 
placental blood and blood of neonates in the first few days of life.
nNIF and nNIF-related peptides are a family of previously unrec-
ognized PMN modulators. We identified additional NET inhibitory 
peptides based on sequence analysis of nNIF. nNIF has substantial 
similarity to cancer-associated SCM recognition, immune defense 
suppression, and serine protease protection peptide (CRISPP) (Fig-
ure 2A), a consensus peptide based on factors present in the blood 
of patients with cancer (35–37). We synthesized CRISPP and a 
scrambled control peptide (CRISPP-SCR) and found that CRISPP 
inhibits NET formation triggered by LPS, as does nNIF, whereas 
CRISPP-SCR does not (Figure 3A). nNIF and CRISPP inhibited 
NET formation by neutrophils isolated by Ficoll-Paque and dif-
ferential centrifugation in addition to PMNs isolated by positive 
immunoselection. Posttreatment protocols demonstrated that 
nNIF and CRISPP do not degrade or dismantle previously formed 
NETs (Figure 4). Thus, they differ from DNases, which disrupt 
NETs after they are formed (2, 3, 9, 15, 38). We also examined a pre-
viously described 44–amino acid carboxy terminus cleavage frag-
ment of A1AT, A1ATm358, which is bound to matrix in the human 
placenta and overlaps in sequence with nNIF (39, 40) (Supplemen-
tal Table 2). We synthesized A1ATm358 and found that it inhibits 
NET formation, although with lesser potency than nNIF (Figure 5).
Together, these observations indicate that nNIF, CRISPP, and 
A1ATm358 represent a previously unrecognized family of nNIF- 
related peptides (NRPs) that modulate NET formation (Figures 
1–5). The presence of NRPs in umbilical blood (nNIF), placenta 
(A1ATm358), and, in some cases, adult plasma (CRISPP-related 
test this possibility, we performed “switch” experiments in which 
PMNs from 60-day-old preterm neonates were preincubated with 
stored, day 0 autologous cord blood plasma or with freshly collect-
ed autologous day-60 venous blood plasma. PMNs from healthy 
adults were preincubated in day-0 cord blood plasma or, in paral-
lel, in autologous adult plasma. Preincubation in day-0 cord blood 
plasma depressed NET formation by day-60 neonatal PMNs and 
control adult PMNs stimulated with LPS, whereas freshly isolated 
autologous plasma did not (Figure 1D). This result, and the time 
course of NET competency (Figure 1A), is consistent with a cord 
blood plasma factor that inhibits NET formation and that rapidly 
decreases in the circulation of the infant after delivery.
Preliminary experiments involving heat denaturation, pro-
teinase K treatment, and lipid extraction of cord blood plasma 
to identify the NET inhibitory factor indicated that it is a protein 
(our unpublished data). We, therefore, examined the proteomes 
of day-0 cord blood plasma and day-28 venous blood plasma from 
a preterm infant whose NET-forming capacity was determined 
in experiments summarized in Figure 1A. 2D gel electrophoresis 
demonstrated protein and peptide clusters with differential rep-
resentations in cord blood and day-28 plasma samples. Trypsin 
digest and tandem mass spectroscopic analysis of proteins from 
one of the clusters, using the NCBI human trypsin-specific data-
base (ftp:/
/ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/db/FASTA/nr.gz), yielded 
partial or complete sequences including a peptide in cord blood 
plasma with a predicted molecular mass of approximately 4 
kDa. Its sequence was identical to the sequence in the carboxy 
terminus of α-1-antitrypsin (A1AT) (Figure 2A), a known 52-kDa 
plasma protease inhibitor with antiinflammatory and immuno-
modulatory properties (31, 32). Using Western blotting with a 
polyclonal antibody raised against the carboxy terminal 18 amino 
acids of A1AT, we found an approximately 4- to 6-kDa peptide in 
term infant cord blood plasma in much greater abundance than 
in venous plasma from healthy adults (Figure 2B) that we provi-
sionally termed neonatal NET-inhibitory factor (nNIF). We then 
immunodepleted cord blood plasma using the anti-A1AT carboxy 
terminus antibody immobilized on affinity resin beads. Depleted 
Figure 3. nNIF and the NRP CRISPP inhibit in vitro NET formation 
triggered by a spectrum of NET-inducing agonists. Neutrophils from 
venous blood of healthy adults were preincubated in medium alone or 
with nNIF, CRISPP, or CRISPP-SCR (all 1 nM) for 1 hour, then activated with 
the indicated agonists (n ≥ 3 for each). NET formation (red fluorescence, 
yellow arrows) was assessed after 1 hour of incubation as in Figure 1A. All 
data are represented as ± SEM. In A, B, C, and E, control values arbitrarily 
set at 1 are indicated by dashed red lines. One-way ANOVA with Tukey’s 
post hoc testing was applied in A, B, C, and E. nNIF was not studied in C 
or D. (A) LPS, 100 ng/ml. **P < 0.05, LPS and CRISPP-SCR/LPS compared 
with control, †P < 0.05, CRISPP/LPS and nNIF/LPS compared with both 
LPS and CRISPP-SCR/LPS. (B) PMA (20 nM). *P < 0.05, both nNIF/PMA 
and CRISPP/PMA compared with PMA or CRISPP-SCR/PMA; **P < 0.01, 
CRISPP/PMA versus CRISPP-SCR/PMA. (C) S. aureus (SA; MOI 100:1).  
*P < 0.05, CRISPP/SA compared with SA or CRISPP-SCR/SA. (D) Dengue 
virus (MOI 0.05:1). Viral culture medium alone served as a “mock” control 
(left panels) for dengue virus. Following incubation, the PMNs were 
immediately fixed in the incubation medium (2% PFA) prior to imaging, 
and quantitation of histone H3 release was not possible. (E) Heme (1 μM). 
*P < 0.05, heme, LPS, and CRISPP-SCR/heme versus control; †P < 0.05, 
CRISPP/heme versus heme. Original magnification, ×20. Scale bars: 50 μm.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 7 8 8
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
peptides) suggests that NET inhibitory factors may be broadly dis-
tributed and that other NRPs may be identified.
CRISPP and nNIF inhibit NET formation induced by a spectrum 
of NET-triggering agonists. We examined the inhibitory activity of 
NRPs when NET formation is induced by diverse agonists, focus-
ing on nNIF and CRISPP. Both inhibited LPS-stimulated NET 
deployment in multiple experiments (Figure 2E, Figure 3A, and 
Supplemental Figure 2). PMA is commonly employed as a potent 
nonphysiologic agonist to induce NET formation in vitro (1, 6, 33, 
41). nNIF and CRISPP, but not CRISPP-SCR, blocked PMA-stim-
ulated NET deployment (Figure 3B). CRISPP also inhibited NET 
formation induced by live Staphylococcus aureus (2, 9, 28, 41) (Fig-
ure 3C). This result suggests that NRPs inhibit “vital” NETosis 
in addition to “suicidal” NETosis, as is triggered by PMA (3, 41), 
since S. aureus is reported to release NETs by chromatin decon-
densation and vesicular export without neutrophil lysis (3, 5, 42). 
We also examined the ability of NRPs to inhibit NETosis induced 
by other pathogens and found that CRISPP inhibited NET gener-
ation stimulated by dengue virus (Figure 3D). Several viruses trig-
ger NET deployment (43–45), but dengue, which interacts with 
ligands on myeloid cells (46), has not previously been reported 
as having this activity. To further explore the inhibitory activities 
of nNIF and NRPs, we examined heme, an endogenous damage- 
associated molecular pattern (DAMP) and toxin (47) that induced 
NETs in a murine model of sickle cell vasculopathy (17). We found 
that heme triggers NET formation by human PMNs and that nNIF 
and CRISPP inhibit this response (Figure 3E). Thus, NRPs inhib-
it NET deployment induced by microbes and microbial toxins, 
host-derived DAMPs, and pharmacologic agonists.
NRPs selectively inhibit NET formation without interrupting oth-
er key neutrophil antimicrobial functions or platelet responses. We 
examined total, phagocytic, and NET-mediated PMN killing of a 
pathogenic strain of Escherichia coli using bacterial killing assays 
and found that CRISPP depressed extracellular NET-mediated 
and total bacterial killing, but that phagocytic intracellular killing 
was not altered (Figure 6A). In additional incubations employ-
ing nNIF or CRISPP, the NRPs did not inhibit generation of ROS, 
phagocytosis, or IL-8–induced chemotaxis in Boyden chambers 
(Figure 6, B–D). Although each peptide was not tested in all assays, 
these experiments indicate that the NRPs selectively inhibit NET 
formation while leaving other key antimicrobial activities of PMNs 
intact. In addition, we found, using flow cytometry, that CRISPP 
does not inhibit surface translocation of P-selectin by thrombin- 
stimulated platelets or formation of heterotypic aggregates by acti-
vated human platelets and PMNs (Figure 6, E and F). These and 
other functions of activated platelets are important in antimicrobi-
al defense (48). In addition, interaction of activated platelets with 
neutrophils induces NET formation (13, 15). Figure 6, E and F, indi-
cates that PMNs, but not platelets, are cellular targets for NRPs and 
that platelet inflammatory activities are not disrupted by NRPs.
nNIF and CRISPP inhibit nuclear chromatin decondensation 
and histone citrullination in activated neutrophils. We used nNIF 
Figure 4. NRPs do not dismantle NETs. (A) Neutrophils 
isolated from venous blood of healthy adults were 
incubated in medium alone (control) or activated with 
LPS (100 ng/ml). CRISPP (1 nM) was added at 0, 30, or 
60 minutes after LPS, and the presence of NETs (red 
fluorescence, yellow arrows) was assessed by live cell 
imaging as in Figure 1A after an additional 1 hour of 
incubation. The images are representative of 3 separate 
experiments. Original magnification, ×20. Scale bars: 100 
μm. (B) Isolated adult neutrophils were stimulated with 
LPS (100 ng/ml, 1 hour). DNase (3.78 U/ml), nNIF (1 nM), 
or CRISPP (1 nM) was then added, and NETs were imaged 
as in A after an additional 1 hour of incubation. In a sec-
ond experiment, NETs were also intact after treatment 
with nNIF or CRISPP, but dismantled by DNase. Original 
magnification, ×60. Scale bars: 20 μm.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 7 8 9
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
and CRISPP as probes to dissect mechanisms of action for NRPs. 
Generation of ROS is thought to be essential in many, but not all, 
pathways that mediate NET formation (2, 3, 6, 18, 28, 33, 49), but 
was not inhibited by CRISPP (Figure 6B). Consistent with this 
result, our previous observations indicated that ROS supplemen-
tation is not sufficient to restore NET competency to neonatal 
PMNs (28), suggesting that nNIF also acts at a regulatory step or 
steps different from those influenced by ROS.
Decondensation of nuclear chromatin is a pivotal event that is 
required for NET formation (1–3, 5, 6, 33, 41, 49). We found that 
PMA induces decondensation and loss of lobulation of PMN nuclei 
(Figure 7A), as previously reported (6). The number of decon-
densed nuclei was dramatically reduced by nNIF and CRISPP, but 
not by nNIF-SCR or CRISPP-SCR (Figure 7A). Neutrophil chro-
matin decondensation is mediated by PAD4, which weakens his-
tone-DNA binding by catalyzing conversion of histone arginines to 
citrullines (1, 7, 8). Consistent with this, an irreversible inhibitor of 
PAD4, Cl-amidine (8), blocked nuclear decondensation under the 
conditions of our experiments (Figure 7A). We then employed a 
cell-free PAD4 assay and found that nNIF blocked its activity, as 
did Cl-amidine used as a control (Figure 7C). In an initial compar-
ison of NRPs, the order of potency of inhibition of PAD4 was nNIF 
≈ CRISPP > A1ATm358, which is the same as their relative inhibition 
of NETosis. In parallel, we examined nuclear histone H3 citrulli-
nation in activated neutrophils (1, 8) and found rapid citrullination 
detected within 15 minutes of activation with PMA. This was inhib-
ited by nNIF and by Cl-amidine (Figure 7D), suggesting that NRPs 
act at this step to block nuclear decondensation (Figure 7A).
Neutrophil elastase (NE) is also implicated in nuclear decon-
densation and NET formation (1, 2, 6, 9, 49). An NE inhibitor, 
sivelestat, blocks nuclear decondensation in vitro (Supplemental 
Figure 4). We synthesized CRISPP and CRISPP-SCR with FLAG 
tags added to the carboxy terminus of each peptide (CRISPP-F, 
CRISPP-SCR-F) and found that both are internalized by activat-
ed neutrophils (Figure 7E), that CRISPP-F inhibits NET formation 
(Supplemental Figure 3), and in a protein proximity assay, that 
CRISPP-F is initially localized within 40 nm of NE (our unpub-
lished experiments). This suggested that NRPs may block actions 
of NE in NETosis. In in vitro assays, however, neither nNIF nor 
CRISPP inhibited NE activity (Supplemental Figure 4 and our 
unpublished experiments).
NRPs inhibit NET formation in vivo and alter outcomes in sys-
temic inflammation. To determine whether nNIF and NRPs inhib-
it NET formation in vivo, we established a new model of in vivo 
NETosis using i.p. infection of C57BL/6 mice with a clinical isolate 
of E. coli. Three hours after inoculation, live cell imaging of perito-
neal fluid samples demonstrated robust NET formation. In addi-
tion, we observed deposition of NETs on the serosal surface of the 
peritoneal membranes. nNIF and CRISPP, but not CRISPP-SCR, 
inhibited NET formation by peritoneal fluid PMNs (Figure 8A) and 
deployment of NETs on the peritoneal surface (Figure 8B). Active 
peritonitis was demonstrated with increased neutrophil numbers 
and bacterial counts (Figure 8, C and D). The number of PMNs 
was greater in samples from CRISPP-treated animals, and the 
trend was to greater numbers in nNIF-treated mice (Figure 8C), 
potentially due to inhibition of lytic NETosis (2, 3). The number 
of E. coli CFUs was also greater in samples from NRP-treated ani-
mals than in those treated with the CRISPP-SCR control (Figure 
8D), suggesting decreased NET-mediated bacterial killing. nNIF 
and CRISPP also inhibited peritoneal NET formation in Swiss 
Webster mice infected with E. coli (Figure 8, E and F), suggesting 
that this result is generalizable across mouse backgrounds.
In a second model, we found that i.p. LPS triggers peritoneal 
NET formation in C57BL/6 mice, although not as robustly as do live 
E. coli, and that LPS-induced peritoneal NET formation was inhib-
ited by nNIF and CRISPP, but not CRISPP-SCR (our unpublished 
Figure 5. A1ATm358 inhibits NET formation. (A) Isolated adult neutrophils 
were preincubated in medium (1 hour) and then incubated alone (control) 
or with LPS (100 ng/ml, 1 hour), followed by live cell imaging as in Figure 
1A. Original magnification, ×60. Scale bars: 20 μm. Red fluorescence, 
yellow arrows = NETs. (B) In parallel, neutrophils were preincubated with 
synthesized A1ATm358 or scrambled A1ATm358 (A1ATm358–SCR) (1, 10, or 
100 nM, 1 hour) and activated with LPS; NETs were assessed by live cell 
imaging after incubation for 1 hour. A second experiment yielded a similar 
concentration-dependent pattern of inhibition by A1ATm358 but not 
A1ATm358–SCR. Original magnification, ×60. Scale bars: 20 μm.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 7 9 0
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
were alive when the experiment was 
terminated at 50 hours (P < 0.02). In a 
second experiment, in which nNIF was 
also examined and that was extended 
to 72 hours, there was reduced mor-
tality in the NRP-treated groups chal-
lenged with LPS compared with mice 
treated with CRISPP-SCR or LPS alone 
(n = 10 for each group) at 50 hours. Fig-
ure 9A illustrates combined data from 
the 2 experiments. At 72 hours in the 
second experiment, the survival advan-
tage provided by nNIF was durable 
 
(P = 0.007 compared with LPS alone), 
whereas that of CRISPP was not. This 
may be due to differences in pharma-
cokinetics or half-lives of nNIF and 
CRISPP under these conditions.
We also performed similar exper-
iments using the cecal ligation and 
puncture (CLP) model of polymi-
crobial sepsis (51–53). Mice treated 
with nNIF had lower clinical illness 
scores (52) at 24 hours and signifi-
cantly increased survival at 144 hours 
after CLP compared with nNIF-SCR–
treated animals (Figure 9, B and C). 
Together, these experiments (Figure 8 
and Figure 9) demonstrate that nNIF 
and CRISPP inhibit NET formation in 
vivo and provide initial evidence that 
they have beneficial effects in models 
of systemic sterile inflammation and 
infection in which NET formation may 
influence tissue injury and mortality 
(9, 13, 14, 53).
Discussion
Inflammatory pathways and immune 
mechanisms have checkpoints and 
modulatory brakes that prevent inap-
propriate initiation or unregulated 
propagation of effector events, which 
could otherwise cause pathologic col-
lateral injury to the host (54, 55). Tight 
control and modulation of inflammato-
ry responses appear to be particularly 
important in the fetus and neonate, but 
the cellular and molecular mechanisms 
involved remain incompletely defined 
(25–27, 56, 57). nNIF in umbilical cord 
blood and A1ATm358 in the placental matrix may represent regu-
latory factors that modulate NETosis in the perinatal milieu. Pla-
cental IL-8, a NETosis-inducing chemokine (41), and syncytiotro-
phoblast microparticles trigger NET formation in vitro, and NETs 
are present in placentas of women with preeclampsia (58). Thus 
NET-inducing stimuli appear to be generated at the maternal-fetal 
data). Intravascular NETs have been observed in mice challenged 
with i.p. LPS (14, 50); these cause tissue damage and contribute 
to mortality when they are induced by i.v. LPS, bacteria, or other 
agonists (9, 12, 14, 15, 17). Therefore, we examined mortality in 
mice given i.p. LPS and found that all animals treated with CRISPP 
(n = 6), but only 30% of those treated with CRISPP-SCR (n = 6), 
Figure 6. NRPs selectively inhibit NET formation. Isolated adult neutrophils or platelets were preincu-
bated with buffer or with CRISPP, nNIF, or CRISPP-SCR (1 nM, 1 hour for each), followed by measurement 
of functional responses. A minimum of 3 separate assays were completed for each response. Error bars 
represent SEM. Tukey’s post hoc testing was applied in B, D, E, and F. (A) After preincubation, neutrophils 
were stimulated with LPS (100 ng/ml) to trigger NET formation and incubated with a pathogenic isolate 
of E. coli. Total, phagocytic, and NET-mediated bacterial killing were measured (28). One-way ANOVA with 
Bonferroni’s post hoc testing. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01. (B) Reactive oxygen species generation was measured 
by dihydrorhodamine detection after LPS stimulation (100 ng/ml, 1 hour). (C) Phagocytosis of fluorescently 
labeled E. coli bioparticles was measured by microscopy after a 4 hour incubation. Treatment with cytocha-
lasin B and D served as a control for inhibition of phagocytosis. Student’s t test. *P < 0.05. (D) Chemotaxis 
in response to IL-8 (2 ng/ml) was examined in a Boyden chamber assay. The dashed line indicates the 
response to IL-8 alone arbitrarily set at 1. (E) Surface translocation of P selectin on platelets activated 
by thrombin (0.1 U/ml) was measured by flow cytometry. The dashed line indicates surface P selectin on 
unstimulated platelets. (F) Formation of platelet-neutrophil aggregates was measured after mixing of 
platelets activated with thrombin (0.1 U/ml) and neutrophils activated with LPS (100 ng/ml). The dashed 
line indicates control aggregate formation in response to LPS stimulation of the PMNs alone.  
*P < 0.05, CRISPP and CRISPP-SCR compared with control.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 7 9 1
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
thermore, nNIF and CRISPP inhibited in vivo NET formation in a 
murine model of E. coli peritonitis (Figure 8). Here, NET formation 
is likely induced by the bacteria, LPS, and host-derived mediators, 
suggesting that NRPs can inhibit NET deployment by neutrophils 
stimulated by multiple agonists that act in combinational fashion 
in a complex inflammatory milieu and that, perhaps, induce NET 
formation via more than one pathway simultaneously (3). Valida-
tion of nNIF and CRISPP as inhibitors of NET deployment in this 
model (Figure 8) also complements analysis of in vitro inhibition 
(Figure 3), since it is suggested that pathways to NET formation 
vary in vivo and in vitro (1).
We utilized nNIF and CRISPP as probes to explore the mech-
anism or mechanisms by which NRPs inhibit NET formation. 
While NETosis induced by a number of agonists involves ROS 
generation (1–4, 6, 18, 49, 66), current (Figure 6B) and previous 
(28) experiments indicate that NRPs act at a different step or 
steps. Based on all studies to date, chromatin decondensation is 
critical in NET deployment regardless of the agonist (1–3, 5, 6, 33, 
42, 49). We found that nNIF and CRISPP inhibit loss of lobules 
and expansion of nuclei in PMA-stimulated neutrophils (Figure 7A 
and Supplemental Figure 4) in an assay based on earlier studies of 
chromatin decondensation in NETosis (6). Neutrophil heterochro-
matin decondensation is mediated by PAD4, which catalyzes con-
version of histone arginines to citrullines with consequent weak-
ening of histone-DNA binding and unwinding of nucleosomes (1, 
7–9). In a cell-free assay of PAD4 activity based on examination 
of a synthetic substrate, we found inhibition by nNIF in parallel 
with Cl-amidine, an established PAD4 inhibitor (Figure 7C). This 
is consistent with inhibition of nuclear decondensation by each 
agent (Figure 7A). In live, intact human neutrophils activated 
with PMA, nNIF and Cl-amidine inhibited nuclear histone citrul-
lination, which, as expected, occurred before nuclear deconden-
sation (Figure 7D). In preliminary assays, CRISPP also inhibited 
PAD4 activity and nuclear histone citrullination (our unpublished 
experiments). Together, these findings indicate that NRPs inhib-
it nuclear decondensation and NET formation at least in part by 
inhibiting PAD4 activity and nuclear histone examination. NE is 
also thought to have a critical role in NETosis (1). NE mediates 
nuclear histone cleavage in PMA-activated neutrophils (6), inhib-
itors of NE activity block nuclear decondensation (1, 6, 33) (Sup-
plemental Figure 4) and NET formation in vivo (64), endogenous 
regulators of NE influence NETosis (33, 67), and NET generation 
is impaired in NE-deficient mice (9). Nevertheless, we found that 
NRPs do not directly inhibit NE activity in in vitro assays (Supple-
mental Figure 4 and our unpublished experiments). We do not at 
this time exclude the possibility that NRPs interrupt NE-mediat-
ed events in NETosis pathways in other ways, however. A FLAG-
tagged construct of CRISPP that inhibits NET formation (Supple-
mental Figure 3) was internalized by activated PMNs (Figure 7E) 
and was closely localized near NE in the neutrophil cytoplasm (our 
unpublished experiments), suggesting that NRPs may have more 
than one site and mechanism of action.
A central question in current inflammatory biology is whether 
NETs primarily protect the host from pathogens, and, if so, under 
what infectious circumstances, or whether they, in contrast, are 
primarily effectors or modulators of inflammatory injury (1–3, 9, 
13–20, 66, 68). Selective inhibitors of NET formation may be par-
interface, suggesting that unregulated NET formation can cause 
inflammatory pathology in the fetomaternal environment. Exces-
sive intrapartum NET formation could also have additional nega-
tive consequences, including long-term neonatal immune dysregu-
lation (2, 3, 25, 26, 56, 59). Immediately after delivery, the neonate 
is at risk for NET-mediated vascular injury and thrombosis (1–3, 9, 
13, 19, 38) triggered by microbial colonization (22, 23) and conse-
quent neutrophil mobilization (24) if NET formation is not tightly 
controlled. nNIF in neonatal plasma and the related NRP A1ATm358 
in the placental interstitium (40) represent potential “stop signals” 
(54) that selectively limit NET formation before and immediately 
after birth. Rapid development of full NET competency by neonatal 
PMNs (Figure 1) and decreased nNIF in neonatal blood in the first 
few days of extrauterine life parallel establishment of the resident 
microbiota of the human infant (22, 23) and suggest that these are 
regulated features of immune development. In our initial screens, 
nNIF was not detected or was minimally present in plasma samples 
from healthy adults or adult patients with chronic inflammatory 
syndromes (Figure 2B; our unpublished data). This suggests that 
nNIF expression may largely be a feature of the fetus and neonate, 
as are certain other immunoregulatory mechanisms (25–27). Addi-
tional studies of healthy and diseased adults, potentially with more 
sensitive assay methods, will be required to resolve this issue.
Our studies and previous observations suggest that nNIF and 
A1ATm358 are generated by proteolytic cleavage of A1AT in the pla-
centa. A1AT is abundant in human placental tissue compartments 
(60, 61). It has been proposed that progressive proteolytic cleav-
age of A1AT occurs in the placenta, and proteases that mediate 
enzymatic fragmentation of A1AT to A1ATm358 in vitro are known 
(39, 62, 63), although a specific placental protease has not been 
identified. A protease that is increased in human placental syncy-
tiotrophoblasts in the third trimester of pregnancy, high tempera-
ture requirement protease 1, cleaves A1AT in the carboxy terminus 
(61). Together, these findings suggest a mechanism for generation 
of biologically active fragments of A1AT in the placenta that would 
no longer be active after delivery and separation of the neonate. 
Nevertheless, the mechanism of generation of nNIF in the fetoma-
ternal environment and the factors that control levels of nNIF in 
cord and postnatal blood (Figure 2) remain to be defined.
In addition to nNIF and A1ATm358, we identified CRISPP as 
an NRP. CRISPP-related peptides have been detected in plasma 
from patients with multiple types of cancer (35–37), but have not 
been linked to regulation of NETosis. NET formation facilitates 
experimental metastasis (64) and may also contribute to outcomes 
in cancer-associated infection and sepsis. Thus, endogenous 
CRISPP-related peptides may have significant influences on neo-
plastic complications by inhibiting formation of NETs, an issue that 
merits investigation. In this study, however, we focused on charac-
terizing CRISPP as a lead NRP that, together with nNIF, may have 
broad relevance and utility in exploration of NET biology.
We found that nNIF and CRISPP inhibit in vitro NET deploy-
ment induced by S. aureus, the bacterial toxin LPS, a previously 
unrecognized viral trigger, dengue, a host-derived DAMP, heme, 
and the potent pharmacologic agonist, PMA. While we have not 
yet examined fungal agonists (2, 11, 65), this analysis indicates 
that NRPs interrupt NET formation triggered by diverse stimu-
li that may be mediated by distinct activation pathways (1). Fur-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 7 9 2
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 7 9 3
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
specific pathogen–free microisolator cages that were located in a room 
maintaining a constant temperature and on a 12-hour light/12-hour 
dark cycle. All treatment groups were weight matched and random-
ized to treatment at the initiation of an experiment. The researchers 
conducting the experiments were blinded to the experimental groups 
during testing. No inclusion or exclusion criteria were used in design-
ing the experiments.
Reagents. Lipopolysaccharide (E. coli serotype 0111:134 and Salmo-
nella enteriditis), poly-l-lysine, cytochalasin B, cytochalasin D, parafor-
maldehyde (PFA), sivelestat, NE, the NE substrate (MeOSuc)-AAPV- 
(pNA), and thrombin were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Additional 
reagents were as follows: TOPRO-3, phalloidin, SYTO Green (cell-per-
meable DNA stain), and SYTOX Orange (cell-impermeable DNA stain) 
(Molecular Probes); Cl-amidine (Calbiochem); DNase (Promega); 
anti-CD15-microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec); Medium-199 (Lonza), and 
micrococcal DNase (Worthington).
nNIF and NRP synthesis. nNIF, NRPs, and their specific scram-
bled peptide controls (Supplemental Table 2) were synthesized by the 
DNA/Peptide Facility, a unit of the Health Sciences Center Cores at 
the University of Utah. The core facility also verified the sequence and 
purity of the provided peptides.
PMN and platelet isolation. PMNs were isolated from ACD or 
EDTA anticoagulated venous blood from healthy adults, healthy term 
infants, and prematurely born infants (28, 30). For the 8 prematurely 
born infants from whom we collected cord and peripheral blood sam-
ples, cord and peripheral blood plasma and PMN preparations were 
obtained at 5 separate time points throughout the first 2 months of 
life. PMN suspensions (>96% pure) were prepared by positive immu-
noselection using anti-CD15–coated microbeads and an auto-MACS 
cell sorter (Miltenyi Biotec) and were resuspended at 2 × 106 cells/ml 
concentration in serum-free M-199 media at 37°C in 5% CO2/95% air. 
Human platelets were isolated as described (72).
Live cell imaging of NET formation. Qualitative assessment of NET 
formation was performed as previously reported (28, 30). Briefly, pri-
mary PMNs isolated from preterm infants, healthy term infants, and 
healthy adults (2 × 106 cells/ml) were incubated with control buffer 
or stimulated with indicated agonists or bacteria for 1 hour at 37°C 
in 5% CO2/95% air on glass coverslips coated with poly-l-lysine. 
For selected experiments, primary PMNs were preincubated with 
autologous plasma, cord blood plasma, nNIF (0.2–70 nM), CRISPP 
(0.2–70 nM), nNIF-SCR (1 nM), or CRISPP-SCR (1 nM) for 1 hour pri-
or to stimulation. After preincubation and/or stimulation, PMNs were 
gently washed with PBS and incubated with a mixture of cell-perme-
able (SYTO Green, Molecular Probes) and -impermeable (SYTOX 
Orange, Molecular Probes) DNA fluorescent dyes. Confocal micros-
copy was accomplished using a FV1000 1X81 confocal microscope 
and FluoView software (Olympus). Both 20× and 60× objectives were 
used. Z-series images were obtained at a step size 1 μm over a range of 
20 μm for each field. Olympus FluoView and Adobe Photoshop CS2 
software were used for image processing.
Imaging of dengue virus–induced NET formation. Using BSL 2 safety 
protocols, primary PMNs isolated from healthy adults (2 × 106 cells/ml) 
were incubated with mock infection buffer or live dengue virus (MOI 
0.05) as for live cell imaging. After a 1-hour incubation, the infected 
PMNs were fixed with 2% PFA for 10 minutes prior to incubation with 
fluorescently labeled, cell-permeable, and cell-impermeable DNA dyes 
and imaged as for live cell imaging using confocal microscopy.
ticularly useful in dissecting this issue in a context-specific fash-
ion and may provide experimental advantages over strategies to 
dismantle NETs with DNases, which can have incomplete effects 
under some conditions (9). Notably, nNIF and CRISPP effective-
ly inhibit NET formation by both human and murine neutrophils 
(Figure 3, Figure 8, and our unpublished experiments), whereas 
recently reported synthetic inhibitors of PAD4 have differential 
efficacy as inhibitors of NETosis by human and mouse neutrophils 
(69). In our initial analysis of outcomes when NRPs are adminis-
tered in vivo, we examined nNIF and CRISPP in mice challenged 
with LPS, which causes sterile systemic inflammation, NET for-
mation, organ damage, and mortality (13, 14, 50, 70). The NRPs 
provided an early survival advantage in this model (Figure 9A), 
suggesting that NETs are agents of inflammatory damage in the 
absence of pathogens, and a consequent requirement for their 
containment and elimination. nNIF also improved mortality in 
the CLP model of polymicrobial sepsis (Figure 9, B and C), sup-
porting existing evidence that NETs are effectors of collateral 
vascular and tissue injury in this experimental syndrome (53). 
The results in both models suggest that NET generation, like oth-
er neutrophil effector functions (54), has evolved to contain and 
eliminate pathogens, but can also injure the host if it is activated 
by pathologic inflammatory signals in the absence of infection or 
by microbes in an uncontrolled fashion. Our findings also suggest 
that NRPs have potential as antiinflammatory therapies (71) in 
specific syndromes in which NET formation contributes to acute 
or progressive pathologic inflammation.
Methods
Animal studies. Swiss Webster and C57BL/6 male mice between the 
ages of 8 and 12 weeks were purchased from Charles River Laborato-
ries or Jackson Laboratories for all experiments. Mice were housed in 
Figure 7. NRPs inhibit nuclear decondensation and histone citrullination 
in activated neutrophils. (A) Neutrophils were preincubated in medium 
alone, with nNIF, nNIF-SCR, CRISPP, or CRISPP-SCR (all 1 nM), or with the 
irreversible PAD4 inhibitor Cl-amidine (10 μM) for 1 hour, treated with PMA 
(20 nM), and then incubated on poly-L-lysine–coated coverslips for 2 hours, 
followed by examination for nuclear decondensation (arrows) by live cell 
imaging. Green fluorescence, nuclear DNA. Original magnification, ×60. 
Scale bars: 20 μm. (B) Nuclear areas were measured (n = 4) using ImageJ 
software (mean nuclear pixel area per cell ± SEM). Paired Student’s t test. 
*P < 0.05; §P = 0.057. (C) nNIF (1 nM), nNIF-SCR (1 nM), or Cl-amidine (10 
μM) was examined in a cell-free deimination assay employing recombinant 
PAD4 and a synthetic substrate. One-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc 
testing. ***P < 0.001. (D) Left panels: neutrophils were preincubated for 30 
minutes in medium, with nNIF or nNIF-SCR (both 1 nM) or with Cl-amidine 
(10 μM), activated for 15 minutes with PMA (20 nM), and citrullinated- 
histone H3 was detected by immunocytochemistry (n = 3). Green fluo-
rescence, citrullinated-histone H3; magenta fluorescence, nuclear DNA. 
Original magnification, ×60. Scale bars: 20 μm. Right panel: histone H3 
citrullination was quantified using ImageJ software (mean citrullinated- 
histone H3 pixel area per cell ± SEM) (n = 3). One-way ANOVA with Tukey’s 
post hoc testing. *P < 0.05. (E) Neutrophils were incubated with FLAG-
tagged CRISPP-FLAG or CRISPP-SCR-FLAG (1 nM for both) for 1 hour, 
activated with LPS (100 ng/ml) for a further 2 hours, and then examined by 
confocal microscopy using an anti-FLAG antibody (n = 3). Yellow fluores-
cence, FLAG tag; blue fluorescence, nuclear counterstain. Original mag-
nification, ×60. Scale bars: 20 μm. The FLAG-tagged peptides were not 
internalized by isolated human platelets (our unpublished experiments).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 7 9 4
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 7 9 5
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
against the carboxy terminal 18 amino acids A1AT (LifeSpan BioSci-
ences) coupled to resin beads from an immunoprecipitation kit pur-
chased from Thermo Fisher Scientific was then used to immunode-
plete the samples. Nonimmune IgG coupled to resin beads was used 
in parallel as a control. Plasma was diluted in lysis buffer from the kit 
and incubated with the anti-A1AT C terminus antibody–coupled beads 
or with control beads overnight at 4°C. The beads were then separated 
by centrifugation and the immunodepleted and control plasma sam-
ples collected. The A1AT C terminus antibody coupled and control 
beads were resuspended in kit-included elution buffer for 10 minutes 
at room temperature, followed by centrifugation and collection of the 
eluate and control supernatants. The eluate was analyzed by Western 
blotting (16.5% Tris-Tricine Gel, Bio-Rad) using the A1AT C terminus 
antibody and by tandem mass spectroscopy. Immunodepleted plasma 
and eluate samples were examined in assays of NET formation. Active 
full-length native and recombinant A1AT (both from Sigma-Aldrich) 
were suspended in elution buffer and tested in parallel.
Bacterial killing assay. We determined NET-mediated and phagocyt-
ic bacterial killing by primary human PMNs as previously described (28).
Chemotaxis assay. Chemotaxis by PMNs isolated from healthy 
adult donors was assessed using a modified Boyden chamber assay 
with or without a 1-hour preincubation with nNIF (1 nM), CRISPP 
 
(1 nM), or CRISPP-SCR (1 nM). Recombinant human IL-8 (2 ng/ml) 
was used as the chemoattractant. Chemotaxis through a 5-micron 
filter was determined by counting PMNs in 10 randomly selected 
high-power fields as previously described (73). In separate experi-
ments, nNIF, CRISPP, or CRISPP-SCR (all at 1 nM) were evaluated for 
chemoattractant activity using the same system.
Phagocytosis assay. PMNs were isolated from blood of healthy adult 
donors and resuspended in M-199 at a concentration of 2 × 106 cells/
ml. Leukocytes were preincubated for 60 minutes under standard 
conditions with cytochalasin D and B (10 μM), nNIF (1 nM), CRISPP 
(1 nM), or CRISPP-SCR (1 nM). Following preincubation, PMNs were 
incubated with 6 × 106 E. coli bioparticles (Molecular Probes) on a 
rotator for 4 hours at 37°C in 5% CO2/95% air. The PMNs were then 
washed and resuspended in the starting volume of M-199 before being 
spun down onto glass coverslips and fixed with 2% PFA for 10 minutes 
and permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 for 10 minutes. Leuko-
cytes were stained with WGA 555 (Invitrogen) and TOPRO-3 (Molec-
ular Probes), and randomly selected high-power visual field images 
were captured using confocal microscopy. We used ImageJ software 
(NIH) to determine the percentage of PMNs that were positive for flu-
orescently labeled E. coli bioparticles detected at 488 nm.
Reactive oxygen species generation. Human PMNs isolated from 
healthy adult whole blood were resuspended to a concentration of 
2 × 106 cells/ml in M-199 media and preincubated with or without 
CRISPP (1 nM) or CRISPP-SCR (1 nM) peptide for 1 hour at 37°C in 
5% CO2/95% air. The PMNs were then stimulated with LPS (100 ng/
ml) for 1 hour, washed, and resuspended with a dihydrorhodamine 
(7.25mM; Molecular Probes) and catalase (1000 units/ml; Sigma- 
Aldrich) mixture and incubated at 37°C for 10 minutes. After incuba-
tion, samples were placed at 4°C and analyzed for ROS-dependent flu-
orescence using flow cytometry as performed in the University of Utah 
core facility (BD, CellQuest software).
Platelet activation assays. P-selectin translocation and surface dis-
play by activated platelets (74) and formation of platelet-neutrophil 
aggregates (75) were measured as described.
Quantitation of NET formation — NET-associated histone H3 con-
tent. We determined NET-associated histone H3 content as previously 
described (30). After live cell imaging of control and stimulated prima-
ry PMNs (2 × 106/ml; various agonists), the cells were incubated with 
PBS containing DNase (40 U/ml) for 15 minutes at room temperature 
to break down and release NETs formed in response to stimulation. The 
supernatant was gently removed and centrifuged at 420 g for 5 min-
utes. The cell-free supernatant was then mixed 3:1 with 4× Laemmli 
buffer prior to Western blotting. We used a polyclonal primary antibody 
against human histone H3 protein (Cell Signaling) and infrared-conju-
gated secondary antibodies (LI-COR). Imaging and densitometry were 
performed on the Odyssey infrared imaging system (LI-COR). We pre-
viously validated this assay as a surrogate for NET formation under in 
vitro conditions (30) as employed in the current studies.
Isolation and identification of nNIF in umbilical cord blood plasma. 
Two plasma samples from a single preterm infant, one from the umbili-
cal cord blood and one from a peripheral blood sample taken on ex ute-
ro day 28, were subjected to abundant plasma protein removal (Nor-
gen) prior to 2D electrophoresis using separation first by isoelectric 
focusing (pH range 3–8) and then by size (TGX Precast Gel, Bio-Rad). 
The resulting gels were compared for differential protein content. Six 
differentially expressed protein clusters (“spots”) were sent to the Uni-
versity of Utah Proteomics Core for analysis. Following trypsin diges-
tion and tandem mass spectroscopy using an LTQ-FT ion-trap/FTMS 
hybrid mass spectrometer (ThermoElectron), candidate proteins/pep-
tides were identified as potential NET-inhibitory factors.
Affinity removal of nNIF. Plasma samples were subjected to abun-
dant plasma protein removal (Norgen). A polyclonal antibody raised 
Figure 8. nNIF and CRISPP inhibit in vivo NET formation. (A and B) 
C57BL/6 mice not pretreated or pretreated with nNIF, CRISPP, or CRISPP-
SCR (10 mg/kg i.p.; 1 hour) were inoculated with E. coli (4.5 × 107 bacte-
ria i.p.). After 3 hours, animals were sacrificed and peritoneal fluid and 
membranes collected for analysis. (A) Peritoneal fluid NET formation (red 
fluorescence, yellow arrow) assessed by live cell imaging and histone H3 
release (red dashed line, baseline arbitrarily set at 1). Three mice per group. 
Original magnification, ×60. Scale bars: 50 μm. One-way ANOVA with 
Tukey’s post hoc testing. ***P < 0.001, CRISPP and nNIF versus CRISPP-
SCR. (B) NET formation on the surfaces of peritoneal membranes (red flu-
orescence, yellow arrows) was quantified by counting the number of NETs 
that crossed standardized grid lines in 4 random microscopic fields using 
ImageJ software. Original magnification, ×60. Scale bars: 50 μm. A second 
experiment yielded a similar pattern. (C) C57BL/6 mice not pretreated (left 
2 bars) or pretreated with CRISPP, nNIF, or CRISPP-SCR were inoculated 
with E. coli i.p. as in A and B, and neutrophil numbers in peritoneal fluid 
were counted after 3 hours (3–5 mice/group). One-way ANOVA with 
Newman-Keul post hoc testing; †P < 0.05, CRISPP vs. CRISPP-SCR or not 
pretreated; *P < 0.05, control vs. all other groups. (D) C57BL/6 mice were 
pretreated with CRISPP or CRISPP-SCR and inoculated with E. coli as in 
A and B (5 animals/group). After 3 hours, bacteria CFU in the peritoneal 
fluid were measured. Single-tailed Mann-Whitney U test, *P < 0.05. (E and 
F) Swiss Webster mice not pretreated or pretreated with nNIF, CRISPP, or 
CRISPP-SCR were inoculated with E. coli i.p. as in A and B. After 3 hours, 
peritoneal fluid and membranes were collected. (E) Peritoneal fluid NET 
formation, imaged and measured as in A (10 mice/group). *P < 0.05, 
CRISPP/E. coli and nNIF/E. coli compared with CRISPP-SCR/E. coli and 
E. coli. (F) NET formation on peritoneal membrane surfaces, imaged and 
quantitated as in B (3 mice in each group). *P < 0.05, E. coli versus control 
(red dashed line); **P < 0.01, CRISPP-SCR/E. coli versus control;  
†P < 0.05, CRISPP/E. coli and nNIF/E. coli versus CRISPP-SCR/E. coli. One-
way ANOVA with Tukey’s post-hoc testing applied in E and F.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 7 9 6
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
PMNs were then spun down onto glass coverslips with 2% PFA fixation 
and 0.1% Triton X-100 permeabilization. FLAG-tagged peptide was 
detected using a monoclonal anti-FLAG antibody (Sigma-Aldrich) with 
TOPRO-3 as a nuclear counterstain.
Mouse models of E. coli and LPS-induced peritonitis. C57BL/6 or Swiss 
Webster mice were pretreated in blinded fashion with CRISPP (10 mg/
kg), nNIF (10 mg/kg), or CRISPP-SCR (10 mg/kg) by i.p. injection 1 hour 
prior to infection (E. coli, 4.5 × 107 CFU/mouse, i.p.) or inoculation (LPS, 
25 mg/kg, i.p.) (Sigma-Aldrich). Control mice were injected with saline 
alone. The mice were sacrificed in a CO2 chamber 3 hours after infection/
inoculation and the peritoneal fluid and membrane samples harvested. 
Briefly, the abdomen was disinfected and opened in the midline without 
injuring the muscle. The peritoneal cavity was lavaged with sterile saline 
solution (1 ml) and analyzed for in vivo NET formation, bacteriology, and 
leukocyte accumulation. NETs in the peritoneal fluid were qualitatively 
and quantitatively analyzed using live cell imaging with confocal micros-
copy and NET-associated histone H3 release assays. NETs on the serosal 
surface of the peritoneal membrane were assessed quantitatively using 
live cell imaging, followed by standardized grid analysis of 5 randomly 
selected high-power visual fields per tissue sample (ImageJ, NIH). We 
quantified peritoneal bacterial CFU counts by permeabilizing all recov-
ered leukocytes with 0.1% Triton X-100 for 10 minutes and performing 
serial dilutions and bacterial cultures on 5% sheep blood agar plates 
(Hardy Diagnostics). After a 24-hour incubation, bacterial counts were 
determined. Total leukocyte counts in the peritoneal lavage were deter-
mined in Neubauer chambers using an optical microscope after dilution 
in Turk’s solution (2% acetic acid). Differential leukocyte analysis was 
performed using a 60× oil immersion objective to assess morphology 
of cytocentrifuged cells stained with May-Gruenwald-Giemsa dye. All 
mice were included in the final analysis.
Mouse model of systemic inflammation induced by LPS (endotox-
emia). C57BL/6 mice were pretreated in blinded fashion with CRISPP 
(10 mg/kg), nNIF (10 mg/kg), or CRISPP-SCR (10 mg/kg) by i.p. injec-
tion 1 hour prior to and 6 hours after inoculation with LPS (25 mg/kg, 
i.p. injection). Control mice were injected i.p. with saline alone. Fluid 
resuscitation and antibiotic treatment were not used in these experi-
Nuclear decondensation assay. PMNs were isolated and resuspend-
ed to 2 × 106 cells/ml in M-199 media, preincubated with nNIF (1 nM), 
CRISPP (1 nM), nNIF-SCR (1 nM), CRISPP-SCR (1 nM), or the PAD4 
inhibitor Cl-amidine (10 μM) for 1 hour at 37°C in 5% CO2/95% air, 
and treated with or without PMA (20 nM) on poly-l-lysine–coated 
glass coverslips for 2 hours. Nuclear decondensation was identified 
as described (6). Five randomly selected high-power visual fields 
per sample were captured via confocal microscopy and analyzed for 
nuclear area using the cell-permeable, fluorescent DNA dye SYTO 
Green. The nuclear pixel areas of more than 100 individual cells per 
high-power field were determined using ImageJ software (NIH).
PAD4 activity assay. We determined nNIF inhibition of PAD4 activ-
ity using a PAD4 Inhibitor Screening Assay Kit (Cayman). Briefly, nNIF 
(1 nM) was incubated with recombinant PAD4 and PAD4 enzyme sub-
strate (2 mM) in PAD4 assay reagent for 30 minutes at 37°C. The PAD4 
inhibitor Cl-amidine (10 μM) was used as a positive control for PAD4 
inhibition. The reaction was stopped with PAD4 Stop Solution and 
detected using an included ammonia detector assay. Ammonia detector 
fluorescence was measured at 470 nm following excitation at 405 nm 
on a SpectraMax M5 fluorescence plate reader (Molecular Devices).
Histone H3 citrullination determination. Adult PMNs were stim-
ulated with PMA (20 nM) for 15 minutes at 37°C in 5% CO2/95% air 
following a 15-minute preincubation with nNIF, CRISPP, nNIF-SCR, 
or CRISPP-SCR (1 nM) or with Cl-amidine (10 μM), spun onto poly-l- 
lysine–coated slides, and examined by immunocytochemistry with 
a primary antibody used to detect human citrullinated histone H3 
(Abcam). Imaging was accomplished via confocal microscopy using a 
FV1000 1X81 confocal microscope and FluoView software (Olympus). 
Semiquantitation was accomplished using ImageJ software (NIH) to 
determine the average citrullinated histone H3 content per cell.
CRISPP peptide cellular localization. FLAG-tagged CRISPP 
(F-CRISPP) and FLAG-tagged CRISPP-SCR (F-CRISPP-SCR) peptides 
were synthesized by our core facility and detected using immunocyto-
chemistry. Adult neutrophils were preincubated with either F-CRISPP 
(1 nM) or F-CRISPP-SCR (1 nM) for 1 hour at 37°C in 5% CO2/95% 
air, followed by stimulation with LPS (100 ng/ml) for 2 hours. The 
Figure 9. nNIF and CRISPP improve survival in experimental systemic inflammation. (A) C57BL/6 mice were challenged with LPS (25 mg/kg i.p.). CRISPP, 
nNIF, or CRISPP-SCR (10 mg/kg i.p.) was given 1 hour before and 6 hours after LPS. Animals with no treatments or given LPS alone were studied in parallel  
(n ≥ 10 mice for each condition). **P < 0.01, log-rank (Mantel-Cox) statistical tool used. The survival difference between nNIF-LPS and CRISPP-LPS compared 
with CRISPP-SCR-LPS trended toward significance. §P = 0.051. (B) C57BL/6 mice were subjected to CLP. nNIF or nNIF-SCR (10 mg/kg i.p.) was given 1 hour 
before and 6 hours after surgery (n ≥ 7 in each group). Mice subjected to sham surgery were studied in parallel (n = 3 in each group). Clinical illness severity 
scores (52) were determined at 24 hours. One-way ANOVA with Newman-Keul post hoc testing; **P < 0.01, nNIF vs. nNIF-SCR groups. (C) Mice assessed for 
severity of systemic illness in B were then followed daily and survivors sacrificed at 144 hours. Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) statistical tool used. **P < 0.01.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 7 9 7
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
Study approval. The University of Utah Institutional Review Board 
approved this study (IRB nos. 0392, 11919, and 39621), and all human 
subjects provided informed consent in accordance with the Declara-
tion of Helsinki. All murine experiments performed were approved by 
the University of Utah Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee 
(no. 12-11017) in a facility approved by the American Association of 
Laboratory Animal Care.
Author contributions
CCY, ASW, and GAZ conceived of the project and designed the 
experiments. CCY and CLK performed patient phenotyping. MTR 
provided statistical expertise. MJC, HS, JAW, RAC, AVDA, CVA, 
SS, and JMF conducted experiments. RAC, AVDA, CVA, ESH, and 
JWR developed experimental tools or mouse models. CCY and 
GAZ wrote the manuscript.
Acknowledgments
We thank Diana Lim, Alex Greer, and Kendra Richardson for 
graphics assistance and manuscript preparation, Heather Major for 
discussions, Neal Tolley for technical assistance, and Michael Kay 
and John Hoidal for invaluable help with critical enzyme assays. 
This work was supported in part by the US NIH (K08HD049699 to 
CCY; K01GM103806 to JWR; R01HL126547 and R01AG048022 
to MTR, R37HL044525 to GAZ; R01HL066277 to ASW; 
U54HL112311 to MTR, ASW, and GAZ), and the Volkswagen 
Foundation (Lichtenberg Professorship to HS).
Address correspondence to: Christian Con Yost, Pediatrics, Uni-
versity of Utah School of Medicine, Williams Building, 295 Chip-
eta Way, Salt Lake City, Utah 84108, USA. Phone: 801.581.7052; 
E-mail: christian.yost@u2m2.utah.edu.
MTR’s present address is: Geriatric Research & Education Center 
(GRECC) George E. Wahlen VAMC, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
ments. Survival was assessed over 50- or 72-hour intervals. All mice 
were included in the final survival analysis.
Mouse model of polymicrobial sepsis using CLP. C57BL/6 mice were 
anesthetized with ketamine/xylazine (100 mg/kg and 10 mg/kg, i.p., 
respectively), and CLP was performed as previously described (52). 
nNIF (10 mg/kg) or nNIF-SCR (10 mg/kg) i.p. was given 1 hour pri-
or to and 6 hours after CLP surgery. The animals received subcuta-
neous sterile isotonic saline (1 ml) for fluid resuscitation immediate-
ly after the surgery. Sham-operated mice were subjected to identical 
procedures except that CLP was not done. Twenty-four hours after 
CLP, all animals were scored for clinical illness severity as previous-
ly described (52). In this assessment, higher scores reflect increased 
illness severity. Survival of mice in the nNIF
/CLP (n = 7), nNIF-SCR/
CLP (n = 8), nNIF
/sham surgery (n = 3), or nNIF-SCR/sham surgery 
 
(n = 3) groups was followed for 5 days after the surgical procedure.
NE activity assay. Synthetic fluorogenic substrate of NE (MeOSuc)- 
AAPV-(pNA) (160 μM) was incubated with bioactive NE (500 nM) 
with or without the NE inhibitor sivelestat (160 μM) or nNIF (50 nM) 
for 3 hours at 37°C. The reactions were quenched with 5% glacial ace-
tic acid and centrifuged at 18,500 RCF for 5 minutes. Chromatograms 
were obtained using an Agilent 1100 Series HPLC and a Phenomen-
ex 5 μm C18 Luna column (100 Å, 4.6 × 150 mm) over a 30-minute 
10% to 90% B gradient (buffer A 0.1% TFA in H2O, buffer B 0.1% TFA 
in ACN). Mass spectra were obtained for secondary validation of the 
reaction products using an API 3500 triple quadrupole mass spec-
trometer. Chromatograms were offset on both the x and y axes (by 0.5 
minutes and 0.1 A214, respectively) for greater visibility. Relative A214 
was determined by normalizing all of the data to the tallest HPLC peak 
displayed in each graph.
Statistics. We used GraphPad Prism statistical software (version 5) 
to analyze results. Mean ± SEM was determined for each experimental 
variable. All data used in each statistical test met the assumption of the 
specific test and were normally distributed. P < 0.05 was considered 
statistically significant.
 1. Sørensen OE, Borregaard N. Neutrophil extra-
cellular traps - the dark side of neutrophils. J Clin 
Invest. 2016;126(5):1612–1620.
 2. Brinkmann V, Zychlinsky A. Neutrophil extracel-
lular traps: is immunity the second function of 
chromatin?. J Cell Biol. 2012;198(5):773–783.
 3. Yipp BG, Kubes P. NETosis: how vital is it? Blood. 
2013;122(16):2784–2794.
 4. Brinkmann V, et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps 
kill bacteria. Science. 2004;303(5663):1532–1535.
 5. Yipp BG, et al. Infection-induced NETosis is a 
dynamic process involving neutrophil multitask-
ing in vivo. Nat Med. 2012;18(9):1386–1393.
 6. Papayannopoulos V, Metzler KD, Hakkim A, Zych-
linsky A. Neutrophil elastase and myeloperoxidase 
regulate the formation of neutrophil extracellular 
traps. J Cell Biol. 2010;191(3):677–691.
 
7. Wang Y, et al. Histone hypercitrullination 
mediates chromatin decondensation and neu-
trophil extracellular trap formation. J Cell Biol. 
2009;184(2):205–213.
 8. Li P, Li M, Lindberg MR, Kennett MJ, Xiong 
N, Wang Y. PAD4 is essential for antibacterial 
innate immunity mediated by neutrophil extra-
cellular traps. J Exp Med. 2010;207(9):1853–1862.
 9. Kolaczkowska E, et al. Molecular mechanisms 
of NET formation and degradation revealed by 
intravital imaging in the liver vasculature. Nat 
Commun. 2015;6:6673.
 10. Nauseef WM. How human neutrophils kill and 
degrade microbes: an integrated view. Immunol 
Rev. 2007;219:88–102.
 11. Bianchi M, et al. Restoration of NET formation 
by gene therapy in CGD controls aspergillosis. 
Blood. 2009;114(13):2619–2622.
 12. Xu J, et al. Extracellular histones are major 
mediators of death in sepsis. Nat Med. 
2009;15(11):1318–1321.
 13. Clark SR, et al. Platelet TLR4 activates neutrophil 
extracellular traps to ensnare bacteria in septic 
blood. Nat Med. 2007;13(4):463–469.
 14. McDonald B, Urrutia R, Yipp BG, Jenne CN, Kubes 
P. Intravascular neutrophil extracellular traps cap-
ture bacteria from the bloodstream during sepsis. 
Cell Host Microbe. 2012;12(3):324–333.
 15. Caudrillier A, et al. Platelets induce neutrophil 
extracellular traps in transfusion-related acute 
lung injury. J Clin Invest. 2012;122(7):2661–2671.
 16. Sayah DM, et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps 
are pathogenic in primary graft dysfunction after 
lung transplantation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
2015;191(4):455–463.
 17. Chen G, Zhang D, Fuchs TA, Manwani D, Wagner 
DD, Frenette PS. Heme-induced neutrophil extra-
cellular traps contribute to the pathogenesis of 
sickle cell disease. Blood. 2014;123(24):3818–3827.
 18. Lood C, et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps 
enriched in oxidized mitochondrial DNA are 
interferogenic and contribute to lupus-like dis-
ease. Nat Med. 2016;22(2):146–153.
 19. Fuchs TA, et al. Extracellular DNA traps pro-
mote thrombosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2010;107(36):15880–15885.
 20. Pillai PS, et al. Mx1 reveals innate pathways to 
antiviral resistance and lethal influenza disease. 
Science. 2016;352(6284):463–466.
 21. McDonagh S, Maidji E, Ma W, Chang HT, Fish-
er S, Pereira L. Viral and bacterial pathogens 
at the maternal-fetal interface. J Infect Dis. 
2004;190(4):826–834.
 22. Palmer C, Bik EM, DiGiulio DB, Relman DA, 
Brown PO. Development of the human infant 
intestinal microbiota. PLoS Biol. 2007;5(7):e177.
 23. Jost T, Lacroix C, Braegger CP, Chassard C. 
New insights in gut microbiota establishment 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 7 9 8
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
in healthy breast fed neonates. PLoS One. 
2012;7(8):e44595.
 24. Deshmukh HS, et al. The microbiota regulates 
neutrophil homeostasis and host resistance to 
Escherichia coli K1 sepsis in neonatal mice. Nat 
Med. 2014;20(5):524–530.
 25. Dowling DJ, Levy O. Ontogeny of early life 
immunity. Trends Immunol. 2014;35(7):299–310.
 26. Adkins B. Neonatal immunology: responses to 
pathogenic microorganisms and epigenetics 
reveal an “immunodiverse” developmental state. 
Immunol Res. 2013;57(1–3):246–257.
 27. Elahi S, et al. Immunosuppressive CD71+ erythroid 
cells compromise neonatal host defence against 
infection. Nature. 2013;504(7478):158–162.
 28. Yost CC, et al. Impaired neutrophil extracel-
lular trap (NET) formation: a novel innate 
immune deficiency of human neonates. Blood. 
2009;113(25):6419–6427.
 29. Marcos V, et al. Delayed but functional neutrophil 
extracellular trap formation in neonates. Blood. 
2009;114(23):4908–4911; author reply 4911.
 30. McInturff AM, et al. Mammalian target of rapa-
mycin regulates neutrophil extracellular trap for-
mation via induction of hypoxia-inducible factor 
1 α. Blood. 2012;120(15):3118–3125.
 31. Janciauskiene SM, Bals R, Koczulla R, Vogelmei-
er C, Köhnlein T, Welte T. The discovery of 
α1-antitrypsin and its role in health and disease. 
Respir Med. 2011;105(8):1129–1139.
 32. Jonigk D, et al. Anti-inflammatory and immuno-
modulatory properties of α1-antitrypsin without 
inhibition of elastase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2013;110(37):15007–15012.
 33. Farley K, Stolley JM, Zhao P, Cooley J, 
Remold-O’Donnell E. A serpinB1 regulatory 
mechanism is essential for restricting neutro-
phil extracellular trap generation. J Immunol. 
2012;189(9):4574–4581.
 34. Frenzel E, et al. Does augmentation with alpha1- 
antitrypsin affect neutrophil extracellular traps  
formation? Int J Biol Sci. 2012;8(7):1023–1025.
 35. Cercek L, Cercek B. Cancer-associated SCM-rec-
ognition, immunedefense suppression, and ser-
ine protease protection peptide. Part I. Isolation, 
amino acid sequence, homology, and origin. 
Cancer Detect Prev. 1992;16(5–6):305–319.
 36. Cercek L, Cercek B. Cancer-associated 
SCM-recognition, immunedefense suppres-
sion, and serine protease protection peptide. 
Part II. Immunedefense suppressive effects 
of the CRISPPs peptide. Cancer Detect Prev. 
1993;17(3):433–445.
 37. Cercek L, Cercek B. Cancer-associated SCM-rec-
ognition, immune defense suppression, and serine 
protease protection peptide. Part III. CRISPP 
peptide protection of serine proteases against 
inhibition. Cancer Detect Prev. 1993;17(3):447–454.
 38. Saffarzadeh M, Preissner KT. Fighting against the 
dark side of neutrophil extracellular traps in dis-
ease: manoeuvres for host protection. Curr Opin 
Hematol. 2013;20(1):3–9.
 39. Niemann MA, Narkates AJ, Miller EJ. Isolation 
and serine protease inhibitory activity of the 
44-residue, C-terminal fragment of alpha 
1-antitrypsin from human placenta. Matrix. 
1992;12(3):233–241.
 40. Niemann MA, Baggott JE, Miller EJ. Binding of 
SPAAT, the 44-residue C-terminal peptide of 
alpha 1-antitrypsin, to proteins of the extracellu-
lar matrix. J Cell Biochem. 1997;66(3):346–357.
 41. Fuchs TA, et al. Novel cell death program leads 
to neutrophil extracellular traps. J Cell Biol. 
2007;176(2):231–241.
 42. Pilsczek FH, et al. A novel mechanism of rapid 
nuclear neutrophil extracellular trap formation 
in response to Staphylococcus aureus. J Immunol. 
2010;185(12):7413–7425.
 43. Saitoh T, et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps 
mediate a host defense response to human 
immunodeficiency virus-1. Cell Host Microbe. 
2012;12(1):109–116.
 44. Jenne CN, et al. Neutrophils recruited to sites 
of infection protect from virus challenge by 
releasing neutrophil extracellular traps. Cell Host 
Microbe. 2013;13(2):169–180.
 45. Raftery MJ, et al. β2 integrin mediates hantavirus- 
induced release of neutrophil extracellular traps. 
J Exp Med. 2014;211(7):1485–1497.
 46. Cheung R, et al. Activation of MDL-1 (CLEC5A) 
on immature myeloid cells triggers lethal shock 
in mice. J Clin Invest. 2011;121(11):4446–4461.
 47. Gladwin MT, Ofori-Acquah SF. Erythroid 
DAMPs drive inflammation in SCD. Blood. 
2014;123(24):3689–3690.
 48. Vieira-de-Abreu A, Campbell RA, Weyrich AS, 
Zimmerman GA. Platelets: versatile effector cells 
in hemostasis, inflammation, and the immune 
continuum. Semin Immunopathol. 2012;34(1):5–30.
 49. Branzk N, Papayannopoulos V. Molecular mech-
anisms regulating NETosis in infection and dis-
ease. Semin Immunopathol. 2013;35(4):513–530.
 50. Tanaka K, et al. In vivo characterization of 
neutrophil extracellular traps in various 
organs of a murine sepsis model. PLoS ONE. 
2014;9(11):e111888.
 51. Hubbard WJ, et al. Cecal ligation and puncture. 
Shock. 2005;24(Suppl 1):52–57.
 52. Araújo CV, et al. A PPARγ agonist enhances bac-
terial clearance through neutrophil extracellular 
trap formation and improves survival in sepsis. 
Shock. 2016;45(4):393–403.
 53. Czaikoski PG, et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps 
induce organ damage during experimental and 
clinical Sepsis. PLoS One. 2016;11(2):e0148142.
 54. Nathan C. Points of control in inflammation. 
Nature. 2002;420(6917):846–852.
 55. Medzhitov R. Origin and physiological roles of 
inflammation. Nature. 2008;454(7203):428–435.
 56. Arck PC, Hecher K. Fetomaternal immune cross-
talk and its consequences for maternal and off-
spring’s health. Nat Med. 2013;19(5):548–556.
 57. Levy O. Innate immunity of the newborn: basic 
mechanisms and clinical correlates. Nat Rev 
Immunol. 2007;7(5):379–390.
 58. Gupta AK, Hasler P, Holzgreve W, Gebhardt S, 
Hahn S. Induction of neutrophil extracellular 
DNA lattices by placental microparticles and IL-8 
and their presence in preeclampsia. Hum Immu-
nol. 2005;66(11):1146–1154.
 59. Sangaletti S, et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps 
mediate transfer of cytoplasmic neutrophil anti-
gens to myeloid dendritic cells toward ANCA 
induction and associated autoimmunity. Blood. 
2012;120(15):3007–3018.
 60. Castellucci M, Theelen T, Pompili E, Fumagalli 
L, De Renzis G, Mühlhauser J. Immunohis-
tochemical localization of serine-protease 
inhibitors in the human placenta. Cell Tissue Res. 
1994;278(2):283–289.
 61. Frochaux V, Hildebrand D, Talke A, Linscheid 
MW, Schlüter H. Alpha-1-antitrypsin: a novel 
human high temperature requirement protease 
A1 (HTRA1) substrate in human placental tissue. 
PLoS One. 2014;9(10):e109483.
 62. Niemann MA, Baggott JE, Miller EJ. Inhibition of 
human serine proteases by SPAAT, the C-termi-
nal 44-residue peptide from alpha1-antitrypsin. 
Biochim Biophys Acta. 1997;1340(1):123–130.
 63. Pei D, Majmudar G, Weiss SJ. Hydrolytic inac-
tivation of a breast carcinoma cell-derived 
serpin by human stromelysin-3. J Biol Chem. 
1994;269(41):25849–25855.
 64. Cools-Lartigue J, et al. Neutrophil extracellular 
traps sequester circulating tumor cells promote 
metastasis. J Clin Invest. 2013;123(8):3446–3458.
 65. Byrd AS, et al. NETosis in Neonates: Evidence of 
a reactive oxygen species-independent pathway 
in response to fungal challenge. J Infect Dis. 
2016;213(4):634–639.
 66. Schauer C, et al. Aggregated neutrophil extracellu-
lar traps limit inflammation by degrading cytokines 
and chemokines. Nat Med. 2014;20(5):511–517.
 67. Zabieglo K, et al. The inhibitory effect of secre-
tory leukocyte protease inhibitor (SLPI) on for-
mation of neutrophil extracellular traps. J Leukoc 
Biol. 2015;98(1):99–106.
 68. Yost CC. Toward the “ideal” inhibitor of NETs. 
Blood. 2014;123(16):2439–2440.
 69. Lewis HD, et al. Inhibition of PAD4 activity is 
sufficient to disrupt mouse and human NET for-
mation. Nat Chem Biol. 2015;11(3):189–191.
 70. Wildhagen KC, et al. Nonanticoagulant hep-
arin prevents histone-mediated cytotoxicity 
in vitro and improves survival in sepsis. Blood. 
2014;123(7):1098–1101.
 71. Nathan C. Neutrophils and immunity: chal-
lenges and opportunities. Nat Rev Immunol. 
2006;6(3):173–182.
 72. Weyrich AS, et al. Activated platelets signal 
chemokine synthesis by human monocytes.  
J Clin Invest. 1996;97(6):1525–1534.
 73. Hill HR, et al. Defect in neutrophil granulocyte 
chemotaxis in Job’s syndrome of recurrent 
“cold” staphylococcal abscesses. Lancet. 
1974;2(7881):617–619.
 74. van Velzen JF, Laros-van Gorkom BA, Pop GA, 
van Heerde WL. Multicolor flow cytometry for 
evaluation of platelet surface antigens and acti-
vation markers. Thromb Res. 2012;130(1):92–98.
 75. Evangelista V, et al. Platelet/polymorphonuclear 
leukocyte interaction in dynamic conditions: 
evidence of adhesion cascade and cross talk 
between P-selectin and the beta 2 integrin 
CD11b/CD18. Blood. 1996;88(11):4183–4194.
