 Liver International 2017; 37: 159–172 
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/liv
  |  159
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. 
Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Received: 24 August 2016 | Accepted: 30 September 2016
DOI: 10.1111/liv.13272
Abstract
Between 80 and 115 million people worldwide are chronically infected with hepatitis 
C virus, with 60%- 
90% of these being undiagnosed. Untreated chronic hepatitis C 
(CHC) is associated with progressive liver disease, cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma 
and liver- 
related mortality. A number of extrahepatic manifestations are also reported 
in CHC patients, further adding to the burden of the disease. CHC also impacts pa-
tients in terms of lower health- 
related quality of life, higher levels of fatigue and re-
duced productivity. Furthermore, the later stages of disease are costly for both 
healthcare systems and society. Pegylated- 
interferon (PEG- 
IFN)+ribavirin (RBV), for 
many years the mainstay of treatment, leads to sustained virological response (SVR) in 
40%- 
70% of patients. However, a substantial number of patients are ineligible for 
treatment, and many patients fail to achieve SVR with this regimen. Furthermore, 
PEG- 
IFN+RBV leads to impairment of patient- 
reported outcomes during treatment, 
and most patients suffer from adverse events, associated with poor adherence, treat-
ment discontinuation and treatment failure. The approval of second- 
generation direct- 
acting antivirals (DAAs) has revolutionized the treatment of CHC patients. All- 
oral, 
PEG- 
IFN and RBV- 
free regimens have higher efficacy rates, shorter treatment dura-
tions, fewer adverse events, higher adherence rates and improvement in PROs from as 
early as Week 4, compared to PEG- 
IFN+RBV regimens. The aim of this article is to 
review the evidence for HCV infection as a systemic disease, summarizing the impact 
of hepatitis C and its treatments on clinical, patient and economic outcomes, with a 
focus on data from Asia and Japan specifically.
K E Y W O R D S
cost-effectiveness, hepatitis C, health-related quality of life, patient-reported outcomes, work 
productivity
1Betty and Guy Beatty Center for Integrated 
Research, Inova Health System, Falls Church, 
VA, USA
2Department of Medicine, Inova Fairfax 
Hospital, Falls Church, VA, USA
3Department of Medicine, Teikyo University 
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
4Liver Center, Saga University Hospital, Saga 
University, Saga, Japan
5Department of Gastroenterology, Liver 
Center, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea
6Hepatobiliary Division, Department of Internal 
Medicine and Hepatitis Center, Kaohsiung 
Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung 
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan
7Department of Hepatology, Graduate 
School of Medicine, Osaka City University, 
Osaka, Japan
8Department of Medicine, National University 
of Singapore, Singapore
9Costello Medical Singapore Pte Ltd, 
Singapore
10Division of Gastroenterology and 
Hepatology and Division of Clinical Pathology, 
University Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland
11Department of Internal Medicine and 
Therapeutics, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy
Correspondence
Zobair M. Younossi, MD, MPH, Betty and 
Guy Beatty Center for Integrated Research, 
Inova Health System, Claude Moore Health 
Education and Research Building, Falls 
Church, VA, USA.
Email: zobair.younossi@inova.org
Funding information
Gilead Sciences provided funding for the 
research, writing and editorial services for 
the manuscript
Handling Editor: Zobair Younossi
R E V I E W
The impact of hepatitis C virus outside the liver:  
Evidence from Asia
Zobair M. Younossi1, 2 | Atsushi Tanaka3 | Yuichiro Eguchi4 | Young-Suk Lim5 |  
Ming-Lung Yu6 | Norifumi Kawada7 | Yock Young Dan8 | Craig Brooks-Rooney9 |  
Francesco Negro10 | Mario U. Mondelli11
Abbreviations: AE, adverse event; CHC, chronic hepatitis C; CLDQ-HCV, chronic liver disease questionnaire-hepatitis C virus; DAA, direct-acting antiviral; EHM, extra hepatic manifestation; 
EQ-5D, euro-quality of life 5 dimension; FACIT-F, functional assessment of chronic illness therapy-fatigue; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; HCV, hepatitis C virus; HRQoL, health-related quality 
of life; IFN, interferon; LDV, ledipasvir; MCS, mental component score; PCS, physical component score; PEG-IFN, Pegylated-interferon; PRO, patient-reported outcome; QALY, quality-adjusted 
life-year; RBV, ribavirin; SF-36, short-form-36; SOF, sofosbuvir; SVR, sustained virological response; WPAI-SHP, work productivity and impairment index-specific health problem.
 160  |    
﻿YOUYOOSI  et  al
1 | INTRODUCTION
Worldwide, it is estimated that between 80 and 115 million people 
(representing around 1.4% of the population) are infected with hepa-
titis C virus (HCV), with 60%- 
90% of these being undiagnosed.1 More 
than 40% of these patients live in Asia, with China, Pakistan, India 
and Japan having large hepatitis C patient populations. However, the 
population figures alone do not adequately reflect the total burden 
of chronic hepatitis C (CHC) infection in the world, particularly in 
those such as Taiwan, Pakistan and Egypt where the prevalence rates 
represent substantial proportions of the population (3.3%, 5.8% and 
10% respectively). Furthermore, it is important to recognize that data 
from the countries that are most severely affected by CHC is largely 
lacking.
The clinical impacts of untreated CHC on the liver are well- 
known: long- 
term development of cirrhosis, hepatocellular car-
cinoma (HCC) and eventual liver failure. HCV infection is a clear 
risk factor for the development of cirrhosis and HCC as well as 
death because of these complications.2 However, in addition to 
the direct impacts on the liver, HCV infection is also associated 
with a number of extra- 
hepatic manifestations (EHMs). In Western 
countries, these EHMs (such as mixed cryoglobulinemia, porphyria 
cutanea tarda, type 2 diabetes and depression) occur in up to 25% 
of patients and also impact substantially on patients’ health and 
well- 
being.3
Although the clinical impact of CHC has received much attention 
worldwide, HCV also impacts patients’ lives outside of their direct 
health outcomes, in terms of their quality of life, work productivity and 
ability to complete normal daily activities.4 Furthermore, CHC also has 
a wider impact on society through the direct healthcare costs and loss 
of productivity.
While only identified 27 years ago, knowledge of hepatitis C has 
increased greatly and in recent years the emergence of second gener-
ation direct- 
acting antivirals (DAAs) with high efficacy rates, shorter 
duration of treatment, and improved safety profiles has allowed the 
medical community to not only consider curing hepatitis C in the ma-
jority of patients but also to consider its potential eradication.5 Given 
the differences in access to treatment of patients living with CHC in 
different countries, the future impact of these treatments may not be 
evenly felt throughout the world. While the prevalence of CHC may be 
declining in some countries, the morbidity and mortality of CHC is ex-
pected to increase in the coming years as the long- 
term complications 
of the disease in those currently infected will only become apparent 
in the future.6
This review article summarizes the impact of CHC from a clinical, 
patient experience and economic perspective. While much has been 
written on this subject for North America and Europe, the impact of 
CHC on Asian patients is under- 
reported and thus this article prom-
inently features the data from Asia, with a specific focus on Japan. 
In many parts of Asia, PEG- 
IFN+RBV remains (as of 2016) first- 
line 
therapy for CHC and thus where available, data for both DAAs and 
PEG- 
IFN+RBV are presented and discussed.
2 | CLINICAL ASPECTS OF CHRONIC 
HCV INFECTION
2.1 | Impact on the liver
In 10%- 
20% of cases, initial HCV infection is spontaneously resolved 
and cleared by patients.7 However, in the majority of patients, chronic 
liver disease develops, characterized by inflammation leading to fibrosis, 
cirrhosis and the development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and 
eventual end- 
stage liver disease.8 From Western studies it is estimated 
that 15%- 
20% of CHC patients will develop cirrhosis, and those with cir-
rhosis have an annual risk of between 1% and 4% for developing HCC.8,9
In Japan, HCV infection accounts for approximately 70% of HCC 
cases, substantially higher than in Western countries.10-12 Untreated 
Japanese CHC patients have a risk of 2.7%- 
3.2% per year for the devel-
opment of HCC, with the incidence rate being significantly associated 
with the degree of fibrosis (0.5% in patients with F0 or F1 fibrosis rising 
to 7.9% in patients with F4 fibrosis).13, 14 While in Europe and North 
America CHC patients are more likely to develop hepatic failure than 
HCC, Japanese patients with CHC are more likely to develop HCC.15 In 
part this reflects the unique demographics of Japanese CHC patients, 
who are older than those in Western countries and are therefore at a 
higher risk of developing HCC.16 The mean age of CHC patients included 
in a 2009- 
2013 evaluation was 58 years, with 30% of patients being 
aged 65 or older; in contrast, CHC patients included in a 2016 database 
study from the USA were, on average, 50 years old.17, 18 However, it is 
possible that after age- 
 and genotype adjustment, the incidence of HCC 
in Japan and European patients with CHC may be similar.19
Given the natural course of CHC infection, a key objective of treat-
ment has been to achieve sustained virological response (SVR) in order 
to potentially avoid the long- 
term complications of CHC. Results from 
Western and Asian studies demonstrate that patients who achieve 
SVR have significantly better long- 
term outcomes than those who do 
not achieve SVR.20 A meta- 
analysis of numerous studies reported that 
Key points
• Chronic hepatitis C (CHC) is a systemic disease, present-
ing with both hepatic and extrahepatic manifestations, 
impairments in patient-reported outcomes and large 
costs for healthcare systems and society as a whole.
• Data from Asia shows that Asian patients experience a 
similar burden of CHC as Western patients.
• Sustained eradication of HCV is associated with improved 
clinical outcomes, reduced patient burden and the avoidance 
of the long-term costs of managing advanced liver disease.
• All-oral regimens, incorporating second-generation di-
rect-acting antivirals have higher efficacy rates, lower 
adverse events, shorter treatment durations, higher ad-
herence levels and better patient-reported outcomes 
than Pegylated-interferon and ribavirin regimens.
     |  161
﻿YOUYOOSI  et  al
achieving SVR is associated with a reduced risk of developing HCC (rel-
ative risk of 0.24 [95% confidence interval (CI) 0.18- 
0.31]) compared to 
patients who do not achieve SVR.20 Furthermore, a study of patients 
in Taiwan showed a significantly lower risk of developing cirrhosis in 
patients who achieved SVR.21 Ultimately, these outcomes translate 
into lower mortality rates for patients achieving SVR compared to 
those who do not achieve SVR: 1.98% (95% CI: 1.0%- 
3.5%) vs 7.75% 
(95% CI: 5.9%- 
11.0%) 5- 
year mortality rates in general CHC patients, 
and 4.9% (95% CI: 3.5%- 
7.3%) vs 15.9% (95% CI: 11.4%- 
21.8%) in 
cirrhotic patients.22 Numerous studies in Japan have also confirmed 
the benefits of achieving SVR on long- 
term outcomes in Japanese pa-
tients.13, 16, 22, 23 Given the benefits of treating patients, the 2016 clin-
ical practice guidelines published by the Japan Society of Hepatology 
recommend that all patients with CHC, except those with decompen-
sated cirrhosis, are eligible for antiviral therapy.24 It is important to 
note that the long- 
term benefits of SVR have primarily been derived 
from studies of patients treated with interferon- 
based regimens; there 
is a lack of long- 
term data for SVR achieved with DAAs. Although there 
are some cautionary notes about the applicability of the benefit of SVR 
in patients who are treated for HCC,25 it seems that most patients 
achieving SVR with DAAs can expect long- 
term benefits.26
2.2 | Extra- 
hepatic manifestations
The effects of chronic HCV infection are not limited solely to the liver. 
While less has been written on the subject of EHMs, a number of re-
cent publications have presented the prevalence, morbidity, mortality 
and burden of EHMs.3, 27, 28 Over the years, a wide range of EHMs 
have been described in patients with chronic HCV infection. A recent 
meta- 
analysis provided pooled prevalence estimates for a number of 
these manifestations.3 Patients with HCV have a greater risk of mixed 
cryoglobulinemia, chronic kidney disease/end- 
stage renal disease, 
type 2 diabetes, lymphoma, lichen planus, Sjögren’s syndrome, por-
phyria cutanea tarda, inflammatory arthritis, depression, cardiovascu-
lar disease and stroke (Table 1).3 Furthermore, in Japanese patients 
specifically, a study of EHMs in CHC patients found that 66% of pa-
tients experienced one or more EHMs.29
The presence of EHMs not only adds further, non- 
hepatic mor-
bidity to CHC patients, but also leads to increased, non- 
hepatic mor-
tality.28, 30 It can therefore be seen that the clinical burden of chronic 
HCV infection on patients is substantial, in terms of the long- 
term, 
direct impacts on the liver as well as the presence of EHMs. However, 
the impact of CHC and its EHMs is wider than simply the clinical 
symptoms and outcomes. They also have a direct, negative impact 
on patients’ well- 
being, daily activities and workplace productivity. 
Comparatively little data have been published on EHMs in Asian CHC 
patients, thus this remains an area of further research.
3 | PATIENTS’ EXPERIENCE WITH 
HCV INFECTION
While clinical outcomes such as SVR are the primary endpoints of most 
clinical trials in CHC, they do not provide a measure of a patient’s ex-
perience with their disease and treatment. Patients who achieve SVR, 
usually report improvements in fatigue, in their mood or in performing 
their daily activities.31 Thus, patient- 
reported outcomes (PROs) are a 
set of tools that provide health care providers and researchers with 
direct measures of a patient’s health condition, without interpretation 
by a clinician or other party.32
The term ‘PRO’ describes a variety of outcomes measuring differ-
ent aspects of a patient’s experience.33 Individual diseases will impact 
PROs differently and therefore the relevance of PROs in a particular 
disease area will depend on which aspects of patients’ lives are most 
impacted by the disease. In patients with CHC, the main PROs rou-
tinely measured are those reporting fatigue, health- 
related quality of 
life (HRQoL) and work productivity.4 Below we summarize the key 
PROs evaluated in CHC patients, however, a recent systematic review 
of patient- 
reported outcomes in HCV presents a more in- 
depth dis-
cussion on this subject.4
TABLE 1 Risk of selected EHMs in HCV infected patients compared to those without HCV3
EHM
Pooled prevalence in HCV 
patients (95% CI)
Pooled prevalence in non- 
HCV 
populations (95% CI)
Risk of condition in HCV patients 
compared to non- 
HCV patients (95% CI)
Mixed cryoglobulinemia
30.1% (21.4%- 
8.9%)
1.9% (0.4%- 
3.4%)
OR: 11.50 (4.56- 
29.00)
Depression
24.5% (14.1%- 
34.9%)
17.2% (13.4%- 
21.0%)
OR: 2.30 (1.31- 
4.01)
Type 2 diabetes mellitus
15% (13%- 
18%)
10% (6%- 
15%)
OR: 1.58 (1.30- 
1.86)
Sjögren’s syndrome
11.9% (7.6%- 
16.2%)
0.7% (0.00%- 
3.3%)
RR: 2.29 (0.19- 
27.09)
Lichen planus
1.9% (1.2%- 
2.5%)
1.1% (0.3%- 
1.8%)
RR: 2.27 (1.41- 
5.66)
Inflammatory arthritis
1% (0.00%- 
2.0%)
0.09% (0.00%- 
0.09%)
OR 2.39 (1.52- 
3.77)
Porphyria cutanea tarda
0.5% (0.1%- 
0.8%)
0.00% (0.00%- 
0.01%)
OR: 8.53 (4.15- 
17.52)
Chronic kidney disease/ 
end stage renal disease
10.1% (6.7%- 
13.4%)
7.6% (4.7%- 
10.5%)
RR: 1.23 (1.12- 
1.34)
Lymphoma
NR
NR
RR: 1.60 (1.34- 
1.86)
Cardiovascular disease
NR
NR
OR 1.20 (1.03- 
1.40)
Stroke
NR
NR
OR 1.35 (1.00- 
1.82)
EHM extrahepatic manifestations, HCV hepatitis C virus, CI confidence interval, OR odds ratio, NR not reported, RR risk ratio.
 162  |    
﻿YOUYOOSI  et  al
3.1 | Health- 
related quality of life
Different from ‘quality of life’, which measures the impact of all factors 
(environmental, developmental, cultural, health etc.) on an individual, 
HRQoL focuses instead on the specific impacts of a disease on patients 
in terms of their physical and mental health as well as their functioning 
and social interactions.34 A multitude of tools have been developed 
to assess HRQoL. These are broadly split into generic tools, which 
can be applied to patients irrespective of their disease, and disease- 
specific tools, which have been designed to assess the specific aspects 
of a condition that are deemed important to patients.33 Amongst ge-
neric tools, the Short Form- 
36 (SF- 
36) and the Euro- 
Quality of Life 
5 Dimension (EQ- 
5D) are most commonly used.35, 36 The Chronic 
Liver Disease Questionnaire- 
Hepatitis C Version (CLDQ- 
HCV) is 
the predominant disease- 
specific tool to assess HRQoL in hepatitis 
C  
patients.37 It is important to note that SF-36, EQ-5D, CLDQ and 
CLDQ-HCV have been translated in a number of countries,
including Japan and some of other Asian countries.38, 39, 40 The key 
characteristics and scoring methods of these tools are summarized in 
Table 2.
Generic tools have the advantage of being able to compare scores 
for patients with a disease against the scores for the general popula-
tion, as well as to compare to patients with other diseases. However, 
some aspects of the generic items may not be relevant for certain 
diseases, and therefore disease- 
specific tools may provide a more 
responsive and sensitive measure of HRQoL of patients in a specific 
disease area.33 The main limitation of disease- 
specific tools is that 
scores from these tools do not allow comparisons with scores from 
other disease areas.
While tools assessing HRQoL are primarily aimed at evaluating 
the impact of a disease on HRQoL, many other factors also impact 
patients’ HRQoL. For example, patients with similar disease states but 
with different demographics (eg, age, gender, socioeconomic status 
etc.) may report different scores when assessed with HRQoL tools.41-
43 Aside from demographics, cultural background also impacts pa-
tients’ experience of their disease and treatment and thus will affect 
the scores reported via HRQoL tools.44, 45 This means that if there are 
differences in patient populations between countries, such as in age 
or culture, then such patient groups may experience diseases differ-
ently and thus would not necessarily report the same HRQoL scores. 
As already noted, Japanese CHC patients tend to be older than in 
other countries and thus they may report different impacts on their 
HRQoL than patients from other countries. It is therefore important 
for doctors to review HRQoL data from studies conducted in their 
country in order to fully understand the impact of a disease on their 
patients.
TABLE 2 Summary of tools used to assess HRQoL in CHC patients
Tool
Number of items
Aspects measured
Scoring
Short form- 
36  
(SF- 
36)35, 102
36 items
• Physical functioning (10 items)
• Role limitations because of physical 
health problems (4 items)
• Role limitations because of emotional/
personal problems (3 items)
• Energy/fatigue (4 items)
• Emotional well-being (5 items)
• Social functioning (2 items)
• Pain (2 items)
• General health (5 items)
Each item is scored according to a scoring grid. 
Scores are between 0 and 100.
Scores for each dimension are derived by averaging 
the scores of the component items. Scores are 
between 0 (poorest health) and 100 (best health).
Two summary scores (physical component score 
[PCS] and mental component score [MCS]) 
combine the scores of all items, weighted for their 
relevance to physical (PCS) or mental (MCS) health 
respectively.
Euro- 
QoL 5 Dimensions 
(EQ- 
5D)36
5 items
• Mobility
• Self-care
• Usual activities
• Pain/discomfort
• Anxiety/depression
Each item is scored on a scale of 1 (full health) to 3 
(worst health). The scores are then expressed 
according to their individual components (eg, 
11111 represents a patient with full health across 
all items).
These scores can be translated into an overall 
utility value of 0 (dead) to 1 (full health). States 
lower than 0 (denoting states ‘worse than death’) 
may be obtained.
Chronic Liver Disease 
Questionnaire (CLDQ)103
29 items
• Abdominal symptoms (3 items)
• Fatigue (5 items)
• Systemic symptoms (5 items)
• Activity (3 items)
• Emotional function (8 items)
• Worry (5 items)
Each item is scored on a scale of 1- 
7, with higher 
scores indicating better HRQOL.
Items are grouped into the respective domains and 
scores averaged to produce a summary score for 
each domain.
An overall summary score is calculated by taking 
the mean of the scores for all items.
CLDQ-HCV105
29 items
• Activity/energy (6 items)
• Emotional (9 items)
• Worry (8 items)
• Systemic (6 items)
CLDQ-HCV is scored in similar fashion to CLDQ 
(see above)
HRQoL health- 
related quality of life, CHC chronic hepatitis C.
     |  163
﻿YOUYOOSI  et  al
3.2 | Fatigue
Fatigue is commonly reported by CHC patients, with 69% of untreated 
CHC patients in France and 52% of patients in the USA reporting 
the presence of fatigue.46, 47 The FACIT- 
F (Functional Assessment of 
Chronic Illness Therapy- 
Fatigue) tool is a widely used, generic question-
naire comprising 13 items assessing the presence and impact of fatigue. 
Each item is scored by patients between 0 and 4, with higher scores 
representing lower levels of fatigue.48 The FACIT- 
F has been used in 
clinical trials in hepatitis C and has been translated into Japanese.49-51
3.3 | Work productivity loss and activity impairment
The concept of work productivity loss describes the losses in an em-
ployed setting because of the impact of a disease on a patient. Such 
losses are predominantly because of either absenteeism or presentee-
ism. Absenteeism is a measure of the work that is not completed because 
of absence from work because of disease.52 Presenteeism on the other 
hand measures the work that is not completed because of lower produc-
tivity at work because of disease.52 Previously, absenteeism was seen as 
the main determinant of productivity loss because of disease; however, 
presenteeism is now recognized as at least of equal importance.52
In addition to the impact on productivity at work, a disease may also 
impair other, non- 
work activities such as studying, housework, child-
care and exercising. The impact of a disease on such activities would 
have a negative effect on patients’ lives and therefore it is important 
that impacts on both work and non- 
work activities are considered.
The Work Productivity and Impairment Index- 
Specific Health 
Problem (WPAI- 
SHP) questionnaire is a generic tool consisting of five 
items evaluating the impact of a disease on patients’ work productiv-
ity, and one item on the impact on normal daily activities.53 Higher 
scores indicate a higher degree of impairment, with 1 indicating total 
impairment and 0 representing no impairment.53 The tool has been 
used and validated across a number of disease areas, including hepati-
tis C, and has been translated into Japanese.51, 54-56
Following on from this introduction to the key PROs studied in 
CHC patients, the subsequent sections summarize the data available 
for these PROs in: untreated patients, patients undergoing treatment 
and in patients after treatment has been completed. Where available, 
data from Japan and Asia are specifically highlighted.
3.4 | PROs in untreated CHC patients
CHC has a substantial, negative impact on patients throughout the 
course of their disease. Prior to diagnosis, patients with hepatitis C 
have lower HRQoL scores than the general population across 7 of 8 
domains of the SF- 
36; findings which were maintained when patients 
were notified of their diagnosis.57 Thus, the impact on HRQoL in CHC 
patients with mild liver disease is at least in part due directly to the 
infection, rather than purely the psychological impact of diagnosis, and 
CHC affects HRQoL even at a stage when it is typically asymptomatic.8
Fatigue and cognitive impairment have been found to be significant 
determinants of impaired HRQoL.58 A study of mostly non- 
cirrhotic 
hepatitis C patients in Brazil reported that 32% of patients had depres-
sive disorders and that all patients reported fatigue, with more than 
50% of patients reporting mild or moderate fatigue.58 Higher scores 
on PRO tools assessing depression and fatigue were correlated with 
worse HRQoL, thus highlighting the impact of these comorbid condi-
tions on the HRQoL of CHC patients.58
As the severity of liver disease progresses, impairment of PROs 
worsens. An analysis of Thai patients with chronic liver disease (19% 
of whom had CHC) demonstrated that more severe liver disease (as 
measured by the Child- 
Turcotte Pugh score) was associated with lower 
HRQoL (measured by both the SF- 
36 and the CLDQ).59 This associa-
tion has also been reported in other studies.59, 60 In particular, compli-
cations associated with decompensated cirrhosis and end- 
stage liver 
disease, such as hepatic encephalopathy and ascites, have a substan-
tial, negative impact on patients’ HRQoL.61,62
In Asia, there are fewer studies to have examined PROs in CHC pa-
tients. Given the cultural and demographic differences between Asian 
and Western countries, it is important to consider the data available 
from Asian countries in order to understand specifically how CHC im-
pacts patients in these countries. A study of untreated CHC patients 
in Taiwan reported significant impairment in six out of eight domains 
of the SF- 
36 compared to the general population.63 Both the mental 
and physical component summary scores were lower for these patients, 
indicating that untreated CHC impacts physical and mental aspects of 
Asian patients’ HRQoL.63 An analysis of data from the Japan National 
Health and Wellness survey compared the HRQoL of 306 CHC pa-
tients with a set of matched controls from the Japanese general pop-
ulation. Compared to these controls, CHC patients had significantly 
lower scores for the domains of bodily pain, general health and men-
tal health. Furthermore, the validation study of the CLDQ in Japanese 
chronic hepatitis C and B patients noted particular impairment in the 
domains of ‘worry’ and ‘emotional function’, compared to physician 
domains.40 Similarly, a study comparing Japanese and American CHC 
patients showed lower mental health, but higher physical health, scores 
in Japanese compared to American patients.64 The results from these 
studies show that Japanese CHC patients have lower HRQoL than pa-
tients without CHC and that Japanese patients experience more of a 
decrement in their mental health compared to Western patients.64, 65 
Given the potential stigma associated with mental health conditions, 
such impairments may not always be proactively reported by patients.
3.5 | PROs in CHC patients receiving treatment
The other major determinant of a patient’s disease experience is the impact 
of treatments for the disease. In recent years, the number of treatments 
available for CHC has expanded considerably, and thus it is important to 
consider not only the clinical efficacy when evaluating treatments but also 
the impact of treatments on PROs. The following paragraphs summarize 
the impact on PROs of three categories of CHC regimens: those contain-
ing interferon and ribavirin (IFN+RBV); those containing RBV but not IFN 
and IFN+RBV free regimens (ie, the all- 
oral, 2nd generation DAAs).
Studies in both Western and Asian countries have demonstrated 
that CHC patients receiving IFN+RBV- 
containing regimens have worse 
 164  |    
﻿YOUYOOSI  et  al
PROs than untreated CHC patients.31, 63, 66 The previously mentioned 
study of CHC patients in Taiwan also included a group of patients re-
ceiving PEG- 
IFN treatment. These patients not only had lower HRQoL 
scores than the general population but also significantly lower scores 
than similar CHC patients not receiving treatment, in the domains of 
role ‘physical’, ‘vitality’, ‘role emotional’ and ‘mental health’.63 A study in 
Japan also reported that CHC patients receiving IFN- 
α- 
based therapy 
had lower scores than untreated CHC patients for both the physical 
and mental component HRQoL summary scores.66 Patients receiving 
treatment also had worse scores in terms of ‘health distress’, ‘wellbe-
ing’, ‘hepatitis limitations’ and ‘hepatitis distress’ and had work produc-
tivity and activity impairment. The results from these studies clearly 
show that therapies containing IFN+RBV have a severe impact on the 
HRQoL and work productivity of Asian CHC patients.
It has been suggested that the occurrence of adverse events (AEs) 
in patients receiving IFN+RBV- 
containing regimens is a key factor in-
fluencing the impairment of PROs during treatment.4 Patients receiv-
ing IFN- 
α- 
based therapy in Japan on average experienced 6 AEs during 
treatment, including fatigue (79% of patients), flu- 
like symptoms (73%), 
depression/sadness (62%), dyspnoea (62%), muscle weakness (60%), 
anaemia (57%), headache (56%) and skin rash (55%).66 The presence of 
these AEs was associated with significantly lower mental and physical 
component HRQoL summary scores Table 3. Moreover, work impair-
ment in patients experiencing AEs was almost double compared to pa-
tients not reporting AEs. Therefore, it would seem that the impairment 
in HRQoL in patients receiving IFN- 
α- 
based regimens is very much in-
fluenced by the occurrence of AEs; a particular concern in Japan where 
patients are older and thus perhaps more sensitive to AEs.66
With the introduction of new therapies for CHC, interferon is being 
gradually replaced by either all- 
oral, IFN+RBV- 
free regimens, or regimens 
combining the second generation DAAs with RBV alone. These regimens 
are associated with higher efficacy and better PROs than IFN+RBV, al-
though the presence of RBV still has a negative effect on PROs.31
A recent analysis of data from eight clinical trials showed that pa-
tients receiving IFN+RBV regimens had substantial decreases in PRO 
scores at 4 weeks after treatment initiation (mean normalized change 
across all PROs: −9.7 from baseline), consistent with the studies pre-
viously described.31 Patients receiving IFN- 
free, RBV- 
containing regi-
mens also experienced decreases in PROs, but to a much lesser extent 
(mean normalized change: −1.9). On the other hand, patients receiving 
IFN+RBV- 
free regimens experienced significant improvements from 
baseline (mean normalized change: +2.1).31 By the end of treatment, 
the changes from baseline for all treatment groups were more pro-
nounced than at Week 4: IFN+RBV patients had lower scores, IFN- 
free, RBV- 
containing patients had lower scores and IFN+RBV patients 
had greater improvements. AE rates were highest in patients receiving 
IFN+RBV regimens, lower in those receiving IFN- 
free, RBV- 
containing 
regimens and lowest in those receiving IFN+RBV- 
free regimens. 
Indeed, 53.1% of IFN+RBV- 
free patients had no treatment- 
emergent 
AEs, compared to 28.2% of RBV- 
containing patients and only 8.6% of 
IFN+RBV patients.31 Results from the pan- 
genotypic, all- 
oral DAA regi-
men of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir further support the possibility of achiev-
ing improvement in PROs within 4 weeks of initiating treatment.50
These results have also been confirmed in Japanese CHC patients. 
An analysis of HRQoL data from two Japanese clinical trials showed 
that patients receiving IFN+RBV- 
free regimens (ledipasvir/sofosbuvir, 
LDV/SOF) had higher physical and mental component summary scores 
and lower levels of fatigue than those patients receiving treatments 
containing RBV (SOF+RBV or LDV/SOF+RBV).67,68 Improvements 
over baseline scores were noted for RBV- 
free patients from as early 
as Week 4 during treatment, compared to decrements for those re-
ceiving RBV- 
containing regimens (Figure 1). By the end of 12 weeks 
of treatment, patients receiving RBV- 
free regimens had significant im-
provements in both the Physical Component Score (PCS) and Mental 
Component Score (MCS), whereas patients receiving RBV- 
containing 
regimens had significantly lower MCS scores compared to baseline 
values. As expected, more patients receiving RBV- 
containing regi-
mens experienced AEs compared to RBV- 
free patients (46% vs 22% 
respectively).
Clearly therefore, both IFN and RBV lead to impairment of PROs 
during treatment.31 While IFN seems to have the biggest impact on 
PROs, the results for regimens containing RBV but not IFN show that 
RBV also has a negative impact, which has perhaps previously been 
obscured when combined with IFN. In contrast, IFN+RBV- 
free regi-
mens not only avoid impairment in PROs but actually lead to improve-
ments in PROs as early as Week 4 after initiating treatment, including 
in Asian patients.31, 67 This is particularly encouraging for CHC patients 
in countries such as Japan, where such patients may have failed mul-
tiple previous rounds of therapy, having likely encountered numerous 
AEs and experienced impairments in their HRQoL and other PROs. 
Such patients may be reluctant to receive further treatment, for fear 
of again having a poor treatment experience. Thus, PRO data for 
IFN+RBV- 
free therapies should be discussed with patients in order 
to provide reassurance that with such regimens they can expect to 
quickly experience improvements in their PROs, as well as benefiting 
from the efficacy of these regimens and the potential avoidance of the 
long- 
term complications of CHC: cirrhosis, HCC and end- 
stage liver 
disease.
FIGURE 1 PCS and MCS scores for Japanese patients receiving 
12 weeks of treatment with or without RBV.67 [Colour figure can be 
viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
51
52
53
54
55
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
Quality of life summary scores
Week
PCS: RBV-containing
MCS: RBV-containing
PCS: RBV-free
MCS: RBV-free
     |  165
﻿YOUYOOSI  et  al
3.6 | PROs in CHC patients following treatment
The introduction of the second generation DAAs has substantially in-
creased SVR rates to ~95% in most populations of CHC patients, such 
that SVR is a realistic goal for the majority of patients.69 As such, the 
focus of the following paragraphs is on the PROs of patients who achieve 
SVR. However, it is worth noting that patients who do not achieve SVR 
have substantially lower PROs than those achieving SVR, further rein-
forcing the importance of SVR as a treatment objective.31, 70-73
A concern often expressed when discussing PROs in CHC patients 
is that PRO improvements in patients who achieve SVR may be be-
cause of the ‘euphoria’ of being cured and may not reflect actual un-
derlying improvements in the disease.31 By Week 12 post- 
treatment, 
Western and Japanese patients who achieved SVR had improvements 
across a number of PROs, irrespective of the treatment regimen re-
ceived.31, 67 However, the improvements were higher for patients 
receiving IFN+RBV- 
free regimens compared to those receiving 
IFN+RBV- 
containing regimens. At Week 24, rather than decreasing 
as might be expected if these were because of the euphoria of being 
cured, the improvements increased further, thus demonstrating these 
improvements to be significant, enduring and to represent a substan-
tial change in the underlying disease as experienced by patients. Most 
recently, PRO data from a placebo- 
controlled trial of an all oral DAA 
regimen for HCV was published.50 This study reported improvement 
of PROs during active treatment but not with placebo, thus indicating 
that improvement in PROs is not related to the ‘euphoria’ of receiving 
treatment but is related to viral suppression.50
An emerging area of research in this field relates to understanding 
the processes behind the deterioration and subsequent improvement 
of PROs in CHC patients, with a particular focus on neurological and 
cognitive impairments. A number of hypotheses have been advanced, 
including: the possibility of a direct effect of HCV replication in the 
brain and central nervous system on cognitive function; an indirect 
impact of HCV- 
driven inflammation, and dysregulation of neuronal 
metabolic function.74 Differing levels of evidence support each of 
these hypotheses, although the strongest evidence currently supports 
the view that the inflammatory response to HCV infection (in particu-
lar, the production of proinflammatory cytokines) plays a major role in 
cognitive dysfunction.75 Thus, from a mechanistic perspective, as the 
HCV virus is eliminated during treatment, the associated inflammatory 
response would be expected to be resolved, leading to improvement 
in cognitive function and in other PROs.
3.7 | Bridging the gap between clinical trials and 
clinical practice
In addition to helping patients understand how treatment regimens 
might affect their lives, PROs are also useful for health care provid-
ers in interpreting the results from controlled clinical trials in the 
context of daily clinical practice. The gap between the efficacy of 
treatments in clinical trials and their effectiveness in clinical prac-
tice is well- 
established.76 In hepatitis C, lower SVR rates have been 
reported in real- 
life studies compared to clinical trials of patients 
receiving PEG- 
IFN+RBV with first generation protease inhibitors.77 
A number of factors can account for the lower SVR rates in real- 
life, 
however, treatment adherence is considered the most important fac-
tor.4 Numerous studies have demonstrated the link between differ-
ent forms of non- 
adherence (missing doses, early discontinuation of 
a regimen, interruptions during a regimen etc.) and lower SVR rates 
in both Western and Asian CHC patients treated with IFN+RBV- 
containing regimens.66, 78, 79
The occurrence of AEs is an important factor influencing adherence 
to treatment. A Japanese study of patients receiving IFN- 
α- 
based ther-
apy showed that patients experiencing AEs not only had lower HRQoL 
and work productivity scores, but they also had significantly lower treat-
ment adherence rates Table 3.66 In particular, patients with depression, 
flu- 
like symptoms, skin rashes and fatigue were half as likely to have 
high medication adherence as those without these AEs. Other studies 
have also demonstrated that the occurrence of depression and fatigue 
during IFN+RBV treatment is associated with treatment discontinua-
tion and/or low adherence and that low adherence levels are associated 
with failure to achieve SVR.80-82 Furthermore, the fear of AEs itself has 
been identified as a key factor in the decision of Taiwanese CHC pa-
tients not to commence PEG- 
IFN+RBV treatment.83
Given the link between PROs, treatment adherence and SVR rates, 
the importance of comparing the PROs for different therapeutic regimens 
can thus be appreciated from a practical level—PROs provide an under-
standing of factors such as depression, fatigue and poor HRQoL that may 
lead to low adherence, and thus PRO tools could allow patients to be 
proactively targeted in order to improve adherence and optimize treat-
ment outcomes. Furthermore, it is now clear that the negative impact of 
IFN+RBV during treatment drives poor adherence, poor outcomes and 
that given alternative, IFN+RBV- 
free regimens without such detrimental 
impacts, it is important that PROs are part of the consideration when 
choosing the most appropriate treatment options for patients.
4 | ECONOMIC ASPECTS OF 
HCV INFECTION
As well as the clinical and patient- 
reported impairments associated with 
HCV infection, the disease also leads to economic impacts on patients, 
healthcare systems and society as a whole. In assessing economic im-
pact, we consider three main categories of cost: direct medical costs, 
direct non- 
medical costs and indirect costs (Figure 2). Direct medical 
costs comprise healthcare- 
specific costs, which require a direct pay-
ment (eg, drug therapy, outpatient visits, hospitalization etc.). Direct 
non- 
medical costs are costs not related to healthcare use, but which 
also require a direct payment (eg, cost of travelling to/from the hospi-
tal, or cost of nursing home admission). Indirect costs do not represent 
direct payments, but instead represent the productivity losses caused 
by the disease (eg, absenteeism, presenteeism, early retirement etc.).84
A recent costing study from Europe examined the annual, direct 
medical costs of CHC patients, stratified by disease stage.85 As pre-
sented in Figure 3, there was a notable increase in costs associated with 
more advanced stages of disease, with liver transplantation representing 
 166  |    
﻿YOUYOOSI  et  al
the highest cost (€137 176 in the first year of transplant), followed by 
HCC (€15 222). This reflects the pattern reported in previous studies 
from the USA: patients with decompensated cirrhosis (US$27 845), 
HCC (US$43 671) and liver transplant (US$93 609) had higher annual 
costs than those without advanced liver disease (US$5330).86 In Asia, 
the majority of liver transplants are from living donors, typically fam-
ily members of the patient and thus liver transplant not only imposes 
a burden on patients but also on the donor. While the direct medical 
costs of patients with mild and moderate liver disease were relatively 
low in the European study (€398 and €417 respectively), patients 
who achieved SVR had by far the lowest cost of only €44 per year.85 
Therefore, achieving SVR is associated with substantial cost benefits to 
healthcare systems, in reducing annual costs but also avoiding the long- 
term expensive sequelae of untreated CHC. Furthermore, treating pa-
tients early (before reaching later, costlier, stages of fibrosis) would also 
further reduce the long- 
term costs experienced by healthcare systems.
This being the case, interventions that can avoid the later disease 
stages of CHC would help to avoid the high medical costs of these 
stages. However, this requires an up- 
front investment in treatments for 
patients in earlier stages of the disease in order to prevent high costs in 
the long- 
term. To help determine which treatments offer the best ‘value 
for money’ in this respect, health economic evaluations are performed 
to compare treatments. These aim to compare the costs and benefits 
of treatments, usually from the perspective of the healthcare system 
(focusing on direct medical costs). These also allow an examination of 
trade- 
offs between the investment in interventions in the short- 
term 
to avoid costs in the long- 
term. The common types of health economic 
analyses, and their defining features, are summarized in Table 4.
Health economic evaluations of various CHC treatments have been 
extensively reported for countries in Europe and North America.87-92 
Similar evaluations have recently been published for some Asian coun-
tries, namely Japan and Singapore.93-95 Here, we consider one of the 
TABLE 3 Impact of AEs on HRQoL and treatment adherence in patients receiving IFN- 
a based therapy (adapted from Kumada et al.66)
Adverse Events
Generic quality- 
of- 
life summary scores
Morisky Medication Adherence Scale: Total scores (%)
Physical component 
summary
Mental component 
summary
Low adherence
Medium 
adherence
High adherence
P value**
Anaemia
49.333
41.881*
29.63
41.67
28.70
.111
No anaemia
50.481
45.320
20.00
37.50
42.50
Fatigue
48.980*
41.955*
29.05
40.54
30.41
.031
No fatigue
52.935
48.486
12.50
37.50
50.00
Depression
48.974*
39.866*
34.48
39.66
25.86
<.001
No depression
51.187
48.949
11.11
40.28
48.61
Skin rash
48.360*
40.093*
30.10
44.66
25.24
.012
No skin rash
51.592
47.284
20.00
34.12
45.88
Flu- 
like symptoms
48.946*
41.795*
29.20
42.34
28.47
.012
No flu- 
like symptoms
52.171
47.505
15.69
33.33
50.98
Dyspnoea
48.098*
40.577*
25.44
43.86
30.70
.301
No dyspnoea
52.475
47.607
25.68
33.78
40.54
Muscle weakness
48.214*
40.056*
30.36
38.39
31.25
.168
No muscle weakness
52.189
48.190
18.42
42.11
39.47
Headache
48.214*
39.715*
33.33
40.00
26.67
.007
No headache
51.854
47.935
15.66
39.76
44.58
AEs adverse events, HRQoL health- 
related quality of life, IFN Interferon.
All models adjusted for age, gender and comorbidities.
*P<.05 relative to those without AEs.
**P values are relative to those without AEs.
FIGURE 2 Summary of the types of 
costs comprising the economic burden of 
a disease. [Colour figure can be viewed at 
wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Direct medical costs 
• Hospitalization
• Tests
• Outpatient consultations
• Pharmacological therapy
• Managing adverse events
• Rehabilitation
Direct non-medical costs 
• Nursing home care
• Paid home caregiving
• Patient transport to/from  
 
 hospital
Indirect costs 
• Productivity losses  
 
 (absenteeism, presenteeism,  
 early retirement, early  
 
 mortality etc.)
• Productivity losses for unpaid  
 caregivers (family, friends) 
     |  167
﻿YOUYOOSI  et  al
Japanese analyses in detail, in order to illustrate the key aspects of 
economic models in CHC. This was a cost- 
utility analysis of LDV/SOF 
compared to other treatment regimens (incorporating combinations of 
PEG- 
IFN, RBV, telaprevir, simperevir, daclatasvir and asunaprevir) in 
GT1 CHC patients.93 The structure of the model is shown in Figure 4. 
Briefly, patients enter the model either as cirrhotic or non- 
cirrhotic, and 
receive treatment. They then either achieve SVR or do not, and over the 
lifetime of the model may progress to compensated cirrhosis, decom-
pensated cirrhosis, HCC, liver transplant or death. Patients who achieve 
SVR have a substantially lower chance of progressing to these later 
health states. The model followed a cohort of 10 000 patients over 
50 years and at the end of this period the number of patients in each 
of the health state was compared between the different possible treat-
ment strategies. Each state is associated with a certain HRQoL and a 
certain cost. More severe disease states have lower HRQoL and higher 
costs.59, 85 Logically, treatments with higher SVR rates are likely to have 
fewer patients in the advanced liver disease states. Such treatments 
therefore would be expected to provide patients with higher HRQoL 
and would have lower long- 
term costs for managing advanced liver 
disease, which may somewhat mitigate the up- 
front cost of treatment.
The results from the model showed that compared to no treat-
ment, all regimens reduced the proportion of patients progressing to 
cirrhosis, HCC, liver transplant and death, although LDV/SOF was as-
sociated with the largest reduction in these adverse outcomes.93 The 
avoidance of these outcomes meant that patients receiving LDV/SOF 
had longer survival and higher HRQoL than patients receiving other 
treatments, or those receiving no treatment. However, LDV/SOF was 
associated with higher drug acquisition costs. Nonetheless, when the 
costs were compared to the gains, LDV/SOF was generally found to 
be cost- 
effective for GT1 patients in Japan (assuming a willingness to 
pay threshold of between 5 and 6 million Japanese Yen per quality- 
adjusted life- 
year (QALY) gained).93
The aforementioned Singapore economic analysis also evaluated 
the cost- 
effectiveness of a number of CHC regimens as first- 
line treat-
ment, but also considered the possibility of reserving IFN- 
free, second- 
generation DAA- 
based regimens for use in patients who do not respond to 
first- 
line IFN- 
based regimens.95 In treatment- 
naïve, non- 
cirrhotic patients 
this strategy was found to be cost- 
effective (at a threshold of US$52 500 
per QALY gained); although it was associated with higher numbers of 
decompensated cirrhosis, HCC, liver transplants and liver- 
related deaths 
than the use of DAA- 
based regimens as first- 
line treatment.95
Both of these analyses reflect the general structure of the majority 
of economic models in CHC: progression of patients over a number of 
years to compensated cirrhosis, decompensated cirrhosis, HCC, liver 
transplant and death. The key findings from such evaluations include:
• Compared to no treatment, all treatments reduce the proportion 
of patients who progress to cirrhosis, HCC, liver transplant and 
death.89, 93, 96
• By avoiding such costly long-term complications, highly effective, 
second generation DAA regimens reduce the long-term costs to 
healthcare systems more than older regimens. Such regimens also 
reduce the costs of managing AEs compared to IFN+RBV regimens, 
representing another saving to healthcare systems.
• Even taking into account the higher acquisition costs, second gen-
eration DAAs are generally cost-effective for treating CHC patients 
across numerous countries, including Japan.54, 89, 93, 94, 96 A system-
atic review of economic evaluations of DAAs found that DAAs were 
either cost-saving or cost-effective in 88% of analyses.97
• When other costs (such as productivity losses) are also consid-
ered, IFN+RBV-free 2nd generation DAA regimens are even more 
cost-effective.93
As noted, one of the key drivers in economic models in CHC is the 
progression to, and cost associated with, advanced liver disease, includ-
ing HCC. However, recent data from Europe have begun to test the as-
sumption that the incidence of HCC decreases in patients who achieve 
SVR with IFN- 
free, second generation DAA regimens.25, 98, 99 Specifically, 
three studies have examined the recurrence of HCC in CHC patients pre-
viously treated for HCC, who subsequently received IFN- 
free, second 
generation DAA regimens. Two of the studies reported higher rates of 
recurrence of HCC in patients treated with such regimens compared to 
FIGURE 3 Annual, per patient direct 
medical costs for chronic hepatitis C 
patients by disease stage.85 [Colour figure 
can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
€398
€417
€1790
€8302
€137 176
€5337
€21 992
€44
€0
€20 000
€40 000
€60 000
€80 000 €100 000 €120 000 €140 000 €160 000
Mild liver disease
Moderate  liver disease
Compensated
cirrhosis
Decompensated
cirrhosis
Liver transplant
(1st year)
Liver transplant
(subsequent years)
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Sustained virological response
Annual direct medical costs per patient
 168  |    
﻿YOUYOOSI  et  al
TABLE 4 Description of the common types of health economics analyses and their key features104
Cost- 
utility analysis (CUA)
Cost- 
effectiveness analysis (CEA)
Cost- 
minimization analysis 
(CMA)
Cost- 
benefit analysis (CBA)
Description
Evaluation of the costs of an intervention 
compared to the benefit expressed as a health 
utility (such as quality- 
adjusted life years gained 
or disability- 
adjusted life years avoided). 
Note: commonly referred to in the literature as 
“cost- 
effectiveness” analysis.
Evaluation of the costs of an intervention 
compared to the benefit in terms of a 
‘natural’ unit (such as per SVR achieved or 
per extra year of life gained).
Note: the term “cost- 
effectiveness” is now 
commonly used to describe cost- 
utility 
analyses and may in general be used to 
describe any type of economic evaluation.
A subtype of CEA whereby 
the outcomes of the 
interventions being 
compared are assumed to be 
equal and therefore the 
comparison is between the 
cost implications of using the 
interventions.
CBA considers both costs and outcomes in the 
same unit (usually money) and therefore 
allows a comparison of interventions based 
on the monetary implications alone.
Comparability of 
results between 
disease areas
Broad.
The benefit of interventions is expressed in terms 
of health utilities, it is possible to compare the 
results for interventions in different disease areas 
(eg, you can compare the cost- 
utility of a 
hepatitis C treatment with a cancer treatment, in 
terms of the cost per quality- 
adjusted life years 
gained).
Limited.
Given the use of ‘natural’ units, it is only 
possible to compare the results from 
CEAs using the same units. For example, 
it is not possible to compare the cost per 
SVR for a hepatitis C intervention with a 
cost per avoided mortality for a malaria 
intervention.
Limited.
CMA can only be realistically 
applied to interventions with 
the same type of outcome 
(eg, avoided mortality), and 
often only for the same 
disease area. See limitations 
of CEA.
Very broad.
CBA converts all aspects into monetary units, 
which allows comparisons not only between 
disease areas, but between healthcare and 
other spending options. In countries with 
publically funded healthcare systems, this 
could theoretically allow a comparison 
between increasing funding for healthcare with 
increased funding for education, transport etc.
Usage in 
hepatitis C
Very common.
Most economic evaluations in healthcare today are 
CUAs (albeit they may be referred to as CEAs). As 
funding decisions have to be made across disease 
areas, CUAs allow comparisons between the 
cost- 
utility of interventions in different disease 
areas, thus allowing the most efficient allocation 
of resources across a health service.
Uncommon.
CEA was historically widely used before 
CUA. Some economic evaluations will 
present results from CEA and CUA 
together.
Uncommon.
Generally, interventions are 
not the same in terms of 
their clinical impact and 
therefore it is uncommon 
that CMA can be performed.
Rare.
The translation of clinical outcomes into costs 
is not well- 
established and thus CBAs are 
infrequently used in healthcare.
     |  169
﻿YOUYOOSI  et  al
what the authors expected in either untreated patients or IFN- 
treated 
patients.25,98 Nevertheless, the third study (reviewing patients from 
three French cohorts), showed no increased risk of HCC recurrence.99 
Thus, currently the data do not definitively answer the question and 
further studies are required. In particular, the current studies were in a 
subset of CHC patients, with prior HCC, rather than in the much larger 
population of CHC patients who do not have a history of HCC. Until 
studies are conducted in such patients, the current assumptions of the 
economic models are reasonable. For Japan in particular, studies in el-
derly patients, with long- 
standing CHC (and thus a relatively high risk of 
HCC occurrence) would be of interest.
The economic analyses described thus far have principally focused 
on the perspective of the payer—such as national health insurance 
schemes and private insurers—without taking into account the full 
value to society of treating CHC patients. A model of work productivity 
in Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan showed that treat-
ment of CHC patients with LDV/SOF could lead to annual productivity 
gains of approximately US$209 million, driven particularly by reduced 
presenteeism.100 Furthermore, an analysis from the USA evaluated the 
‘value of cure’ in GT1, CHC patients from a broader societal perspec-
tive.101 The authors considered a scenario whereby all CHC patients 
are treated with a 2nd generation DAA+PEG- 
IFN+RBV or all- 
oral ther-
apy, compared to no treatment. The value to society was taken as the 
increase in QALYs multiplied by the value of these (taken as US$50 000 
per QALY), minus the treatment cost. The results showed that overall 
costs of treatment were US$109- 
128 billion, while the potential ben-
efits were US$129- 
197 billion; therefore, the value of cure to society 
was estimated between US$19- 
68 billion. In essence, an investment of 
US$128 billion would lead to long- 
term savings of at least US$197 bil-
lion.101 This analysis suggests that the returns to society from treating 
all CHC patients are likely to offset the investment.
Despite the evidence suggesting cost-effectiveness of the new 
anti-HCV treatment, it is critical to remember that willingness to pay 
(WTP) threshold can differ from country to country. It is suggested that 
WTP should not exceed 2-3 time GDP per capita for each country. This 
obviates the need to economic analysis of new anti-HCV treatment in 
each country based on its economic reality.
5 | CONCLUSION
In summary, while the hepatic aspects of HCV infection are important, 
they are by no means the only aspects to be considered. CHC has 
further substantial, negative impacts on patients’ health (extrahepatic 
manifestations), their well- 
being (fatigue, depression, health- 
related 
quality of life), their productivity (absenteeism and presenteeism) and 
their daily activities. The disease also places a burden on society as a 
whole: through the healthcare costs of managing the long- 
term con-
sequences of CHC and through productivity losses.
This article has highlighted in particular the impact of CHC on 
Japanese patients, who represent a unique population of patients, 
being older and more treatment- 
experienced than patients in other 
countries. However, even given the cultural and demographic differ-
ences between Japanese and Western patients, Japanese patients ex-
perience the impacts of CHC to a similar degree as Western patients.
In addition to Japanese patients with HCV, the impact of HCV infec-
tion in patients from other Asian countries are less well studied.
In addition to the disease itself, the impact of treatment on patients 
needs to be considered, especially for older regimens incorporating IFN 
and/or RBV. When deciding on how best to treat patients, it is important 
to fully consider how a treatment will affect all aspects of their disease 
experience, not solely the impact on clinical outcomes. The introduction 
of second generation DAAs offers the opportunity to successfully cure a 
large proportion of CHC patients and potentially to eradicate CHC from 
most countries within a generation. Such an achievement would benefit 
not only the currently infected patients, but also all future generations 
who would not be infected if hepatitis C were to be eradicated.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Zobair M. Younossi—Research grants: AbbVie Pharmaceuticals, 
Bristol- 
Myers Squibb (BMS) and Gilead Sciences. Consulting fees: 
AbbVie Pharmaceuticals, BMS, Intercept, Gilead Sciences and GSK. 
Atsushi Tanaka—No conflicts of interest relating to this paper. 
FIGURE 4 Schematic of the structure 
of the cost- 
utility model assessing 
ledipasvir/sofosbuvir for the treatment of 
GT1 patients in Japan.93 [Colour figure can 
be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
SVR non-
cirrhotic
Non-cirrhotic
Compensated
cirrhotic 
Hepatocellular
carcinoma 
Excess
mortality 
Decompensated
cirrhotic 
Post-liver
transplant 
Liver
transplant 
Model
Entry 
Antiviral treatment
SVR
cirrhotic
The health state titled “Excess mortality” 
represents the disease-specific mortality 
associated with DCC, HCC or liver transplant  
SVR sustained virological response, DCC decompensated cirrhosis, HCC hepatocellular carcinoma
 170  |    
﻿YOUYOOSI  et  al
Yuichiro Eguchi—No conflicts of interest relating to this paper. Young- 
Suk Lim—Research grants: Bayer Healthcare, BMS, Gilead Sciences 
and Novartis. Advisory board member: Bayer Healthcare, BMS and 
Gilead Sciences. Ming- 
Lung Yu—Research grants: Abbvie, BMS, 
Gilead Sciences, Merck and Roche. Consulting fees: Abbott, Abbvie, 
BMS, Gilead Sciences, Merck and Roche, PhamaEssentia. Speaker 
fees: Abbott, Abbvie, BMS, Gilead Sciences, Merck and Roche, 
PhamaEssentia. Norifumi Kawada—Research grants: Merck Sharp & 
Dohme (MSD), AbbVie, Chugai, Otsuka and Eisai. Speaker fees: MSD, 
Abbvie and Gilead Sciences. Yock Young Dan—Education and research 
grants: BMS, Gilead Sciences, Novartis, AbbVie and Sanofi Aventis. 
Advisory board member: BMS, Gilead Sciences, Novartis, AbbVie 
and MSD. Craig Brooks- 
Rooney—Is an employee of Costello Medical 
Singapore Pte Ltd, which was funded by Gilead Sciences to provide 
research, writing and editorial services for this manuscript. Francesco 
Negro—Advisory board member: MSD, Gilead Sciences, BMS and 
AbbVie. Research grants: Gilead Sciences. Mario U. Mondelli—None.
REFERENCES
 
1. Harris M, Ward E, Gore C. Finding the undiagnosed: a qualitative 
exploration of hepatitis C diagnosis delay in the United Kingdom. J 
Viral Hepatitis. 2016;23:479–486.
 
2. Beste LA, Leipertz SL, Green PK, Dominitz JA, Ross D, Ioannou GN. 
Trends in burden of cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma by un-
derlying liver disease in US veterans, 2001- 
2013. Gastroenterology 
2015;149:1471–1482.e1475; quiz e1417-1478.
 
3. Younossi Z, Park H, Henry L, Adeyemi A, Stepanova M. Extrahepatic 
manifestations of hepatitis C: a meta- 
analysis of prevalence, qual-
ity of life, and economic burden. Gastroenterology 2016a;150: 
1599–1608.
 
4. Younossi Z, Henry L. Systematic review: patient- 
reported outcomes 
in chronic hepatitis C–the impact of liver disease and new treatment 
regimens. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2015;41:497–520.
 
5. Pawlotsky JM. Hepatitis C virus: from discovery to eradication in 
40 years? Clin Microbiol Infect. 2011;17:105–106.
 
6. Armstrong GL, Alter MJ, McQuillan GM, Margolis HS. The past in-
cidence of hepatitis C virus infection: implications for the future 
burden of chronic liver disease in the United States. Hepatology 
2000;31:777–782.
 
7. Leone N, Rizzetto M. Natural history of hepatitis C virus infection: 
from chronic hepatitis to cirrhosis, to hepatocellular carcinoma. 
Minerva Gastroenterol Dietol. 2005;51:31–46.
 
8. Lauer GM, Walker BD. Hepatitis C virus infection. N Engl J Med. 
2001;345:41–52.
 
9. Fattovich G, Stroffolini T, Zagni I, Donato F. Hepatocellular carcinoma 
in cirrhosis: incidence and risk factors. Gastroenterology. 2004;127(5 
Suppl 1):S35–S50.
 10. Kiyosawa K, Umemura T, Ichijo T, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma: re-
cent trends in Japan. Gastroenterology. 2004;127(5 Suppl 1):S17–S26.
 11. El-Serag HB, Kanwal F. Epidemiology of hepatocellular carcinoma 
in the United States: where are we? Where do we go? Hepatology 
2014;60:1767–1775.
 12. Chung H, Ueda T, Kudo M. Changing trends in hepatitis C infection 
over the past 50 years in Japan Intervirology 2010;53:39–43.
 13. Maruoka D, Imazeki F, Arai M, Kanda T, Fujiwara K, Yokosuka O. 
Long- 
term cohort study of chronic hepatitis C according to inter-
feron efficacy. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012;27:291–299.
 14. Yoshida H, Shiratori Y, Moriyama M, et al. Interferon therapy re-
duces the risk for hepatocellular carcinoma: national surveillance 
program of cirrhotic and noncirrhotic patients with chronic hepatitis 
C in Japan. IHIT Study Group. Inhibition of Hepatocarcinogenesis by 
Interferon Therapy. Ann Intern Med. 1999;131:174–181.
 15. Imazeki F, Yokosuka O, Fukai K, et al. Lower incidence of hepatic fail-
ure than hepatocellular carcinoma in Japanese patients with chronic 
hepatitis C. Liver Int. 2005;25:772–778.
 16. Dohmen K, Kawano A, Takahashi K, et al. The incidence and 
risk factors for the development of hepatocellular carcinoma 
after peginterferon plus ribavirin therapy for chronic hepatitis C. 
Hepatogastroenterology. 2013;60:2034–2038.
 17. Masaki N, Yamagiwa Y, Shimbo T, et al. Regional disparities in inter-
feron therapy for chronic hepatitis C in Japan: a nationwide retro-
spective cohort study. BMC Public Health. 2015;15:1.
 18. Vutien P, Hoang J, Brooks L Jr, Nguyen NH, Nguyen MH. Racial 
disparities in treatment rates for chronic hepatitis C: analysis of a 
population- 
based cohort of 73,665 patients in the United States. 
Medicine. 2016;95:e3719.
 19. Bruno S, Crosignani A, Maisonneuve P, Rossi S, Silini E, Mondelli MU. 
Hepatitis C virus genotype 1b as a major risk factor associated with 
hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with cirrhosis: a seventeen-year 
prospective cohort study. Hepatology 2007;46:1350–1356.
 20. Morgan RL, Baack B, Smith BD, Yartel A, Pitasi M, Falck-Ytter Y. 
Eradication of hepatitis C virus infection and the development of 
hepatocellular carcinoma: a meta- 
analysis of observational studies. 
Ann Intern Med. 2013;158(Pt 1):329–337.
 21. Tseng CW, Chang TT, Tzeng SJ, et al. Association of sustained 
virologic response with reduced progression to liver cirrho-
sis in elderly patients with chronic hepatitis C. Clin Interv Aging. 
2016;11:327–334.
 22. Simmons B, Saleem J, Heath K, Cooke GS, Hill A. Long- 
term 
treatment outcomes of patients infected with hepatitis C virus: 
a systematic review and meta- 
analysis of the survival bene-
fit of achieving a sustained virological response. Clin Infect Dis. 
2015;61:730–740.
 23. Ikezaki H, Nomura H, Furusyo N, et al. Efficacy of interferon- 
beta 
plus ribavirin combination treatment on the development of hepa-
tocellular carcinoma in Japanese patients with chronic hepatitis C. 
Hepatol Res. 2016;46:E174–E180.
 24. Asahina Y, Izumi N, Hiromitsu K, et al. JSH guidelines for the man-
agement of hepatitis C virus infection: a 2016 update for genotype 1 
and 2. Hepatol Res. 2016;46:129–165.
 25. Reig M, Marino Z, Perello C, et al. Unexpected early tumor recur-
rence in patients with hepatitis C virus - 
related hepatocellular car-
cinoma undergoing interferon- 
free therapy: a note of caution. J 
Hepatol 2016;65:719–726.
 26. Cammà C, Cabibbo G, Craxì A. Direct antiviral agents and risk 
for HCC early recurrence: much ado about nothing. J Hepatol 
2016;65:861–862.
 27. Cacoub P, Comarmond C, Domont F, Savey L, Desbois AC, Saadoun 
D. Extrahepatic manifestations of chronic hepatitis C virus infection. 
Therap Adv Infect Dis. 2016;3:3–14.
 28. Negro F, Forton D, Craxi A, Sulkowski MS, Feld JJ, Manns MP. 
Extrahepatic morbidity and mortality of chronic hepatitis C. 
Gastroenterology. 2015;149:1345–1360.
 29. Nagao Y, Tanaka J, Nakanishi T, et al. High incidence of extrahe-
patic manifestations in an HCV hyperendemic area. Hepatol Res. 
2002;22:27–36.
 30. Lee M-H, Yang H-I, Lu S-N, et al. Chronic hepatitis C virus infec-
tion increases mortality from hepatic and extrahepatic diseases: 
a community- 
based long- 
term prospective study. J Infect Dis 
2012;206:469–477.
 31. Younossi ZM, Stepanova M, Henry L, Nader F, Hunt S. An in- 
depth 
analysis of patient- 
reported outcomes in patients with chronic hep-
atitis C treated with different anti- 
viral regimens. Am J Gastroenterol 
2016b;111:808–816.
     |  171
﻿YOUYOOSI  et  al
 32. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for industry: patient- 
reported outcome measures: use in medical product development to 
support labeling claims. Fed Regist. 2009;74:65132–65133.
 33. McKenna SP. Measuring patient- 
reported outcomes: moving beyond 
misplaced common sense to hard science. BMC Med. 2011;9:86.
 34. Martin L, Younossi Z. Health- 
related quality of life (HRQL) in chronic 
liver disease. Dig Liver Dis. 2005;37:819–820.
 35. Ware JE, Kosinski M. Interpreting SF- 
36 summary health measures: 
a response. Qual Life Res 2001;10:405–413; discussion 415-420.
 36. Janssen MF, Pickard AS, Golicki D, et al. Measurement proper-
ties of the EQ- 
5D- 
5L compared to the EQ- 
5D- 
3L across eight 
patient groups: a multi- 
country study. Qual Life Res. 2013;22: 
1717–1727.
 37. Younossi Z, Loria A, Eschiek C, Gerber L, Kallman J. The Chronic Liver 
Disease Questionnaire-Hepatitis C (CLDQ-HCV): A sensitive and valid 
health related quality of life instrument. Paper presented at: American 
Association for the Study of Liver Disease Annual Meeting 2012.
 38. Fukuhara S, Ikegami N, Torrance GW, Nishimura S, Drummond 
M, Schubert F. The development and use of quality- 
of- 
life mea-
sures to evaluate health outcomes in Japan. Pharmacoeconomics. 
2002;20(Suppl 2):17–23.
 39. Fukuhara S, Bito S, Green J, Hsiao A, Kurokawa K. Translation, adap-
tation, and validation of the SF- 
36 Health Survey for use in Japan. J 
Clin Epidemiol. 1998;51:1037–1044.
 40. Tanaka A, Kikuchi K, Miura R, et al. Validation of the Japanese ver-
sion of the Chronic Liver Disease Questionnaire for the assessment 
of health- 
related quality of life in patients with chronic viral hepatitis. 
Hepatol Res. 2016;46:E45–E50.
 41. Kim J, Kim K. Gender differences in health- 
related quality of life of 
Korean patients with chronic obstructive lung disease. Public Health 
Nurs 2015;32:191–200.
 42. Song HJ, Lee EK, Kwon JW. Gender differences in the impact of 
obesity on health- 
related quality of life. Asia Pac J Public Health. 
2016;28:146–156.
 43. Quinten C, Coens C, Ghislain I, et al. The effects of age on health- 
related quality of life in cancer populations: a pooled analysis of 
randomized controlled trials using the European Organisation for 
Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) QLQ- 
C30 involving 
6024 cancer patients. Eur J Cancer 2015;51:2808–2819.
 44. Kalyva E, Abdul-Rasoul M, Kehl D, Barkai L, Lukacs A. A cross- 
cultural 
study on perceived health- 
related quality of life in children and ad-
olescents with type 1 diabetes mellitus. J Diabetes Complications. 
2016;30:482–487.
 45. Dibonaventura MD, Yuan Y, Lescrauwaet B, et al. Multicountry bur-
den of chronic hepatitis C viral infection among those aware of their 
diagnosis: a patient survey. PLoS ONE. 2014;9:e86070.
 46. Marcellin F, Préau M, Ravaux I, Dellamonica P, Spire B, Carrieri MP. 
Self- 
reported fatigue and depressive symptoms as main indicators 
of the quality of life (QOL) of patients living with HIV and Hepatitis 
C: implications for clinical management and future research. HIV Clin 
Trials 2007;8:320–327.
 47. Sarkar S, Jiang Z, Evon D, Wahed A, Hoofnagle J. Fatigue before, 
during and after antiviral therapy of chronic hepatitis C: results from 
the Virahep- 
C study. J Hepatol. 2012;57:946–952.
 48. Chandran V, Bhella S, Schentag C, Gladman DD. Functional assess-
ment of chronic illness therapy- 
fatigue scale is valid in patients with 
psoriatic arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2007;66:936–939.
 49. Webster K, Cella D, Yost K. The Functional Assessment of Chronic 
Illness Therapy (FACIT) Measurement System: properties, applica-
tions, and interpretation. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2003;1:79.
 50. Younossi ZM, Stepanova M, Feld J, et al. Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir 
improves patient- 
reported outcomes in HCV patients: results from 
ASTRAL- 
1 placebo- 
controlled trial. J Hepatol. 2016c;65:33–39.
 51. Younossi ZM, Stepanova M, Henry L, et al. Effects of sofosbuvir- 
based treatment, with and without interferon, on outcome and 
productivity of patients with chronic hepatitis C. Clin Gastroenterol 
Hepatol 2014;12:1349–1359.e1313.
 52. Gosselin E, Lemyre L, Corneil W. Presenteeism and absenteeism: 
differentiated understanding of related phenomena. J Occup Health 
Psychol. 2013;18:75–86.
 53. Reilly MC, Zbrozek AS, Dukes EM. The validity and reproducibil-
ity of a work productivity and activity impairment instrument. 
Pharmacoeconomics. 1993;4:353–365.
 54. Samp JC, Perry R, Piercy J, Wood R, Baran RW. Patient health utility, 
work productivity, and lifestyle impairment in chronic hepatitis C pa-
tients in France. Clin Res Hepatol Gastroenterol. 2015;39:307–314.
 55. Scott J, Gilles L, Fu M, et al. Simeprevir added to peginterferon and rib-
avirin lessens time with fatigue, depressive symptoms and functional 
limitations in patients with chronic hepatitis C compared with pegin-
terferon and ribavirin: results from 1161 patients in the QUEST- 
1, 
QUEST- 
2 and PROMISE studies. J Viral Hepatitis. 2015;22:639–650.
 56. Vietri J, Otsubo T, Montgomery W, Tsuji T, Harada E. The incremen-
tal burden of pain in patients with depression: results of a Japanese 
survey. BMC Psychiatry. 2015;15:1.
 57. Strauss E, Porto-Ferreira FA, de Almeida-Neto C, Teixeira MC. 
Altered quality of life in the early stages of chronic hepatitis C is due 
to the virus itself. Clin Res Hepatol Gastroenterol. 2014;38:40–45.
 58. Fábregas BC, de Ávila RE, Faria MN, Moura AS, Carmo RA, Teixeira 
AL. Health related quality of life among patients with chronic hepati-
tis C: a cross- 
sectional study of sociodemographic, psychopathologi-
cal and psychiatric determinants. Braz J Infect Dis. 2013;17:633–639.
 59. Sobhonslidsuk A, Silpakit C, Kongsakon R, Satitpornkul P, Sripetch 
C, Khanthavit A. Factors influencing health- 
related quality of life in 
chronic liver disease. World J Gastroenterol. 2006;12:7786–7791.
 60. Matsushita H, Ikeda F, Iwasaki Y, et al. Assessment of health- 
related 
quality of life and how it predicts the outcome of pegylated inter-
feron and ribavirin therapy for chronic hepatitis C. J Gastroenterol 
Hepatol. 2014;29:337–343.
 61. Arguedas MR, DeLawrence TG, McGuire BM. Influence of hepatic 
encephalopathy on health- 
related quality of life in patients with cir-
rhosis. Dig Dis Sci. 2003;48:1622–1626.
 62. Jara M, Bednarsch J, Malinowski M, et al. Predictors of quality of 
life in patients evaluated for liver transplantation. Clin Transplant. 
2014;28:1331–1338.
 63. Chang SC, Yang SS, Chang CC, Lin CC, Chung YC, Li TC. Assessment 
of health- 
related quality of life in antiviral- 
treated Taiwanese 
chronic hepatitis C patients using SF- 
36 and CLDQ. Health Qual Life 
Outcomes. 2014;12:97.
 64. Younossi ZM, Stepanova M, Mizokami M, Omata M, Hunt S. Higher 
Quality of Life Gains in Japanese Hepatitis C Patients Treated with 
Ledipasvir/Sofosbuvir. Tokyo: Asian Pacific Association for the Study 
of the Liver; 2016d.
 65. Liu GG, DiBonaventura M, Yuan Y, et al. The burden of illness for 
patients with viral hepatitis C: evidence from a national survey in 
Japan. Value Health. 2012;15(1 Suppl):S65–S71.
 66. Kumada H, daCosta DM, Yuan Y, et al. The patient- 
related burden 
of pegylated- 
interferon- 
α therapy and adverse events among pa-
tients with viral hepatitis C in Japan. Value Health Reg Issues 2014;3: 
50–58.
 67. Younossi ZM, Stepanova M, Omata M, Mizokami M, Hunt S. Quality 
of Life of Japanese Patients with Chronic Hepatitis C Treated with 
Ledipasvir and Sofosbuvir. Tokyo: Asian Pacific Association for the 
Study of the Liver; 2016e.
 68. Younossi Z, Stepanova M, Omata M, Mizokami M, Nader F, Hunt S. 
Fatigue in Japanese patients with chronic hepatitis C treated with 
Ledipasvir and Sofosbuvir with or without Ribavirin. Value Health. 
2016f;19:A316–A317.
 69. Smith MA, Chan J, Mohammad RA. Ledipasvir- 
sofosbuvir: interfer-
on- 
/ribavirin- 
free regimen for chronic hepatitis C virus infection. 
Ann Pharmacother. 2015;49:343–350.
 172  |    
﻿YOUYOOSI  et  al
 70. Smith-Palmer J, Cerri K, Valentine W. Achieving sustained virologic 
response in hepatitis C: a systematic review of the clinical, economic 
and quality of life benefits. BMC Infect Dis. 2015;15:19.
 71. Mandorfer M, Payer BA, Scheiner B, et al. Health- 
related quality of 
life and severity of fatigue in HIV/HCV co- 
infected patients before, 
during, and after antiviral therapy with pegylated interferon plus rib-
avirin. Liver Int. 2014;34:69–77.
 72. Vera-Llonch M, Martin M, Aggarwal J, et al. Health- 
related quality 
of life in genotype 1 treatment- 
naive chronic hepatitis C patients 
receiving telaprevir combination treatment in the ADVANCE study. 
Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2013;38:124–133.
 73. John-Baptiste AA, Tomlinson G, Hsu PC, et al. Sustained responders 
have better quality of life and productivity compared with treatment 
failures long after antiviral therapy for hepatitis C. Am J Gastroenterol. 
2009;104:2439–2448.
 74. Adinolfi LE, Nevola R, Lus G, et al. Chronic hepatitis C virus infec-
tion and neurological and psychiatric disorders: an overview. World J 
Gastroenterol. 2015;21:2269–2280.
 75. Senzolo M, Schiff S, D’Aloiso CM, et al. Neuropsychological alter-
ations in hepatitis C infection: the role of inflammation. World J 
Gastroenterol. 2011;17:3369–3374.
 76. Nordon C, Karcher H, Groenwold RH, et al. The “Efficacy- 
Effectiveness Gap”: historical background and current conceptual-
ization. Value Health. 2016;19:75–81.
 77. Vo KP, Vutien P, Akiyama MJ, et al. Poor sustained virological re-
sponse in a multicenter real- 
life cohort of chronic hepatitis C pa-
tients treated with Pegylated interferon and Ribavirin plus Telaprevir 
or Boceprevir. Dig Dis Sci. 2015;60:1045–1051.
 78. Niederau C, Mauss S, Schober A, et al. Predictive factors for sus-
tained virological response after treatment with pegylated interferon 
alpha- 
2a and ribavirin in patients infected with HCV genotypes 2 
and 3. PLoS ONE. 2014;9:e107592.
 79. Chen TM, Huang PT, Wen CF, Tung JN, Chow KC, Chen YP. 
Reappraisal of the importance of mutations in the NS5A- 
PKR- 
binding domain of hepatitis C- 
1b virus in the era of optimally indi-
vidualized therapy. J Viral Hepatitis. 2011;18:119–128.
 80. Raptopoulou M, Tsantoulas D, Vafiadi I, et al. The effect of adherence 
to therapy on sustained response in daily or three times a week inter-
feron alpha- 
2b plus ribavirin treatment of naive and nonresponder 
chronic hepatitis C patients. J Viral Hepatitis. 2005;12:91–95.
 81. Bonner JE, Esserman DA, Golin CE, Evon DM. Self- 
efficacy and 
adherence to antiviral treatment for chronic hepatitis C. J Clin 
Gastroenterol. 2015;49:76–83.
 82. Beste LA, Ioannou GN, Larson MS, Chapko M, Dominitz JA. 
Predictors of early treatment discontinuation among patients with 
genotype 1 hepatitis C and implications for viral eradication. Clin 
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010;8:972–978.
 83. Yu ML, Yeh ML, Tsai PC, et al. Huge gap between clinical efficacy and 
community effectiveness in the treatment of chronic hepatitis C: a 
nationwide survey in Taiwan. Medicine. 2015;94:e690.
 84. Boccuzzi SJ. Indirect health care costs. In: Weintraub WS, ed. 
Cardiovascular Health Care Economics. New York, NY: Humana Presss; 
2003:63–79.
 85. Kieran JA, Norris S, O’Leary A, et al. Hepatitis C in the era of direct- 
acting antivirals: real- 
world costs of untreated chronic hepatitis C; a 
cross- 
sectional study. BMC Infect Dis. 2015;15:471.
 86. McAdam-Marx C, McGarry LJ, Hane CA, Biskupiak J, Deniz B, 
Brixner DI. All- 
cause and incremental per patient per year cost asso-
ciated with chronic hepatitis C virus and associated liver complica-
tions in the United States: a managed care perspective. J Manag Care 
Pharm. 2011;17:531–546.
 87. Najafzadeh M, Andersson K, Shrank WH, et al. Cost- 
effectiveness of 
novel regimens for the treatment of hepatitis C virus. Ann Intern Med. 
2015;162:407–419.
 88. Rein DB, Wittenborn JS, Smith BD, Liffmann DK, Ward JW. The 
cost- 
effectiveness, health benefits, and financial costs of new anti-
viral treatments for hepatitis C virus. Clin Infect Dis. 2015;61:157– 
168.
 89. Younossi ZM, Park H, Saab S, Ahmed A, Dieterich D, Gordon SC. 
Cost- 
effectiveness of all- 
oral ledipasvir/sofosbuvir regimens in pa-
tients with chronic hepatitis C virus genotype 1 infection. Aliment 
Pharmacol Ther. 2015;41:544–563.
 90. Deuffic-Burban S, Obach D, Canva V, et al. Cost- 
effectiveness and 
budget impact of interferon- 
free direct- 
acting antiviral- 
based reg-
imens for hepatitis C treatment: the French case. J Viral Hepatitis 
2016;23:767–779.
 91. Chhatwal J, He T, Lopez-Olivo MA. Systematic review of modelling 
approaches for the cost effectiveness of hepatitis C treatment with 
direct- 
acting antivirals. Pharmacoeconomics 2016a;34:551–567.
 92. Gissel C, Gotz G, Mahlich J, Repp H. Cost- 
effectiveness of Interferon- 
free therapy for Hepatitis C in Germany–an application of the effi-
ciency frontier approach. BMC Infect Dis. 2015;15:297.
 93. Igarashi A, Guerra I, Marié L, Cure S, Lopresti M. Cost- 
utility analy-
sis of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir for the treatment of genotype 1 chronic 
hepatitis C in Japan. Curr Med Res Opin 2017;33:11–21.
 94. Igarashi A, Tang W, Cure S, et al. Cost- 
utility analysis of sofosbuvir for 
the treatment of genotype 2 chronic hepatitis C in Japan. Curr Med 
Res Opin 2017;33:1–10.
 95. Zhao YJ, Khoo AL, Lin L, et al. Cost-effectiveness of strategy-
based approach to treatment of genotype 1 chronic hepatitis C. J 
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;31:1628–1637.
 96. McEwan P, Ward T, Webster S, et al. Estimating the cost- 
effectiveness 
of daclatasvir plus asunaprevir in difficult to treat Japanese patients 
chronically infected with hepatitis C genotype 1b. Hepatol Res 
2015;46:423–433.
 97. Chhatwal J, He T, Hur C, Lopez-Olivo M. Cost-effectiveness of 
 
direct-acting antivirals for hepatitis C treatment: a systematic 
 
review of 227 analysis. Barcelona: The International Liver Congress; 
2016b.
 98. Conti F, Buonfiglioli F, Scuteri A, et al. Early occurrence and recur-
rence of hepatocellular carcinoma in HCV- 
related cirrhosis treated 
with direct acting antivirals. J Hepatol 2016;65:727–733.
 99. Pol S. Lack of evidence of an effect of Direct Acting Antivirals on 
the recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma: The ANRS collab-
orative study group on hepatocellular carcinoma (ANRS CO22 
HEPATHER, CO12 CIRVIR and CO23 CUPILT cohorts). J Hepatol 
2016;65:734–740.
 
100. Younossi ZM, Chan HYL, Dan YY, et al. Impact of Ledipasvir/
Sofosbuvir on the Work Productivity of Chronic Hepatitis C patients 
in Asia. Tokyo: Asian Pacific Association for the Study of the Liver; 
2016 g.
 
101. Younossi ZM, Park H, Dieterich D, Saab S, Ahmed A, Gordon SC. 
The Value of Cure Associated with Treating Treatment-naive (TN) 
Chronic Hepatitis C (CH-C) Genotype 1 (GT1): Are the New All Oral 
Regimens a Good Value to Society? Liver Int. 2016; doi: 10.1111/
liv.13298 [Epub ahead of print].
 
102. Medical Outcomes Study: 36-Item Short Form Survey Scoring 
Instructions. http:/
/www.rand.org/health/surveys_tools/mos/mos_
core_36item_scoring.html. Accessed May 06, 2016.
 
103. Younossi ZM, Guyatt G, Kiwi M, Boparai N, King D. Development of 
a disease specific questionnaire to measure health related quality of 
life in patients with chronic liver disease. Gut. 1999;45:295–300.
 
104. Shiell A, Donaldson C, Mitton C, Currie G. Health economic evalua-
tion. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2002;56:85–88.
 
105. Younossi ZM, Stepanova M, Henry L. Performance and Validation 
of Chronic Liver Disease Questionnaire-Hepatitis C Version (CLDQ-
HCV) in Clinical Trials of Patients with Chronic Hepatitis C. Value 
Health. 2016;19:544–551.
