 September 27, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e262–e279. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000440
e262
ABSTRACT: Epidemiological evidence is accumulating that indicates 
greater time spent in sedentary behavior is associated with all-cause and 
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in adults such that some countries 
have disseminated broad guidelines that recommend minimizing sedentary 
behaviors. Research examining the possible deleterious consequences 
of excess sedentary behavior is rapidly evolving, with the epidemiology-
based literature ahead of potential biological mechanisms that might 
explain the observed associations. This American Heart Association 
science advisory reviews the current evidence on sedentary behavior 
in terms of assessment methods, population prevalence, determinants, 
associations with cardiovascular disease incidence and mortality, 
potential underlying mechanisms, and interventions. Recommendations 
for future research on this emerging cardiovascular health topic are 
included. Further evidence is required to better inform public health 
interventions and future quantitative guidelines on sedentary behavior and 
cardiovascular health outcomes.
E
vidence is accumulating that sedentary behavior might be associated with in-
creased cardiovascular-specific and overall mortality. Insufficient physical ac-
tivity predicts premature cardiovascular disease (CVD) mortality and disease 
burden, such that the United States and other developed countries have issued 
physical activity guidelines, but these guidelines are specific to physical activity and 
do not include sedentary behavior.1 Sedentary behavior guidelines to reduce the risk 
of chronic diseases for adults have been developed in some countries, but they are 
broadly stated and nonquantitative. For example, Australia and the United Kingdom 
have public health guidelines stating that adults should minimize the amount of time 
spent being sedentary (sitting) for extended periods.2,3 Such broad public health 
guidelines for adults are likely appropriate, because evidence is still accumulating 
regarding the strength of the association, the evidence for causation (including un-
derstanding mechanisms), and the support for dose-response relationships that 
demonstrate sedentary behavior to be an independent risk factor for adverse health 
outcomes. Although at one time, excess sedentary behavior was considered to be 
at one end of the continuum of physical activity such that a person with no moderate-
to-vigorous physical activity (MVPA) was considered “sedentary,” consensus is build-
ing that sedentary behavior is distinct from lack of MVPA. Even the word “sedentary,” 
derived from the Latin “sedentarius” and defined as “sitting, remaining in one place,” 
connotes a different set of behaviors than non-MVPA.4 Thus, researchers studying 
MVPA, physical inactivity, and sedentary behavior are now viewing these behaviors 
as separate entities with their own unique determinants and health consequences.
Deborah Rohm Young, 
PhD, FAHA, Chair
Marie-France Hivert, MD, 
MMSc, FAHA, Co-Chair
Sofiya Alhassan, PhD
Sarah M. Camhi, PhD, FAHA
Jane F. Ferguson, PhD, 
FAHA
Peter T. Katzmarzyk, PhD, 
FAHA
Cora E. Lewis, MD, MSPH, 
FAHA
Neville Owen, PhD
Cynthia K. Perry, PhD, 
FNP
, FAHA
Juned Siddique, DrPH
Celina M. Yong, MD, MBA, 
MSc
On behalf of the Physical 
Activity Committee of 
the Council on Lifestyle 
and Cardiometabolic 
Health; Council on Clini-
cal Cardiology; Council 
on Epidemiology and 
Prevention; Council on 
Functional Genomics and 
Translational Biology; and 
Stroke Council
Sedentary Behavior and Cardiovascular Morbidity 
and Mortality
A Science Advisory From the American Heart Association
Endorsed by The Obesity Society
© 2016 American Heart 
Association, Inc.
Key Words: AHA Scientific 
Statements ◼ adults  
◼ cardiovascular disease  
◼ diabetes mellitus ◼ metabolic 
syndrome ◼ mortality ◼ prevalence 
◼ sedentary lifestyle 
AHA SCiEnCE AdviSory
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Sedentary Behavior and Cardiovascular Morbidity and Mortality
Circulation. 2016;134:e262–e279. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000440 
September 27, 2016
e263
CLiniCAL STATEMEnTS 
And GUidELinES
This American Heart Association science advisory 
summarizes the existing evidence about sedentary be-
havior as a potential risk factor for CVD and diabetes mel-
litus, including how the behavior is assessed, its preva-
lence and potential determinants, its association with CVD 
outcomes, initial potential mechanisms that might explain 
observed associations, and interventions designed to re-
duce it. We limit this advisory to the available evidence 
of sedentary behavior and disease outcomes rather than 
examining relationships with CVD risk factor precursors, 
such as hypertension or obesity. Finally, recommenda-
tions are provided for future research needed before the 
development of quantitative national guidelines.
To date, most of the scientific evidence on seden-
tary behavior and CVD morbidity and mortality has 
been with adult populations. The effects of sedentary 
behavior on CVD and metabolic disease risk in children 
and adolescents have been reviewed elsewhere.5 Fur-
thermore, correlates of sedentary behavior are differ-
ent for children than adults, as are potential interven-
tion strategies. Therefore, we restrict this advisory 
to adults without ambulatory limitations. On the basis 
of objective measurements, US adults spend an aver-
age of 6 to 8 hours per day sitting,6 thus, sedentary 
behavior is highly prevalent. The Figure illustrates the 
average 24-hour day for US adults based on NHANES 
(National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey) 
data, highlighting the significant portion of time spent 
in sedentary and light activities and the little time spent, 
on average, in MVPA.6,8
The Sedentary Behaviour Research Network, an 
organization of researchers and health professionals, 
suggests the following definition for sedentary behav-
ior: “Sedentary behavior refers to any waking behavior 
characterized by an energy expenditure ≤1.5 metabol-
ic equivalents while in a sitting or reclining posture.”9 
One metabolic equivalent is defined as the energy ex-
pended while sitting at rest, or the standard of 3.5 mL 
of oxygen per kilogram of body weight per minute.10 
(MVPA is defined as activities that expend at least 3.0 
metabolic equivalents.) We adopt this definition for this 
advisory. This is similar to the 2013 American Heart 
Association scientific statement “Guide to the Assess-
ment of Physical Activity: Clinical and Research Ap-
plications,” in which sedentary behavior intensity was 
defined as 1 to 1.5 metabolic equivalents.11 Common 
sedentary behaviors, displayed in the Table, include 
television (TV) viewing, computer use (ie, screen time), 
driving, and reading.
SEdEnTAry BEHAvior MEASUrEMEnT
Sedentary behavior is typically assessed from self-report 
instruments or through the use of objective measure-
ment devices. Direct observation is another assessment 
that can be performed in discrete locations, but it is 
not discussed in this advisory. For the purpose of this 
advisory, we refer to “sedentary time” when estimates 
or measures of time per day or week are assessed; in 
other instances, we refer to “sedentary behavior.” De-
vice-derived measures of sedentary time can provide im-
proved measurement precision over self-report assess-
ments, as well as unique insights into different patterns 
of behavior. However, to develop relevant guidelines, in-
form intervention design, and assist in the development 
of broad-reaching environmental and policy initiatives, 
there is a need to understand sedentary behavior in the 
contexts (behavior settings) within which it takes place.12 
This requires the use of self-report assessment tools.13 
For example, sedentary behavior commonly occurs in 
the settings of home, work or school, and transport, as 
well as during leisure time. For example, going to the 
theater usually involves sitting through the performance. 
Although objective measures can provide the precise 
time a person was sitting, self-report instruments are 
necessary to understand “why, where, and what” (ie, 
context) the individual was doing. Thus, device-based 
and self-report measurements are complementary.
Two recent publications provide perspectives on why 
both device-based and self-report measurements of 
sedentary behavior are necessary.14,15 Compared with 
device-derived measures, self-report indices can deliver 
underestimates of actual time spent sitting in some do-
mains. Objective devices for assessment of sedentary 
time are in a rapid state of technical evolution and can-
not be regarded as a “gold standard.” Many still need 
their measurement properties assessed through valida-
tion and calibration studies and their real-world feasibil-
ity tested in population-based studies and intervention 
trials.16
Self-report Assessments
The virtue of self-report measures is that they can be 
context specific; however, accuracy across contexts 
varies. TV viewing time at home typically is reported with 
considerable accuracy.17,18 On the other hand, self-re-
port measures of workplace sedentary behavior appear 
to be less accurate, with sitting time underestimated 
compared with device-derived measures.19 In the con-
text of transport, little is known about the measurement 
properties for time spent sitting in motor vehicles.20
Self-report instruments range from a single item to de-
tailed questionnaires to complex behavior diaries; which 
instrument to use depends on the information’s purpose. 
Although not an exhaustive list, the Sedentary Behaviour 
Research Network identifies 13 questionnaires on its 
website.21 In 2011, Healy et al14 reviewed the reliabil-
ity and validity of self-report sedentary behavior instru-
ments. Test-retest reliability has been assessed from 3 
days to 2 months, with correlation coefficients ranging 
from 0.30 to 0.97. Validity against accelerometers as 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Young et al
September 27, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e262–e279. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000440
e264
the criterion resulted in correlation coefficients of 0.07 
to 0.49. Criterion correlations tended to be higher when 
an activity log was used as the criterion, although a large 
range was still reported (r=0.13 to 0.75). When select-
ing an appropriate self-report instrument, investigators 
should consider the primary aim of the study or project, 
the target population, the importance of the context of 
the behavior, and logistical constraints.22 Also, a com-
bination of simple forms of self-report (eg, work start 
time, lunch break time, and finishing time) or the use of 
travel diaries to identify time spent sitting in vehicles can 
be combined with device-based measurement to provide 
accurate context-anchored assessments.13,15
device-Based Assessments
Accelerometers have been the most commonly used de-
vices to objectively monitor sedentary time. Accelerom-
eters measure acceleration, defined as change in veloc-
ity. Participants have traditionally worn accelerometers 
on a belt around their waist during waking hours and 
remove them for water-based activities, a methodology 
and protocol that has been shown to be both valid and 
reliable.23,24 Wearing a device on a wrist or ankle can 
be helpful in quantifying behaviors that have different 
positions25,26 and can be less burdensome than using 
a waist-worn device. The movement detected by accel-
erometers is converted to electrical signals or “counts” 
that can be summed over a period of time to quantify 
total sedentary time (minutes) or patterns of sedentary 
time (eg, duration of bouts or episodes, breaks in sed-
entary time).14 Data from accelerometers are typically 
reported as a percentage of total wear time or absolute 
hours per day.
Although objective devices reduce measurement 
error associated with self-report, they do have limita-
tions. As mentioned previously, they are not able to 
provide context or domain for the behavior. However, 
SLEEP
8.3 hours
LIGHT
7.8 hours
SEDENTARY
7.7 hours
New evidence 
emerging on its 
contribution  to 
cardiovascular risk
Limited evidence 
available on its 
association with 
cardiovascular risk
Substantial evidence 
available on its 
association 
with cardiovascular risk
Basis for physical activity 
guidelines
MVPA 0.2 hours
Figure. Estimated daily time spent 
in different contexts of energy 
expenditure among adults, based 
on the national Health and nutrition 
Examination Survey.6,7 
Light time=24–MVPA–Sleep–Sedentary 
time. MVPA indicates moderate to vigor-
ous physical activity.
Table.  Common Sedentary Behavior Activities Performed While Sitting or reclining That require Energy 
Expenditure <1.5 METs
Home
Work/School
Transportation
Leisure
TV viewing: sitting, reclining
Computer work
Driving or riding in a vehicle
Playing an instrument 
Talking on the phone
 Sitting
Arts and crafts
Listening to music
Writing
Knitting/sewing
Eating
Talking on the phone
Meditating
Bathing
Sitting in class
Playing cards or board games
Reading
Typing
Viewing a sports event
Reading
Attending a religious service
METS indicates metabolic equivalents; and TV, television.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Sedentary Behavior and Cardiovascular Morbidity and Mortality
Circulation. 2016;134:e262–e279. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000440 
September 27, 2016
e265
CLiniCAL STATEMEnTS 
And GUidELinES
new emerging analytic methods, such as neural network 
techniques, could help to identify specific activities 
through pattern recognition.27 Furthermore, accelerom-
eters worn around the waist are not able to accurately 
detect lower-body movements in activities such as cy-
cling, water-based activities, or upper-body movements 
associated with activities like resistance training. Thus, 
these activities might be misclassified as sedentary. 
Although wearing a device on a wrist or ankle can mini-
mize these limitations, the validity of the data when used 
in this position is still being established.25,26 Further-
more, accelerometers can be inaccurate in distinguish-
ing sitting from standing,14 although those that include 
inclinometers could mitigate this concern. New analytic 
techniques are being developed that identify, analyze, 
and visually present sedentary behaviors from wrist-
worn triaxial accelerometers28 and that are capable of 
assessing posture by including inclinometers.29–33 Other 
methods in development include inclinometers that are 
combined with cameras to assess body position and 
estimate sedentary behavior.34
Accelerometer data reduction involves several steps. 
A count-per-minute cut point can be chosen to quantify 
time in sedentary behavior. Less than 100 counts per 
minute is most commonly used to identify sedentary time 
from waist-worn accelerometers.35 Devices worn at the 
wrist or ankle might require different thresholds, which 
are not known at this time because these techniques 
are still being evaluated.36 For data analysis, wear-time 
algorithms take into account how many hours within a 
day, how many days, and which days (weekday and/or 
weekend) the device is worn to determine whether there 
has been adequate wear time to characterize sedentary 
time, and many variations of data processing exist within 
the sedentary behavior research literature.14,35 Choosing 
different algorithms for wear time can result in signifi-
cantly different estimates for sedentary time.37 Thus, ac-
celerometer data reduction can be quite complex; it is a 
sedentary behavior research priority to standardize data 
reduction techniques.29
Sedentary Behavior Measurement: Summary  
of Key Findings
• There is no “gold standard” for sedentary behavior 
assessment; self-report measures provide infor-
mation on the behavioral context that is not avail-
able from objective measures.
• New objective measures are under development 
to assess body position. Reliability and validity 
properties will need to be established.
• Approaching accelerometry data processing with 
standardized procedures can help to better syn-
thesize the sedentary behavior scientific literature. 
Existing datasets can be reanalyzed after stan-
dardized methods are in place.
SEdEnTAry BEHAvior PrEvALEnCE
Data from economic, occupational, and time use surveys 
suggest that sedentary behavior has increased at the 
population level from the 1960s. Sedentary occupations 
constituted ≈15% of the total US jobs in 1960, increas-
ing to >20% by 2008.38 Ng and Popkin, using time use 
data, reported that average sedentary time increased 
from 26 hours per week in 1965 to 38 hours in 2009 in 
the United States and from 30 hours per week in 1960 
to 42 hours per week in 2005 in the United Kingdom.39 
Because of insufficient measurement tools, more spe-
cific data are not available to be able to more definitively 
ascertain trends. In the 2000s, sedentary behavior be-
gan to be reported from large population-based surveys 
using a variety of assessment methods and resulting in 
differing estimates of its prevalence.
On the basis of objective measurement from acceler-
ometers, adults spend an average of 6 to 8 hours per 
day in sedentary time,6,7,18,40–42 and adults >60 years 
of age average 8.5 to 9.6 hours per day in sedentary 
time.43–48 Data from NHANES suggest these findings 
on sedentary time remained stable from 2003–2004 
to 2005–2006.6,7 Those who spent more time in MVPA 
had similar sedentary time to those who were less physi-
cally active (mean sedentary time 472 minutes per day 
vs 489 minutes per day [7.9 hours per day versus 8.2 
hours per day]),7 which suggests that MVPA might not 
displace sedentary time.
Evidence conflicts as to whether there are sex dif-
ferences: the 2003 to 2004 NHANES accelerometer 
data indicate that women <60 years of age were more 
sedentary than men, although after age 60, men were 
more sedentary.6 Other studies also concluded that old-
er women were less sedentary than older men.40,43,46 A 
recent review concluded that there was no difference in 
sedentary time by sex, although studies of adults and 
older adults were combined.49 Occupational status and 
type, as well other factors (eg, child-caring responsibili-
ties, chores, volunteer activities), might vary by sex and 
age and could confound results, which makes demo-
graphic comparisons difficult to interpret.
Self-report data on sedentary behavior (queried by 
time spent sitting, TV viewing, computer use, screen 
time) are less consistent, with the amount of time in 
sedentary behaviors ranging from 2 to 8 hours per 
day.50–55 Differences might result from the self-report 
assessment, domain, context, and country exam-
ined. For example, civil service employees in North-
ern Ireland reported sitting an average of 7.8 hours 
per day.55 In contrast, a large review examining sitting 
time, as measured by the International Physical Activity 
Questionnaire, with 49 493 adults residing in 20 coun-
tries reported an average sitting time of ≈5 hours per 
day,52 which is similar to the results reported in the 
2010 US National Health Interview Survey.51 A recent 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Young et al
September 27, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e262–e279. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000440
e266
review of research conducted with older adults found 
59% reported sitting for >4 hours and 27% reported 
sitting for >6 hours per day.47
TV viewing, a common leisure-time sedentary be-
havior, is a subset of sitting time, and thus, time spent 
watching TV is lower than overall sedentary time. For 
example, accelerometry data from the 2008 Health Sur-
vey for England found that on average, adults spent 8.5 
hours per day in sedentary time, of which ≈4 hours per 
day was reported to be TV viewing.41 In an Australian 
sample of ≈10 
000 adults, the mean daily time self-re-
ported watching TV was 2 hours for men and 1.8 hours 
for women.54 A large US study, based on self-report, 
found more than half of all adults viewed >2 hours of 
TV per day.56 TV viewing time might be greater for older 
adults: A review found that 54% and 53% reported TV 
watching time and screen time, respectively, for >3 
hours per day.47
Sedentary Behavior Prevalence by race/Ethnicity
The association between race/ethnicity and sed-
entary behavior has been examined in a number of 
large adult samples.57–69 Most have focused on TV 
viewing time; it has been commonly found that blacks 
watch more TV than adults of other races/ethnici-
ties.60,62,63,65,66,69–71 For example, Bowman56 analyzed 
data from 9157 adults and found that blacks were 
more likely to watch >2 hours per day of TV than other 
racial/ethnic groups. However, these findings must be 
considered in the context of the inherent limitations 
of survey-based studies; large reliability differences 
between race/ethnic groups have been found, with TV 
viewing time questions more reliable for white than 
black populations.72
An NHANES analysis found a positive association be-
tween TV viewing time and total sedentary time across 
all racial/ethnic groups18 ; however, for blacks and Mexi-
can Americans, the association between TV viewing time 
categories and average sedentary time was only signifi-
cant for those reporting ≥5 hours of TV viewing per day 
compared with the <1 hour category. In contrast, the 
association between the 2 variables was more linear 
for non-Hispanic whites. Three studies showed no asso-
ciation between screen time or general sitting time and 
race/ethnicity.57,59,73
Another NHANES analysis using data collected from 
accelerometers in 2003 to 2004 found that Mexican 
American adults spent significantly less time being sed-
entary than other US adults. There was no difference 
in sedentary time between white and black adults, with 
one exception: White men aged 40 to 59 years were 
more sedentary than same-aged black men.6 One major 
review of sedentary behavior prevalence in adults was 
not able to find consistent associations between race/
ethnicity and sedentary time.49
Sedentary Behavior Prevalence: Summary  
of Key Findings
• Prevalence of sedentary behavior differs depend-
ing on the assessment tool; however, it is esti-
mated that adults spend 6 to 8 hours per day in 
sedentary behavior, including sitting, TV viewing, 
screen time, and computer use. The prevalence is 
greater for older adults.
• Data conflict as to whether there are differences 
in sedentary behavior by sex or race/ethnicity. 
Different instruments and types of sedentary behav-
ior assessed contribute to the differences.
PoTEnTiAL PSyCHoSoCiAL And 
EnvironMEnTAL inFLUEnCES on 
SEdEnTAry BEHAvior
The documentation of prevalence in sedentary behav-
ior overall and across demographic groups helps to 
identify those at potentially higher risk; however, such 
evidence does not identify mutable factors for interven-
tions to reduce sedentary behavior. An ecological model 
across the 4 domains of sedentary behavior proposes 
that multiple levels of determining factors will influence 
sedentary behaviors differently in these domains.74 Al-
though the relevant evidence is still rudimentary, studies 
have begun to identify some of the correlates of seden-
tary behaviors. Most studies have used cross-sectional 
designs, which can identify significant associations but 
cannot infer causality. Nevertheless, evidence on the 
correlates of sedentary behaviors, particularly on cogni-
tive, social, and environmental attributes, can generate 
plausible hypotheses to be tested and can provide initial 
insights relevant to the development of interventions.
Psychosocial influences
A number of cross-sectional studies have shown higher 
sedentary time to be inversely associated with psy-
chological well-being49,75 and health-related quality of 
life49,76,77 and positively associated with depressive 
symptoms.49,78 The psychosocial constructs of attitudes 
toward sedentary behavior, social norms, social sup-
port, and self-efficacy for sitting less have varying cross-
sectional associations.79–82 Prospective associations or 
results from intervention studies examining psychosocial 
variables as outcomes or mediators of effects are not 
currently available in the literature.
Built Environment influences
The built environment could play a role in promoting 
some sedentary behaviors or discouraging other health-
enhancing behaviors such as physical activity, although 
the existing evidence for associations is modest.83 A pre-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Sedentary Behavior and Cardiovascular Morbidity and Mortality
Circulation. 2016;134:e262–e279. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000440 
September 27, 2016
e267
CLiniCAL STATEMEnTS 
And GUidELinES
intervention/postintervention study that manipulated the 
microenvironment of sedentary behavior (by removing 
seating from a playground) found significantly less sitting 
among adults visiting the park with children.84 Also, the 
adults were more likely to engage in MVPA (odds ratio, 
4.50; 95% confidence interval [CI], 2.1–9.8) relative to 
sitting, although no difference was found between sitting 
and standing. Cross-sectional associations for macroen-
vironmental factors (eg, land use mix, walkability) and 
sedentary behavior have been mixed, with some studies 
finding no associations85 and others reporting positive 
associations.74,86 One study in Australia indicated that liv-
ing in low-walkable neighborhoods was associated with 
a greater increase in TV time over 4 years for those 
residents who were unemployed.87
Summary of Key Findings: Potential influences
• There is cross-sectional evidence that psychologi-
cal well-being could be inversely associated with 
sedentary behavior, but prospective studies are 
needed to understand the directionality of poten-
tial associations.
• Little evidence exists on how built environment 
attributes might contribute to the amount of time 
spent in sedentary behavior.
PoTEnTiAL GEnETiC inFLUEnCES on 
SEdEnTAry BEHAvior
There is some evidence to suggest that a predisposition 
toward sedentary behavior is in part genetically deter-
mined. In an objective measurement of behavior, which 
used heart rate and movement sensors in monozygotic 
and dizygotic twins, the heritability of sedentary behavior 
was estimated at 31% (95% CI, 9%–51%), with heritabil-
ity of physical activity energy expenditure estimated at 
47% (95% CI, 23%–53%).88
Several investigator groups have used candidate 
gene approaches to assess the effects of genetic vari-
ation on sedentary behavior phenotypes.89 Genes that 
have been investigated and might be involved in physi-
cal activity or inactivity include ACE, CASR, DRD2, ED-
NRB, FABP2, FTO, LEPR, MC4R, NHLH2, SLC9A9, and 
UCP189,90; however, results are conflicting, and many 
findings have not been replicated. Although agnostic 
analytic approaches through genome-wide association 
studies have not yet yielded convincing loci, larger 
sample sizes combined with objective measurements 
of sedentary behavior might be required to detect sig-
nificant effects. It is likely that multiple genetic variants 
with small effect sizes are present in the population 
and could interact with environmental factors to con-
tribute to the overall degree of sedentary behavior in 
an individual.
Summary of Key Findings: Potential influences
• There might be a significant genetic component 
contributing to sedentary behavior in individuals; 
however, no specific loci have been convincingly 
identified and replicated.
SEdEnTAry BEHAvior And Cvd And 
diABETES MELLiTUS riSK, MorBidiTy, And 
MorTALiTy
There is now a substantial body of prospective data on 
associations of sedentary behavior with risk of developing 
diabetes mellitus and CVD, as well as with overall mor-
tality. Several (mainly cross-sectional) studies have also 
found significant associations of sedentary time (deleteri-
ous) and breaks from sedentary time (protective) with risk 
biomarkers.91 However, this body of evidence is modest 
compared with what is known about how higher physical 
activity is associated with lower CVD and diabetes mel-
litus risk. For the most part, the sedentary behavior stud-
ies have arisen from existing cross-sectional and cohort 
studies that have baseline self-report assessments of ≥1 
sedentary behavior domains (most commonly self-report-
ed), with the outcomes of interest obtained over follow-up. 
More recent studies have been able to statistically control 
for the effects of either leisure-time MVPA or total physi-
cal activity, thus leading to analyses to assess the inde-
pendent effects of sedentary behavior on the outcomes. 
Other work has investigated the potential health benefits 
of reallocating sedentary time to alternative activities (ie, 
sleep, light-intensity activity, MVPA) via isotemporal substi-
tution modeling.92,93 In studies in which the sample sizes 
were sufficient, effects by major population subgroups, 
such as sex and race/ethnicity, have also been reported.
Metabolic Syndrome
Metabolic syndrome is a cluster of risk factors that in-
crease risk for CVD and diabetes mellitus. In the United 
States, ≈34% of US adults have metabolic syndrome.94 
Few studies have reported on prospective associations of 
sedentary behavior as a possible risk factor for develop-
ing metabolic syndrome. A meta-analysis of 10 cross-sec-
tional studies found that greater time spent in sedentary 
behavior resulted in higher odds of metabolic syndrome 
(odds ratio, 1.73; 95% CI, 1.55–1.94)95; however, 9 of 
the 10 studies defined sedentary behavior from self-
reported screen time.95 More recent research has de-
fined sedentary behavior using either reports of total 
sitting time or low activity counts from accelerometer 
data. Results have shown a robust positive association 
of self-reported sitting time with odds of metabolic syn-
drome,96–100 even with adjustment for MVPA. Only 2 stud-
ies have examined prospective associations of sedentary 
behavior and metabolic syndrome. Wijndaele et al101 found 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Young et al
September 27, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e262–e279. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000440
e268
that baseline TV time was not significantly associated 
with 5-year change in a clustered metabolic risk score, a 
measure analogous to metabolic syndrome; however, an 
increase in TV time over this period was associated with 
an increase in the score in women but not men.101 Shuval 
et al102 found that prolonged baseline sedentary behavior 
(TV viewing or sitting in a car) was not associated with 
metabolic syndrome incidence in men. Sedentary time 
assessed from objective measures examining develop-
ment of metabolic syndrome has not been reported.
diabetes Mellitus
A small number of prospective studies have investigated 
the association of sedentary behavior as a risk factor for 
developing type 2 diabetes mellitus, with most showing 
a consistent positive association.58,103–105 Meta-analyses 
and systematic reviews have confirmed this association, 
reporting a fairly consistent effect size with little evidence 
of publication bias.106–108 In the meta-analysis by Grøntved 
et al,107 each additional 2 hours per day in TV viewing 
was associated with a relative risk of 1.20 (95% CI, 1.14–
1.27) of developing type 2 diabetes mellitus. High seden-
tary behavior has been associated with increased risk of 
type 2 diabetes mellitus in both men104 and women58 of 
diverse ethnic backgrounds.105 Most studies have investi-
gated sedentary behavior in the context of physical activ-
ity and found that both high sedentary behavior and low 
MVPA independently predicted higher risk of developing 
type 2 diabetes mellitus.58,103–105 The association between 
high sedentary behavior and higher risk of type 2 diabetes 
mellitus was also found to be independent of the demo-
graphic characteristics of age, sex, race/ethnicity, and 
socioeconomic status. Adjustment for indices of adiposity 
(typically body mass index [BMI] or waist circumference) in 
the models usually reduced the effect size,58,103–105 which 
supports the notion that the association could be medi-
ated in part through excess weight. For example, in the 
previously mentioned meta-analysis, controlling for BMI 
reduced the relative risk to 1.13 (95% CI, 1.08–1.18) for 
each additional 2 hours of daily TV viewing time.107
Most studies have used self-reported TV viewing time 
to assess sedentary behavior; however, in the Nurses’ 
Health Study,58 increased risk of developing type 2 
diabetes mellitus was associated with other sedentary 
behaviors (such as sitting at work, away from home, 
or while driving) and with sitting at home, whereas low-
intensity activity behaviors such as standing or walking 
around home were associated with reduced risk of type 
2 diabetes mellitus. Specifically, they found that each 
additional 2 hours per day of TV viewing was associated 
with a 14% (95% CI, 5%–23%) increase in the risk of type 
2 diabetes mellitus, whereas each additional 2 hours per 
day in standing or walking around the home was associ-
ated with a 12% (95% CI, 7%–16%) reduction in risk of 
type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Cardiovascular disease
A number of meta-analyses and reviews have been pub-
lished in the past several years evaluating the prospective 
evidence on the associations of sedentary behavior with 
CVD outcomes.106,107,109,110 Although sedentary behavior 
was assessed using different methods from studies eval-
uated by several meta-analyses and systematic reviews, 
increased risk was found to be consistent for TV time 
and CVD events (hazard ratio [HR], 1.17 [95% CI, 1.13–
1.20]109; relative risk, 1.15 [95% CI, 1.06–1.23]107), with 
a greater risk when defined as overall sedentary behavior 
for CVD incidence (pooled relative risk, 2.47; 95% CI, 
1.44–4.24110) and for CVD mortality (pooled HR, 1.90; 
95% CI, 1.36–2.66110). In an analysis of data from the 
EPIC (European Prospective Investigation Into Cancer and 
Nutrition) Norfolk study, Wijndaele et al111 demonstrated 
that each additional hour per day of TV viewing was as-
sociated with an increased risk for incident total (fatal and 
nonfatal) CVD (HR, 1.06; 95% CI, 1.03–1.08), nonfatal 
CVD (HR, 1.06; 95% CI, 1.03–1.09), and coronary heart 
disease (HR 1.08, 95% CI, 1.03–1.13) after adjustment 
for a number of covariates, including demographics, es-
timated total daily physical activity, CVD, and diabetes 
mellitus history. BMI only partially mediated the effects. 
Stamatakis et al112 also reported a significant association 
(HR, 2.10; 95% CI, 1.14–3.88) between screen time (≥4 
hours per day versus <2 hours per day) and incident CVD 
events (fatal and nonfatal) among Scottish adults after ad-
justment for sociodemographics, health status, obesity 
status, and MVPA. Chomistek et al113 reported that sitting 
at least 10 hours per day versus ≤5 hours per day was 
associated with an increased risk of incident fatal and 
nonfatal CVD (HR, 1.18; 95% CI, 1.05–1.32) among mid-
dle-aged American women participating in the Women’s 
Health Initiative, after adjustment for leisure-time physical 
activity, sociodemographics, dietary patterns, CVD risk 
factor status, and BMI. The risk of incident stroke (HR, 
1.21; 95% CI, 1.07–1.37) was of a similar magnitude.113 
The association between sedentary behavior and CVD in-
cidence does not appear to be appreciably altered by the 
inclusion of BMI as a covariate.107
All-Cause and Cause-Specific Mortality
Several large prospective cohort studies have shown 
significant associations between sedentary behavior 
and mortality risk.114–121 Most have used self-report mea-
sures, including time spent watching TV, sitting, lying 
down, or riding in a car. For example, the US National In-
stitutes of Health–AARP Diet and Health Study119 followed 
up 240 
819 middle-aged adults for a mean of 8.5 years, 
classifying them according to time spent in TV viewing, 
sitting, and MVPA. All-cause, CVD, and cancer deaths and 
other causes of mortality were each significantly related 
to greater time spent TV viewing, even after adjustment 
for demographics and MVPA. Time spent sitting was re-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Sedentary Behavior and Cardiovascular Morbidity and Mortality
Circulation. 2016;134:e262–e279. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000440 
September 27, 2016
e269
CLiniCAL STATEMEnTS 
And GUidELinES
lated to all-cause death and other causes of mortality (but 
not CVD or cancer). The SUN (Seguimiento Universidad 
de Navarra) cohort, a follow-up of graduates of the Uni-
versity of Navarre in Spain, examined self-reported TV 
viewing, computer use, and driving at baseline over a me-
dian follow-up of 8.2 years.114 Participants reporting ≥3 
hours per day of TV viewing had twice the risk of mortality 
of those reporting <1 hour per day after adjustment for 
multiple covariates, including leisure-time physical activity 
(incidence rate ratio, 2.04; 95% CI, 1.16–3.57). There 
were no subgroup differences by sex, BMI, or leisure-time 
physical activity. There were no significant associations 
with computer use or time spent driving, although small 
to moderate relationships cannot be ruled out given the 
relatively small number of deaths (n=128) and wide CIs.
Two recent prospective studies have examined this is-
sue with objective measures of sedentary time. In the Mr 
OS study (Osteoporotic Fractures in Men), men ≥71 years 
old wore an armband activity monitor and were followed up 
for an average of 4.5 years.122 Comparisons of quartiles of 
time spent in sedentary behavior, light activity, and MVPA 
were made with respect to all-cause mortality: (1) More 
time spent in sedentary behavior (at least 915 minutes per 
day) compared with the least (<77 minutes per day) had 
an HR of 1.79 (95% CI, 1.19–2.70); (2) less time spent 
in light activity (<42 minutes per day) compared with the 
most (≥88 minutes per day) had an HR of 1.57 (95% CI, 
1.08–2.29); and (3) less time spent in MVPA (<38 minutes) 
compared with the most (≥114 minutes per day) had an 
HR of 1.58 (95% CI, 1.10–2.27). The association between 
sedentary time and mortality was most pronounced in men 
who were exceeding current recommendations for MVPA, 
which suggests that MVPA does not counter the risks of 
also being highly sedentary. In the second study, Koster et 
al123 studied NHANES participants ≥50 years of age who 
had at least 1 valid day of accelerometer data. After an 
average follow-up of 2.8 years, all-cause mortality risk in-
creased significantly with greater sedentary time in both 
the third and fourth quartiles, whether hours per day or per-
cent time spent being sedentary was assessed. People in 
the highest quartile of the proportion of time spent being 
sedentary (>73.5% of time in men and >70.5% of time 
in women) had a nearly 6 times greater risk of death 
(HR, 5.94; 95% CI, 2.49–14.15) compared with those in 
the lowest quartile of sedentary time (55.4% in men and 
53.9% in women); these associations were independent 
of time spent in MVPA, mobility limitation, demographics, 
and multiple morbidities.
Several reviews, systematic reviews, and meta-analy-
ses have also examined sedentary behavior and mortal-
ity.106–110,124–126 These have shown fairly consistent rela-
tionships between various sedentary behavior measures 
and all-cause and CVD mortality, whereas findings for 
cancer mortality were not consistent. One meta-analysis 
evaluated the effects of sedentary behavior in adults 
who were classified as physically active and physically in-
active. The results showed that the effects of sedentary 
time on all-cause mortality were greater among those 
with low levels of physical activity (HR, 1.46; 95% CI, 
1.22–1.75) than among those with high levels of physi-
cal activity (HR, 1.16; 95% CI, 0.84–1.59).106
Isotemporal substitution modeling analyses are start-
ing to appear in the literature to attempt to discern the 
morbidity and mortality benefits that could be achieved 
when sedentary time is replaced with other movement 
behaviors. In an analysis of older adults participating in 
the National Institutes of Health–AARP Diet and Health 
Study, the effects on all-cause mortality of replacing 1 
hour of sedentary time with MVPA, or exercise, and non-
exercise behaviors was much greater among those who 
were physically inactive than among those who were 
physically active.93 In contrast, a cross-sectional study 
using similar modeling procedures with NHANES 2005 
to 2006 accelerometry data indicated that replacing 
sedentary time with MVPA yielded the greatest benefits 
in CVD risk factors.92 Future work emerging from these 
modeling approaches will inform eventual public health 
messages regarding the intensity of activity needed to 
replace sedentary time to confer CVD-reducing benefits.
Summary of Key Findings: Sedentary Behavior 
and Cvd and diabetes Mellitus risk
• Prospective evidence is accumulating that seden-
tary behavior could be a risk factor for CVD and 
diabetes mellitus morbidity and mortality and for 
all-cause mortality. The degree to which this is 
independent of the effects of MVPA needs further 
study.
PoTEnTiAL MECHAniSMS To ExPLAin THE 
ASSoCiATionS oF SEdEnTAry BEHAvior 
WiTH Cvd And diABETES MELLiTUS riSK 
And MorTALiTy
For MVPA, there is a large body of experimental evidence 
identifying how different durations, intensities, and types 
of physical activity can influence CVD risk biomarkers.127 
Although this work provides insights of potential rel-
evance to understanding the mechanistic basis for the 
association of sedentary behavior with CVD and diabetes 
mellitus risk, it is likely that sedentary behavior influenc-
es risk in part through some distinct mechanisms that 
act independent of MVPA.128 Physical inactivity, whether 
genetically determined (eg, in animal models of reduced 
physical activity) or forced (eg, animal models using run-
ning wheel lock or hindlimb unloading), can influence pre-
cursors of CVD and diabetes mellitus. There is evidence 
that important effects of increasing physical activity can 
be mediated centrally through the brain129–131 and that 
the metabolic and vascular consequences of inadequate 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Young et al
September 27, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e262–e279. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000440
e270
physical activity appear to be mediated primarily through 
peripheral tissues and cells, including muscle, adipose 
tissue, and endothelial and inflammatory cells.132 There 
is considerable cross talk between skeletal muscle, adi-
pose tissue, and other organs and tissues,133 and it is 
likely that physical inactivity (and potentially sedentary 
behavior) could lead to CVD or diabetes mellitus through 
a complex systemic network of responses.
An immediate result of a change from a high physi-
cal activity state to a highly sedentary state is a reduc-
tion in muscle and systemic insulin sensitivity, and if the 
resulting energy imbalance is sustained, adipose tissue 
will expand.134 The consequences of energy surplus, adi-
posity, and insulin resistance on inflammation and CVD 
risk have been well described.135–137 Additionally, post-
prandial glucose spikes are regular daily exposures that 
can promote oxidative stress, triggering a biochemical 
inflammatory cascade, endothelial dysfunction, and sym-
pathetic hyperactivity. This creates a chronic biological 
state of exaggerated postprandial dysmetabolism, a mi-
lieu conducive for the development of atherosclerosis 
and CVD.138,139 A decrease in insulin sensitivity that re-
sults from becoming sedentary can occur independent 
of increased adiposity or energy surplus. Relative to the 
physically active condition, 3 days of inactivity (reduc-
tion in daily steps from ≈12 
000 to 5000) resulted in 
significantly higher postprandial glucose concentra-
tions obtained from a free-living diet, with no change in 
weight.140 Stephens et al141 found that compared with 
a low physical activity but minimal sitting condition (<6 
hours per day), 41% greater insulin was required after a 
standard glucose infusion after 1 day in the high sitting 
condition (>16 hours per day) when in positive energy 
balance, and 20% greater insulin was required in the high 
sitting/energy balance condition. When 7 hours of sit-
ting time was broken up by 2-minute bouts of either light 
or moderate activity every 20 minutes, insulin sensitivity 
in response to a standard glucose load was increased 
compared with uninterrupted sitting.142 These studies 
exemplify the short-term peripheral effects of becom-
ing sedentary and how they can be mitigated with even 
light physical activity. How these physiological changes 
might progress to pathophysiological changes has not 
yet been demonstrated in animal or human studies.
Blood flow increases from a seated to a standing 
position and is further increased during physical activity 
in response to increased oxygen requirements in mus-
cle. The increase in blood flow affects the vasculature 
through both mechanical and molecular signaling, with 
increased shear stress, as well as increases in signaling 
molecules and vasodilators.143 The absence of exercise-
induced hemodynamic vascular signaling brought on by 
sedentary behavior is thought to lead to dysregulation 
and development of inflammatory-mediated atherogen-
esis,132 as well as altered muscle gene expression.144 
Acute laboratory-based studies provide some initial evi-
dence to support this hypothesis: 5 days of inactivity 
(<5000 steps per day) among regularly physically active 
young men reduced vascular dilation function compared 
with the physically active state.145 Furthermore, 3 hours 
of uninterrupted sitting also reduced vascular function; 
however, 5-minute bouts of light walking at regular inter-
vals prevented this decline.146
There are clearly physiological changes that occur 
when physically active individuals become inactive. 
Changes can also be detected in experiments testing 
prolonged sitting conditions. Despite these potentially 
relevant findings on how physical inactivity can be as-
sociated with biological dysregulation, we do not have 
direct evidence that this leads to CVD. Additionally, the 
distinction between the positive benefits of MVPA and 
the deleterious consequences of physical inactivity ver-
sus the newly identified negative effects of sedentary 
behavior remains unresolved.128 For example, is CVD 
risk in sedentary behavior mediated primarily through 
the absence of exercise-derived signaling molecules 
or through adverse signaling that occurs specifically 
through sedentary behavior? Further studies in animals 
and humans and increased use of unbiased profiling 
techniques could shed light on additional molecular me-
diators of sedentary behavior-associated CVD risk and 
pave the way for novel therapeutic options.
Summary of Key Findings: Potential Mechanisms
• Sedentary behavior might increase CVD and diabe-
tes mellitus risk through distinct mechanisms that 
are independent of MVPA; however, further study 
is needed.
• Reduced insulin sensitivity is found during pro-
longed sedentary behavior that can be mitigated 
with short bouts of physical activity.
• Substantially more research using animal and 
human models is needed to understand patho-
physiological changes that support the epidemio-
logical research findings.
inTErvEnTionS To rEdUCE SEdEnTAry 
BEHAvior
There is a modest body of evidence on interventions 
with adults to reduce sedentary behavior. These have fo-
cused primarily on those settings most associated with 
sedentary behavior: TV viewing and the workplace. More 
recent interventions have used technology to encourage 
participants to take breaks from prolonged sitting. Few 
interventions have included participants from a range of 
sociodemographic and cultural backgrounds.147
In a systematic review of interventions for reducing 
sedentary time in adults, Prince et al148 performed a me-
ta-analysis of 7 interventions, the primary focus of which 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Sedentary Behavior and Cardiovascular Morbidity and Mortality
Circulation. 2016;134:e262–e279. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000440 
September 27, 2016
e271
CLiniCAL STATEMEnTS 
And GUidELinES
was the reduction of sedentary behavior. The interven-
tions focused on reducing overall sitting time or sitting 
in the workplace. They found that these interventions 
resulted in a significant and clinically meaningful reduc-
tion in self-reported and objectively measured sedentary 
time, with a mean difference of 91 minutes per day be-
tween the intervention and control groups. The quality 
of the studies was classified as very low and moderate, 
however, which implies that further research is needed 
to provide confidence in the estimate. In the same re-
view, they also performed meta-analyses on interven-
tions that measured sedentary behavior but were primar-
ily focused on physical activity (n=22) or both physical 
activity and sedentary behavior (n=6). In these studies, 
the effect sizes were modest, with a mean difference of 
19 minutes per day between the intervention and control 
groups in the physical activity–focused interventions and 
35 minutes per day in the 6 interventions that focused 
on both behaviors. These results suggest that to reduce 
sedentary time, an intervention must focus specifically 
on the behavior rather than intend for a reduction of sed-
entary behavior to be a carryover effect of increasing 
physical activity.
Many workplace-based interventions have used activi-
ty-permissive workstations to reduce sedentary behavior 
by enabling office workers to stand, walk, or pedal while 
working at their usual computer and other desk-based 
job tasks. In a meta-analysis of 8 interventions using ac-
tivity-permissive workstations, Neuhaus et al149 reported 
a mean difference in intervention and control groups of 
77 minutes per 8-hour workday, which suggests that in-
stallation of such workstations can lead to substantial 
reductions in sedentary time.
There is increasing interest in using technology to re-
duce sedentary behavior, for example, using smartphone 
applications (apps) to interrupt sedentary time. These 
technologies offer the potential to deliver time- and con-
text-sensitive health information across a broad segment 
of the population.150 Smartphone apps can be designed 
that incorporate behavior change theory strategies (self-
monitoring, goal setting, positive reinforcement)151 and 
social networking152 and provide just-in-time interven-
tions in which prolonged sedentary behavior is detected 
in real time and participants are then encouraged to en-
gage in brief physical activity breaks of at least light in-
tensity.153,154 Recently, Bond et al153 used a smartphone 
app to monitor and interrupt sedentary behavior in real 
time in 30 overweight or obese adults. Participants were 
presented with 3 smartphone-based physical activity 
break conditions in counterbalanced order: (1) 3-minute 
break after 30 minutes of sitting time; (2) 6-minute break 
after 60 minutes; or (3) 12-minute break after 60 min-
utes. Participants followed each condition for 7 days. All 
3 of the break conditions yielded significant decreases in 
sedentary time, with the 3-minute break condition being 
superior to the 12-minute break condition. As rates of 
smartphone ownership continue to increase, it is likely 
that future interventions for reducing sedentary behavior 
will rely on mobile apps because of their adaptability and 
scalability, so that interventions can be conducted on 
larger samples across multiple populations in a variety 
of different settings.
Key Findings: interventions
• Interventions focusing solely on reducing sedentary 
behavior appear to be more effective at reducing 
sedentary behavior than those that include strate-
gies for both increasing physical activity and reduc-
ing sedentary behaviors.
• The use of technology to reduce sedentary behav-
iors requires further study but appears promising.
rECoMMEndATionS For FUTUrE rESEArCH 
on SEdEnTAry BEHAvior
As indicated by the reference list that accompanies this 
science advisory, the scientific evidence for the deleteri-
ous CVD effects of sedentary behavior is quite recent. 
Thus, the future research needs are vast.
Reliable, valid, precise, and standard measures of 
sedentary behavior are needed for both self-report and 
objective assessments. Researchers working in this field 
have a unique opportunity to come to a consensus on 
a set of self-report instruments that assess sedentary 
behavior across the various behavior domains and pro-
tocols, data processing methods, and summaries of 
sedentary time using devices. Common sets of mea-
surements will allow for meaningful systematic reviews 
and meta-analysis results. With common measurement 
instruments, researchers can more accurately ascertain 
which population subgroups are at increased risk for be-
ing sedentary and in which contexts. We will also learn 
more about where sedentary behaviors are most likely to 
occur and what domains are associated with the great-
est CVD risk.
The risk of adverse CVD and diabetes mellitus out-
comes associated with sedentary behavior must be 
quantified. This is necessary to produce specific guide-
lines for limits of sedentary time and in which contexts 
sedentary behavior might be particularly deleterious. 
Evidence is insufficient to determine a threshold for how 
much sedentary behavior is too much; a linear, dose-
response pattern with no identifiable threshold is a possi-
bility. Valid and reliable instruments are key to accurately 
assess the patterns of association between sedentary 
behavior and adverse CVD outcomes. Advanced analytic 
techniques may be needed to understand the cardiovas-
cular health risks across the continuum of movement be-
haviors. Identification of the amounts or patterns of sed-
entary behavior at which cardiovascular risk becomes 
elevated is a key research issue.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Young et al
September 27, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e262–e279. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000440
e272
Surveillance on the prevalence of sedentary behavior 
among the population must continue. National surveil-
lance should be made with valid and reliable sedentary 
behavior assessment methods. Surveillance should in-
clude not only overall sedentary behavior but also the 
contexts in which the behaviors occur and the time spent 
in different sedentary behaviors.
More data are needed to determine sociodemograph-
ic characteristics for those who are at greatest risk for 
sedentary behavior. Current data are inconsistent re-
garding what demographic characteristics are associ-
ated with higher sedentary behavior participation. High-
quality research is needed to identify groups at higher 
risk according to age, sex, race/ethnicity, occupation, 
and socioeconomic status. It is also important to under-
stand how specific sedentary behaviors might vary by 
sociodemographic characteristics.
Covariates associated with sedentary behavior need 
to be identified. Spurious associations could result if the 
incorrect covariates are included in analytical models 
that assess associations between sedentary behavior 
and health outcomes. To date, researchers have been in-
cluding covariates that are known to be associated with 
physical activity or those that might be associated with 
the outcome of interest. The scientific base is currently 
too sparse to recommend the appropriate covariates 
that should be included in data analyses.
Potential mechanisms for the observed associa-
tions between sedentary behavior and outcomes must 
be investigated. Evidence remains scarce, relying es-
sentially on a few animal models. Future studies should 
carefully parse out differences of effects of being sed-
entary per se from reduction in physical activity. Ran-
domized trials could contribute to understanding this 
distinction. The few short-term physiological studies 
conducted to date are informative, but more human 
studies are needed; recent advances in human genet-
ics and other “omics” technology could help to reveal 
biological mechanisms. It is hoped that a better under-
standing of mechanisms will inform interventions and 
support clinical and public health recommendations. 
To accomplish this work, considerably more research-
ers are required, with expertise ranging from genom-
ics to population science.
Risk factors for sedentary behaviors need to be 
identified. There is a paucity of prospective data on 
modifiable risk factors for sedentary behaviors, from 
personal psychological characteristics to microen-
vironmental and macroenvironmental factors. Both 
observational prospective cohort and intervention 
studies, including randomized trials, are necessary to 
address these gaps. A cadre of researchers studying 
sedentary behavior through the social ecological lens 
will allow for scientific discovery at the genetic through 
the policy level. This broad spectrum of inquiry should 
be encouraged and, if possible, systematized. Inter-
ventions are needed to understand whether changes 
in sedentary behavior can change outcomes, then to 
understand the underlying mechanisms and whether 
policy- or environment-level changes can reduce time 
spent in sedentary behaviors.
Interventions are critical to determine whether reduc-
tions in sedentary time can reduce the risk of CVD and 
diabetes mellitus. Current findings suggest that it is pos-
sible to create interventions to reduce sedentary time; 
future studies should also assess whether sedentary-
reduction interventions lead to improvements in CVD 
health and reduction of adverse outcomes. Randomized 
controlled trials are needed to produce the strongest evi-
dence. Trials that compare different doses of reduced 
sedentary time on outcomes are needed. This is espe-
cially critical for development of an evidence base for 
quantitative sedentary behavior guidelines. Both individu-
al and community-based interventions, as well as a com-
bination of the two, should be proposed and evaluated.
As displayed in the Figure, adults spend about as 
much daily time in light activities as they do in sedentary 
behaviors. This could represent a huge potential to de-
crease sedentary time and increase time spent in light 
activities. However, we know virtually nothing about the 
cardiovascular health benefits of doing “something,” or 
engaging in light activities. A comparison of the health 
benefits of promoting MVPA to those of reducing sitting 
time by 3 to 6 hours per day could eventually result in 
different public health recommendations.155
ConCLUSionS
The evidence to date is suggestive, but not conclu-
sive, that sedentary behavior contributes to CVD and 
diabetes mellitus risk. Nonetheless, there is evidence 
to suggest that sedentary behavior could contribute 
to excess morbidity and mortality. However, there cur-
rently is insufficient evidence on which to base specific 
public health recommendations regarding the appropri-
ate limit to the amount of sedentary behavior required 
to maximize CVD health benefits. Given the current 
state of the science on sedentary behavior and in the 
absence of sufficient data to recommend quantitative 
guidelines, it is appropriate to promote the advisory, 
“Sit less, move more.”
 
FooTnoTES
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid 
any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise as a 
result of an outside relationship or a personal, professional, or 
business interest of a member of the writing panel. Specifically, 
 
all members of the writing group are required to complete and 
submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such relation-
ships that might be perceived as real or potential conflicts of 
interest.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Sedentary Behavior and Cardiovascular Morbidity and Mortality
Circulation. 2016;134:e262–e279. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000440 
September 27, 2016
e273
CLiniCAL STATEMEnTS 
And GUidELinES
This advisory was approved by the American Heart Associa-
tion Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee on Febru-
ary 15, 2016, and the American Heart Association Executive 
Committee on March 28, 2016. A copy of the document is 
available at http://professional.heart.org/statements by using 
either “Search for Guidelines & Statements” or the “Browse 
by Topic” area. To purchase additional reprints, call 843-216-
2533 or e-mail kelle.ramsay@wolterskluwer.com.
The American Heart Association requests that this docu-
ment be cited as follows: Young DR, Hivert M-F, Alhassan S, 
Camhi SM, Ferguson JF, Katzmarzyk PT, Lewis CE, Owen N, 
Perry CK, Siddique J, Yong CM; on behalf of the Physical Activ-
ity Committee of the Council on Lifestyle and Cardiometabolic 
Health; Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council on Epidemiology 
and Prevention; Council on Functional Genomics and Transla-
tional Biology; and Stroke Council. Sedentary behavior and car-
diovascular morbidity and mortality: a science advisory from 
the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2016;134:e262–
e279. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000440.
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is 
conducted by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For 
more on AHA statements and guidelines development, 
visit http://professional.heart.org/statements. Select the 
“Guidelines & Statements” drop-down menu, then click “Pub-
lication Development.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, 
enhance 
ment, and/or distribution of this document are not 
permitted without the express permission of the American 
Heart Association. Instructions for obtaining permission are lo-
cated at http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/General/Copyright-
Permission-Guidelines_UCM_300404_Article.jsp. A link to the 
“Copyright Permissions Request Form” appears on the right 
side of the page.
Circulation is available at http://circ.ahajournals.org.
Writing Group disclosures
Writing Group 
Member
Employment
research  
Grant
other 
research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
ownership 
interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
other
Deborah Rohm 
Young
Kaiser Permanente 
Southern California
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Marie-France 
Hivert
Harvard Pilgrim Health 
Care Institute
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Sofiya Alhassan
University of 
Massachusetts
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Sarah M. Camhi
University of 
Massachusetts
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Jane F.  
Ferguson
Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Peter T. 
Katzmarzyk
Pennington Biomedical 
Research Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Cora E. Lewis
University of Alabama 
at Birmingham
NIH*
None
None
None
None
None
None
Neville Owen
Baker IDI Heart and 
Diabetes Institute, 
Melbourne
National Health and 
Medical Research 
Council of Australia*
None
None
None
None
None
National 
Health and 
Medical 
Research 
Council of 
Australia*
Cynthia K. Perry
Oregon Health & 
Science University
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Juned Siddique
Northwestern University
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Celina M. Yong
Stanford University
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as 
reported on the Disclosure Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be 
“significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 
5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be 
“modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
*Significant.
diSCLoSUrES
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Young et al
September 27, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e262–e279. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000440
e274
rEFErEnCES
 1. US Department of Health and Human Services. 2008 Physical Ac-
tivity Guidelines for Americans. Washington, DC: US Department 
of Health and Human Services; 2008.
 2. Australia’s Physical Activity and Sedentary Behaviour Guidelines 
for Adults (18–64 years). Canberra, Australia: Australian Govern-
ment Department of Health; 2014.
 3. UK Department of Health. Start Active, Stay Active: A Report on 
Physical Activity for Health from the Four Home Countries’ Chief 
Medical Officers. London, England: Crown Copyright; 2011.
 4. Dictionary.com LLC. Sedentary [definition]. http://dictionary.Ref-
erence.Com/browse/sedentary. Accessed June 19, 2015.
 5. Saunders TJ, Chaput JP, Tremblay MS. Sedentary behaviour as 
an emerging risk factor for cardiometabolic diseases in children 
and youth. Can J Diabetes. 2014;38:53–61. doi: 10.1016/j.
jcjd.2013.08.266.
 6. Matthews CE, Chen KY, Freedson PS, Buchowski MS, Beech 
BM, Pate RR, Troiano RP. Amount of time spent in sedentary 
behaviors in the United States, 2003-2004. Am J Epidemiol. 
2008;167:875–881. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwm390.
 7. Schuna JM Jr, Johnson WD, Tudor-Locke C. Adult self-reported and 
objectively monitored physical activity and sedentary behavior: 
NHANES 2005-2006. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2013;10:126. 
doi: 10.1186/1479-5868-10-126.
 8. Troiano RP, Berrigan D, Dodd KW, Mâsse LC, Tilert T, McDowell 
M. Physical activity in the United States measured by accelerom-
eter. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2008;40:181–188. doi: 10.1249/
mss.0b013e31815a51b3.
 9. Sedentary Behaviour Research Network. Standardized use of the 
terms “sedentary” and “sedentary behaviours.” Appl Physiol Nutr 
Metab. 2012;37:540–542. doi: 10.1139/h2012-024.
 
10. Ainsworth BE, Haskell WL, Whitt MC, Irwin ML, Swartz AM, Strath 
SJ, O’Brien WL, Bassett DR Jr, Schmitz KH, Emplaincourt PO, Ja-
cobs DR Jr, Leon AS. Compendium of physical activities: an up-
date of activity codes and MET intensities. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 
2000;32(suppl):S498–S504.
 
11. Strath SJ, Kaminsky LA, Ainsworth BE, Ekelund U, Freedson PS, 
Gary RA, Richardson CR, Smith DT, Swartz AM; on behalf of the 
American Heart Association Physical Activity Committee of the 
Council on Lifestyle and Cardiometabolic Health and Cardiovascu-
lar, Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation and Prevention Committee of 
the Council on Clinical Cardiology, and Council on Cardiovascular 
and Stroke Nursing. Guide to the assessment of physical activity: 
clinical and research applications: a scientific statement from the 
American Heart Association. Circulation. 2013;128:2259–2279. 
doi: 10.1161/01.cir.0000435708.67487.da.
 
12. Sallis JF, Owen N. Ecological models of health behavior. In: Glanz K, 
Rimer BK, Viswanath K, eds. Health Behavior: Theory, Research, and 
Practice. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass; 2015:23–42.
 
13. Owen N. Ambulatory monitoring and sedentary behaviour: a pop-
ulation-health perspective. Physiol Meas. 2012;33:1801–1810. 
doi: 10.1088/0967-3334/33/11/1801.
 
14. Healy GN, Clark BK, Winkler EA, Gardiner PA, Brown WJ, Matthews 
CE. Measurement of adults’ sedentary time in population-based 
studies. Am J Prev Med. 2011;41:216–227. doi: 10.1016/j.
amepre.2011.05.005.
 
15. Troiano RP, Pettee Gabriel KK, Welk GJ, Owen N, Sternfeld B. Re-
ported physical activity and sedentary behavior: why do you ask? 
J Phys Act Health. 2012;(suppl 1):S68–S75.
 
16. Owen N, Salmon J, Koohsari MJ, Turrell G, Giles-Corti B. Sed-
entary behaviour and health: mapping environmental and social 
contexts to underpin chronic disease prevention. Br J Sports Med. 
2014;48:174–177. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2013-093107.
 
17. Clark BK, Sugiyama T, Healy GN, Salmon J, Dunstan DW, Owen N. 
Validity and reliability of measures of television viewing time and oth-
er non-occupational sedentary behaviour of adults: a review. Obes 
Rev. 2009;10:7–16. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-789X.2008.00508.x.
 
18. Clark BK, Healy GN, Winkler EA, Gardiner PA, Sugiyama T, 
Dunstan DW, Matthews CE, Owen N. Relationship of televi-
sion time with accelerometer-derived sedentary time: NHANES.  
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2011;43:822–828. doi: 10.1249/MSS. 
0b013e3182019510.
 
19. Thorp AA, Healy GN, Winkler E, Clark BK, Gardiner PA, Owen N, 
Dunstan DW. Prolonged sedentary time and physical activity in 
workplace and non-work contexts: a cross-sectional study of of-
fice, customer service and call centre employees. Int J Behav Nutr 
Phys Act. 2012;9:128. doi: 10.1186/1479-5868-9-128.
reviewer disclosures
reviewer
Employment
research Grant
other 
research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
ownership 
interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
other
David 
Buchner
University of Illinois
NIH* (Co-PI on a grant from 
NIH that uses accelerometers 
to assess physical activity 
and sedentary behavior)
None
None
None
None
None
None
I-Min Lee
Harvard Medical 
School
NIH† (PI of grant on 
objectively assessed physical 
activity, sedentary behavior, 
and health outcomes)
None
None
None
None
Virgin Pulse*
None
Mark 
Tremblay
CHEO Research 
Institute (CANADA)
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the 
Disclosure Questionnaire, which all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives 
$10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or 
share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” 
under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Sedentary Behavior and Cardiovascular Morbidity and Mortality
Circulation. 2016;134:e262–e279. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000440 
September 27, 2016
e275
CLiniCAL STATEMEnTS 
And GUidELinES
 
20. Sugiyama T, Ding D, Owen N. Commuting by car: weight gain 
among physically active adults. Am J Prev Med. 2013;44:169–
173. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2012.09.063.
 
21. Sedentary behavior questionnaires. Sedentary Behaviour Re-
search Network Web site. http://www.sedentarybehaviour.org/
sedentary-behaviour-questionnaires/. Accessed April 28, 2015.
 
22. Sternfeld B, Goldman-Rosas L. A systematic approach to 
 
selecting an appropriate measure of self-reported physical activity 
 
or sedentary behavior. J Phys Act Health. 2012;9(suppl 1): 
S19–S28.
 
23. Plasqui G, Bonomi AG, Westerterp KR. Daily physical activity as-
sessment with accelerometers: new insights and validation stud-
ies. Obes Rev. 2013;14:451–462. doi: 10.1111/obr.12021.
 
24. Esliger DW, Tremblay MS. Technical reliability assessment 
of three accelerometer models in a mechanical setup. Med 
Sci Sports Exerc. 2006;38:2173–2181. doi: 10.1249/01.
mss.0000239394.55461.08.
 
25. Mannini A, Intille SS, Rosenberger M, Sabatini AM, Haskell W. Ac-
tivity recognition using a single accelerometer placed at the wrist 
or ankle [published correction appears in Med Sci Sports Exerc. 
2015;47:448–449]. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2013;45:2193–
2203. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e31829736d6.
 
26. Rosenberger ME, Haskell WL, Albinali F, Mota S, Nawyn J, Intille S. 
Estimating activity and sedentary behavior from an accelerometer 
on the hip or wrist. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2013;45:964–975. 
doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e31827f0d9c.
 
27. Staudenmayer J, Pober D, Crouter S, Bassett D, Freedson P. An 
artificial neural network to estimate physical activity energy expen-
diture and identify physical activity type from an accelerometer. 
 
J Appl Physiol (1985). 2009;107:1300–1307. doi: 10.1152/ 
japplphysiol.00465.2009.
 
28. Rowlands AV, Olds TS, Hillsdon M, Pulsford R, Hurst TL, Eston 
RG, Gomersall SR, Johnston K, Langford J. Assessing sedentary 
behavior with the GENEActiv: introducing the sedentary sphere. 
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2014;46:1235–1247. doi: 10.1249/
MSS.0000000000000224.
 
29. Gibbs BB, Hergenroeder AL, Katzmarzyk PT, Lee IM, Jakicic JM. 
Definition, measurement, and health risks associated with seden-
tary behavior. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2014;47:1295–1300. doi: 
10.1249/MSS.0000000000000517.
 
30. Levine J, Melanson EL, Westerterp KR, Hill JO. Tracmor sys-
tem for measuring walking energy expenditure. Eur J Clin Nutr. 
2003;57:1176–1180. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejcn.1601673.
 
31. Zhang K, Pi-Sunyer FX, Boozer CN. Improving energy expen-
diture estimation for physical activity. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 
2004;36:883–889.
 
32. Grant PM, Ryan CG, Tigbe WW, Granat MH. The validation of a 
novel activity monitor in the measurement of posture and motion 
during everyday activities. Br J Sports Med. 2006;40:992–997. 
doi: 10.1136/bjsm.2006.030262.
 
33. Carr LJ, Mahar MT. Accuracy of intensity and inclinometer output 
of three activity monitors for identification of sedentary behav-
ior and light-intensity activity. J Obes. 2012;2012:460271. doi: 
10.1155/2012/460271.
 
34. Kerr J, Marshall SJ, Godbole S, Chen J, Legge A, Doherty AR, 
Kelly P, Oliver M, Badland HM, Foster C. Using the SenseCam 
to improve classifications of sedentary behavior in free-living 
settings. Am J Prev Med. 2013;44:290–296. doi: 10.1016/j.
amepre.2012.11.004.
 
35. Tudor-Locke C, Camhi SM, Troiano RP. A catalog of rules, vari-
ables, and definitions applied to accelerometer data in the Na-
tional Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 2003-2006. Prev 
Chronic Dis. 2012;9: 110332.
 
36. Kim Y, Lee JM, Peters BP, Gaesser GA, Welk GJ. Examination of 
different accelerometer cut-points for assessing sedentary be-
haviors in children. PLoS One. 2014;9:e90630. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0090630.
 
37. Winkler EA, Gardiner PA, Clark BK, Matthews CE, Owen N, Healy 
GN. Identifying sedentary time using automated estimates of ac-
celerometer wear time. Br J Sports Med. 2012;46:436–442. doi: 
10.1136/bjsm.2010.079699.
 
38. Church TS, Thomas DM, Tudor-Locke C, Katzmarzyk PT, Ear-
nest CP, Rodarte RQ, Martin CK, Blair SN, Bouchard C. Trends 
over 5 decades in U.S. occupation-related physical activity and 
their associations with obesity. PLoS One. 2011;6:e19657. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0019657.
 
39. Ng SW, Popkin BM. Time use and physical activity: a shift away 
from movement across the globe. Obes Rev. 2012;13:659–680. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-789X.2011.00982.x.
 
40. Ekelund U, Brage S, Griffin SJ, Wareham NJ; ProActive UK Re-
search Group. Objectively measured moderate- and vigorous-
intensity physical activity but not sedentary time predicts insulin 
resistance in high-risk individuals. Diabetes Care. 2009;32:1081–
1086. doi: 10.2337/dc08-1895.
 
41. Stamatakis E, Coombs N, Rowlands A, Shelton N, Hillsdon M. 
Objectively-assessed and self-reported sedentary time in relation 
to multiple socioeconomic status indicators among adults in Eng-
land: a cross-sectional study. BMJ Open. 2014;4:e006034. doi: 
10.1136/bmjopen-2014-006034.
 
42. Clemes SA, O’Connell SE, Edwardson CL. Office workers’ objec-
tively measured sedentary behavior and physical activity during 
and outside working hours. J Occup Environ Med. 2014;56:298–
303. doi: 10.1097/JOM.0000000000000101.
 
43. Evenson KR, Buchner DM, Morland KB. Objective measurement of 
physical activity and sedentary behavior among US adults aged 
60 years or older. Prev Chronic Dis. 2012;9:E26.
 
44. Gennuso KP, Gangnon RE, Matthews CE, Thraen-Borowski KM, 
Colbert LH. Sedentary behavior, physical activity, and markers 
of health in older adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2013;45:1493–
1500. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e318288a1e5.
 
45. Bankoski A, Harris TB, McClain JJ, Brychta RJ, Caserotti P, Chen 
KY, Berrigan D, Troiano RP, Koster A. Sedentary activity associ-
ated with metabolic syndrome independent of physical activity. 
Diabetes Care. 2011;34:497–503. doi: 10.2337/dc10-0987.
 
46. Santos DA, Silva AM, Baptista F, Santos R, Vale S, Mota J, 
Sardinha LB. Sedentary behavior and physical activity are inde-
pendently related to functional fitness in older adults. Exp Geron-
tol. 2012;47:908–912. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2012.07.011.
 
47. Harvey JA, Chastin SF, Skelton DA. Prevalence of sedentary be-
havior in older adults: a systematic review. Int J Environ Res Public 
Health. 2013;10:6645–6661. doi: 10.3390/ijerph10126645.
 
48. Gorman E, Hanson HM, Yang PH, Khan KM, Liu-Ambrose T, Ashe 
MC. Accelerometry analysis of physical activity and sedentary 
behavior in older adults: a systematic review and data analysis. 
Eur Rev Aging Phys Act. 2014;11:35–49. doi: 10.1007/s11556-
013-0132-x.
 
49. Rhodes RE, Mark RS, Temmel CP. Adult sedentary behavior: a sys-
tematic review. Am J Prev Med. 2012;42:e3–e28. doi: 10.1016/j.
amepre.2011.10.020.
 
50. Bennett GG, Wolin KY, Viswanath K, Askew S, Puleo E, Em-
mons KM. Television viewing and pedometer-determined physi-
cal activity among multiethnic residents of low-income hous-
ing. Am J Public Health. 2006;96:1681–1685. doi: 10.2105/
AJPH.2005.080580.
 
51. Larsen BA, Martin L, Strong DR. Sedentary behavior and preva-
lent diabetes in Non-Latino Whites, Non-Latino Blacks and Latinos: 
findings from the National Health Interview Survey. J Public Health 
(Oxf). 2015;37:634–640. doi: 10.1093/pubmed/fdu103.
 
52. Bauman A, Ainsworth BE, Sallis JF, Hagströmer M, Craig CL, 
Bull FC, Pratt M, Venugopal K, Chau J, Sjöström M; IPS Group. 
The descriptive epidemiology of sitting: a 20-country com-
parison using the International Physical Activity Questionnaire 
(IPAQ). Am J Prev Med. 2011;41:228–235. doi: 10.1016/j.
amepre.2011.05.003.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Young et al
September 27, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e262–e279. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000440
e276
 
53. Bennie JA, Chau JY, van der Ploeg HP, Stamatakis E, Do A, Bauman 
A. The prevalence and correlates of sitting in European adults: 
a comparison of 32 Eurobarometer-participating countries. Int J 
Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2013;10:107. doi: 10.1186/1479-5868-
10-107.
 
54. Dempsey PC, Howard BJ, Lynch BM, Owen N, Dunstan DW. Associ-
ations of television viewing time with adults’ well-being and vitality. 
Prev Med. 2014;69:69–74. doi: 10.1016/j.ypmed.2014.09.007.
 
55. Clemes SA, Houdmont J, Munir F, Wilson K, Kerr R, Addley K. 
Descriptive epidemiology of domain-specific sitting in working 
adults: the Stormont study. J Public Health (Oxf). 2016;38:53–60. 
doi: 10.1093/pubmed/fdu114.
 
56. Bowman SA. Television-viewing characteristics of adults: correla-
tions to eating practices and overweight and health status. Prev 
Chronic Dis. 2006;3:A38.
 
57. Shields M, Tremblay MS. Screen time among Canadian adults: a 
profile. Health Rep. 2008;19:31–43.
 
58. Hu FB, Li TY, Colditz GA, Willett WC, Manson JE. Television watch-
ing and other sedentary behaviors in relation to risk of obesity 
and type 2 diabetes mellitus in women. JAMA. 2003;289:1785–
1791. doi: 10.1001/jama.289.14.1785.
 
59. Proper KI, Cerin E, Brown WJ, Owen N. Sitting time and socio-
economic differences in overweight and obesity. Int J Obes 
(Lond). 2007;31:169–176. doi: 10.1038/sj.ijo.0803357.
 
60. Ballard M, Gray M, Reilly J, Noggle M. Correlates of video game 
screen time among males: body mass, physical activity, and 
other media use. Eat Behav. 2009;10:161–167. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.eatbeh.2009.05.001.
 
61. Banks E, Jorm L, Rogers K, Clements M, Bauman A. Screen-time, 
obesity, ageing and disability: findings from 91 
266 participants 
in the 45 and Up Study. Public Health Nutr. 2011;14:34–43. doi: 
10.1017/S1368980010000674.
 
62. Beunza JJ, Martínez-González MA, Ebrahim S, Bes-Rastrollo M, 
Núñez J, Martínez JA, Alonso A. Sedentary behaviors and the 
risk of incident hypertension: the SUN Cohort. Am J Hypertens. 
2007;20:1156–1162. doi: 10.1016/j.amjhyper.2007.06.007.
 
63. Buckworth J, Nigg C. Physical activity, exercise, and sedentary 
behavior in college students. J Am Coll Health. 2004;53:28–34. 
doi: 10.3200/JACH.53.1.28-34.
 
64. Ekelund U, Brage S, Besson H, Sharp S, Wareham NJ. Time spent 
being sedentary and weight gain in healthy adults: reverse or bidi-
rectional causality? Am J Clin Nutr. 2008;88:612–617.
 
65. Kronenberg F, Pereira MA, Schmitz MK, Arnett DK, Evenson KR, 
Crapo RO, Jensen RL, Burke GL, Sholinsky P, Ellison RC, Hunt SC. 
Influence of leisure time physical activity and television watching 
on atherosclerosis risk factors in the NHLBI Family Heart Study. 
Atherosclerosis. 2000;153:433–443.
 
66. Ogletree SM, Drake R. College students’ video game participation 
and perceptions: gender differences and implications. Sex Roles. 
2007;56:537–542. doi: 10.1007/s11199-007-9193-5.
 
67. Rastogi T, Vaz M, Spiegelman D, Reddy KS, Bharathi AV, Stampfer 
MJ, Willett WC, Ascherio A. Physical activity and risk of coronary 
heart disease in India. Int J Epidemiol. 2004;33:759–767. doi: 
10.1093/ije/dyh042.
 
68. Raynor DA, Phelan S, Hill JO, Wing RR. Television viewing and 
long-term weight maintenance: results from the National Weight 
Control Registry. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2006;14:1816–1824. 
doi: 10.1038/oby.2006.209.
 
69. Salmon J, Bauman A, Crawford D, Timperio A, Owen N.  
The association between television viewing and overweight 
among Australian adults participating in varying levels of 
leisure-time physical activity. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 
2000;24:600–606.
 
70. Yang H, Oliver MB. Exploring the effects of television view-
ing on perceived life quality: a combined perspective of mate-
rial value and upward social comparison. Mass Commun Soc. 
2010;13:118–138. doi: 10.1080/15205430903180685.
 
71. King AC, Goldberg JH, Salmon J, Owen N, Dunstan D, Weber 
D, Doyle C, Robinson TN. Identifying subgroups of U.S. adults 
at risk for prolonged television viewing to inform program de-
velopment. Am J Prev Med. 2010;38:17–26. doi: 10.1016/j.
amepre.2009.08.032.
 
72. Evenson KR, McGinn AP. Test-retest reliability of adult surveillance 
measures for physical activity and inactivity. Am J Prev Med. 
2005;28:470–478. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2005.02.005.
 
73. Sirgy MJ, Lee D, Kosenko R, Kosenko R, Meadow HL, Rahtz D, 
Cicic M, Jin GX, Yarsuvat D, Blenkhorn Dl, Wright N. Does tele-
vision viewership play a role in the perception of quality of life? 
 
J Advert. 1998;27:125–142.
 
74. Owen N, Sugiyama T, Eakin EE, Gardiner PA, Tremblay MS, 
Sallis JF. Adults’ sedentary behavior determinants and interven-
tions. Am J Prev Med. 2011;41:189–196. doi: 10.1016/j.
amepre.2011.05.013.
 
75. Buman MP, Hekler EB, Haskell WL, Pruitt L, Conway TL, Cain KL, 
Sallis JF, Saelens BE, Frank LD, King AC. Objective light-intensity 
physical activity associations with rated health in older adults. Am 
J Epidemiol. 2010;172:1155–1165. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwq249.
 
76. Davies CA, Vandelanotte C, Duncan MJ, van Uffelen JG. Associa-
tions of physical activity and screen-time on health related qual-
ity of life in adults. Prev Med. 2012;55:46–49. doi: 10.1016/j.
ypmed.2012.05.003.
 
77. Rebar AL, Duncan MJ, Short C, Vandelanotte C. Differences in 
health-related quality of life between three clusters of physical 
activity, sitting time, depression, anxiety, and stress. BMC Public 
Health. 2014;14:1088. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-14-1088.
 
78. van Uffelen JG, van Gellecum YR, Burton NW, Peeters G, Heesch 
KC, Brown WJ. Sitting-time, physical activity, and depressive 
symptoms in mid-aged women. Am J Prev Med. 2013;45:276–
281. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2013.04.009.
 
79. Salmon J, Owen N, Crawford D, Bauman A, Sallis JF. Physical activ-
ity and sedentary behavior: a population-based study of barriers, 
enjoyment, and preference. Health Psychol. 2003;22:178–188.
 
80. Van Holle V, McNaughton SA, Teychenne M, Timperio A, Van Dyck 
D, De Bourdeaudhuij I, Salmon J. Social and physical environmental 
correlates of adults’ weekend sitting time and moderating effects 
of retirement status and physical health. Int J Environ Res Public 
Health. 2014;11:9790–9810. doi: 10.3390/ijerph110909790.
 
81. Van Dyck D, Cardon G, Deforche B, Owen N, De Cocker K, Wi-
jndaele K, De Bourdeaudhuij I. Socio-demographic, psychoso-
cial and home-environmental attributes associated with adults’ 
domestic screen time. BMC Public Health. 2011;11:668. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2458-11-668.
 
82. De Cocker K, Duncan MJ, Short C, van Uffelen JG, Vandelanotte 
C. Understanding occupational sitting: prevalence, correlates 
and moderating effects in Australian employees. Prev Med. 
2014;67:288–294. doi: 10.1016/j.ypmed.2014.07.031.
 
83. Koohsari MJ, Sugiyama T, Sahlqvist S, Mavoa S, Hadgraft N, 
Owen N. Neighborhood environmental attributes and adults’ 
sedentary behaviors: review and research agenda. Prev Med. 
2015;77:141–149. doi: 10.1016/j.ypmed.2015.05.027.
 
84. Roemmich JN, Beeler JE, Johnson L. A microenvironment ap-
proach to reducing sedentary time and increasing physical activity 
of children and adults at a playground. Prev Med. 2014;62:108–
112. doi: 10.1016/j.ypmed.2014.01.018.
 
85. Lee RE, Mama SK, Adamus-Leach HJ. Neighborhood street scale 
elements, sedentary time and cardiometabolic risk factors in in-
active ethnic minority women. PLoS One. 2012;7:e51081. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0051081.
 
86. Van Dyck D, Cerin E, Conway TL, De Bourdeaudhuij I, Owen N, 
Kerr J, Cardon G, Frank LD, Saelens BE, Sallis JF. Associations 
between perceived neighborhood environmental attributes and 
adults’ sedentary behavior: findings from the U.S.A., Australia and 
Belgium. Soc Sci Med. 2012;74:1375–1384. doi: 10.1016/j.
socscimed.2012.01.018.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Sedentary Behavior and Cardiovascular Morbidity and Mortality
Circulation. 2016;134:e262–e279. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000440 
September 27, 2016
e277
CLiniCAL STATEMEnTS 
And GUidELinES
 87. Ding D, Sugiyama T, Winkler E, Cerin E, Wijndaele K, Owen N. 
Correlates of change in adults’ television viewing time: a four-
year follow-up study. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2012;44:1287–
1292. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e31824ba87e.
 88. den Hoed M, Brage S, Zhao JH, Westgate K, Nessa A, Ekelund 
U, Spector TD, Wareham NJ, Loos RJ. Heritability of objec-
tively assessed daily physical activity and sedentary behavior. 
Am J Clin Nutr. 2013;98:1317–1325. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.113. 
069849.
 89. de Vilhena e Santos DM, Katzmarzyk PT, Seabra AF, Maia JA. 
Genetics of physical activity and physical inactivity in humans.  
Behav Genet. 2012;42:559–578. doi: 10.1007/s10519-012- 
9534-1.
 90. Lightfoot JT. Current understanding of the genetic basis for 
physical activity. J Nutr. 2011;141:526–530. doi: 10.3945/
jn.110.127290.
 91. Healy GN, Matthews CE, Dunstan DW, Winkler EA, Owen N. 
Sedentary time and cardio-metabolic biomarkers in US adults: 
NHANES 2003-06. Eur Heart J. 2011;32:590–597. doi: 10.1093/ 
eurheartj/ehq451.
 92. Buman MP, Winkler EA, Kurka JM, Hekler EB, Baldwin CM, Owen 
N, Ainsworth BE, Healy GN, Gardiner PA. Reallocating time to 
sleep, sedentary behaviors, or active behaviors: associations 
with cardiovascular disease risk biomarkers, NHANES 2005-
2006. Am J Epidemiol. 2014;179:323–334. doi: 10.1093/aje/
kwt292.
 93. Matthews CE, Moore SC, Sampson J, Blair A, Xiao Q, Keadle 
SK, Hollenbeck A, Park Y. Mortality benefits for replacing sit-
ting time with different physical activities. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 
2015;47:1833–1840. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0000000000000621.
 94. Roger VL, Go AS, Lloyd-Jones DM, Benjamin EJ, Berry JD, 
Borden WB, Bravata DM, Dai S, Ford ES, Fox CS, Fullerton HJ, 
Gillespie C, Hailpern SM, Heit JA, Howard VJ, Kissela BM, Kittner 
SJ, Lackland DT, Lichtman JH, Lisabeth LD, Makuc DM, Marcus 
GM, Marelli A, Matchar DB, Moy CS, Mozaffarian D, Mussolino 
ME, Nichol G, Paynter NP, Soliman EZ, Sorlie PD, Sotoodehnia N, 
Turan TN, Virani SS, Wong ND, Woo D, Turner MB; on behalf of 
the American Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke 
Statistics Subcommittee. Heart disease and stroke statistics— 
2012 update: a report from the American Heart Association 
[published correction appears in Circulation. 2012;125:e1002. 
doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e31825e7519]. Circulation. 2012;125: 
e2–e220. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e31823ac046.
 95. Edwardson CL, Gorely T, Davies MJ, Gray LJ, Khunti K, Wilmot EG, 
Yates T, Biddle SJ. Association of sedentary behaviour with meta-
bolic syndrome: a meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2012;7:e34916. 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034916.
 96. Petersen CB, Nielsen AJ, Bauman A, Tolstrup JS. Joint asso-
ciation of physical activity in leisure and total sitting time with 
metabolic syndrome amongst 15,235 Danish adults: a cross-
sectional study. Prev Med. 2014;69:5–7. doi: 10.1016/j.
ypmed.2014.08.022.
 97. Gardiner PA, Healy GN, Eakin EG, Clark BK, Dunstan DW, Shaw 
JE, Zimmet PZ, Owen N. Associations between television view-
ing time and overall sitting time with the metabolic syndrome 
in older men and women: the Australian Diabetes, Obesity and 
Lifestyle study. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2011;59:788–796. doi: 
10.1111/j.1532-5415.2011.03390.x.
 98. Wagner A, Dallongeville J, Haas B, Ruidavets JB, Amouyel P, 
Ferrières J, Simon C, Arveiler D. Sedentary behaviour, physical 
activity and dietary patterns are independently associated with 
the metabolic syndrome. Diabetes Metab. 2012;38:428–435. 
doi: 10.1016/j.diabet.2012.04.005.
 99. Mabry RM, Winkler EA, Reeves MM, Eakin EG, Owen N. 
Associations of physical activity and sitting time with the meta-
bolic syndrome among Omani adults. Obesity (Silver Spring). 
2012;20:2290–2295. doi: 10.1038/oby.2012.26.
 
100. Chu AH, Moy FM. Joint association of sitting time and physical 
activity with metabolic risk factors among middle-aged Malays 
in a developing country: a cross-sectional study. PLoS One. 
2013;8:e61723. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061723.
 
101. Wijndaele K, Healy GN, Dunstan DW, Barnett AG, Salmon J, Shaw 
JE, Zimmet PZ, Owen N. Increased cardiometabolic risk is as-
sociated with increased TV viewing time. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 
2010;42:1511–1518. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181d322ac.
 
102. Shuval K, Finley CE, Barlow CE, Gabriel KP, Leonard D, Kohl 
HW 3rd. Sedentary behavior, cardiorespiratory fitness, physi-
cal activity, and cardiometabolic risk in men: the Cooper Center 
Longitudinal Study. Mayo Clin Proc. 2014;89:1052–1062. doi: 
10.1016/j.mayocp.2014.04.026.
 
103. Ford ES, Schulze MB, Kröger J, Pischon T, Bergmann MM, 
Boeing H. Television watching and incident diabetes: Findings 
from the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and 
Nutrition-Potsdam Study. J Diabetes. 2010;2:23–27. doi: 
10.1111/j.1753-0407.2009.00047.x.
 
104. Hu FB, Leitzmann MF, Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, Willett WC, 
Rimm EB. Physical activity and television watching in relation 
to risk for type 2 diabetes mellitus in men. Arch Intern Med. 
2001;161:1542–1548.
 
105. Krishnan S, Rosenberg L, Palmer JR. Physical activity and televi-
sion watching in relation to risk of type 2 diabetes: the Black 
Women’s Health Study. Am J Epidemiol. 2009;169:428–434. 
doi: 10.1093/aje/kwn344.
 
106. Biswas A, Oh PI, Faulkner GE, Bajaj RR, Silver MA, Mitchell MS, 
Alter DA. Sedentary time and its association with risk for disease 
incidence, mortality, and hospitalization in adults: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2015;162:123–132. 
doi: 10.7326/M14-1651.
 
107. Grøntved A, Hu FB. Television viewing and risk of type 2 diabetes, 
cardiovascular disease, and all-cause mortality: a meta-analysis. 
JAMA. 2011;305:2448–2455. doi: 10.1001/jama.2011.812.
 
108. Proper KI, Singh AS, van Mechelen W, Chinapaw MJ. Sedentary 
behaviors and health outcomes among adults: a systematic re-
view of prospective studies. Am J Prev Med. 2011;40:174–182. 
doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2010.10.015.
 
109. Ford ES, Caspersen CJ. Sedentary behaviour and cardiovas-
cular disease: a review of prospective studies. Int J Epidemiol. 
2012;41:1338–1353. doi: 10.1093/ije/dys078.
 
110. Wilmot EG, Edwardson CL, Achana FA, Davies MJ, Gorely T, 
Gray LJ, Khunti K, Yates T, Biddle SJ. Sedentary time in adults 
and the association with diabetes, cardiovascular disease and 
death: systematic review and meta-analysis [published correc-
tion appears in Diabetologia. 2013;56:942–943]. Diabetologia. 
2012;55:2895–2905. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2677-z.
 
111. Wijndaele K, Brage S, Besson H, Khaw KT, Sharp SJ, Luben 
R, Bhaniani A, Wareham NJ, Ekelund U. Television viewing and 
incident cardiovascular disease: prospective associations 
and mediation analysis in the EPIC Norfolk Study. PLoS One. 
2011;6:e20058. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020058.
 
112. Stamatakis E, Hamer M, Dunstan DW. Screen-based entertain-
ment time, all-cause mortality, and cardiovascular events: pop-
ulation-based study with ongoing mortality and hospital events 
follow-up [published correction appears in J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2011;57:1717]. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:292–299. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2010.05.065.
 
113. Chomistek AK, Manson JE, Stefanick ML, Lu B, Sands-Lincoln M, 
Going SB, Garcia L, Allison MA, Sims ST, LaMonte MJ, Johnson 
KC, Eaton CB. Relationship of sedentary behavior and physi-
cal activity to incident cardiovascular disease: results from the 
Women’s Health Initiative. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:2346–
2354. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.03.031.
 
114. Basterra-Gortari FJ, Bes-Rastrollo M, Gea A, Núñez-Córdoba 
JM, Toledo E, Martínez-González MÁ. Television viewing, 
computer use, time driving and all-cause mortality: the SUN 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Young et al
September 27, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e262–e279. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000440
e278
cohort. J Am Heart Assoc. 2014;3:e000864. doi: 10.1161/
JAHA.114.000864.
 
115. Dunstan DW, Barr EL, Healy GN, Salmon J, Shaw JE, Balkau 
B, Magliano DJ, Cameron AJ, Zimmet PZ, Owen N. Television 
viewing time and mortality: the Australian Diabetes, Obesity and 
Lifestyle Study (AusDiab). Circulation. 2010;121:384–391. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.894824.
 
116. Holtermann A, Mork PJ, Nilsen TI. Hours lying down per day 
and mortality from all-causes and cardiovascular disease: the 
HUNT Study, Norway. Eur J Epidemiol. 2014;29:559–565. doi: 
10.1007/s10654-014-9939-7.
 
117. Katzmarzyk PT, Church TS, Craig CL, Bouchard C. Sitting time 
and mortality from all causes, cardiovascular disease, and can-
cer. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2009;41:998–1005. doi: 10.1249/
MSS.0b013e3181930355.
 
118. Matthews CE, Cohen SS, Fowke JH, Han X, Xiao Q, Buchowski 
MS, Hargreaves MK, Signorello LB, Blot WJ. Physical activity, 
sedentary behavior, and cause-specific mortality in black and 
white adults in the Southern Community Cohort Study. Am J 
Epidemiol. 2014;180:394–405. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwu142.
 
119. Matthews CE, George SM, Moore SC, Bowles HR, Blair A, 
Park Y, Troiano RP, Hollenbeck A, Schatzkin A. Amount of time 
spent in sedentary behaviors and cause-specific mortality in 
US adults. Am J Clin Nutr. 2012;95:437–445. doi: 10.3945/
ajcn.111.019620.
 
120. Seguin R, Buchner DM, Liu J, Allison M, Manini T, Wang CY, 
Manson JE, Messina CR, Patel MJ, Moreland L, Stefanick ML, 
Lacroix AZ. Sedentary behavior and mortality in older women: 
the Women’s Health Initiative. Am J Prev Med. 2014;46:122–
135. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2013.10.021.
 
121. Warren TY, Barry V, Hooker SP, Sui X, Church TS, Blair SN. 
Sedentary behaviors increase risk of cardiovascular disease 
mortality in men. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2010;42:879–885. doi: 
10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181c3aa7e.
 
122. Ensrud KE, Blackwell TL, Cauley JA, Dam TT, Cawthon PM, 
Schousboe JT, Barrett-Connor E, Stone KL, Bauer DC, Shikany 
JM, Mackey DC; Osteoporotic Fractures in Men Study Group. 
Objective measures of activity level and mortality in older 
men. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2014;62:2079–2087. doi: 10.1111/
jgs.13101.
 
123. Koster A, Caserotti P, Patel KV, Matthews CE, Berrigan D, Van 
Domelen DR, Brychta RJ, Chen KY, Harris TB. Association of 
sedentary time with mortality independent of moderate to vigor-
ous physical activity. PLoS One. 2012;7:e37696. doi: 10.1371/ 
journal.pone.0037696.
 
124. de Rezende LF, Rodrigues Lopes M, Rey-López JP, Matsudo VK, 
Luiz Odo C. Sedentary behavior and health outcomes: an over-
view of systematic reviews. PLoS One. 2014;9:e105620. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0105620.
 
125. Thorp AA, Owen N, Neuhaus M, Dunstan DW. Sedentary be-
haviors and subsequent health outcomes in adults a system-
atic review of longitudinal studies, 1996-2011. Am J Prev Med. 
2011;41:207–215. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2011.05.004.
 
126. van Uffelen JG, Wong J, Chau JY, van der Ploeg HP, Riphagen 
I, Gilson ND, Burton NW, Healy GN, Thorp AA, Clark BK, 
Gardiner PA, Dunstan DW, Bauman A, Owen N, Brown WJ. 
Occupational sitting and health risks: a systematic review. Am 
J Prev Med. 2010;39:379–388. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2010. 
05.024.
 
127. Powell KE, Paluch AE, Blair SN. Physical activity for health: What 
kind? How much? How intense? On top of what? Annu Rev Public 
Health. 2011;32:349–365. doi: 10.1146/annurev-publhealth- 
031210-101151.
 
128. Thyfault JP, Du M, Kraus WE, Levine JA, Booth FW. Physiology 
of sedentary behavior and its relationship to health outcomes. 
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2015;47:1301–1305. doi: 10.1249/
MSS.0000000000000518.
 
129. Garland T Jr, Schutz H, Chappell MA, Keeney BK, Meek TH, 
Copes LE, Acosta W, Drenowatz C, Maciel RC, van Dijk G, Kotz 
CM, Eisenmann JC. The biological control of voluntary exercise, 
spontaneous physical activity and daily energy expenditure in re-
lation to obesity: human and rodent perspectives. J Exp Biol. 
2011;214(pt 2):206–229. doi: 10.1242/jeb.048397.
 
130. Fuss J, Gass P. Endocannabinoids and voluntary activity in 
mice: runner’s high and long-term consequences in emotional 
behaviors. Exp Neurol. 2010;224:103–105. doi: 10.1016/j.
expneurol.2010.03.016.
 
131. Ceccarini G, Maffei M, Vitti P, Santini F. Fuel homeostasis and 
locomotor behavior: role of leptin and melanocortin pathways. 
J Endocrinol Invest. 2015;38:125–131. doi: 10.1007/s40618- 
014-0225-z.
 
132. Park Y, Booth FW, Lee S, Laye MJ, Zhang C. Physical activity 
opposes coronary vascular dysfunction induced during high fat 
feeding in mice. J Physiol. 2012;590:4255–4268. doi: 10.1113/
jphysiol.2012.234856.
 
133. Raschke S, Eckel J. Adipo-myokines: two sides of the same coin: 
mediators of inflammation and mediators of exercise. Mediators 
Inflamm. 2013;2013:320724. doi: 10.1155/2013/320724.
 
134. Booth FW, Laye MJ, Lees SJ, Rector RS, Thyfault JP. Reduced 
physical activity and risk of chronic disease: the biology behind 
the consequences. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2008;102:381–390. doi: 
10.1007/s00421-007-0606-5.
 
135. de Luca C, Olefsky JM. Stressed out about obesity and insulin re-
sistance. Nat Med. 2006;12:41–42. doi: 10.1038/nm0106-41.
 
136. Gregor MF, Hotamisligil GS. Inflammatory mechanisms in obesity. 
 
Annu Rev Immunol. 2011;29:415–445. doi: 10.1146/annurev- 
immunol-031210-101322.
 
137. O’Keefe JH, Bell DS. Postprandial hyperglycemia/hyperlipidemia 
(postprandial dysmetabolism) is a cardiovascular risk factor.  
Am J Cardiol. 2007;100:899–904. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2007. 
03.107.
 
138. Ceriello A. The post-prandial state and cardiovascular dis-
ease: relevance to diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 
2000;16:125–132.
 
139. Heine RJ, Balkau B, Ceriello A, Del Prato S, Horton ES, Taskinen 
MR. What does postprandial hyperglycaemia mean? Diabet Med. 
2004;21:208–213.
 
140. Mikus CR, Oberlin DJ, Libla JL, Taylor AM, Booth FW, Thyfault JP. 
Lowering physical activity impairs glycemic control in healthy volun-
teers. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2012;44:225–231. doi: 10.1249/ 
MSS.0b013e31822ac0c0.
 
141. Stephens BR, Granados K, Zderic TW, Hamilton MT, Braun B. 
Effects of 1 day of inactivity on insulin action in healthy men 
and women: interaction with energy intake. Metabolism. 
2011;60:941–949. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2010.08.014.
 
142. Dunstan DW, Howard B, Healy GN, Owen N. Too much sitting: 
 
a health hazard. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2012;97:368–376. 
doi: 10.1016/j.diabres.2012.05.020.
 
143. Hellsten Y, Nyberg M, Jensen LG, Mortensen SP. Vasodilator 
interactions in skeletal muscle blood flow regulation. J Physiol. 
2012;590:6297–6305. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2012.240762.
 
144. Zderic TW, Hamilton MT. Identification of hemostatic genes ex-
pressed in human and rat leg muscles and a novel gene (LPP1/
PAP2A) suppressed during prolonged physical inactivity (sitting). 
Lipids Health Dis. 2012;11:137. doi: 10.1186/1476-511X-11-137.
 
145. Boyle LJ, Credeur DP, Jenkins NT, Padilla J, Leidy HJ, Thyfault 
JP, Fadel PJ. Impact of reduced daily physical activity on con-
duit artery flow-mediated dilation and circulating endothelial mic-
roparticles. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2013;115:1519–1525. doi: 
10.1152/japplphysiol.00837.2013.
 
146. Thosar SS, Bielko SL, Mather KJ, Johnston JD, Wallace JP. Effect 
of prolonged sitting and breaks in sitting time on endothelial func-
tion. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2015;47:843–849. doi: 10.1249/
MSS.0000000000000479.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Sedentary Behavior and Cardiovascular Morbidity and Mortality
Circulation. 2016;134:e262–e279. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000440 
September 27, 2016
e279
CLiniCAL STATEMEnTS 
And GUidELinES
 
147. Manini TM, Carr LJ, King AC, Marshall S, Robinson TN, Rejeski WJ. 
Interventions to reduce sedentary behavior. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 
2015;47:1306–1310. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0000000000000519.
 
148. Prince SA, Saunders TJ, Gresty K, Reid RD. A comparison of 
the effectiveness of physical activity and sedentary behaviour 
interventions in reducing sedentary time in adults: a system-
atic review and meta-analysis of controlled trials. Obes Rev. 
2014;15:905–919. doi: 10.1111/obr.12215.
 
149. Neuhaus M, Eakin EG, Straker L, Owen N, Dunstan DW, Reid N, 
Healy GN. Reducing occupational sedentary time: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of evidence on activity-permissive 
workstations. Obes Rev. 2014;15:822–838. doi: 10.1111/
obr.12201.
 
150. King AC, Hekler EB, Grieco LA, Winter SJ, Sheats JL, Buman 
MP, Banerjee B, Robinson TN, Cirimele J. Harnessing different 
motivational frames via mobile phones to promote daily physi-
cal activity and reduce sedentary behavior in aging adults. PLoS 
One. 2013;8:e62613. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062613.
 
151. Spring B, Schneider K, McFadden HG, Vaughn J, Kozak AT, 
Smith M, Moller AC, Epstein LH, Demott A, Hedeker D, Siddique 
J, Lloyd-Jones DM. Multiple behavior changes in diet and activ-
ity: a randomized controlled trial using mobile technology. Arch 
Intern Med. 2012;172:789–796. doi: 10.1001/archinternmed. 
2012.1044.
 
152. Pellegrini CA, Duncan JM, Moller AC, Buscemi J, Sularz A, DeMott 
A, Pictor A, Pagoto S, Siddique J, Spring B. A smartphone- 
supported weight loss program: design of the ENGAGED ran-
domized controlled trial. BMC Public Health. 2012;12:1041. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2458-12-1041.
 
153. Bond DS, Thomas JG, Raynor HA, Moon J, Sieling J, Trautvetter 
J, Leblond T, Wing RR. B-MOBILE: a smartphone-based interven-
tion to reduce sedentary time in overweight/obese individuals: a 
within-subjects experimental trial. PLoS One. 2014;9:e100821. 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100821.
 
154. Dantzig S, Geleijnse G, van Halteren AT. Toward a persuasive 
mobile application to reduce sedentary behavior. Pers Ubiquit 
Comput. 2013;17:1237–1246. doi: 10.1007/s00779-012- 
0588-0.
 
155. Haskell WL. Physical activity by self-report: a brief history and 
future issues. J Phys Act Health. 2012;9(suppl 1):S5–S10.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
