 CASE REPORT
Long-term stabilisation of myeloma with curcumin
Abbas Zaidi,1 Maggie Lai,2 Jamie Cavenagh1
1Department of Haematology,
Barts Health NHS Trust,
London, UK
2Myeloma UK, Edinburgh, UK
Correspondence to
Dr Abbas Zaidi,
abbashmzaidi@gmail.com
Accepted 19 February 2017
To cite: Zaidi A, Lai M,
Cavenagh J. BMJ Case Rep
Published online: [please
include Day Month Year]
doi:10.1136/bcr-2016-
218148
SUMMARY
Myeloma is a haematological malignancy which typically
follows a relapsing-remitting course. While treatment
can control the myeloma and improve quality of life for
given periods of time, remissions generally become
progressively shorter with subsequent relapses, and
patients ultimately enter a final refractory phase. To help
control symptoms and enhance quality of life, some
patients use complementary therapies as an adjunct to
their conventional therapy. Here, we describe a myeloma
patient who started a daily dietary supplement of
curcumin when approaching her third relapse. In the
absence of further antimyeloma treatment, the patient
plateaued and has remained stable for the last 5 years
with good quality of life.
BACKGROUND
Myeloma is a B-cell malignancy that is charac-
terised by the monoclonal expansion and accumu-
lation of abnormal plasma cells within the bone
marrow. Clinical manifestations include bone pain,
renal
impairment,
recurrent
infections
and
anaemia.1 Over the past decade, advances in the
understanding of the disease, together with the
development of several novel treatments, have led
to significant improvements in overall survival.2
Despite this, myeloma remains incurable, with a
median overall survival of 5.2 years from diagno-
sis.3 The course of the disease is typically one of
recurrent remission and relapse. However, patients
progressively acquire resistance to treatment and
subsequent remissions become shorter and shorter.
Eventually, either they run out of treatment options
or become refractory to them.
In an effort to improve long-term outcomes,
some myeloma patients seek to use dietary supple-
ments, mostly for palliative purposes. While they
may help to improve quality of life, there is little
evidence they can increase survival.4 Among them,
curcumin, the active constituent of turmeric, has
gained popularity as a complementary therapy in
several cancers.
Here, we present a case of a heavily pretreated
relapsing myeloma patient who, in the absence of
further treatment options at the time, started daily
curcumin and has since remained stable for the past
5 years.
CASE PRESENTATION
A woman aged 57 years was initially diagnosed
with monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined
significance (MGUS) in 2007 following an inciden-
tal finding of M-protein (18 g/L) during investiga-
tion for hypertension.
Within 15 months, the patient had rapidly pro-
gressed to ISS stage 3 myeloma with M-protein
49 g/L, urinary protein 1.3 g/24-hour, Bence-Jones
protein 1.0 g/24-hour, Hb 9.7 g/dL and increasing
back pain. She initially declined antimyeloma treat-
ment but 6 months later, following vertebral col-
lapse at T5 and T12, started cyclophosphamide,
thalidomide and dexamethasone (CTD) treatment.
However, after a week, the patient was admitted
with idiosyncratic syndrome including hyponatrae-
mia, a fall in albumin and worsening of blood
counts. She received red cell transfusion and her
electrolyte abnormalities were carefully corrected.
Although there was evidence of a response to
CTD (M-protein 34 g/L), bortezomib and dexa-
methasone treatment was initiated as an alternative,
but this was discontinued after three cycles due to
progressive disease (M-protein 49 g/L). The patient
was then treated with lenalidomide and dexametha-
sone with the aim of reducing disease burden prior
to high-dose therapy and autologous stem cell
transplantation. Treatment was frequently inter-
rupted and dose adjusted to account for neutro-
penia and despite a minor response after six cycles
(starting
M-protein
47 g/L,
finishing
M-protein
34 g/L), in October 2009, she proceeded with stem
cell mobilisation. However, neither cyclophospha-
mide nor plerixafor/GCSF priming were successful.
A bone marrow biopsy revealed 50% myeloma cells
and a course of CTD was restarted with cautious
titration of thalidomide.
The patient achieved a partial response with
CTD retreatment over the course of 17 cycles
(M-protein 13 g/L) with no further episodes of
idiosyncratic
syndrome.
However,
attempts
to
harvest stem cells in February 2011 and again there
months later, both failed. By then, her M-protein
had risen to 24 g/L and the patient was too neutro-
penic to be considered for a clinical trial.
At this point, the patient began a daily regime of
oral curcumin complexed with bioperine (to aid
absorption), as a single dose of 8 g each evening on
an empty stomach. A few months later, she also
embarked on a once-weekly course of hyperbaric
oxygen therapy (90 min at 2 ATA) which she has
maintained ever since. Her paraprotein levels grad-
ually declined to a nadir of 13 g/L, her blood
counts steadily improved and there was no evi-
dence of further progressive lytic bone disease.
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
The patient continues to take oral curcumin 8 g
daily without further antimyeloma treatment. Over
the last 60 months, her myeloma has remained
stable with minimal fluctuation in paraprotein level,
her blood counts lie within the normal range and
Zaidi A, et al. BMJ Case Rep 2017. doi:10.1136/bcr-2016-218148
1
Unexpected outcome ( positive or negative) including adverse drug reactions
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://casereports.bmj.com/
BMJ Case Reports: first published as 10.1136/bcr-2016-218148 on 16 April 2017. Downloaded from 
 she has maintained good quality of life throughout this period.
Repeat bone imaging in 2014 identified multiple lucencies
<1 cm in the right hip and degenerative changes in both hips,
but these were attributed to osteoarthritis rather than the
myeloma. Recent cytogenetic analysis revealed she had no
abnormal cytogenetics by fluorescent in situ hybridisation.
DISCUSSION
A small but significant number of myeloma patients consume
dietary supplements in conjunction with conventional treatment
primarily to help cope with the side effects of treatment,
manage symptoms and enhance general well-being. Few, if any,
use dietary supplementation as an alternative to standard anti-
myeloma therapy. Here, we describe a case in which curcumin
has maintained long-term disease control in a multiply-relapsed
myeloma patient. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
report in which curcumin has demonstrated an objective
response in progressive disease in the absence of conventional
treatment.
Curcumin is a polyphenol derived from the perennial herb
Curcuma longa (turmeric) and has, for centuries, been used as a
traditional Indian medicine. Several reports published over the
two decades have claimed various health benefits of curcumin
and this has led to its increasing popularity as a dietary supple-
ment to prevent or treat a number of different diseases.5 6
The biological activity of curcumin is indeed remarkable. It is
a highly pleiotropic molecule which possesses natural antioxi-
dant, anti-inflammatory, antiseptic and analgesic properties.7
More recently, it has demonstrated antiproliferative effects in a
wide variety of tumour cells including myeloma cells and exerts
its antiproliferative effects through multiple cellular targets that
regulate cell growth and survival.
In
vitro,
curcumin
prevents
myeloma
cell
proliferation
through inhibition of IL-6-induced STAT-3 phosphorylation and
through modulation of the expression of NF-kB-associated pro-
teins such as IkB〈,Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, cyclin D1 and IL-68 and
apoptosis-related molecules including p53 and Bax.9 In other
studies, curcumin was shown to circumvent resistance to dexa-
methasone, doxorubicin and melphalan as well as potentiate the
effects
of
bortezomib,
thalidomide10
and
lenalidomide.11
Furthermore, curcumin-induced cell death was not influenced
by myeloma molecular heterogeneity.12
The antimyeloma effects of curcumin in the clinical setting
however are less clear. Only one phase I/II study has evaluated
curcumin treatment in myeloma patients. These patients were
either asymptomatic, relapsed or had plateau phase disease.
Treatment with curcumin downregulated the expression of
NFkB, COX-2 and STAT3 in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells, but no objective responses were observed in any subgroup
of patients.13 This may be as a result of small sample size in this
study, follow-up was limited to 3 months and clinical responses
may have been observed with longer follow-up. However,
downregulation of NFkB, COX-2 and STAT3 expression may
not correlate with the clinical activity of curcumin and there
may be further mechanisms of action that remain unclear, pos-
sibly through the modulation of another target. W
e would not
be able to identify any patient-specific mechanisms of activity in
this case study, as the patient has been taking curcumin for some
time now and baseline bone marrow or peripheral blood
samples are not available. However, in the setting of a clinical
trial, it may be possible to use next-generation sequencing to
help identify a mutation that may be a potential target for
curcumin.
Another study examined its effects in preventing the progres-
sion of MGUS and smouldering myeloma to myeloma.14 15 The
results showed that curcumin exerted a trace of biological
activity with modest decreases in free light chain and parapro-
tein levels and a reduction in a marker of bone resorption with
curcumin treatment, suggesting the therapeutic potential of cur-
cumin in MGUS and smouldering myeloma. However, more
studies are needed to address this further.
Whether such effects are observed in patients with active
disease remains to be seen. The fact that our patient, who had
advanced stage disease and was effectively salvaged while exclu-
sively on curcumin, suggests a potential antimyeloma effect of
curcumin. She continues to take daily curcumin and remains in
a very satisfactory condition with good quality of life. This case
provides further evidence of the potential benefit for curcumin
in myeloma. W
e would recommend further evaluation of curcu-
min in myeloma patients in the context of a clinical trial.
Learning points
▸ Myeloma is a relapsing-remitting cancer for which there is
currently no cure.
▸ Curcumin, a polyphenol derived from turmeric, has been
used for many years in some
▸ herbal remedies.
▸ We report a case of a myeloma patient with advanced
myeloma who, in the absence of conventional treatment,
plateaued and has remained stable for many years with
daily curcumin.
▸ Dietary supplements, such as curcumin, may be beneficial
for some myeloma patients.
Twitter Follow Maggie Lai @MyelomaUK
Contributors AZ and JC involved in treating the described patient initially
discussed and planned writing this case. The planning was made with ML of
Myeloma UK. Each performed a review of the literature and a summary of the case
was provided by AZ and JC to ML who wrote the initial draft. The final paper was
edited by AZ and reviewed and edited by JC.
Competing interests None declared.
Patient consent Obtained.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially,
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is
properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc/4.0/
REFERENCES
1
Smith D, Yong K. Multiple myeloma. BMJ 2013;346:f3863.
2
Kumar SK, Rajkumar SV, Dispenzieri A, et al. Improved survival in multiple myeloma
and the impact of novel therapies. Blood 2008;111:2516–20.
3
Kumar SK, Dispenzieri A, Lacy MQ, et al. Continued improvement in survival in
multiple myeloma: changes in early mortality and outcomes in older patients.
Leukaemia 2014;28:1122–8.
4
Smith PJ, Clavarino A, Long J, et al. Why do some cancer patients receiving
chemotherapy choose to take complementary and alternative medicines and what
are the risks? Asia Pac J Clin Oncol 2014;10:1–10.
5
Aggarwal BB, Harikumar KB. Potential therapeutic effects of curcumin, the
anti-inflammatory agent, against neurodegenerative, cardiovascular, pulmonary,
metabolic, autoimmune and neoplastic diseases. Int J Biochem Cell Biol
2009;41:40–59.
6
Gupta SC, Patchva S, Aggarwal BB. Therapeutic roles of curcumin: lessons learned
from clinical trials. AAPS J 2013;15:195–218.
2
Zaidi A, et al. BMJ Case Rep 2017. doi:10.1136/bcr-2016-218148
Unexpected outcome ( positive or negative) including adverse drug reactions
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://casereports.bmj.com/
BMJ Case Reports: first published as 10.1136/bcr-2016-218148 on 16 April 2017. Downloaded from 
 7
Aggarwal BB, Sung B. Pharmacological basis for the role of curcumin in chronic
diseases: an age-old spice with modern targets. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2009;30:85–94.
8
Bharti AC, Donato N, Singh S, et al. Curcumin (diferuloylmethane) down-regulates
the constitutive activation of nuclear factor-kappa B and Ikappa B alpha kinase in
human multiple myeloma cells, leading to suppression of proliferation and induction
of apoptosis. Blood 2003;101:1053–62.
9
Li W, Wang Y, Song Y, et al. A preliminary study of the effect of curcumin on the expression
of p53 protein in a human multiple myeloma cell line. Oncol Lett 2015;9:1719–24.
10
Sung B, Kunnumakkara AB, Sethi G, et al. Curcumin circumvents chemoresistance
in vitro and potentiates the effect of thalidomide and bortezomib against human
multiple myeloma in nude mice model. Mol Cancer Ther 2009;8:959–70.
11
Wong R, Golombick T, Diamond TH, et al. Curcumin enhances the cytotoxic and
chemo-sensitising effects of lenalidomide in human multiple myeloma cells.
J Hematol Malig 2013;3:1–7.
12
Gomez-Bougie P, Halliez M, Maïga S, et al. Curcumin induces cell death of the
main molecular myeloma subtype, particularly the poor prognosis subgroups.
Cancer Biol Ther 2015;16:60–5.
13
Vadhan-Raj S, Weber D, Wang M, et al. Curcumin downregulates NF-B and related
genes in patients with multiple myeloma: results of a phase I/II study. Blood
2007;110:1177.
14
Golombick T, Diamond TH, Badmaev V, et al. The potential role of curcumin in
patients with monoclonal gammopathy of undefined significance—its effect on
paraproteinemia and the urinary N-telopeptide of type I collagen bone turnover
marker. Clin Cancer Res 2009;15:5917–22.
15
Golombick T, Diamond TH, Manoharan A, et al. Monoclonal gammopathy
of undetermined significance, smoldering multiple myeloma, and curcumin:
a randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled cross-over 4 g study and an
open-label 8 g extensions study. Am J Hematol 2012;87:455–60.
Copyright 2017 BMJ Publishing Group. All rights reserved. For permission to reuse any of this content visit
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.
BMJ Case Report Fellows may re-use this article for personal use and teaching without any further permission.
Become a Fellow of BMJ Case Reports today and you can:
▸ Submit as many cases as you like
▸ Enjoy fast sympathetic peer review and rapid publication of accepted articles
▸ Access all the published articles
▸ Re-use any of the published material for personal use and teaching without further permission
For information on Institutional Fellowships contact consortiasales@bmjgroup.com
Visit casereports.bmj.com for more articles like this and to become a Fellow
Zaidi A, et al. BMJ Case Rep 2017. doi:10.1136/bcr-2016-218148
3
Unexpected outcome ( positive or negative) including adverse drug reactions
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://casereports.bmj.com/
BMJ Case Reports: first published as 10.1136/bcr-2016-218148 on 16 April 2017. Downloaded from 
