   1
Zakeri R, Cowie MR. Heart 2018;0:1–8. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2016-310790
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: 
controversies, challenges and future directions
Rosita Zakeri,1,2 Martin R Cowie1,2
AbstrAct
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) 
comprises almost half of the population burden of HF. 
Because HFpEF likely includes a range of cardiac and 
non-cardiac abnormalities, typically in elderly patients, 
obtaining an accurate diagnosis may be challenging, 
not least due to the existence of multiple HFpEF mimics 
and a newly identified subset of patients with HFpEF 
and normal plasma natriuretic peptide concentrations. 
The lack of effective treatment for these patients 
represents a major unmet clinical need. Heterogeneity 
within the patient population has triggered debate over 
the aetiology and pathophysiology of HFpEF, and the 
neutrality of randomised clinical trials suggests that we 
do not fully understand the syndrome(s). Dysregulated 
nitric oxide–cyclic guanosine monophosphate–protein 
kinase G signalling, driven by comorbidities and 
ageing, may be the fundamental abnormality in 
HFpEF, resulting in a systemic inflammatory state and 
microvascular endothelial dysfunction. Novel informatics 
platforms are also being used to classify HFpEF 
into subphenotypes, based on statistically clustered 
clinical and biological characteristics: whether such 
subclassification will lead to more targeted therapies 
remains to be seen. In this review, we summarise 
current concepts and controversies, and highlight the 
diagnostic and therapeutic challenges in clinical practice. 
Novel treatments and disease management strategies 
are discussed, and the large gaps in our knowledge 
identified.
IntroductIon
Heart failure (HF) with preserved ejection fraction 
(HFpEF) accounts for up to half of all HF in the 
developed world.1 The reported population prev-
alence ranges from 1% to 3%, and is predicted 
to rise further with lengthening life expectancy, 
greater diagnostic awareness, and increasing rates 
of obesity, diabetes, hypertension and atrial fibril-
lation (AF).1 Whether HFpEF constitutes a single 
syndrome or a collection of syndromes is debated, 
neverless the diagnostic label identifies patients 
with a poor quality of life, high rates of hospitalisa-
tion and premature mortality.1–3 Clinical guidelines 
offer few evidence-based treatment recommenda-
tions.2–4 Large randomised clinical trials of thera-
pies improving outcomes in HF with reduced EF 
(HFrEF) have failed to demonstrate prognostic 
benefit in patients with HFpEF, obliging us to 
re-examine our understanding of the mechanisms 
driving morbidity and mortality in this syndrome, 
and the extent of their reversibility.
In this review, we summarise current ideas, 
controversies and challenges in the diagnosis and 
treatment of HFpEF; discuss our understanding 
of its pathophysiology; and outline novel targeted 
therapies and disease management strategies under 
investigation. The large gaps in our knowledge are 
clearly evident.
dIAgnosIs
How is HFpEF diagnosed?
Among patients with a clinical diagnosis of HF, 
the distribution of EF has been reported variably 
as either unimodal5 or bimodal.6 The decision to 
dichotomise HF into HFrEF or HFpEF according 
to an EF of 50% was arbitrary, but has become 
enshrined in the literature. Current guidelines advo-
cate using EF≥50% as one component of a diag-
nostic algorithm for HFpEF,2 3 alongside detection 
of additional myocardial abnormalities to implicate 
a cardiac cause for symptoms (table 1).2 3 A stream-
lined method for identifying left ventricular (LV) 
diastolic dysfunction has been proposed, based on 
expert opinion.7 The gold standard to confirm (or 
refute) a diagnosis of HFpEF is based on demon-
stration of elevated LV filling pressures during 
cardiac catheterisation, at which time the pres-
ence or absence of concomitant pulmonary arterial 
hypertension can be assessed.2 3 Non-invasive or 
invasive stress testing is recommended to unmask 
symptoms (which often occur exclusively on exer-
tion) and diastolic dysfunction, in order to improve 
diagnostic sensitivity, particularly in individuals 
with an intermediate pretest probability of HFpEF.8 
Other pathologies giving rise to similar symptoms, 
such as myocardial ischaemia or anaemia, should be 
actively excluded before a diagnosis of HFpEF is 
accepted (table 2).
Areas of diagnostic uncertainty
‘Normal’ levels of B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) 
are reported in up to 30% of patients, despite clin-
ical, echocardiographic and invasive haemodynamic 
evidence of HFpEF.9 The absence of LV dilatation 
(and thus lower diastolic wall stress) in HFpEF 
yields lower BNP concentrations and therefore less 
sensitive discrimination between the normal and 
HF state. Further ambiguity may be introduced 
by obesity, which is associated with lower plasma 
BNP concentrations and possible heightened peri-
cardial restraint,10 and by AF, which is associated 
with raised plasma BNP concentrations.11 The 
phenotypic overlap between HFpEF and ‘AF with 
associated breathlessness and raised BNP’ may be 
considerable, though prompt different management 
strategies.
It is unclear whether patients with HF symptoms, 
preserved EF and more than mild epicardial coro-
nary artery disease (CAD) can be considered to have 
HFpEF. CAD is widely noted in HFpEF cohorts and 
review
to cite: Zakeri R, Cowie MR. 
Heart Epub ahead of 
print: [please include Day 
Month Year]. doi:10.1136/
heartjnl-2016-310790
 
► Additional material is 
published online only. To view 
please visit the journal online 
(http:// 
dx. 
doi. 
org/ 
10. 
1136/ 
heartjnl- 
2016- 
310790).
1National Heart and Lung 
Institute, Imperial College 
London, London, UK
2Department of Cardiology, 
Royal Brompton and Harefield 
NHS Foundation Trust, London, 
UK
correspondence to
Professor Martin R Cowie, 
National Heart and Lung 
Institute, Imperial College 
London, Dovehouse Street, 
London, SW3 6LY, UK;  
m. 
cowie@ 
imperial. 
ac. 
uk
Received 4 August 2017
Revised 2 November 2017
Accepted 4 November 2017
 
Heart Online First, published on January 5, 2018 as 10.1136/heartjnl-2016-310790
Copyright Article author (or their employer) 2018. Produced by BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (& BCS) under licence. 
group.bmj.com
 on January 5, 2018 - Published by 
http://heart.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 2
Zakeri R, Cowie MR. Heart 2018;0:1–8. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2016-310790
review
HF symptoms that are disproportionate to the severity of CAD 
or persist after revascularisation may represent one of several 
proposed HFpEF patient phenotypes.12 Evidence of microvas-
cular ischaemia (eg, as demonstrated by cardiac stress magnetic 
resonance imaging [MRI]) would be compatible with microvas-
cular inflammation, which is hypothesised to be important in 
HFpEF.13
In practice, due to the lack of pathognomonic diagnostic 
criteria and complex requirement for systematic exclusion of 
other pathologies, in typically elderly patients with multimor-
bidity, many individuals with breathlessness or fluid retention 
may be labelled as ‘HFpEF’ without the phenotype being prop-
erly established. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing is empirically 
used to differentiate HFpEF from exercise intolerance due to 
non-cardiac limitations such as pulmonary disease or decon-
ditioning, though feasibility may be limited in some elderly or 
frail patients.
PAtHoPHysIology
does HFpEF simply represent advanced age?
Observational studies report abnormalities in cardiovascular 
structure and function in HFpEF which exceed those observed 
in age, sex and body size matched individuals without HF,14 even 
after adjusting for the cumulative burden of comorbidities.15 
Skeletal muscle mass is reduced in HFpEF, beyond that which is 
observed with normal ageing, and directly contributes to exer-
cise limitation.16 Furthermore, mortality rates among patients 
with HFpEF exceed those for patients with similar age, sex 
and comorbidity distribution in trials of hypertension, diabetes 
and CAD, with a higher proportion of cardiovascular deaths 
observed in HFpEF.17 These observations suggest that HFpEF 
is not simply an ageing heart and vascular system. Indeed, the 
majority of older adults with comorbidities do not develop 
HFpEF.
do advancing age and comorbidities contribute to HFpEF 
pathophysiology?
Late-onset HFpEF may have a different pathophysiology to 
HFpEF presenting at a younger age. Observational studies 
suggest that ‘accelerated’ ageing may be a mechanism for ventric-
ular–arterial stiffening in HFpEF, particularly among women.18 
Additionally, senile wild-type transthyretin deposition has been 
associated with HFpEF in predominantly elderly patients.19
Comorbidities are universal in HFpEF cohorts and uniquely 
influence ventricular and vascular remodelling and prognosis.15 
Recently, it has been suggested that comorbidities are integral 
to the development of HFpEF.13 Cardiometabolic diseases, 
including obesity, systemic hypertension and diabetes, are 
proposed to induce a systemic proinflammatory state which in 
turn triggers systemic and coronary microvascular inflammation. 
Nitric oxide (NO) bioavailability is reduced and downstream 
second messenger signalling at the level of the endothelium 
and cardiomyocyte (reduced cyclic guanosine monophosphate 
(cGMP) content and protein kinase G (PKG) activity) promotes 
myocyte and myocardial hypertrophy, cardiomyocyte stiffness 
and interstitial fibrosis13. This hypothesis reconciles phenotypic 
diversity in HFpEF cohorts, with findings at cellular and tissue 
level in human HFpEF biopsies,20 in vivo endothelial dysfunc-
tion21 and autopsy evidence of coronary microvascular rarefac-
tion in HFpEF.22
Importantly, however, the heterogeneity of patient character-
istics, organ-system involvement and number of pathophysio-
logical abnormalities that have been associated with established 
HFpEF (Figure 1) support a multifactorial aetiology in most 
patients. Therefore, identification of vulnerable individuals 
and specific genetic or environmental aetiological factors is still 
needed. 
do distinct pathophysiological subtypes of HFpEF exist?
Pragmatic subphenotypes of HFpEF have been described 
according to dominant comorbidities or grouped clinical 
table 1 Diagnostic criteria for HFpEF
Esc guidelines 20162
AHA guidelines 20133
History and examination
Symptoms and signs of HF
Symptoms and signs of HF
Ejection fraction
≥50%
≥50%
Natriuretic peptides
BNP>35 pg/mL and/or
NT-proBNP>125 pg/mL
Elevated levels are supportive
Imaging
Cardiac structural alterations
Abnormal LV diastolic function
  
 
 
LAVI>34 mL/m2
  
 
 
LVMI≥115 g/m2 (Males) ≥95 g/m2 (Females)
And/or cardiac functional alterations
  
 
 
E/e’ mean septal-lateral≥13
  
 
 
Mean e’ septal/lateral wall<9 cm/s
Additional indirect measures
  
 
 
Reduced global longitudinal strain
  
 
 
Elevated PASP (from TR velocity)
ECG
AF, LVH, repolarisation abnormalities
No specifications
Exclusions
Exclude other known causes of HF
Exclude other known causes of HF
Further testing in case of uncertainty
Diastolic stress test
  
E/e’, PASP, strain, SV and CO
or invasive assessment of LV pressures
  
Rest PCWP≥15 mm Hg or LVEDP≥16 mm Hg±change with exercise*
*Defined as increase in PCWP to ≥25 mm Hg with exercise by Obokata et al.8
AF, atrial fibrillation; BNP, b-type natriuretic peptide; CO, cardiac output; HF, heart failure; HFpEF, HF with preserved ejection fraction; LAVI, left atrial volume index; LV, left 
ventricular; LVEDP, left ventricular end diastolic pressure; LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; LVMI, left ventricular mass index; NT-proBNP, N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide; 
PASP, pulmonary artery systolic pressure; PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure; SV, stroke volume; TR, tricuspid regurgitation. 
group.bmj.com
 on January 5, 2018 - Published by 
http://heart.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 3
Zakeri R, Cowie MR. Heart 2018;0:1–8. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2016-310790
review
characteristics.23 For example, an HFpEF subphenotype with 
pulmonary arterial hypertension and right ventricular dysfunc-
tion has been well characterised and often signifies advanced 
stage HF.23 Accumulating evidence suggests that patients with 
HFpEF and concomitant obesity,10 diabetes15 or AF11 exhibit 
unique characteristics and a poorer prognosis than patients 
without these comorbidities. As yet, however, it remains 
unproven whether these clinical subtypes reflect a spectrum of 
the same disease or mutually exclusive mechanisms that may 
respond to different therapies
‘Deep’ phenotyping of individuals with HFpEF, using 
advanced bioinformatics, is an evolving area of investigation. 
Initial studies have proposed novel subphenotypes extending 
beyond individual comorbidity-defined subgroups.23 24 Large 
dataset-based clustering and machine learning analyses are well 
suited to model the complex interactions that may contribute to 
HFpEF pathophysiology . Importantly, however, generalisability 
and reliability of the output depend on patient selection and the 
quality and completeness of data entry. Furthermore, ‘omics' 
methodologies have not yet been applied to HFpEF patient 
cohorts without elevated BNP or diastolic dysfunction.
trEAtmEnt
What is the evidence for current treatment recommendations 
in HFpEF?
No therapy has yet been shown to improve survival in randomised 
controlled trials of patients with HFpEF and EF≥50%. Existing 
treatment recommendations focus on judicious use of diuretics 
to relieve congestion (when present), and optimal management 
of comorbidities (table 3).
What has been learnt from previous trials in HFpEF?
No single reason underlies the neutral or negative outcomes 
of previous trials (online supplementary table S1). Trials 
employing a low EF cut-off for HFpEF (eg >40% CHARM-Pre-
served,25>45% I-PRESERVE26) or recruiting few patients with 
EF ≥50% (SENIORS27) insufficiently represented symptomatic 
HFpEF, as defined by current guidelines.3 In TOPCAT, regional 
differences in placebo group adverse event rates correlated with 
apparent differences in benefit with spironolactone therapy,28 
suggesting possible inappropriate patient inclusion at some sites. 
The interpretation of PEP-CHF, examining the value of perindo-
pril in the treatment of HFpEF, was hindered by a high drop-out 
rate (40% treatment arm, 36% placebo arm), and one-third of 
patients received open-label treatment during the study.29
Therapies targeting the renin–angiotensin system have 
uniformly failed to demonstrate benefit in HFpEF trials.25 26 28 29 
Evidently, neurohumoral stimulation does not exert a domi-
nant impact on the clinical course of unselected patients with 
HFpEF. RELAX30 tested an alternative therapeutic hypoth-
esis that prevention of cGMP breakdown with phosphodies-
terase 5 (PDE-5) inhibition would enhance exercise capacity 
table 2 Differential diagnosis of HFpEF
classical HFpEF
Heart failure (high left ventricular 
filling pressures) associated with:
Atrial fibrillation
Chronic kidney disease
Coronary artery disease
  
 
 
Mild-to-moderate obstructive epicardial 
disease
  
 
 
Abnormal coronary microcirculation
Diabetes
Hypertension
Obesity
Sleep disordered breathing
differential diagnosis—cardiac
Specific cardiomyopathy
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Sarcomeric (and other) gene mutations
Glycogen storage disease
Lysosomal storage disease (including Fabry’s 
disease)
Amyloidosis
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
  
 
 
Familial
  
 
 
  
 
 
Sarcomeric (and other) gene mutations
  
 
 
  
 
 
Amyloidosis
  
 
 
  
 
 
(familial TTR or apolipoprotein 
mutation)
  
 
 
  
 
 
Hereditary haemochromatosis (iron 
overload)
  
 
 
  
 
 
Fabry’s disease
  
 
 
  
 
 
Glycogen storage disease
  
 
 
  
 
 
Laminopathy/desminopathy
  
 
 
  
 
 
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum
  
 
 
Non-familial
  
 
 
  
 
 
Amyloidosis (or wild-type TTR)
  
 
 
  
 
 
Systemic sclerosis
  
 
 
  
 
 
Sarcoidosis
  
 
 
  
 
 
Endomyocardial fibrosis
  
 
 
  
 
 
Carcinoid heart disease
  
 
 
  
 
 
Radiation
  
 
 
  
 
 
Drug toxicity (eg, anthracyclines)
  
 
 
  
 
 
Heavy metals (copper, iron, cobalt, lead)
Arrhythmogenic right or left ventricular 
cardiomyopathy
Non-compaction cardiomyopathy
Congenital heart disease
Atrial and ventricular septal defects
Coronary artery disease
Moderate-to-severe (obstructive) epicardial 
disease
Heart failure with recovered EF
High cardiac output heart failure
Anaemia, hyperthyroidism, sepsis, skeletal 
disorders, systemic arteriovenous fistulas, 
vitamin B1 deficiency
Malignancy
Direct infiltration and masses (primary or 
secondary)
Radiation-induced cardiomyopathy
Atrial myxoma
Pericardial disease
Constrictive pericarditis
Pericardial effusion and cardiac tamponade
Effusive-constrictive pericarditis
Pulmonary vein stenosis
Right heart failure due to:
Primary pulmonary arterial hypertension
Right ventricular infarction
Rhythm disturbance
Atrial or ventricular arrhythmias
Complete atrioventricular dissociation
Continued
Valvular heart disease
Acquired or congenital severe stenosis or 
regurgitation
differential diagnosis—extracardiac
Anaemia
Pulmonary disease
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Interstitial lung disease
Renal failure (acute or chronic)
EF, ejection fraction; HFpEF, heart failure with preserved ejection fraction; TTR, 
transthyretin.
table 2 Continued 
group.bmj.com
 on January 5, 2018 - Published by 
http://heart.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 4
Zakeri R, Cowie MR. Heart 2018;0:1–8. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2016-310790
review
in patients with HFpEF, but was also neutral. Translational 
studies have reported low myocardial cGMP content in human 
HFpEF biopsies;20 hence, low cGMP production may be the key 
perturbation in HFpEF, rather than excess cGMP breakdown, 
explaining the neutral result. Since PDE-5 inhibitors improve 
outcomes in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension, 
theoretically targeting patients with HFpEF who have severe 
pulmonary vascular disease (combined precapillary and postcap-
illary pulmonary hypertension) may produce a different result.
Randomised controlled trials (RCT) evidence is generally 
regarded as the most robust evidence for regulatory authori-
ties and guideline writers. Such studies are expensive, often of 
limited duration, and typically focus on a few ‘hard’ endpoints, 
such as cardiovascular mortality. However, if HF hospitalisation 
had been selected as the primary endpoint in CHARM-Pre-
served25 or TOPCAT,28 the study conclusions might have been 
different (supplementary table S1).
What therapies for HFpEF are currently under investigation?
Several novel therapies are currently under investigation in 
randomised trials  (Figure 2) 
Therapies to modify cellular cGMP and structural adaptations
Pharmacological modulation of the NO-cGMP-PKG signalling 
pathway may increase cGMP content and reduce myocardial stiff-
ness in HFpEF (Figure 3). To date, neither direct replenishment 
of cGMP
, via soluble guanylate cylase stimulators (riociguat,31 
vericiguat32), nor indirect cGMP replenishment via the organic NO 
donor, isosorbide mononitrate33 (ISMN), have met their primary 
endpoints in HFpEF trials. ISMN reduced patient activity levels 
in the Nitrate’s Effect on Activity Tolerance in Heart Failure with 
Preserved Ejection Fraction (NEAT-HFpEF) trial, possibly due to 
excess hypotension or renal sodium retention,33 and is therefore 
contraindicated in HFpEF unless required for another indication, 
for example, angina.4 Inorganic nitrate preferentially delivers NO 
during hypoxia and acidosis, as occur during stress and exercise, 
potentially avoiding hypotensive sequelae. In a phase II study, 
beetroot juice (dietary inorganic nitrate) improved systemic vaso-
dilation during exercise and submaximal exercise endurance in 
patients with HFpEF.34 Further studies using an inhaled nitrite 
preparation are in progress (NCT02742129).
Natriuretic peptides increase intracellular cGMP (Figure 3). 
Neprilysin inhibitors prevent the breakdown of biologically active 
natriuretic peptides. In the phase II PARAMOUNT trial, the 
combined neprilysin inhibitor/angiotensin receptor blocker, sacu-
bitril–valsartan, was associated with lower NT-proBNP
, reduced 
left atrial size and a trend towards improved functional class 
compared with valsartan therapy alone,35 implying a disease-modi-
fying effect in HFpEF. A phase III trial with the combined primary 
endpoint of cardiovascular death or first HF hospitalisation is 
underway (PARAGON-HF, NCT01920711). The impact of sacubi-
tril–valsartan, compared with individualised medical management 
of comorbidities, on NT-proBNP
, symptoms, exercise capacity and 
safety in HFpEF is also being studied (NCT03066804). 
Therapies to improve exercise intolerance and functional 
adaptations
It is debatable whether exercise intolerance in HFpEF is 
predominantly due to impaired cardiac, chronotropic21 or 
peripheral vascular reserve.36 Theoretically, greater LV filling 
Figure 1 Pathphysiological abnormalities associated with the heart failure with preserved ejection fraction syndrome. AF, atrial fibrillation, LA, left 
atria; LV, left ventricular; RV, right ventricular.
group.bmj.com
 on January 5, 2018 - Published by 
http://heart.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 5
Zakeri R, Cowie MR. Heart 2018;0:1–8. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2016-310790
review
table 3 Current evidence for treatment of HFpEF
target
therapy
Evidence
level of 
evidence
Survival
ACEI/ARB
Beta blockers
Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist
No RCT evidence of benefit (possible benefit in subgroup with low BNP)49
Possible benefit on pooled analysis in patients with EF≥40%50
No RCT evidence of benefit
–
–
–
Hospitalisation for HF
ACEI/ARB
Beta blockers
Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist
Loop diuretics
No RCT evidence of benefit (possible benefit in subgroup with low BNP)49
No RCT evidence of benefit
Benefit of spironolactone in TOPCAT (as secondary outcome)28
Benefit of diuretic therapy combined with vasodilators in CHAMPION43
–
–
IIA4
IB2 or C3
Symptoms
IB or C
  
Congestion
Loop diuretics
CHAMPION trial (diuretic therapy combined with vasodilators)43
  
Exercise capacity
Isosorbide mononitrate
Associated with reduced activity levels in NEAT-HFpEF33
III
Management of comorbidities in 
HFpEF
IB3 or C3
  
Hypertension
Antihypertensive therapy
Management of acute hypertensive oedema
BP targets extrapolated from hypertension guidelines
–
  
Atrial fibrillation
  
Stroke prevention
  
Rhythm control
  
Rate control
Oral anticoagulation
Ablation
Beta blockers, CCB, digoxin
Risk scores extrapolated from AF guidelines
No RCT evidence of benefit (Observational single-centre data)51
No RCT evidence for rate targets
IA (AF)
–
–
  
CAD
Pharmacotherapy (including statins)
Revascularisation
No RCT evidence of benefit
No RCT evidence of benefit (Observational single centre data12)
–
–
  
Diabetes
Empagliflozin
Reduction in (incident) HF hospitalisation among patients with diabetes and high CV risk (HF 
phenotype not reported)48
–
  
Kidney disease
ACEI/ARB (for hypertension)
–
  
Obesity
Weight loss programme (behavioural)
Pharmacotherapy/bariatric surgery
Improvement in peak VO2 in patients≥60 years47
No RCT evidence of benefit
–
–
  
Pulmonary disease
No RCT evidence of benefit
–
  
Sleep disordered breathing
No RCT evidence of benefit
–
ACEI, ACE inhibitors; AF, atrial fibrillation; ARB, angiotensin receptor blockers; BNP, B-type natriuretic peptide; BP, blood pressure; CAD, coronary artery disease; CCB, calcium channel blockers; 
CV, cardiovascular; HF, heart failure; HFpEF, heart failure with preserved ejection fraction.
Figure 2 Therapeutic targets under investigation in HFpEF. HFpEF, heart failure with preserved ejection fraction; LA, left atrial; sCG, soluble 
guanylate cyclase.
group.bmj.com
 on January 5, 2018 - Published by 
http://heart.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 6
Zakeri R, Cowie MR. Heart 2018;0:1–8. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2016-310790
review
occurs at lower heart rates, although excess rate lowering 
may exacerbate chronotropic incompetence in HFpEF. The If 
current blocker, ivabradine, variably demonstrated improved,37 
worsened38 or no effect39 on exercise capacity, quality of life 
and BNP in phase II HFpEF trials. RAPID-HF will assess 
whether restoring chronotropic competence using rate adap-
tive pacing can improve exercise capacity in patients with 
HFpEF in sinus rhythm who display chronotropic incompe-
tence (NCT02145351).
Pulmonary vasodilation may improve pulmonary hyperten-
sion in HFpEF. A number of agents are currently being tested, 
including oral trepostinil (NCT03037580, NCT03043651), 
riociguat (NCT02744339) and nitrate therapy (NCT02980068). 
BEAT-HFpEF 
(NCT02885636) 
is 
investigating 
whether 
albuterol improves pulmonary vascular tone in HFpEF.
Therapies to ameliorate advanced symptoms
Creation of a controlled left-to-right interatrial shunt in patients 
with advanced HFpEF, improved functional capacity and quality 
of life after 12 months in an open-label study of 64 patients.40 
Open-label phase 1 studies are underway for similar devices 
(CORolla, NCT02499601; Occlutech atrial flow regulator, 
NCT03030274). A small sham-controlled RCT is due to report 
shortly (REDUCE LAP-HF I; NCT 02600234). 
Monitoring strategies to prevent adverse outcomes
Outcomes from disease management programmes have not been 
reported stratified by HF type,41 though feasibility of imple-
menting a specialised HFpEF programme has been described in 
a single centre.42
Following the favourable results of the CHAMPION trial,43 
which included patients with a spectrum of EFs, additional 
prospective studies of remote pulmonary artery pressure moni-
toring are underway in the USA and Europe/Australia.
Treatment of comorbidities and exercise training
OPTIMIZE-HFpEF (NCT02425371) will determine whether 
systematic screening and targeted management of comorbidities 
in HFpEF patients (>60 years of age) will improve a composite 
outcome comprising symptoms, NT-proBNP
, diuretic use, HF 
hospitalisation and death compared with usual care. The safety, 
tolerability and efficacy of iron repletion, in the presence or 
absence of anaemia, on walking distance after 1 
year are being 
investigated in FAIR-HFpEF (NCT03074591).
To date, exercise training represents the only intervention 
that has demonstrated symptomatic benefit in relatively young 
patients with HFpEF, likely through beneficial effects on periph-
eral (arterial and skeletal muscle) targets.44 The exercise protocol 
employed in early studies may not be feasible in all elderly or 
frail patients with HFpEF; thus, further studies to refine the 
content of exercise programmes (Exercise Intolerance in Elderly 
Patients With HFpEF, NCT02636439), define the mechanism 
of benefit (Resistance training in HFpEF, NCT02435667) and 
optimal location of exercise (Implementation of Telerehabili-
tation In Support of HOme-based Physical Exercise for Heart 
Failure, NCT02435667) are underway.
FuturE dIrEctIons
definition of HFpEF and its fundamental mechanisms
The lack of consistent diagnostic criteria for HFpEF makes compar-
ison across randomised trials difficult. There is a pressing need 
to improve the specificity of an HFpEF diagnosis from other HF 
syndromes and comorbid disease states, such as symptomatic CAD 
and AF. Novel diagnostics, including multiparametric biomarkers 
and new imaging techniques, may help to identify unique biolog-
ical signature(s) for HFpEF (eg, circulating galectin-3 and MRI-T1 
mapping techniques may be used to quantify myocardial fibrosis).
Fundamental and specific changes in myocardial structure and 
function in patients with HFpEF support the ongoing search for 
Figure 3 Myocardial cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) signalling in HFpEF (potential therapeutic targets are highlighted in red). Natriuretic 
peptides bind to the natriuretic peptide receptors A and B (NPRA/B) and stimulate cGMP via particulate guanylate cyclase (pGC). Neprilysin inhibitors 
act through this pathway. Nitric oxide synthases produce nitric oxide which stimulates cGMP via soluble guanylate cyclase (sCG). sCG stimulators 
and nitrates/nitrites target this pathway. cGMP activates protein kinase G (PKG) which has a number of beneficial effects (as demonstrated). 
Phosphodiesterase-5a inhibitors (PDE5a) act directly on this pathway by preventing the breakdown of cGMP.
group.bmj.com
 on January 5, 2018 - Published by 
http://heart.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 7
Zakeri R, Cowie MR. Heart 2018;0:1–8. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2016-310790
review
mechanistically targeted therapies.15 Few insights are available from 
the extreme ends of the HFpEF spectrum; thus, identification of 
key predictors and drivers of HFpEF from at-risk populations with 
comorbid disease (eg, diabetes, hypertension, AF), as well as better 
description of the trajectory/ies of HFpEF, including mode of death 
and cardiovascular events, may lead to identification of pivotal 
mechanisms and new therapeutic targets. Albeit in the context of 
a typically elderly population where non-cardiovascular events may 
also critically determine clinical outcomes.
Validation of HFpEF subphenotypes
Characterisation of HFpEF subphenotypes will provide greatest 
value if categories can be replicated across populations, clearly 
distinguished from ‘non-HFpEF’ and linked to unique mechanisms 
of disease. This will be a starting point for prospective comparative 
studies. Collection of high-dimensional data from large numbers 
of patients, with and without HFpEF, should facilitate these aims, 
provided this is matched to accurate coding practices. Integration of 
data collection into routine clinical workflow may minimise missing 
variables and enable correlation with nuanced clinical assessment. 
One such initiative is being conducted in patients with pulmo-
nary vascular disease, including left-sided heart disease-related 
pulmonary hypertension, in the multicentre NHLBI-sponsored 
PVDOMICS network (NCT02980887).
Unfortunately, low availability of myocardial tissue from 
patients with HFpEF hinders translational research in this field. 
More broadly representative animal models (beyond hyperten-
sion-related remodelling) may identify novel disease mecha-
nisms. The extent to which ‘deep’ phenotyping of HFpEF will 
advance the field will depend on the demonstration of biological 
relevance and incremental therapeutic or prognostic value.
clinical trial design considerations and novel therapeutic 
strategies
Enrolment in HFpEF treatment trials is challenging. Patients 
who are very elderly, frail, obese or have a high comorbidity 
burden are often underrepresented, which limits the gener-
alisability of trial findings and their relevance to clinical prac-
tice. Validation of simplified diagnostic algorithms is urgently 
required, as well as identification of the key clinical or biological 
characteristics that influence outcome. Invasive stress testing can 
be very useful but may not be feasible for all centres.
New trial designs may be useful in HFpEF, and this requires 
discussion between trialists, regulators and reimbursement 
authorities. Adaptive design features allow flexibility based on 
interim analysis, and thus may improve the value and efficiency 
of clinical trials. Such a strategy may have altered the outcome 
of the TOPCAT trial.28 Flexible trial protocols may also accel-
erate incorporation of emerging science: for example, enrol-
ment criteria for PARAGON stipulated BNP elevation, though 
recent data suggest that neprilysin inhibition may preferentially 
benefit patients with a low BNP
.45 Patient-reported outcome 
measures (symptom burden, quality of life) and non-cardiovas-
cular sequelae associated with HFpEF (eg, sarcopaenia, renal 
failure) should also feature more prominently among primary 
or secondary endpoints of clinical trials. The feasibility of a 
patient-centric endpoint was demonstrated in NEAT-HFpEF,33 
and there are signs that regulators are more willing to consider 
such endpoints in areas of unmet need.46
Ultimately, a single therapy or therapeutic approach may not 
be effective for all patients with HFpEF. Complex (combined) 
interventions or therapeutic programmes incorporating exer-
cise and lifestyle modification, including weight loss, should 
be evaluated and have been beneficial in small trials.44 47 The 
current focus on cardiovascular-targeted therapies is also 
unlikely to reduce the burden of non-cardiovascular deaths in 
HFpEF. Therefore, evidence from randomised trials to guide the 
management of comorbidities in HFpEF remains vital, and may 
provide relevant information for primary prevention.48
conclusIon
HFpEF is an evolving concept that, as yet, has failed to translate 
into meaningful improvement in the outcome of individuals with 
HF symptoms but no overt reduction in LV systolic function or 
primary valve disease. The syndrome(s) is/are multifaceted and 
debilitating, and the prevalence is likely to increase steeply in 
the coming decades. Several emerging diagnostic and treatment 
strategies appear promising but require validation. Currently, 
those writing clinical guidelines have little high-quality evidence 
on which to base advice for clinicians and their patients. In the 
future, it is likely that the syndrome will be disaggregated into 
different phenotypes, where different therapeutic approaches 
may be appropriate. Certainly however our current knowledge 
base is inadequate to the task of managing this increasing clinical 
problem.49–51
contributors RZ and MRC drafted and revised the manuscript.
competing interests None declared.
Provenance and peer review Commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
rEFErEncEs
 1 Dunlay SM, Roger VL, Redfield MM. Epidemiology of heart failure with preserved 
ejection fraction. Nat Rev Cardiol 2017;14:591–602.
 2 Ponikowski P, Voors AA, Anker SD, et al2016 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and 
treatment of acute and chronic heart failure: the task force for the diagnosis and 
treatment of acute and chronic heart failure of the European Society of Cardiology 
(ESC) developed with the special contribution of the Heart Failure Association (HFA) 
of the ESC. Eur Heart J 2016;37:2129–200.
 3 Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for the 
management of heart failure: a report of the American college of cardiology 
foundation/American heart association task force on practice guidelines. Circulation 
2013;128:1810–52.
 4 Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/HFSA focused update of the 
2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of heart failure: a report of the 
American college of cardiology/American heart association task force on clinical 
practice guidelines and the heart failure society of america. Circulation 2017;136:e13
7–e161.
 5 Solomon SD, Anavekar N, Skali H, et al. Influence of ejection fraction on 
cardiovascular outcomes in a broad spectrum of heart failure patients. Circulation 
2005;112:3738–44.
 6 Gaasch WH, Delorey DE, Kueffer FJ, et al. Distribution of left ventricular ejection 
fraction in patients with ischemic and hypertensive heart disease and chronic heart 
failure. Am J Cardiol 2009;104:1413–5.
 7 Nagueh SF, Smiseth OA, Appleton CP, et al. Recommendations for the evaluation of 
left ventricular diastolic function by echocardiography: an update from the American 
society of echocardiography and the european association of cardiovascular imaging. 
J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2016;29:277–314.
 8 Obokata M, Kane GC, Reddy YN, et al. Role of diastolic stress testing in the 
evaluation for heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a simultaneous invasive-
echocardiographic study. Circulation 2017;135:825–38.
 9 Anjan VY, Loftus TM, Burke MA, et al. Prevalence, clinical phenotype, and outcomes 
associated with normal B-type natriuretic peptide levels in heart failure with 
preserved ejection fraction. Am J Cardiol 2012;110:870–6.
 
10 Obokata M, Reddy YNV, Pislaru SV, et al. Evidence supporting the existence of a 
distinct obese phenotype of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Circulation 
2017;136:6–19.
 
11 Zakeri R, Borlaug BA, McNulty SE, et al. Impact of atrial fibrillation on exercise 
capacity in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a RELAX trial ancillary study. 
Circ Heart Fail 2014;7:123–30.
 
12 Hwang SJ, Melenovsky V, Borlaug BA. Implications of coronary artery disease in heart 
failure with preserved ejection fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol 2014;63:2817–27.
group.bmj.com
 on January 5, 2018 - Published by 
http://heart.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 8
Zakeri R, Cowie MR. Heart 2018;0:1–8. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2016-310790
review
 
13 Paulus WJ, Tschöpe C. A novel paradigm for heart failure with preserved ejection 
fraction: comorbidities drive myocardial dysfunction and remodeling through coronary 
microvascular endothelial inflammation. J Am Coll Cardiol 2013;62:263–71.
 
14 Lam CS, Roger VL, Rodeheffer RJ, et al. Cardiac structure and ventricular-vascular 
function in persons with heart failure and preserved ejection fraction from Olmsted 
County, Minnesota. Circulation 2007;115:1982–90.
 
15 Mohammed SF, Borlaug BA, Roger VL, et al. Comorbidity and ventricular and vascular 
structure and function in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a community-
based study. Circ Heart Fail 2012;5:710–9.
 
16 Haykowsky MJ, Brubaker PH, Morgan TM, et al. Impaired aerobic capacity and 
physical functional performance in older heart failure patients with preserved 
ejection fraction: role of lean body mass. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 
2013;68:968–75.
 
17 Campbell RT, Jhund PS, Castagno D, et al. What have we learned about patients with 
heart failure and preserved ejection fraction from DIG-PEF, CHARM-preserved, and 
I-PRESERVE? J Am Coll Cardiol 2012;60:2349–56.
 
18 Wohlfahrt P, Redfield MM, Lopez-Jimenez F, et al. Impact of general and central 
adiposity on ventricular-arterial aging in women and men. JACC Heart Fail 
2014;2:489–99.
 
19 Mohammed SF, Mirzoyev SA, Edwards WD, et al. Left ventricular amyloid deposition 
in patients with heart failure and preserved ejection fraction. JACC Heart Fail 
2014;2:113–22.
 
20 van Heerebeek L, Hamdani N, Falcão-Pires I, et al. Low myocardial protein kinase G 
activity in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Circulation 2012;126:830–9.
 
21 Borlaug BA, Olson TP, Lam CS, et al. Global cardiovascular reserve dysfunction in heart 
failure with preserved ejection fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol 2010;56:845–54.
 
22 Mohammed SF, Hussain S, Mirzoyev SA, et al. Coronary microvascular rarefaction 
and myocardial fibrosis in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Circulation 
2015;131:550–9.
 
23 Shah SJ, Katz DH, Selvaraj S, et al. Phenomapping for novel classification of heart 
failure with preserved ejection fraction. Circulation 2015;131:269–79.
 
24 Kao DP, Lewsey JD, Anand IS, et al. Characterization of subgroups of heart failure 
patients with preserved ejection fraction with possible implications for prognosis and 
treatment response. Eur J Heart Fail 2015;17:925–35.
 
25 Yusuf S, Pfeffer MA, Swedberg K, et al. Effects of candesartan in patients with chronic 
heart failure and preserved left-ventricular ejection fraction: the CHARM-Preserved 
Trial. Lancet 2003;362:777–81.
 
26 Massie BM, Carson PE, McMurray JJ, et al. Irbesartan in patients with heart failure 
and preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J Med 2008;359:2456–67.
 
27 van Veldhuisen DJ, Cohen-Solal A, Böhm M, et al. Beta-blockade with nebivolol 
in elderly heart failure patients with impaired and preserved left ventricular 
ejection fraction: data from SENIORS (Study of Effects of Nebivolol Intervention on 
Outcomes and Rehospitalization in Seniors with heart failure). J Am Coll Cardiol 
2009;53:2150–8.
 
28 Pitt B, Pfeffer MA, Assmann SF, et al. Spironolactone for heart failure with preserved 
ejection fraction. N Engl J Med 2014;370:1383–92.
 
29 Cleland JG, Tendera M, Adamus J, et al. The perindopril in elderly people with chronic 
heart failure (PEP-CHF) study. Eur Heart J 2006;27:2338–45.
 
30 Redfield MM, Chen HH, Borlaug BA, et al. Effect of phosphodiesterase-5 inhibition on 
exercise capacity and clinical status in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2013;309:1268–77.
 
31 Bonderman D, Pretsch I, Steringer-Mascherbauer R, et al. Acute hemodynamic effects 
of riociguat in patients with pulmonary hypertension associated with diastolic heart 
failure (DILATE-1): a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, single-dose study. 
Chest 2014;146:1274–85.
 
32 Pieske B, Maggioni AP, Lam CSP, et al. Vericiguat in patients with worsening chronic 
heart failure and preserved ejection fraction: results of the soluble guanylate cyclase 
stimulator in heart failure patients with preserved ef (socrates-preserved) study. Eur 
Heart J 2017;38:1119–27.
 
33 Redfield MM, Anstrom KJ, Levine JA, et al. Isosorbide mononitrate in heart failure with 
preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J Med 2015;373:2314–24.
 
34 Zamani P, Rawat D, Shiva-Kumar P, et al. Effect of inorganic nitrate on 
exercise capacity in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Circulation 
2015;131:371–80.
 
35 Solomon SD, Zile M, Pieske B, et al. The angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitor 
LCZ696 in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a phase 2 double-blind 
randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2012;380:1387–95.
 
36 Haykowsky MJ, Brubaker PH, Stewart KP, et al. Effect of endurance training on 
the determinants of peak exercise oxygen consumption in elderly patients with 
stable compensated heart failure and preserved ejection fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2012;60:120–8.
 
37 Kosmala W, Holland DJ, Rojek A, et al. Effect of If-channel inhibition on hemodynamic 
status and exercise tolerance in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a 
randomized trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 2013;62:1330–8.
 
38 Pal N, Sivaswamy N, Mahmod M, et al. Effect of selective heart rate slowing in heart 
failure with preserved ejection fraction. Circulation 2015;132:1719–25.
 
39 Komajda M, Isnard R, Cohen-Solal A, et al. Effect of ivabradine in patients with heart 
failure with preserved ejection fraction: the EDIFY randomized placebo-controlled trial. 
Eur J Heart Fail 2017.
 
40 Kaye DM, Hasenfuß G, Neuzil P, et al. One-year outcomes after transcatheter insertion 
of an interatrial shunt device for the management of heart failure with preserved 
ejection fraction. Circ Heart Fail 2016;9:e003662.
 
41 McAlister FA, Stewart S, Ferrua S, et al. Multidisciplinary strategies for the 
management of heart failure patients at high risk for admission: a systematic review 
of randomized trials. J Am Coll Cardiol 2004;44:810–9.
 
42 Shah SJ, Cogswell R, Ryan JJ, et al. How to develop and implement a specialized 
heart failure with preserved ejection fraction clinical program. Curr Cardiol Rep 
2016;18:122.
 
43 Adamson PB, Abraham WT, Bourge RC, et al. Wireless pulmonary artery pressure 
monitoring guides management to reduce decompensation in heart failure with 
preserved ejection fraction. Circ Heart Fail 2014;7:935–44.
 
44 Edelmann F, Gelbrich G, Düngen HD, et al. Exercise training improves exercise capacity 
and diastolic function in patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: 
results of the Ex-DHF (Exercise training in Diastolic Heart Failure) pilot study. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2011;58:1780–91.
 
45 Anand IS, Claggett B, Liu J, et al. Interaction between spironolactone and natriuretic 
peptides in patients with heart failure and preserved ejection fraction: from the 
TOPCAT trial. JACC Heart Fail 2017;5:241–52.
 
46 Cowie MR, Filippatos GS, Alonso Garcia MLA, et al. New medicinal products for 
chronic heart failure: advances in clinical trial design and efficacy assessment. Eur J 
Heart Fail 2017;19:718–27.
 
47 Kitzman DW, Brubaker P, Morgan T, et al. Effect of caloric restriction or aerobic 
exercise training on peak oxygen consumption and quality of life in obese older 
patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA 2016;315:36–46.
 
48 Fitchett D, Zinman B, Wanner C, et al. Heart failure outcomes with empagliflozin in 
patients with type 2 diabetes at high cardiovascular risk: results of the EMPA-REG 
OUTCOME trial. Eur Heart J 2016;37:1526–34.
 
49 Anand IS, Rector TS, Cleland JG, et al. Prognostic value of baseline plasma amino-
terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide and its interactions with irbesartan treatment 
effects in patients with heart failure and preserved ejection fraction: findings from the 
I-PRESERVE trial. Circ Heart Fail 2011;4:569–77.
 
50 Zheng SL, Chan FT, Nabeebaccus AA, et al. Drug treatment effects on outcomes in 
heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Heart 2017.
 
51 Machino-Ohtsuka T, Seo Y, Ishizu T, et al. Efficacy, safety, and outcomes of catheter 
ablation of atrial fibrillation in patients with heart failure with preserved ejection 
fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol 2013;62:1857–65.
group.bmj.com
 on January 5, 2018 - Published by 
http://heart.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 directions
controversies, challenges and future 
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction:
Rosita Zakeri and Martin R Cowie
 published online January 5, 2018
Heart 
 
http://heart.bmj.com/content/early/2018/01/05/heartjnl-2016-310790
Updated information and services can be found at: 
These include:
References
 
#BIBL
http://heart.bmj.com/content/early/2018/01/05/heartjnl-2016-310790
This article cites 49 articles, 29 of which you can access for free at: 
service
Email alerting
box at the top right corner of the online article. 
Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article. Sign up in the
Notes
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions
To request permissions go to:
http://journals.bmj.com/cgi/reprintform
To order reprints go to:
http://group.bmj.com/subscribe/
To subscribe to BMJ go to:
group.bmj.com
 on January 5, 2018 - Published by 
http://heart.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
