 ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 08 November 2018
doi: 10.3389/fnint.2018.00054
The Varieties of the Psychedelic
Experience: A Preliminary Study of
the Association Between the
Reported Subjective Effects and the
Binding Affinity Profiles of
Substituted Phenethylamines and
Tryptamines
Federico Zamberlan 1,2, Camila Sanz 1, Rocío Martínez Vivot 2,3, Carla Pallavicini 2,4,
Fire Erowid 5, Earth Erowid 5 and Enzo Tagliazucchi 1,2,6*
1Departamento de Física, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2Instituto de Física de Buenos Aires (IFIBA)
and National Scientific and Technical Research Council (CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina, 3Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas (BIOMED) and Technical Research Council (CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina, 4Fundación Para la Lucha
contra las Enfermedades Neurológicas de la Infancia (FLENI), Buenos Aires, Argentina, 5Erowid Center, Grass Valley, CA,
United States, 6UMR7225 Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière (ICM), Paris, France
Edited by:
Sidarta Ribeiro,
Federal University of Rio Grande do
Norte, Brazil
Reviewed by:
Attila Szabo,
University of Oslo, Norway
Andrew Robert Gallimore,
Okinawa Institute of Science and
Technology Graduate University,
Japan
Luís Fernando Tófoli,
Universidade Estadual de Campinas,
Brazil
*Correspondence:
Enzo Tagliazucchi
tagliazucchi.enzo@googlemail.com
Received: 22 June 2018
Accepted: 15 October 2018
Published: 08 November 2018
Citation:
Zamberlan F, Sanz C,
Martínez Vivot R, Pallavicini C,
Erowid F, Erowid E and Tagliazucchi E
(2018) The Varieties of the
Psychedelic Experience: A
Preliminary Study of the Association
Between the Reported Subjective
Effects and the Binding Affinity
Profiles of Substituted
Phenethylamines and Tryptamines.
Front. Integr. Neurosci. 12:54.
doi: 10.3389/fnint.2018.00054
Classic psychedelics are substances of paramount cultural and neuroscientific
importance. A distinctive feature of psychedelic drugs is the wide range of potential
subjective effects they can elicit, known to be deeply influenced by the internal
state of the user (“set”) and the surroundings (“setting”). The observation of cross-
tolerance and a series of empirical studies in humans and animal models support
agonism at the serotonin (5-HT)2A receptor as a common mechanism for the action
of psychedelics. The diversity of subjective effects elicited by different compounds
has been attributed to the variables of “set” and “setting,” to the binding affinities
for other 5-HT receptor subtypes, and to the heterogeneity of transduction pathways
initiated by conformational receptor states as they interact with different ligands
(“functional selectivity”). Here we investigate the complementary (i.e., not mutually
exclusive) possibility that such variety is also related to the binding affinity for a
range of neurotransmitters and monoamine transporters including (but not limited to)
5-HT receptors. Building on two independent binding affinity datasets (compared to
“in silico” estimates) in combination with natural language processing tools applied to
a large repository of reports of psychedelic experiences (Erowid’s Experience Vaults), we
obtained preliminary evidence supporting that the similarity between the binding affinity
profiles of psychoactive substituted phenethylamines and tryptamines is correlated with
the semantic similarity of the associated reports. We also showed that the highest
correlation was achieved by considering the combined binding affinity for the 5-HT,
dopamine (DA), glutamate, muscarinic and opioid receptors and for the Ca+ channel.
Applying dimensionality reduction techniques to the reports, we linked the compounds,
receptors, transporters and the Ca+ channel to distinct fingerprints of the reported
subjective effects. To the extent that the existing binding affinity data is based on
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
1
November 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 54
 Zamberlan et al.
Pharmacology of Psychedelics Subjective Effects
a low number of displacement curves that requires further replication, our analysis
produced preliminary evidence consistent with the involvement of different binding
sites in the reported subjective effects elicited by psychedelics. Beyond the study of
this particular class of drugs, we provide a methodological framework to explore the
relationship between the binding affinity profiles and the reported subjective effects of
other psychoactive compounds.
Keywords: psychedelics, consciousness, phenomenology, binding affinity profile, semantic analysis
INTRODUCTION
‘‘But there are many components of a drug’s action, like the
harmonics from the fundamental to the inaudible which, taken
in concert, defines the drug. With musical instruments, these
components can be shown as sine waves on an oscilloscope. (. . .)
But in psychopharmacology? There is no psychic oscilloscope. There
are no easily defined and measured harmonics or phase angles.
Certainly, any eventual definition of a drug will require some such
dissection into components each of which makes some contribution
to the complex whole. The mental process may some day be defined
by a particular combination of these components.’’
— (Shulgin and Shulgin, 1995).
Psychedelics are psychoactive substances remarkable for
their capacity to elicit a wide range of idiosyncratic effects
on consciousness of the self and the environment, as well
as changes in perception, emotion and cognition (Nichols,
2016; Carhart-Harris et al., 2018; Preller and Vollenweider,
2018). For millenia, different cultures have adopted the
ceremonial use of plants and fungi containing psychedelic
molecules. These ‘‘classic’’ psychedelics include mescaline
(present in cacti such as peyote, Lophophora williamsii),
psilocybin (primarily found in the mushrooms of Psilocybe
genus) and N,N-Dimethyltryptamine (DMT; an orally inactive
compound enabled by the combination with β-carbolines in
ayahuasca, a brew originally from the Amazon basin; Schultes
and Hofmann, 1979; Rätsch, 2005; Nichols, 2016). The discovery
of the psychedelic properties of lysergic acid diethylamide
(LSD) by A. Hofmann in 1943 provided the first example of
a semi-synthetic classic psychedelic, and signaled a period of
intense scientific investigation on the subjective effects1 elicited
by these substances, their mechanism of action in the brain, and
their therapeutic potential (Hofmann, 1980).
Experiments both in humans and animal models have
provided strong evidence that the psychedelic effects of these
molecules are mediated by at least partial agonism at serotonin
(5-HT)2A receptors, with a possible role for agonism at other
5-HT receptor subtypes such as 5-HT2C and 5-HT1A (Glennon
et al., 1983, 1984; Spencer et al., 1987; Fiorella et al., 1995;
Vollenweider et al., 1998; Halberstadt et al., 2011; Hanks and
González-Maeso, 2012; Quednow et al., 2012; Kometer et al.,
2013; Rickli et al., 2016; Kraehenmann et al., 2017a,b; Preller
et al., 2017). These experiments, together with the observation
1Here ‘‘subjective effects’’ stands for drug-induced reportable experiences,
which might reflect changes in sensory perception, but also bodily sensations
and altered thought processes and cognition.
of cross-tolerance between classic psychedelics (Balestrieri and
Fontanari, 1959; Isbell et al., 1959, 1961; Appel and Freedman,
1968), led to the consolidation of the serotonergic hypothesis
of psychedelic action (Nichols, 2016). This hypothesis states
that psychedelics elicit their effects via a common mechanism
based on agonism at a relatively small set of 5-HT receptor
subtypes. The existence of such mechanism agrees with early
studies showing that, in spite of substantial variation in chemical
structure, the subjective effects induced by classic psychedelics
such as mescaline, psilocybin, DMT and LSD can be considered
as similar (Wolbach et al., 1962). Though distinctions have been
reported (Coyle et al., 2012; Sanz et al., 2018), they have been
attributed to variations in the internal state of the user (‘‘set’’)
and the surrounding (‘‘setting’’; Studerus et al., 2012), as well as
dose, which can be difficult to control in non-laboratory settings.
The objective of the present work is to investigate the variety
of subjective effects elicited by different psychedelic molecules
and to empirically study possible mechanisms underlying such
diversity. A large body of anecdotal experiences supports the
existence of differences in the subjective effects of serotonergic
psychedelics, in particular concerning those elicited by relatively
novel synthetic derivatives of phenethylamines (i.e., mescaline
analogs) and tryptamines (i.e., DMT analogs). A frequently
cited example is that of N,N-Diisopropyltryptamine (DiPT), a
substituted tryptamine and 5-HT1A/2A agonist remarkable for
producing auditory distortions, in contrast to the predominantly
visual effects of classic psychedelics (Shulgin and Carter, 1979;
Shulgin and Shulgin, 1997; Kometer and Vollenweider, 2016).
Adding to this particular example, over 200 psychoactive
substituted phenethylamines and tryptamines presenting an
ample range of reported subjective effects are described in
the work of A. Shulgin (Shulgin et al., 1961, 1969; Shulgin
and Shulgin, 1995, 1997). While most of these compounds
are either confirmed or suspected serotonergic psychedelics,
others
(such
as
3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine
[MDA]
and
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine
[MDMA])
act
primarily as monoamine transporter substrates that facilitate the
presynaptic release of 5-HT, dopamine (DA) and norepinephrine
and have received the alternative denomination of ‘‘entactogens’’
(Nichols, 1986).
The aforementioned evidence for the variety of subjective
effects elicited by serotonergic psychedelics presents a challenge
to the single-receptor hypothesis of psychedelic action. It
has been suggested that such variety could be explained by
functional selectivity, i.e., ligand-dependent selectivity for certain
intracellular pathways (Urban et al., 2007; Seifert, 2013; Zhou
and Bohn, 2014; López-Giménez and González-Maeso, 2018).
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
2
November 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 54
 Zamberlan et al.
Pharmacology of Psychedelics Subjective Effects
As stated by D. Nichols: ‘‘Specific agonists with particular
substitution patterns may be able selectively to activate a
subset of effectors, a phenomenon now known as functional
selectivity. It seems likely that functional selectivity can at least
partially explain some of the differences reported for the human
psychopharmacology of hallucinogens. To date there has been
no attempt to correlate specific signaling pathways with any
aspect of human psychopharmacology of hallucinogens’’ (Nichols,
2017). A complementary possibility (i.e., not mutually exclusive)
to that of functional selectivity is that different psychedelic
molecules present distinct binding affinity profiles for receptors
of neuromodulators and neurotransmitters other than 5-HT
(e.g., DA, norepinephrine, histamine, glutamate) and may also
act as monoamine transporter substrates.
This work presents a quantitative evaluation of this possibility.
We first tested the correlation between the similarity of the
reported subjective effects elicited by 18 psychedelic compounds
and the similarity of their binding affinity profiles assayed at
42 possible binding sites, as well as the correlation of both with
a metric of molecular structure similarity. We also replicated
the main result using an independent set of binding affinity
measurements at 14 different receptors. In spite of limitations
affecting the binding affinity data (see the ‘‘Discussion’’ section),
the observation of a significant positive correlation represents
preliminary support for the involvement of different receptors in
the reported subjective effects. Our work also introduces a novel
quantitative and data-driven method based on natural language
processing tools to study correlations between pharmacological
action and reported subjective experiences.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Analysis Overview
The outline of our analysis is presented in Figure 1. Each node in
the diagram represents a data source and the method followed
to compute the similarity between different compounds. The
psychoactive drugs investigated in this study are shown in
Figure 2 (Ray, 2010) and Figure 3 (Rickli et al., 2015, 2016),
with the phenethylamine and tryptamine functional groups
highlighted in red and blue, respectively. The upper node in
Figure 1 represents data on the reported subjective effects
of the compounds, which was provided by Erowid Center’s
Experience Vaults (Erowid et al., 2017). Latent Semantic
Analysis (LSA; Landauer, 2006) was used to compute the
semantic similarity between sets of reports of subjective effects
corresponding to the different psychedelic compounds, following
our analysis in a previously published article (Sanz et al.,
2018). The left node in Figure 1 corresponds to data on
the molecular structure of compounds included in this study
(identified using simplified molecular-input line-entry system
[SMILES] strings). The 2D molecular structure similarity was
computed using ChemMine Tools2 (Backman et al., 2011).
Finally, the right node in Figure 1 corresponds to data on
the binding affinity profiles of the molecules (Ray, 2010; Rickli
et al., 2015, 2016), obtained from assays performed by the
2http://chemmine.ucr.edu/
NIMH Psychoactive Drug Screening Program (PDSP)3 and
by researchers from the University of Basel in Switzerland,
as described in Rickli et al. (2015, 2016). The similarity
between the binding affinity profiles of each pair of compounds
was obtained as the Pearson’s linear correlation coefficient
of their sign-inverted and log-scaled equilibrium dissociation
constants (pKi).
Binding Affinity Similarity
Data on the binding affinity of 18 psychedelic molecules was
obtained from tables in the supplementary material of Ray
(2010). This data was complemented with binding affinity
measurements of 19 compounds published in Rickli et al. (2015,
2016), which were used to provide independent validation of the
main results of our analysis.
Two primary sources of data comprise the binding affinities
published in Ray (2010). Of the drugs investigated in this
work, data for LSD and ibogaine were obtained from the
literature. For LSD this information came from NIMH-PDSP
assays (Nichols et al., 2002), while the data for ibogaine
was compiled from different sources (Ray, 2010). New PDSP
binding assays were conducted for the remaining molecules
using the methodology described in Ray (2010) and Glennon
et al. (2000). Of all sites tested only 42 presented at least one
‘‘hit’’ (i.e., equilibrium dissociation constant Ki < 10,000 nm).
These sites included 5-HT receptors (5-HT2A, 5-HT2C, 5-HT2B,
5-HT1A, 5-HT1B, 5-HT1D, 5-HT1E, 5-HT5A, 5-HT6, 5-HT7),
dopamine receptors (D1, D2, D3, D4, D5), adrenergic receptors
(α1A, α1B, α2A, α2B, α2C, β1, β2), serotonin transporter (SERT),
DA transporter (DAT), norepinephrine transporter (NET),
imidazoline1 receptor (I1), sigma receptors (σ1, σ2), delta opioid
receptor (DOR), kappa opioid receptor (KOR), mu opioid
receptor (MOR), muscarinic receptors (M1, M2, M3, M4, M5),
histamine receptors (H1, H2), cannabinoid receptors (CB1, CB2),
calcium+ ion channel (Ca+) and N-methyl D-aspartate (NMDA)
glutamate receptor. The procedure described in Ray (2010) was
followed for the normalization of the Ki values4. A logarithmic
transformation with a sign inversion was applied (since higher
affinities result in lower Ki values). This transformation was
given by pKi = −log10(Ki; Neubig et al., 2003). Since the Ki values
generated by the NIMH-PDSP assays were capped at 10,000,
the lowest possible pKi value was −4 (note that pKi = −4 was
also assigned in other circumstances, as described in Ray (2010);
e.g., when the primary assay did not produce >50% inhibition).
All the Ki values are available as online Supplementary Material
in Ray (2010); as well as in Supplementary Table S1 (raw Ki
values) and Supplementary Table S2 (normalized pKi values) of
the Supplementary Material.
The
radioligand
binding
assays
conducted
in
Rickli
et
al.
(2015,
2016)
are
described
with
detail
elsewhere
3https://pdspdb.unc.edu/pdspWeb/
4We note, however, that our results were preserved using different
normalization procedures and, in particular, when working directly
with the raw Ki values. This is shown in Supplementary Figure S1.
Furthermore, since the analyses are based on linear correlations, the results
are mathematically invariant under multiplicative factors (e.g., choice of
measurement units).
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
3
November 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 54
 Zamberlan et al.
Pharmacology of Psychedelics Subjective Effects
FIGURE 1 | Outline of the methodology followed to link reported subjective effects, binding affinity profiles and molecular structures.
(Hysek et al., 2012; Simmler et al., 2013). Briefly, measurements
were performed at membrane preparations of human embryonic
kidney cells. Affinity values (Ki) were derived from IC50 values
(Cheng-Prusoff equation) obtained from 3–5 independently
FIGURE 2 | Molecular structure of the compounds selected from Ray (2010), with the phenethylamine and tryptamine functional groups highlighted in red and blue,
respectively. Full chemical names and abbreviations are provided in the “Materials and Methods” section.
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
4
November 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 54
 Zamberlan et al.
Pharmacology of Psychedelics Subjective Effects
FIGURE 3 | Molecular structure of the compounds selected from Rickli et al. (2015, 2016), with the phenethylamine and tryptamine functional groups highlighted in
red and blue, respectively. Full chemical names and abbreviations are provided in the “Materials and Methods” section.
replicated concentration-response curves; this procedure was
performed at the following binding sites: 5-HT receptors
(5-HT1A, 5-HT2A, 5-HT2C), dopamine receptors (D1, D2, D3),
adrenergic receptors (α1A, α2A), the histamine H1 receptor,
trace amine-associated receptors (TAAR1, from rat and mouse
genes), SERT, DAT and NET. A logarithmic transformation
was applied as described above to obtain the pKi values. The
supplementary information includes the analysis (Figure A1) of
activation potency measurements (EC50) at 5-HT2A receptors
and of monoamine transporter inhibition at NET, DAT and
SERT. Details of these experiments are provided in Rickli et al.
(2015, 2016).
Finally, to compare the binding affinities of two psychedelic
compounds, we computed the Pearson’s linear correlation
coefficient between the corresponding sets of pKi values. When
applied to all pairs of compounds, this resulted in matrices
containing all correlation coefficients. Whenever the compounds
under comparison presented missing data at a subset of sites, the
correlation coefficient was computed using only the pKi values
that were simultaneously available for both compounds.
Selection of Psychedelic Compounds
A subset of the molecules investigated in Ray (2010) was
included in the present study (Figure 2). These partially overlap
with those investigated in Rickli et al. (2015, 2016); those
that were assayed in the latter but not in the former are
presented in Figure 3. We followed two criteria for inclusion
of compounds in our study. First, we discarded molecules
lacking binding affinity data at most of the sites. Second,
only compounds with a sufficiently high (>10) number of
subjective reports in the Erowid database were included. The
application of these criteria to the data presented in Ray
(2010) resulted in the inclusion of 18 compounds, 10 of
which were classified as substituted phenethylamines and seven
as substituted tryptamines. The same criteria applied to the
data provided in Rickli et al. (2015, 2016) resulted in the
inclusion of 19 compounds (11 phenethylamines and eight
tryptamines). LSD belongs to the class of ergolines, which can be
considered as a subtype of tryptamines (‘‘rigidified tryptamines,’’
Nichols, 2016). Therefore, for reasons of simplicity, we
classified LSD as a tryptamine (note however that the
phenethylamine functional group can be found in the tetracyclic
ring structure of ergolines). For the purposes of this work,
this classification is analogous to that into phenylalkylamines
(which includes phenethylamines) and indolealkylamines (which
include tryptamines, but also ergolines and β-carbolines;
Glennon, 1994).
The 18 compounds from Ray (2010) that were included in this
study are the following:
• Mescaline
(3,4,5-Trimethoxyphenethylamine):
naturally
occurring substituted phenethylamine, first identified in
1897 by A. Heffter and synthesized in 1919 by Spath (1919).
• 2C-B (4-Bromo-2,5-dimethoxyphenethylamine): substituted
phenethylamine, first synthesized in 1974 by A. Shulgin
(Shulgin and Shulgin, 1995). Missing data for β1, β2 and Ca+.
• 2C-E
(4-Ethyl-2,5-dimethoxyphenethylamine):
substituted
phenethylamine, first synthesized in 1977 by A. Shulgin
(Shulgin and Shulgin, 1995). Missing data for β2, σ1,
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
5
November 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 54
 Zamberlan et al.
Pharmacology of Psychedelics Subjective Effects
• 2C-T-2
(4-Ethylthio-2,5-dimethoxyphenethylamine):
substituted phenethylamine, first synthesized in 1981 by
A. Shulgin (Shulgin and Shulgin, 1995).
• DOB
([±]-2,5-Dimethoxy-4-bromoamphetamine):
substituted phenethylamine, first synthesized in 1967 by
A. Shulgin (Shulgin and Shulgin, 1995).
• DOI ([±]-2,5-Dimethoxy-4-iodoamphetamine): substituted
phenethylamine, first synthesized in 1973 by Coutts and
Malicky (1973). Missing data for Ca+.
• DOM
([±]-2,5-Dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine):
substituted phenethylamine, first synthesized in 1963 by
A. Shulgin (Shulgin and Shulgin, 1995). Missing data for M3,
M4 and Ca+.
• TMA-2
([±]-2,4,5-Trimethoxamphetamine):
substituted
phenethylamine, first synthesized in 1933 by V. Bruckner and
assayed in 1962 by A. Shulgin (Shulgin and Shulgin, 1995).
Missing data for I1, σ1, σ2, DOR, KOR, MOR, M1, M3, M4,
CB1, CB2 and NMDA.
• MDA
([±]-3,4-Methylenedioxyamphetamine):
substituted
entactogen phenethylamine, first synthesized in 1910 by G.
Mannish and W. Jacobson and tested by G. Ailes in 1930
(Mannich and Jacobsohn, 1910). Missing data for σ1, σ2, DOR,
MOR, M1, M3, M4, H1, Ca+ and NMDA.
• MDMA
([±]-3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine):
substituted entactogen phenethylamine, first synthesized by
A. Köllisch at MERCK laboratories in 1912 and not explored
in humans until the 1970s (McDowell and Kleber, 1994).
Missing data for σ1, σ2, DOR and CB2.
• DMT
(N,N-Dimethyltryptamine):
naturally
occurring
substituted tryptamine that is ubiquitous within the kingdom
Plantae, as well as endogenous to the human brain (Barker
et al., 1981). It was first synthesized in 1931 by Manske (1931).
Missing data for DOR, MOR, H1 and NMDA.
• 5-MeO-DMT
(5-Methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine):
naturally occurring substituted tryptamine present in a
variety of plant species and a toad species (Shulgin and
Shulgin, 1995). It was first synthesized in 1936 by Hoshino
and Shimodaira (1936). Missing data for DOR, MOR, H1 and
NMDA.
• 5-MeO-MiPT
(5-Methoxy-N-methyl-N-isopropyltrypt
amine): substituted tryptamine, first synthesized by Repke
et al. (1985). Missing data for CB1.
• DiPT (N,N-Diisopropyltryptamine): substituted tryptamine,
first synthesized and tested by Shulgin and Carter (1979).
• 5-MeO-DiPT
(5-Methoxy-N,N-diisopropyltryptamine):
substituted tryptamine, first synthesized and tested by Shulgin
and Carter (1979).
• DPT (N,N-Dipropyltryptamine): substituted tryptamine, first
reported in 1971.
• LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide): synthetic ergoline first
produced by A. Hofmann in 1938 and subsequently tested by
himself in 1943 (Hofmann, 1980). Missing data for α2B, α2C, I1,
σ1, σ2, M1, M2, M3, M4, M5, H2, CB1, CB2, Ca+ and NMDA.
Ibogaine, a naturally occurring tryptamine which can be
found in plants of the Apocynaceae family (Schultes and
Hofmann, 1979). The synthesis of ibogaine was achieved in
1956 by M. M. Janot and R. Goutarel (Goutarel and Janot, 1956).
Missing data for 5-HT2B, 5-HT1E, 5-HT5A, 5-HT6, 5-HT7, D4,
D5, α1A, α1B, α2A, α2B, α2C, β2, NET, I1, M4, M5, H2, CB1, CB2 and
Ca+. While ibogaine is used primarily in ritual and therapeutic
contexts, the range of receptors involved (including, but not
limited to, the 5-HT2A receptor; Sweetnam et al., 1995) and its
equally heterogenous subjective effects allow for variability that
is of advantage when investigating the correlation between both
dimensions.
The additional compounds assayed in Rickli et al. (2015, 2016)
and included in this study are the following:
• 2C-C (4-Chloro-2,5-dimethoxyphenethylamine): substituted
phenethylamine, first synthesized in 1984 by Cheng and
Castagnoli (1984).
• 2C-I
(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-iodophenethylamine):
substituted
phenethylamine, first synthesized and tested in 1976 by A.
Shulgin (Shulgin and Shulgin, 1995).
• 2C-P (2,5-Dimethoxy-4-propylphenethylamine): substituted
phenethylamine, first synthesized and tested by A. Shulgin
(Shulgin and Shulgin, 1995).
• 2C-T-4
(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-isopropylthiophenethylamine):
substituted phenethylamine, first synthesized and tested by A.
Shulgin (Shulgin and Shulgin, 1995).
• 2C-T-7
(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-propylthiophenethylamine):
substituted phenethylamine, first synthesized and tested by
A. Shulgin (Shulgin and Shulgin, 1995).
• 2C-D (2,5-Dimethoxy-4-methylphenethylamine): substituted
phenethylamine, first synthesized and tested by Ho et al.
(1970).
• 25I-NBOMe
(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-iodo-N-(2-methoxybenzyl)
phenethylamine):
substituted
phenethylamine,
first
synthesized by Heim (2004).
• 4-OH-MET
(4-Hydroxy-N-methyl-N-ethyltryptamine):
substituted tryptamine and close analog of psilocin, first
synthesized by A. Shulgin (Shulgin and Shulgin, 1997).
• 5-MeO-AMT: substituted alpha-methylated tryptamine, first
synthesized by A. Shulgin and D. Nichols (Shulgin and
Shulgin, 1997).
• 4-OH-DiPT (4-Hydroxy-diisopropyltryptamine): substituted
tryptamine, first synthesized by Repke et al. (1977) and
investigated in humans by A. Shulgin (Shulgin and Shulgin,
1997).
• Psilocin
(4-Hydroxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine):
naturally
occurring
substituted
tryptamine,
primarily
found
in
mushrooms of the Psilocybe genus and metabolized in vivo
from psilocybin.
While many reports of experiences with mushrooms of the
Psilocybe genus (containing psilocybin as their main active
compound) were available, we decided not to use them as
a proxy for the isolated active principle. Mushrooms can
contain other psychoactive alkaloids (e.g., baeocystin and
norbaeocystin) capable of influencing the subjective effects
(Leung and Paul, 1968). They may also contain phenethylamine,
which could underlie some of the undesired effects associated
with consumption of Psilocybe mushrooms, such as tachycardia,
nausea, anxiety (Beck et al., 1998). A survey reported that
these undesired effects were frequently observed in users who
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
6
November 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 54
 Zamberlan et al.
Pharmacology of Psychedelics Subjective Effects
consumed mushrooms, but not in those who consumed isolated
psilocybin (van Amsterdam et al., 2011). Finally, interoception
(understood as the sensing of peripheral bodily signals) is known
to play a role in anticipatory events that can modulate behavior
and subjective effects even before a drug has time to reach
the brain and elicit its pharmacological action (Wise et al.,
2008). Hofmann and Wasson speculated that the chewing of
mushrooms could elicit a faster onset of the subjective effects
relative to ingesting a pill containing psilocybin, because in
the former case psilocybin can be absorbed by the mucous
membrane, while in the latter case the pills must first reach the
stomach and dissolve before psilocybin can enter the system
(an account of this speculation in the context of a traditional
mushroom ceremony carried out with pills containing psiloybin
instead of mushrooms can be found in Hofmann, 1980).
Semantic Similarity of Subjective Effects
Reports
Reports of the subjective effects of the psychedelic compounds
included in this study were acquired from Erowid’s Experience
Vaults5. Erowid Center is a nonprofit, member-supported
organization providing access to reliable, non-judgmental
information about psychoactive plants, chemicals and related
issues, containing a large number (>20,000) of published reports
of the subjective effects of different psychoactive substances.
The full Erowid corpus and the classification of its reports into
different categories is extensively described in a previous work
(Sanz et al., 2018). A total of 16 reports were obtained for
mescaline, 143 for 2C-B, 206 for 2C-E, 101 for 2C-T-2, 36 for
DOB, 32 for DOI, 23 for DOM, 19 for TMA-2, 63 for MDA,
770 for MDMA, 236 for DMT, 247 for 5-MeO-DMT, 69 for
5-MeO-MiPT, 45 for DiPT, 182 for 5-MeO-DiPT, 137 for DPT,
718 for LSD, 32 for ibogaine, 64 for 2C-C, 383 for 2C-I, 57 for
2C-P, 16 for 2C-T-4, 171 for 2C-T-7, 48 for 2C-D, 144 for
25I-NBOMe, 51 for 4-OH-MET, 109 for 5-MeO-AMT, 208 for
4-OH-DiPT and 8 for psilocin/psilocybin. All the Erowid users
authorize the use of their narratives with research purposes at the
time of submission. The data obtained from Erowid’s Experience
Vaults was completely anonymous, consisting of lists of terms
derived from the tokenization of all the reports associated with
each substance, without links to individual reports nor the users
who submitted them. The measures followed to secure data
confidentiality and privacy at the Erowid Center servers are
described on its website. This data is both accessible online and
available upon request at the Erowid Center for its use with
research purposes.
The preprocessing of the reports was performed using the
Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK6) in Python 3.4.6 (Bird, 2006).
The reports were first separated into individual words after
discarding all punctuation marks. Each word was lemmatized
using NLTK (i.e., converted to the root from which it is inflected).
All words were converted to lowercase and lemmatized words
containing less than three characters were discarded. As
described in a previous work (Sanz et al., 2018), words including
5https://erowid.org/experiences/
6http://www.nltk.org/
substance names, slang variations and terms related to possible
routes of administration were removed from the reports.
To quantify the semantic similarity between the reports of
the psychedelic compounds included in this study we applied
LSA (Landauer, 2006), a natural language processing technique
based on the hypothesis that words with similar meaning appear
with similar frequency in texts (Sahlgren, 2008). The rationale
behind LSA is comparing the profile of word frequencies
after reducing the rank of the word-by-document matrix, thus
attenuating the problems of sparseness and lack of context-
sensitive term occurrence. Before applying LSA we computed
the frequency of the different words using the term frequency-
inverse document frequency (tf-idf) transform, as implemented
in scikit-learn7 (Pedregosa et al., 2011; Leskovec et al., 2014). The
tf-idf transform computes a matrix in which rows are unique
words in the corpus and columns represent ‘‘documents’’ (for
this analysis, a ‘‘document’’ contains all the reports associated
with a psychoactive compound contained in the published
corpus from the Erowid Experience Vaults, see Sanz et al.,
2018). The product of the term frequency and the inverse
document frequency determines the entries of this matrix. The
term frequency is defined as the number of times each term
appears in each document. The inverse document frequency
is defined as the logarithmically scaled inverse fraction of the
documents containing the term. To eliminate very frequent/rare
terms from the corpus, only those terms appearing in more/less
than 5%/95% of the documents were retained, resulting in a
vocabulary of 1,466 words.
The word-by-document matrix obtained using the tf-idf
transform was decomposed into the product of three matrices
using Singular Value Decomposition (SDV; Klema and Laub,
1980). Of the three resulting matrices (U, S, V), S contains in
its diagonal the matrix of singular values ordered by size, and U
and V are real unitary matrices (their size is determined by the
number of words and documents, respectively). To reduce the
number of linearly independent rows (terms) while preserving
the similarity structure among columns (documents), only the
first D largest singular values were retained and all others were
set to zero, resulting in the reduced matrix of singular values
S∗. Following previous work (Sanz et al., 2018), we retained the
D = 20 largest singular values. Computing the product of the
matrices U, S∗, V yields a low-rank approximation of the word-
by-document frequency matrix.
Finally, the correlation matrix containing the Pearson’s linear
correlation coefficient between the columns of the rank-reduced
word-by-document matrix (corresponding to each of the drugs)
was computed as a metric of the semantic similarity of the reports
of each pair of compounds.
Structural Similarity
To measure the 2D structural similarity between the molecular
structures of the compounds we computed atom pair similarities
using the Tanimoto coefficient, as implemented in ChemMine
Tools8 (Backman et al., 2011). Each molecule was represented
7www.scikit-learn.org
8http://chemmine.ucr.edu/
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
7
November 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 54
 Zamberlan et al.
Pharmacology of Psychedelics Subjective Effects
as a set of atom pairs, comprising pairs of non-hydrogen atom
types together with the distances between them (computed as
the lengths of the shortest bond-by-bond paths between them,
Sheridan et al., 1996). The Tanimoto coefficient provides an
index ranging between 0 and 1, obtained as the size of the
intersection of the atom pair sets divided by the size of the
union of the atom pair sets. This method has been shown to
perform more efficiently than other metrics and is a standard tool
to quantify 2D molecular similarity (Chen and Reynolds, 2002;
Willett, 2006).
Principal Components of Subjective
Reports
We applied principal component analysis (PCA) to reduce the
word-by-document matrix into a smaller number of components
that capture idiosyncratic features of the reported experiences
in the Erowid database. PCA was performed using an algorithm
based on SVD as implemented in MATLAB 2014 (Wall et al.,
2003). We retained the first five components explaining the
highest variance in the tf-idf rank-reduced word frequency
matrices. For each component we obtained 1,466 coefficients,
which were used to represent in word cloud format,9 the words
that were most representative of each component.
The scores of each document (i.e., the combined set of
subjective reports of a given psychoactive substance in the
Erowid corpus) were used to produce radar plots quantifying
the presence of the five principal components in the narratives.
By correlating the binding affinity of each receptor with
the corresponding principal component scores across the
18 compounds, we produced radar plots quantifying the
relevance of each receptor/transporter/Ca+ channel for each of
the five principal components.
Virtual Screening of Binding Affinity
Profiles
Following the methodology introduced by Vidal and Mestres
(2010) suggesting that an unknown interaction of a ligand
for a particular target can be approximated by its molecular
resemblance to a selection of assayed active compounds, we
implemented a similar ‘‘in silico’’ approach for the virtual
screening of binding affinity profiles (Vidal and Mestres, 2010).
The main objective of this analysis was to obtain an independent
set of binding affinity values to compare with those reported in
Ray (2010) and evaluate the plausibility given the relatively low
number of replicates.
Using
the
open-source
data
mining
and
integration
platform KNIME10 (Berthold et al., 2009), we extracted the
molecular structures with their respective assayed binding
affinity values from two public access chemical databases:
ChEMBL11 (Gaulton et al., 2012) curated by the European
Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) of the European Molecular
Biology Laboratory (EMBL), and the KiDatabase12 (Evans
9https://wordart.com/
10https://www.knime.com/
11https://www.ebi.ac.uk/chembl/
12https://pdsp.unc.edu/databases/kidb.php
et al., 2001) from the PDSP of the National Institute of Mental
Health (NIMH). The molecular descriptor summarizing the
structure of each compound as a binary (‘‘bit’’) vector was
calculated using the Fingerprint node of the open-source
cheminformatics
extension
RDKit
for
KNIME13.
The
similarity between the fingerprints of a pair of molecules
was obtained using the Tanimoto distance coefficient (described
in a previous section). For this purpose, the Fingerprint
Similarity node from the KNIME-CDK Integration was used
(Beisken et al., 2013). With the objective of minimizing
the noise due to the contribution of compounds without
a sufficiently high structural correlation with the drugs
included
in
this
study,
we
implemented
the
filtration
criteria proposed by Paulke et al. (2013) consisting of a
cut-off similarity value equivalent to the 95% quantile of the
overall similarity distribution. Finally, the Ki values were
predicted by inverse distance weighting, assigning different
contribution weights to each molecule in the databases that are
inversely proportional to the structural difference between the
molecules:
Kj
i(m) =
�
i wi(m)ui
�
i wi(m) ;
wi(m) =
1
d(m, xi)p
where Kj
i(m) represents the binding affinity value of the
molecule m (i.e., one of those presented in Figure 2) at
the j-th receptor, ui represents the binding affinity of the
i-th ligand at the databases included in the analysis, and
wi(m) is a weighting term for the affinity value based on
an exponent of the inverse distance between the molecule
m and the xi ligand. The distance was computed as one
minus the Tanimoto coefficient based on different molecular
descriptor algorithms. The best power parameter value ‘‘p’’
and the most suitable molecular descriptor algorithm were
obtained after running an iterative optimization procedure
benchmarked
against
the
known
binding
affinity
profile
of
13
non-selective
psychiatric
drugs
assayed
by
Roth
et al. (2004). Using the optimal value p = 4.0 and the
‘‘Layered’’ algorithm gave a 39% of hits against 34 receptors,
an
acceptable
result
compared
to
the
reference
value
of
59.3%–66.7%
achieved
by
Vidal
and
Mestres
(2010)
using the same procedure applied to a larger database of
compounds.
RESULTS
Correlation Between the Similarity of
Reported Subjective Effects, Binding
Affinity Profiles and Molecular Structures
We first computed the similarities between the compounds
in terms of the reported subjective effects, binding affinity
profiles and molecular structures based on the data provided
in Ray (2010). These are presented in matrix and graph
forms in Figure 4A (graphs were visualized using Gephi14
13http://www.rdkit.org/
14https://gephi.org/
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
8
November 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 54
 Zamberlan et al.
Pharmacology of Psychedelics Subjective Effects
FIGURE 4 | Correlation between the similarities of reported subjective effects, binding affinity profiles and molecular structures. (A) Top: matrices containing the
pairwise structural, binding affinity profile and subjective effects similarities of the 18 compounds. To uniformize the color scales, we converted all entries to z-scores
by subtracting the means and dividing by the variances. Bottom: graph representation of the pairwise similarities. Each node corresponds to compound, node sizes
represent the sum of the similarities to all other compounds, and edge sizes represent the similarities between the linked nodes. (B) Scatter plots of the binding
affinity profile similarity vs. subjective effects similarity (left), molecular structure similarity vs. subjective effects similarity (center) and binding affinity profile similarity vs.
molecular structure similarity (right). Dashed lines represent the best linear fit in the least squares sense. Pearson’s linear correlation coefficients (R) and the
associated p-values (p) are shown in the insets.
with the ‘‘force atlas’’ layout; Bastian et al., 2009). It is
clear from the matrix and graph representations of the
molecular similarity that the Tanimoto coefficient differentiates
phenethylamines from tryptamines. 2C-x and DOx compounds
presented high within-group structural similarity, as well
as MDA and MDMA. As expected, tryptamines and their
methoxylated analogs (e.g., DMT and 5-MeO-DMT) presented
a high degree of structural similarity. Ibogaine and LSD
presented a moderate similarity to other tryptamines (likely a
consequence of their complex multi-cyclic structures) and a
lower similarity to phenethylamines. Such clear differentiation
between tryptamines and phenethylamines was not as marked
for the similarity of binding affinity profiles and the reported
subjective effects. Compounds of the 2C-x family, tryptamines
and their methoxylated analogs presented the highest similarities
in terms of binding affinity profiles, while ibogaine presented a
generally low similarity to the other compounds (however, this
could be influenced by the relatively high amount of missing data
for ibogaine—see the ‘‘Materials and Methods’’ section).
As shown in Figure 4B, we observed positive and significant
correlations between the binding affinity profile similarity
and the reported subjective effects similarity (R = 0.60,
p = 2.2e–16), between the binding affinity profile similarity
and the molecular structure similarity (R = 0.46, p = 2.5e–9), and
between the reported subjective effects similarity and molecular
structure similarity (R = 0.3, p = 1.9e–4). To test whether these
correlations were driven by two clusters presenting high/low
within/between
group
similarities,
we
employed
different
symbols
for
phenethylamine-phenethylamine,
tryptamine-
tryptamine and phenethylamine-tryptamine pairs in the scatter
plots of Figure 4B. These clusters are not apparent in the
visualization of the data. We observed that correlations restricted
to phenethylamine-tryptamine pairs were in all cases significant
(p < 1e–4).
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
9
November 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 54
 Zamberlan et al.
Pharmacology of Psychedelics Subjective Effects
FIGURE 5 | (A) Correlation between reported subjective effects similarity and molecular structure similarity (black) and between reported subjective effects similarity
and binding affinity profile similarity (gray) plotted as a function of the number of dimensions retained after performing SVD in the latent semantic analysis (LSA)
algorithm. (B) Scatter plot of the binding affinity profile similarity computed using the values provided in Ray (2010) and those obtained by the implemented virtual
screening procedure. The dashed line represents the best linear fit in the least squares sense. The Pearson’s linear correlation coefficient (R) and the associated
p-value (p) are shown in the inset.
We tested how the correlation values and their significance
depended on the number of components retained in the
SVD step of LSA (see ‘‘Materials and Methods’’ section).
As shown in Figure 5A, both sets of correlation coefficients
(reported subjective effects vs. molecular structure/binding
affinity profiles) remained positive, but declined as a function
of the number of components retained. We also employed a
previously validated computational framework for the ‘‘in silico’’
estimation of binding affinity profiles (‘‘virtual receptorome
screening’’). This approach consisted of querying large databases
for ligands that have been experimentally assayed at certain
sites and that are also structurally close to the molecules in
Figure 2. The binding affinities were then estimated by the
average of the experimental data of all those ligands weighted by
the structural similarity with each of the psychedelic molecules
included in the present study (see the ‘‘Virtual Screening
of Binding Affinity Profiles’’ section of the ‘‘Materials and
Methods’’ for more information). This method was implemented
to provide an independent evaluation of the feasibility of
the PDSP data provided in Ray (2010); as well as of the
data compiled from different sources. The significant positive
correlation (R = 0.42, p = 7.3e–8) between the empirical and
estimated binding affinity profiles supports such feasibility (see
Figure 5B).
Replication of the Correlation Between the
Similarity of Reported Subjective Effects
and the Binding Affinity Profiles
To provide independent support for the results in Figure 4,
we investigated the correlation between the semantic similarity
of the reported subjective effects and the similarity of the
binding affinity profiles using the Ki values published in
Rickli et al. (2015, 2016). The results of this analysis are
presented in Figure 6. Figure 6A shows the semantic (retaining
20 dimensions in the LSA algorithm) and binding affinity
similarity matrices. We observed high binding affinity profile
similarities for 2C-x compounds, consistent with the results
obtained from the PDSP data (Figure 4). 25I-NBOMe presented
a relatively lower similarity to other phenethylamines. Also
consistent with Figure 4, tryptamines presented lower within-
group similarity in terms of binding affinities and of the reported
subjective effects. Conversely, phenethylamines presented higher
within-group similarity in both senses. Figure 6B shows
the correlation coefficient between the semantic and binding
affinity profile similarities as a function of the number of
dimensions. We observed R > 0.4 except for the lowest
number of dimensions. The scatter plot in the inset provides
an example of the correlation between both variables (R = 0.48,
p = 1e–11).
Optimization of Receptor Selection for the
Prediction of the Reported Subjective
Effects and Molecular Structure
Similarities
The correlations reported in Figure 4B correspond to those
obtained using the binding affinities measured at all 42 sites
(Ray, 2010). It could be the case that higher correlations are
achievable when considering only a subset of those sites. This
would imply that the binding affinities at those sites are of
a higher relative importance to explain the subjective effects
of the compounds. We first evaluated whether the binding
affinity profiles restricted to 5-HT receptor subtypes yielded
a higher correlation than the reported in Figure 4B for all
42 sites, which did not occur (R = 0.31). This suggested
the relevance of other neurotransmitters and neuromodulators
for the prediction of the similarity of the reported subjective
effects.
We explored the combinations of receptor types to find the
one that maximized the correlations in Figure 4B. The search
space was restricted to combinations including at least one of the
following groups of receptors: 5-HT, dopamine (D), adrenergic
(α/β) and muscarinic (M). This restriction ensured that sufficient
data points were available for the computation of the correlation
coefficients. Figure 7A shows the sorted linear correlation
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
10
November 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 54
 Zamberlan et al.
Pharmacology of Psychedelics Subjective Effects
FIGURE 6 | Correlation between the similarities of reported subjective effects and the binding affinity profiles, based on data from Rickli et al. (2015, 2016).
(A) Matrices containing the pairwise binding affinity profile (right) and reported subjective effects similarities (left) of the 19 compounds selected from Rickli et al.
(2015, 2016). To uniformize the color scales, we converted all entries to z-scores by subtracting the means and dividing by the variances. (B) Correlation between
reported subjective effects similarity and binding affinity profile similarity as a function of the number of dimensions retained in the LSA algorithm. The scatter plot in
the inset represents the binding affinity profile similarity vs. subjective effects similarity (for 25 dimensions), including the associated Pearson’s linear correlation
coefficient (R) and the corresponding p-value (p). The dashed line indicates the best linear fit in the least squares sense.
coefficients between the binding affinity profile similarity and
reported subjective effects similarity (black), and between the
binding affinity profile similarity and the molecular structure
similarity (gray). The panels below display the combinations
of receptors/transporters/Ca+ channel corresponding to each
correlation value shown above. The optimal combination of
sites (R = 0.63, p < 1e–17) to predict the reported subjective
effects similarity from the binding affinity profile similarity was
based on data from 5-HT, DA, opioid, muscarinic, NMDA
receptors and the Ca+ channel (Figure 7B, left). The optimal
prediction (R = 0.52, p < 1e–11) of the molecular structure
similarity was based on the binding affinity profile restricted
to 5-HT, imidazoline, σ and muscarinic receptors (Figure 7B,
right). In Figure 7C we show the matrices containing the pairwise
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
11
November 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 54
 Zamberlan et al.
Pharmacology of Psychedelics Subjective Effects
FIGURE 7 | Optimization of receptor selection for the prediction of the subjective effects and molecular structure similarities. (A) Top: linear correlation coefficients
(sorted, ascending) between binding affinity profile and subjective effects similarities (black), and between binding affinity profile and molecular structure similarities
(gray). The binding affinity profile similarities were computed using all combinations of receptor types, transporter proteins and the Ca+ channel (5-HT, serotonin
receptors; D, dopamine receptors; α/β, adrenergic receptors, Trans.; serotonin/dopamine/norepinephrine transporters, I, Imidazoline1 receptor; σ, sigma receptors;
OR, delta, kappa and mu opioid receptors; M, muscarinic receptors; H, histamine receptors; CBs, cannabinoid receptors; Ca+, calcium+ channel; NMDA, N-methyl
D-aspartate glutamate receptor), with the restriction that at least one of 5-HT, D, α/β and M had to be included. Bottom: the combinations corresponding to each
linear correlation value shown in the panel above. (B) Left: scatter plot of the binding affinity profile similarity vs. subjective effect similarity for the set of binding sites
maximizing the linear correlation coefficient (5-HT + D + OR + M + NMDA + Ca+). Right: scatter plot of the binding affinity profile similarity vs. molecular structure
similarity for the set of receptors maximizing the linear correlation coefficient (5-HT + I + σ + M). Dashed lines represent the best linear fit in the least squares sense.
Pearson’s linear correlation coefficients (R) and their associated p-values (p) are shown in the insets. (C) Top: matrix containing the pairwise binding affinity profile
similarity, computed using the set of binding sites optimizing the prediction of subjective effects similarity. Bottom: matrix containing the pairwise binding affinity
profile similarity, computed using the binding sites optimizing the prediction of molecular structure similarity.
binding affinity profile similarity, restricted to the set of receptors
obtained by the optimization procedures described above. The
resemblance with the reported subjective effects and molecular
structure similarity matrices shown in Figure 4A is apparent
upon direct visual inspection.
To assess the robustness of the results presented in Figure 7,
we conducted a bootstrap analysis with 1,000 iterations, applying
in each iteration the LSA algorithm to 50% of the words in
the Erowid reports (randomly chosen, with replacement). Each
iteration yielded a correlation coefficient between the binding
affinity profile similarity and the reported subjective effects
similarity, for each combination of receptors/transporters/Ca+
channel shown in Figure 7A. The average correlation coefficients
across all 1,000 bootstrap iterations are shown in Figure 8A,
using the same ordering of the permutations as in Figure 7A.
Even though small fluctuations occurred, a similar functional
dependence was observed, implying that the combinations
explored in Figure 7A produced very similar correlation
coefficients across all bootstrap iterations. Figure 8B shows
the optimal selection of receptors/transporters/Ca+ channel
for all bootstrap iterations in matrix form. It is clear that
certain receptors were frequently included (e.g., 5-HT receptors)
while others were systematically excluded. Figure 8C shows the
percentage of times (over all 1,000 iterations) that a receptor
type/transporter protein/Ca+ channel appeared in the set that
maximized the correlation between the binding affinity profile
similarity and the reported subjective effects similarity. 5-HT,
DA, opioid, muscarinic, cannabinoid and NMDA receptors and
the Ca+ channel were selected for all or almost all bootstrap
iterations.
Principal Components of the Reports of
Subjective Effects
The next step of our analysis was to identify the facets of the
reported subjective experiences linked to the degree of binding
affinity at the 42 sites published in Ray (2010). For this purpose,
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
12
November 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 54
 Zamberlan et al.
Pharmacology of Psychedelics Subjective Effects
FIGURE 8 | Bootstrap analysis of the receptor selection optimization. (A) The average linear correlation coefficient between binding affinity profile similarity and
subjective effects similarity across 1,000 bootstrap iterations. For each iteration, the correlation coefficients were computed for all the combinations shown in
Figure 7A, and plotted in the same ordering (mean ± STD). (B) The columns of the matrix contain the optimal selection of receptors/transporters/Ca+ channel for
each bootstrap iteration. (C) The percentage of times a receptor type/transporter/Ca+ channel appeared in set that maximized the correlation between the binding
affinity profile similarity and the subjective effects similarity.
we applied PCA to the word-by-document rank-reduced matrix
obtained after applying LSA to the tf-idf matrix (see ‘‘Materials
and Methods’’ section). This analysis included all the reports
of psychoactive substances in the Erowid corpus as described
in a previous publication (Sanz et al., 2018). We retained
the first five principal components, which explained ≈58% of
the variance of the data. The coefficients associated to each
word indicated its relevance for each component and were
used as the weights to construct the word clouds presented
in Figure 9A. The five principal components are summarized
below:
• 1st component (‘‘perception’’), variance explained ≈23%. Top
10 ranking words: visuals, color, visual, pattern, saw, reality,
face, their, outside, vision.
• 2nd component (‘‘body load’’), variance explained ≈13%. Top
10 ranking words: visuals, stimulation, mood, compound,
peak, material, visual, dosage, minute, comedown.
• 3rd component (‘‘preparation’’), variance explained ≈9%. Top
10 ranking words: boil, bowl, smell, add, ounce, filter, strain,
pour, material, mix.
• 4th component (‘‘dependence’’), variance explained ≈7%.
Top 10 ranking words: addict, addiction, withdrawal, nausea,
vomit, sick, money, puke, warm, tolerance.
• 5th component (‘‘therapeutic’’), variance explained ≈5%. Top
10 ranking words: withdrawal, depression, anxiety, prescribe,
vision, symptom, nausea, boil, medication, reality.
The names of the principal components were chosen
to indicate the nature of their most relevant terms. The
FIGURE 9 | Principal components of the subjective effects reports. (A) Word clouds representing the most relevant terms in the first five principal components of the
Erowid corpus (Sanz et al., 2018), ordered as a decreasing function of explained variance. (B) Scores of the principal components for each psychedelic compound.
(C) Radar plot showing the principal component scores of 3 of the 18 psychedelic compounds. (D) Radar plot showing the principal component scores of three
psychoactive compounds in the Erowid database that were not investigated in this study. Radar plots are scaled so that the minimum (possibly negative) value of
each axis is located at the vertex.
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
13
November 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 54
 Zamberlan et al.
Pharmacology of Psychedelics Subjective Effects
‘‘perception’’ component presented high weights for terms
associated with conscious perception of the self (e.g., ‘‘ego,’’
‘‘fear’’) and the environment (e.g., ‘‘visual,’’ ‘‘color’’). While
the ‘‘body load’’ component also included such terms, others
associated with stress and negative bodily sensations also
presented high weights (e.g., ‘‘nausea,’’ ‘‘tension,’’ ‘‘headache,’’
‘‘jaw,’’ ‘‘stimulate’’). The ‘‘preparation’’ component was clearly
associated with the processing and preparation of psychoactive
materials. The remaining two components (‘‘dependence’’ and
‘‘therapeutic’’) were labeled following similar considerations.
Words relevant for the ‘‘dependence’’ component included terms
such as ‘‘addict,’’ ‘‘addiction,’’ ‘‘withdrawal,’’ and ‘‘tolerance,’’
as well as others that could be related to the adverse reactions
observed during the withdrawal syndrome of some addictive
drugs (‘‘nausea,’’ ‘‘vomit,’’ ‘‘sick,’’ ‘‘puke’’). With respect to the
last component (‘‘therapeutic’’), many terms of high relevance
were directly associated with medical disorders (‘‘depression,’’
‘‘insomnia,’’ ‘‘disorder,’’ ‘‘anxiety,’’ ‘‘treatment,’’ ‘‘prescribe,’’
‘‘med,’’ ‘‘symptom’’). Words in common with the ‘‘dependence’’
component could represent adverse secondary reactions of
medicaments. The inclusion of terms associated with psychedelic
or visionary experiences (‘‘universe,’’ ‘‘visuals,’’ ‘‘vision,’’ ‘‘ego’’)
might indicate the therapeutic use of some of the compounds
included in our analysis.
Figure 9B shows the score of each principal component
for the 18 psychedelic compounds included from Ray (2010).
As expected, the ‘‘perception’’ component presented the
highest score for all compounds (except ibogaine), with the
highest scores corresponding to 2C-E, DPT and DMT. In
terms of the ‘‘body load’’ component, the highest scores
were observed for 5-MeO-MIPT, TMA-2 and 2C-T-2; in
terms of the ‘‘preparation’’ component were DMT, DiPT
and 5-MeO-DMT; in terms of the ‘‘dependence’’ component
were MDMA, ibogaine and 5-MeO-DMT and in terms of
the ‘‘therapeutic’’ component were the same three as in the
‘‘dependence’’ component. Figure 9C presents radar plots
showing the principal component scores of three compounds
included in this study (LSD, TMA-2 and ibogaine), while
Figure 9D presents an analogous plot for three psychoactive
compounds included in the Erowid database but not analyzed
in this study (cocaine, venlafaxine and plants of the Datura
genus; Sanz et al., 2018). These substances presented scores
agreeing with their known subjective effects, ‘‘set’’ and ‘‘setting’’;
e.g., cocaine scored high in the ‘‘dependence’’ component,
venlafaxine in the ‘‘therapeutic’’ component, and plants of
the Datura genus in the ‘‘perception’’ and ‘‘preparation’’
components.
Correlations Between Receptor Binding
Affinities and Principal Component Scores
Knowing the principal component scores for each psychedelic
compound, as well as their receptor binding affinities, it was
possible to obtain their correlation and thus to determine
whether a higher binding affinity for a certain receptor predicted
higher principal component scores and vice-versa. The results
of this analysis are presented in Figure 10A. The most
salient results were the positive correlations between binding
affinities at some 5-HT receptor subtypes and the score of
the ‘‘perception’’ component. We observed generally negative
correlations for the ‘‘body load’’ component, and positive
correlations between affinity at transporters (SERT, DAT),
opioid (MOR, KOR) and NMDA receptors and the ‘‘therapeutic’’
component scores, while Ca+ affinity correlated positively with
the ‘‘dependence’’ component scores. Figure 10B shows a radar
plot for the correlation at sites presenting different profiles
(5-HT2A, MOR, Ca+).
DISCUSSION
We have performed a novel synthesis of data on the reported
subjective effects of 18 psychedelic compounds, their affinities
at 42 possible binding sites and their molecular structure
(Ray, 2010). We supported this analysis with a replication
using an independent dataset of 19 compounds assayed at
14 sites (Rickli et al., 2015, 2016). While it is acknowledged
that certain psychedelic molecules act at non-5-HT receptors
(Nichols, 2016) and that binding assays suggest affinity for
an ample range of sites (Ray, 2010; Rickli et al., 2015, 2016),
quantitative analyses of reported subjective effects are required
to evaluate potential polypharmacological influences on the
consciousness-altering properties of psychedelics. Performing
controlled experiments for this evaluation is severely limited by
the obstacle of administering scheduled drugs to participants
and assessing their subjective experiences in a laboratory
setting (Nutt et al., 2013). We were able to elude this
limitation by the use of self-reported narratives of the
subjective effects elicited by psychedelic compounds (Erowid
et al., 2017). In the following, we present a discussion of
our findings and how they relate to current theories about
the mechanisms behind psychedelic effects in the human
brain, and what factors might underlie the variability of
these effects. Finally, we discuss the limitations of our study,
with an emphasis on those related to the binding affinity
data.
Our findings include evidence supporting a variety of
reported subjective effects in compounds of similar molecular
structure, as seen in the semantic similarity matrix shown
in Figure 4A, as well as in Figure 5. While the distinction
between
entactogens
such
as
MDMA
and
MDA
and
serotonergic psychedelics is well-established both in terms
of neuropharmacology and phenomenology (Nichols, 1986),
there is scarcer evidence supporting such distinction for the
other substituted tryptamines and phenethylamines analyzed
in this study (with the possible exception of ibogaine, known
to produce effects that only partially overlap with those
of classic psychedelics, Sweetnam et al., 1995; Schenberg
et al., 2017). Early human studies reported a failure to
successfully discriminate between the acute effects of classic
psychedelics such as LSD, psilocybin and mescaline (Hollister
and Hartman, 1962; Wolbach et al., 1962). The use of animal
models trained in drug discrimination tasks provided more
mixed results (Winter, 2009; Baker, 2017), even though
it has been suggested that drug discrimination capacity
in animals is not related to the typical subjective effects
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
14
November 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 54
 Zamberlan et al.
Pharmacology of Psychedelics Subjective Effects
FIGURE 10 | Correlations between receptor binding affinities and principal component scores. (A) Matrix containing the Pearson’s linear correlation coefficients
between principal component scores (rows) and binding affinities (columns) at the 42 sites, computed across 18 psychedelic compounds (Ray, 2010). Blank spaces
indicate that it was not possible to compute the linear correlation value due to missing data. (B) Radar plot showing the correlations in (A) for three binding sites with
different profiles (5-HT2A binding affinity presented the highest correlation with the “perception” component scores, mu opioid receptor (MOR) with the “therapeutic”
and “dependence” component scores, and Ca+ with the “dependence” component scores).
experienced by humans (Baker, 2017). Some of the most salient
distinctions between classic psychedelics are related to their
pharmacokinetics. While some of these differences can be
explained by metabolic processes outside the central nervous
system, recent research shows that the formation of particular
ligand-receptor complexes influences the pharmacokinetics of
LSD, as well as the activation of specific signaling pathways,
which in turn might impact on the potency and subjective
effects of the drug (Wacker et al., 2017). Thus, we speculate
that differences in terms of pharmacokinetics between classic
psychedelics could reflect properties of the receptor-ligand
complex and that those properties might also nuance the
subjective effects of the drugs. In contrast to classic psychedelics,
the phenomenology of more novel synthetic compounds
(e.g., 2C-x and DOx families of substituted phenethylamines)
is less researched, but anecdotal reports compiled in two
volumes by Ann and Alexander Shulgin (Shulgin and Shulgin,
1995, 1997) suggest a variety of subjective effects. Previous
analyses of Erowid’s large corpora of experience narratives is
consistent with such variety (Coyle et al., 2012; Sanz et al.,
2018).
While it is now clear that 5-HT2A agonism underlies
the psychedelic effect of certain substituted tryptamines and
phenethylamines, the series of events that occur after the
molecule interacts with the receptor is likely to depend on
the conformation of the ligand-receptor complex (functional
selectivity; Urban et al., 2007). In other words, knowing the
affinity of a certain ligand for the 5-HT2A receptor still
entails uncertainty about cellular responses, and how the
differential activation of intracellular signaling events affects the
subjective experience elicited by the drug. Functional selectivity
has been demonstrated for a class of receptors known as
G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs; Zhou and Bohn, 2014).
While the canonical 5-HT2A signaling pathway depends on
Gαq coupling and activation of phospholipase C (PLC; Conn
and Sanders-Bush, 1986), evidence exists showing that the
canonical activation of PLC does not suffice to explain the
mechanism of action of psychedelics (Sanders-Bush et al.,
1988; Egan et al., 1998; Rabin et al., 2002), and that other
complex signaling mechanisms (such as that mediated by
phospholipase A2 [PLA2]) are differentially activated by 5-HT2A
psychoactive ligands, which in turn induce specific patterns of
intracellular signaling and behavioral responses (Moya et al.,
2007).
Elucidating the chain of events leading from differential
signaling pathway activation to the subjective effects elicited
by different psychedelic molecules is currently beyond our
capabilities (Nichols, 2016, 2017). However, a future project
that systematically characterizes the activation profiles of PLC,
PLA2, β-arrestins and other intracellular signaling events for
different psychedelic compounds could yield valuable data for
the correlation with the associated reported subjective effects.
Such data could contribute towards establishing indirect links
between the profiles of the activated intracellular signaling
events and the qualitative aspects of the associated psychedelic
experiences. However, our findings suggest that functional
selectivity at the 5-HT2A receptor (and possibly at other 5-HT
receptor subtypes) may not be the sole contributor to the
variety of reported subjective effects. As shown in Figure 4,
the similarity of the reported subjective effects can be at least
partially predicted by the binding affinity profiles at a wide
range of receptors and transporter proteins. This result was
replicated in an independent dataset, as shown in Figure 5.
Such positive correlations would not be expected if the nature
of the elicited subjective effects depended solely on functional
selectivity at the 5-HT2A receptor. It must be noted, however,
that both mechanisms are not mutually exclusive and are likely
to act in combination. In particular, it is clear that (partial)
agonism at the 5-HT2A receptor is a necessary condition to
enable the effects of psychedelic compounds. The situation
becomes more complicated after considering that some of the
other neurotransmitters investigated in this study (e.g., DA,
histamine, norepinephrine, glutamate, acetylcholine, endorphins
and cannabinoids) also bind to GPCR (Urban et al., 2007; Zhou
and Bohn, 2014), and that each of them could influence the
subjective effects via functional selectivity. Even though it is clear
that a large-scale project is required to establish an explanatory
bridge between the action of psychedelics at the molecular level
and their consciousness-altering properties, we believe that our
methodological approach suggests the direction towards the first
steps in this direction.
Even when considering the possibility that affinity for an
ample range of receptors mediates psychedelic action, the reverse
process of tuning the set of binding sites to achieve an optimal
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
15
November 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 54
 Zamberlan et al.
Pharmacology of Psychedelics Subjective Effects
prediction of the reported subjective effects similarities revealed
the redundancy of certain binding sites (i.e., histaminic, σ,
α/β receptors and monoamine transporters) However, the sole
consideration of 5-HT receptor subtypes yielded a relatively poor
prediction. In particular, our analyses highlighted the relevance
of DA receptors (D1–5). The dopaminergic action of LSD is
well-documented (Nichols, 1976; Watts et al., 1995). It has been
proposed that LSD binds first to 5-HT2A receptors, leading
to increased sensitivity of the dopaminergic system (primarily
the D2 and D4 receptors; Seeman et al., 2005; Marona-Lewicka
et al., 2009) resulting in a biphasic temporal effect (Freedman,
1984; Marona-Lewicka and Nichols, 2007). Previous studies also
established that the interaction with DA receptors is relevant for
the action of other psychedelics; for instance, it has been reported
that the D2 receptor inverse agonist haloperidol impaired the
subjective effects of psilocybin in humans (Vollenweider et al.,
1998), even though silent antagonism of haloperidol at the
5HT2A receptor most likely contributed to the impairment of
these effects.
Experimental evidence supports the relevance of group II
(mGluR2/3) and NMDA glutamate receptors for the action of
psychedelic tryptamines, including the interaction between 5-HT
receptor-mediated behavior and glutamate systems (Winter
et al., 2004; González-Maeso et al., 2007, 2008; Delille et al.,
2012; Carbonaro et al., 2015). It has been speculated that
the glutamatergic action of psychedelics could underlie the
similarities with the phenomenology and neurophysiology of
certain NMDA antagonist arylcyclohexylamines (e.g., ketamine,
phencyclidine (PCP); Bowdle et al., 1998; Muthukumaraswamy
et al., 2015; Schartner et al., 2017). Our analyses also suggest that
affinities for muscarinic and opioid receptors are relevant for
the prediction of the reported subjective effects. This is a largely
unexplored research area; however, there is at least one example
of a compound with high specificity for an opioid receptor
presenting strong altering-consciousness properties (salvinorin
A, a highly selective and potent KOR agonist; Roth et al.,
2002).
The best prediction of molecular structure similarity was
achieved considering the binding affinities at 5-HT, imidazoline,
muscarinic and σ receptors. This is consistent with the
differential selectivity for 5-HT receptors between tryptamines
and phenethylamines. The latter display higher selectivity
for 5-HT2A
and 5-HT2C
receptors, while the behavioral
and subjective effects of tryptamines are also likely to be
influenced by 5-HT1A agonism (McKenna et al., 1990; Blair
et
al., 2000;
Nichols, 2016). It also known that DMT
regulates σ receptors, which may be a property shared
with other substituted tryptamines as opposed to substituted
phenethylamines (Fontanilla et al., 2009), even though the
physiological relevance of this action at σ receptors in vivo
remains unknown. The role of muscarinic and imidazoline
receptors in the structural distinction between tryptamines and
phenethylamines remains unclear and should be addressed in
future studies.
The use of published narratives instead of well-validated
psychometric tests (Dittrich, 1998; Studerus et al., 2010) lacks
numerical ratings of different items that characterize the
psychedelic experience. We applied PCA to the subjective reports
and found components that could be identified with effects on
consciousness, perception and bodily sensations. However, other
components transcended these elementary facets of subjective
experience and could be identified with substance dependence,
therapeutic use and with the preparation of psychoactive
materials. These components contained valuable information,
allowing the identification of certain receptors and monoamine
transporter proteins with reports of therapeutic use; however,
the PCA analysis did not compensate the lack of information
provided by psychometric tests. Future efforts include the
development of a ‘‘mixed’’ online platform for the submission
of free narratives and a structured assessment of the experiences
by means of rating a series of numerical items. In spite of
these limitations, the PCA analysis yielded results consistent
with the known subjective and somatic effects of different drugs.
For instance, LSD presented a high score for the ‘‘perception’’
component in contrast to TMA-2, which was reported to induce
a higher body load (Shulgin, 1964), and ibogaine presented
high scores for the ‘‘dependence’’ and ‘‘therapeutic’’ components,
most likely reflecting its use in the treatment of addictions
(Popik et al., 1995; Schenberg et al., 2014). An interesting
methodological development is the link between the principal
components and the binding sites. These results reproduced
some known facts about the functional role of different receptors;
for instance, the results shown in Figure 10 reflect the known
association between the 5-HT2A receptor and the perception-
altering properties of psychedelics in humans (Glennon et al.,
1983; Spencer et al., 1987; Fiorella et al., 1995; Vollenweider et al.,
1998; Halberstadt et al., 2011; Hanks and González-Maeso, 2012;
Quednow et al., 2012; Kometer et al., 2013; Rickli et al., 2016;
Kraehenmann et al., 2017a,b; Preller et al., 2017).
At this point of the discussion it is instructive to return to
the quotation heading the introductory section of this article
(Shulgin and Shulgin, 1995). While the concept of decomposing
the subjective effects of a drug as the addition of elementary
components is theoretically attractive, the analogy with Fourier
analysis (i.e., the decomposition into harmonics) is limited in
the sense that the Fourier decomposition is linear (i.e., the
signal is represented as a weighted sum of different terms). On
the other hand, the brain is a highly non-linear system and
neuromodulation is not an exception (Chialvo, 2010; Breakspear,
2017). An illustrative example comes from the pharmacology
of atypical antipsychotics. While it is well-established that
D2 receptor antagonism alleviates the positive symptoms of
schizophrenia, the brain-wide antagonism of such receptors leads
to a number of undesired side effects (Kapur et al., 2000).
However, incorporating 5-HT2A antagonism results in a series
of complex effects including the reduction of 5-HT2A-mediated
DA activation and the release of DA that competes with the
drug’s D2 antagonist effects, reducing antagonistic action in brain
areas involved in the side effects (Markowitz et al., 1999). As a
result of these interactions between different neuromodulatory
systems, atypical antipsychotics perform well despite having
lower D2 occupancy than first generation drugs. The complex
and interrelated nature of neuromodulatory systems in the brain
also questions the validity of employing specific antagonists to
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
16
November 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 54
 Zamberlan et al.
Pharmacology of Psychedelics Subjective Effects
investigate the role of the antagonized receptors in the reported
subjective effects of the drug or in animal behavior. While this
experimental paradigm has been fundamental to establish the
key relevance of 5-HT2A receptors for psychedelic action, it is
uncertain whether it can be extended to manipulate more subtle
aspects of the effects elicited by psychedelic drugs (Winter, 2009).
Our study is based on the synthesis of data from diverse
sources and therefore it inherits limitations intrinsic to each
source of information. As discussed in a recent article (Sanz et al.,
2018), the reports in the Erowid database could be contaminated
by expectation effects, and most lack laboratory verification of
the identity and dosage of the consumed substances, which may
be elusive even to the users themselves. Additional potential
confounds include lack of information on the history of drug
use (i.e., whether users were drug naïve when they consumed the
substances, and whether metabolites of other drugs were present,
which could affect the nature of the reported experiences), and
intrinsic variability in genetic and metabolic traits of the users.
However, the large number of reports available from Erowid’s
published database could allow a meaningful signal to emerge
in spite of these uncontrolled sources of noise (Halevy et al.,
2009). The acquisition of such amount of data for many different
psychedelic compounds (most of which are currently placed in
the Schedule 1 category) in a double-blind placebo-controlled
study presents difficulties that are most likely insurmountable
within the current legislation (Nutt et al., 2013).
Particular emphasis must be given to the limitations inherent
to the binding affinity data. Such values do not inform of the
pharmacological action at the GPCRs (i.e., whether the drugs are
agonists, partial agonists, antagonists, etc.). Thus, in principle the
binding affinity at a given receptor for two molecules included
in this study could represent the efficiency to elicit opposite
responses. However, lack of functional assay experiments for
these compounds may not result in critical confounds under the
assumption that very similar (in the structural sense) molecules
are unlikely to present opposite actions at the same target.
A previous study found that two structurally similar ligands
generally occupy the same region in the binding sites at the
receptor, citing this observation as support for the use of shape
matching in drug design (Boström et al., 2006). This matching
between structurally similar ligands may indicate a similar
pharmacological action at the receptor. Another limitation of the
data employed in our study relates to the influence of the chosen
radioligands, which can affect the estimated binding affinity
values, especially when comparing measurements based on
antagonist vs. agonist radioligands (which could label different
populations of the active/inactive conformations of the receptor;
Bylund and Toews, 1993).
We emphasize that binding affinity values may not be directly
proportional to drug potency (i.e., EC50 and IC50 values). Such
relationship is expected from a simple model of drug-receptor
interaction based on the law of mass action; according to this
model the potency of a drug is directly proportional to the
equilibrium dissociation constant (Kenakin, 2004). In this model,
a key assumption is that the intrinsic activity (or efficacy;
Stephenson, 1956) of the drug at the receptor is similar to that
of a full agonist. We have included in the Appendix an analysis
based on data included in Rickli et al. (2015, 2016) and Ray
(2010) showing that such approximate relationship is observed
across different sets of serotonergic psychedelics at the 5-HT2A,
5-HT2C receptors and at the monoamine transporters NET, DAT
and SERT. It is uncertain whether this simple model can be
applied to all drug-receptor pairs here investigated. However,
there is evidence that such relationship holds for 5-HT, DA
and monoamine transporters, for which a significant correlation
exists between the binding affinity similarities (i.e., affinities
restricted to these sites only) and the reported subjective effects
similarities (R = 0.55, p = 9.3e–14; see Figure 7). We also note
that dissociation constants reflect chemical/thermodynamical
properties of the ligand-receptor interactions, whereas potency
measurements are relative, e.g., to the choice of measured
response. It is also not clear that in vitro measurements of
EC50/IC50 values are more accurate than binding affinities for
the purpose of our analyses, given that the in vivo (in this case,
in humans) elicited response will depend upon the concentration
of the drug and its metabolites. Such concentration does not
only depend on the consumed dose, but also on metabolism and
diffusion through different tissues and membranes. For these
reasons, the screening of binding affinities is considered as a
reasonable first approximation for the expected in vivo activity of
a drug (Roth et al., 2004), given the presence of several unknowns
that can only be dissipated by obtaining dose-response curves
using different response variables (see for instance Drews, 2000:
‘‘The set of binding affinities for a given compound is termed
its affinity fingerprint. The similarity of affinity fingerprints has
been shown to correlate with the biological activities of druglike
substances’’).
Given these limitations, we note that our methodological
developments yielded sensible results in spite of unaccounted
potential sources of noise in the data. We also note that positive
and significant correlations between reported subjective effects
and binding affinity profile similarities were obtained from two
independent sources of data (Ray, 2010; Rickli et al., 2015,
2016). Future new experiments should be carried out that
contribute towards overcoming these limitations, i.e., functional
assays, experiments using homogeneous radioligands, the
measurement of possible allosteric effects, dose-response curves
at other receptors, and a more complete screening in order
to avoid missing binding affinity data. The use of ‘‘in silico’’
computational modeling may contribute towards overcoming
some of these limitations and lend support to experimental
data. Our relatively straightforward computational approach
to estimate binding affinity profiles presented a significant
correlation with the empirical values published in Ray (2010),
exemplifying the potential relevance of this type of approach for
future studies.
From all possible perspectives, the scientific study of
psychedelic drugs is a very young field of research. Unlike other
drugs, human studies are unavoidable to fully understand the
neuropsychopharmacology of psychedelics (Shulgin and Shulgin,
1995). The most salient feature of these compounds is their
capacity to modify the conscious state of the user; thus, their
investigation cannot rely solely on animal models lacking the
capacity to produce complex reports of conscious content.
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
17
November 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 54
 Zamberlan et al.
Pharmacology of Psychedelics Subjective Effects
Unfortunately, sources of reliable data are still scarce, both
in terms of the elicited subjective effects and pharmacological
measurements in vivo. We cannot avoid concluding that our
study and its results should be considered as preliminary.
Further replications of the binding affinity data measurements
are required for a consensus to emerge, thus paving the way
towards the application of the proposed methodology to yield
more robust and reliable results. We must point out that,
while preliminary studies are unavoidable in any young field
of research, the future possibilities of conducting replication
studies could be hindered by spreading conclusions that are
unguaranteed by the obtained results which should, in turn, be
backed up by standard and consensual reference data. For these
reasons, we have opted to incorporate to our analysis all currently
available sources of binding affinity data in order to lend as much
support as possible to our relatively limited conclusions, while at
the same time developing tools that could become increasingly
relevant as the field matures and more reliable sources of data
become available. Also, for these reasons, a large portion of our
discussion relates to actual or potential limitations of the data,
how they could impact the present analyses, and how they could
be overcome in future studies.
In conclusion, we proposed and applied a novel method
towards
the
characterization
of
the
reported
subjective
effects of psychedelic compounds and their relationship to
pharmacological data. Future studies may build upon our
methodology by linking the semantic similarity of subjective
reports to the brain-wide effects of psychedelic compounds as
measured using functional neuroimaging techniques (Dos Santos
et al., 2016). Our methodology is especially useful for the study
of psychedelics, given the aforementioned difficulties inherent to
assessing their subjective effects in a laboratory setting. However,
we conceive the creation and mining of similar large databases of
experiences associated with the use neuropsychiatric medications
(e.g., antidepressants and antipsychotics). The combination
of this information with chemical, neuropharmacological,
neuroimaging and transcriptomics data could allow a ‘‘reverse-
engineering’’ procedure (e.g., Figure 7) for the optimization of
binding affinity profiles relative to the beneficial and detrimental
effects of the drugs.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
FZ and CS analyzed data. RMV and CP provided critical
comments and helped draft an early version of the manuscript.
FE and EE contributed materials and towards the interpretation
of the Erowid Experience Vault data. ET conceived the analysis,
analyzed data, prepared the figures and wrote the final version of
the manuscript.
FUNDING
FZ was supported by a doctoral fellowship granted by the
National Scientific and Technical Research Council (CONICET,
Argentina). RMV and CP were supported by postdoctoral
fellowships granted by the National Scientific and Technical
Research Council (CONICET, Argentina). ET was supported by
a Marie Curie Individual fellowship granted by the European
Commission (702681—MIDOC—DLV-702681).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge Ariel Chernomoretz for discussions on tools
to measure structural similarity, and Daniel Fraiman, Pablo
Riera, Pablo Gonzalez, Facundo Alvarez, Juan Manuel Garrido,
Luke Williams and David Nichols for general comments on
the manuscript and/or the presentation of the figures. We
also acknowledge insightful discussions on natural language
processing of subjective experience narratives with Facundo
Carrillo, Mariano Sigman, Diego Fernandez Slezak, Robin
Carhart-Harris and Raphaël Millière. Finally, we also thank the
founders, curators, contributors and volunteers of Erowid Center
for sharing their data and for their decades of work on the
experience report collection.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online
at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnint.
2018.00054/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Appel,
J.
B.,
and
Freedman,
D.
(1968).
Tolerance
and
cross-tolerance
among
psychotomimetic
drugs.
Psychopharmacologia
13,
267–274.
doi: 10.1007/bf00401404
Backman, T. W. H., Cao, Y., and Girke, T. (2011). ChemMine tools: an online
service for analyzing and clustering small molecules. Nucleic Acids Res. 39,
W486–W491. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr320
Baker, L. E. (2017). ‘‘Hallucinogens in drug discrimination,’’ in Current Topics in
Behavioral Neurosciences, eds M. A. Geyer, B. A. Ellenbroek, C. A. Marsden,
R. E. Barnes and S. L. Andersen (Berlin: Springer), 201–219.
Balestrieri, A., and Fontanari, D. (1959). Acquired and crossed tolerance to
mescaline, LSD-25, and BOL-148. AMA Arch. Gen. Psychiaty 1, 279–282.
doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.1959.03590030063008
Barker, S. A., Monti, J. A., and Christian, S. T. (1981). N, N-dimethyltryptamine: an
endogenous hallucinogen. Int. Rev. Neurobiol. 22, 83–110. doi: 10.1016/s0074-
7742(08)60291-3
Bastian, M., Heymann, S., and Jacomy, M. (2009). Gephi: an open source software
for exploring and manipulating networks. ICWSM 8, 361–362.
Beck, O., Helander, A., Karlson-Stiber, C., and Stephansson, N. (1998). Presence
of phenylethylamine in hallucinogenic Psilocybe mushroom: possible role in
adverse reactions. J. Anal. Toxicol 22, 45–49. doi: 10.1093/jat/22.1.45
Beisken, S., Meinl, T., Wiswedel, B., de Figueiredo, L. F., Berthold, M., and
Steinbeck, C. (2013). KNIME-CDK: workflow-driven cheminformatic. BMC
Bioinformatics 14:257. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-14-257
Berthold, M. R., Cebron, N., Dill, F., Gabriel, T. R., Kötter, T., Meinl, T., et al.
(2009). KNIME—the Konstanz information miner: version 2.0 and beyond.
ACM SIGKDD Expl. Newsl. 11, 26–31. doi: 10.1145/1656274.1656280
Bird, S. (2006). ‘‘NLTK: the natural language toolkit,’’ in Proceedings of
the COLING/ACL on Interactive Presentation Sessions (Stroudsburg, PA:
Association for Computational Linguistics), 69–72.
Blair, J. B., Kurrasch-Orbaugh, D., Marona-Lewicka, D., Cumbay, M. G.,
Watts, V. J., Barker, E. L., et al. (2000). Effect of ring fluorination on the
pharmacology of hallucinogenic tryptamines. J. Med. Chem. 43, 4701–4710.
doi: 10.1021/jm000339w
Boström, J., Hogner, A., and Schmitt, S. (2006). Do structurally similar
ligands
bind
in
a
similar
fashion?
J.
Med.
Chem.
49,
6716–6725.
doi: 10.1021/jm060167o
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
18
November 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 54
 Zamberlan et al.
Pharmacology of Psychedelics Subjective Effects
Bowdle, A. T., Radant, A. D., Cowley, D. S., Kharasch, E. D., Strassman, R. J., and
Roy-Byrne, P. P. (1998). Psychedelic effects of ketamine in healthy volunteers
relationship to steady-state plasma concentrations. Anesthesiology 88, 82–88.
doi: 10.1097/00000542-199801000-00015
Breakspear, M. (2017). Dynamic models of large-scale brain activity. Nat. Neurosci.
20, 340–352. doi: 10.1038/nn.4497
Bylund, D. B., and Toews, M. L. (1993). Radioligand binding methods: practical
guide and tips. Am. J. Physiol. 265, L421–L429. doi: 10.1152/ajplung.1993.265.
5.l421
Carbonaro, T. M., Eshleman, A. J., Forster, M. J., Cheng, K., Rice, K. C., and
Gatch, M. B. (2015). The role of 5-HT2A, 5-HT2C and mGlu2 receptors in
the behavioral effects of tryptamine hallucinogens N,N-dimethyltryptamine
and N,N-diisopropyltryptamine in rats and mice. Psychopharmacology 232,
275–284. doi: 10.1007/s00213-014-3658-3
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Leech, R., Hellyer, P. J., Shanahan, M., Feilding, A.,
Tagliazucchi, E., et al. (2018). The entropic brain: a theory of conscious
states informed by neuroimaging research with psychedelic drugs. Front. Hum.
Neurosci. 8:20. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00020
Chen, X., and Reynolds, C. H. (2002). Performance of similarity measures in
2D fragment-based similarity searching: comparison of structural descriptors
and similarity coefficients. J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 42, 1407–1414.
doi: 10.1021/ci025531g
Cheng, A. C., and Castagnoli, N. Jr. (1984). Synthesis and physicochemical
and
neurotoxicity
studies
of
1–(4-substituted-2,5-dihydroxyphenyl)-2-
aminoethane analogs of 6-hydroxydopamine. J. Med. Chem. 27, 513–520.
doi: 10.1021/jm00370a014
Chialvo, D. R. (2010). Emergent complex neural dynamics. Nat. Phys. 6, 744–750.
doi: 10.1038/nphys1803
Conn, P. J., and Sanders-Bush, E. (1986). Regulation of serotonin-stimulated
phosphoinositide hydrolysis: relation to the serotonin 5-HT-2 binding site.
J. Neurosci. 6, 3669–3675. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.06-12-03669.1986
Coutts, R. T., and Malicky, J. L. (1973). The synthesis of some analogs of the
hallucinogen 1- (2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylphenyl)-2-aminopropane (DOM).
Can. J. Chem. 51, 1402–1409. doi: 10.1139/v73-210
Coyle, J., Presti, D., and Baggott, M. (2012). Quantitative analysis of narrative
reports of psychedelic drugs. arXiv 1206.0312 [q-bioQM].
Delille, H. K., Becker, J. M., Burkhardt, S., Bleher, B., Terstappen, G. C.,
Schmidt, M., et al. (2012). Heterocomplex formation of 5-HT2A-mGlu2 and
its relevance for cellular signaling cascades. Neuropharmacology 62, 2184–2191.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2012.01.010
Dittrich, A. (1998). The standardized psychometric assessment of altered
states of consciousness (ASCs) in humans. Pharmacopsychiatry 31, 80–84.
doi: 10.1055/s-2007-979351
Dos Santos, R. G., Osório, F. L., Crippa, J. A. S., and Hallak, J. E. (2016).
Classical hallucinogens and neuroimaging: a systematic review of human
studies: hallucinogens and neuroimaging. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 71, 715–728.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.10.026
Drews, J. (2000). Drug discovery: a historical perspective. Science 287, 1960–1964.
doi: 10.1126/science.287.5460.1960
Egan, C. T., Herrick-Davis, K., Miller, K., Glennon, R. A., and Teitler, M. (1998).
Agonist activity of LSD and lisuride at cloned 5HT2A and 5HT2C receptors.
Psychopharmacology 136, 409–414. doi: 10.1007/s002130050585
Erowid, E., Erowid, F., and Thyssen, S. (2017). Erowid experience vaults. Available
online at: http://www.Erowid.org/exp
Evans, J. M., Lopez, E., and Roth, B. L. (2001). The NIMH psychoactive drug
screening program’s Ki database: an on-line, searchable database of receptor-
ligand affinity values. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 27:2076.
Fiorella, D., Rabin, R. A., and Winter, J. C. (1995). The role of the
5-HT2A and 5-HT2C receptors in the stimulus effects of hallucinogenic
drugs I: antagonist correlation analysis. Psychopharmacology 121, 347–356.
doi: 10.1007/bf02246074
Fontanilla, D., Johannessen, M., Hajipour, A. R., Cozzi, N. V., Jackson, M. B.,
and Ruoho, A. E. (2009). The hallucinogen N,N-dimethyltryptamine
(DMT) is an endogenous sigma-1 receptor regulator. Science 323, 934–937.
doi: 10.1126/science.1166127
Freedman, D. (1984). ‘‘LSD: the bridge from human to animal,’’ in Hallucinogens:
Neurochemical, Behavioral, and Clinical Perspectives, ed. B. L. Jacobs (New
York, NY: Raven Press), 203–226.
Gaulton, A., Bellis, L. J., Bento, A. P., Chambers, J., Davies, M., Hersey, A., et al.
(2012). ChEMBL: a large-scale bioactivity database for drug discovery. Nucleic
Acids Res. 40, D1100–D1107. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr777
Glennon, R. A. (1994). Classical hallucinogens: an introductory overview. NIDA
Res. Monogr. 146, 4–32.
Glennon, R. A., Lee, M., Rangisetty, J. B., Dukat, M., Roth, B. L., Savage, J. E., et al.
(2000). 2-Substituted tryptamines: agents with selectivity for 5-HT6 serotonin
receptors. J. Med. Chem. 43, 1011–1018. doi: 10.1021/jm990550b
Glennon, R. A., Titeler, M., and McKenney, J. D. (1984). Evidence for 5-HT2
involvement in the mechanism of action of hallucinogenic agents. Life Sci. 35,
2505–2511. doi: 10.1016/0024-3205(84)90436-3
Glennon, R. A., Young, R., and Rosecrans, J. A. (1983). Antagonism of the
effects of the hallucinogen DOM and the purported 5-HT agonist quipazine by
5-HT2 antagonists. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 91, 189–196. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(83)
90464-8
González-Maeso, J., Ang, R. L., Yuen, T., Chan, P., Weisstaub, N. V.,
López-Giménez, J. F., et al. (2008). Identification of a serotonin/glutamate
receptor
complex
implicated
in
psychosis.
Nature
452,
93–97.
doi: 10.1038/nature06612
González-Maeso, J., Weisstaub, N. V., Zhou, M., Chan, P., Ivic, L., Ang,
R., et al. (2007). Hallucinogens recruit specific cortical 5-HT2A receptor-
mediated signaling pathways to affect behavior. Neuron 53, 439–452.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.01.008
Goutarel, R., and Janot, M. M. (1956). U.S. Patent No. 2,813,873. Washington, DC:
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Halberstadt, A. L., Lehmann-Masten, V. D., Geyer, M. A., and Powell, S. B. (2011).
Interactive effects of mGlu5 and 5-HT2A receptors on locomotor activity in
mice. Psychopharmacology 215, 81–92. doi: 10.1007/s00213-010-2115-1
Halevy, A., Norvig, P., and Pereira, F. (2009). The unreasonable effectiveness of
data. IEEE Intell. Syst. 24, 8–12. doi: 10.1109/mis.2009.36
Hanks, J. B., and González-Maeso, J. (2012). Animal models of serotonergic
psychedelics. ACS Chem. Neurosci. 4, 33–42. doi: 10.1021/cn300138m
Heim,
R.
(2004).
Synthese
und
pharmakologie
potenter
5-HT2A-
rezeptoragonisten mit N-2-methoxybenzyl-partialstruktur. Entwicklung Eines
Neuen Struktur-Wirkungskonzepts. Ph.D. Thesis, (Berlin: Freie Universität
Berlin).
Ho, B. T., Tansey, L. W., Balster, R. L., An, R., McIsaac, W. M., and Harris, R. T.
(1970). Amphetamine analogs. II. Methylated phenethylamines. J. Med. Chem.
13, 134–135. doi: 10.1021/jm00295a034
Hofmann, A. (1980). LSD: My Problem Child. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hollister, L. E., and Hartman, A. M. (1962). Mescaline, lysergic acid diethylamide
and psilocybin: comparison of clinical syndromes, effects on color perception
and biochemical measures. Compr. Psychiatry 3, 235-241. doi: 10.1016/s0010-
440x(62)80024-8
Hoshino, T., and Shimodaira, K. (1936). Uber die synthese des bufotenin-methyl-
Äthers (5-methoxy-N-dimethyl-tryptamin) und bufotenins (synthesen in der
indol-gruppe XV). Bull. Chem. Soc. Jap. 11, 221–224. doi: 10.1246/bcsj.11.221
Hysek, C. M., Domes, G., and Liechti, M. E. (2012). MDMA enhances
‘‘mind reading’’ of positive emotions and impairs ‘‘mind reading’’ of
negative emotions. Psychopharmacology 222, 293–302. doi: 10.1007/s00213-012
-2645-9
Isbell, H., Miner, E. J., and Logan, C. R. (1959). Cross tolerance between D-2-
brom-lysergic acid diethylamide (BOL-148) and the D-diethylamide of lysergic
acid (LSD 25). Psychopharmacology 1, 109–116. doi: 10.1007/bf00409110
Isbell, H., Wolbach, A. B., Wikler, A., and Miner, E. J. (1961). Cross
tolerance between LSD and psilocybin. Psychopharmacologia 2, 147–159.
doi: 10.1007/bf00407974
Kapur, S., Zipursky, R., Jones, C., Remington, G., and Houle, S. (2000).
Relationship between dopamine D2 occupancy, clinical response, and side
effects: a double-blind PET study of first-episode schizophrenia. Am.
J. Psychiatry 157, 514–520. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.157.4.514
Kenakin, T. (2004). Principles: receptor theory in pharmacology. Trends
Pharmacol. Sci. 25, 186–192. doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2004.02.012
Klema, V., and Laub, A. (1980). The singular value decomposition: its
computation and some applications. IEEE Trans. Automat. Control. 25,
164–176. doi: 10.1109/tac.1980.1102314
Kometer, M., Schmidt, A., Jäncke, L., and Vollenweider, F. X. (2013).
Activation of serotonin 2A receptors underlies the psilocybin-induced effects
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
19
November 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 54
 Zamberlan et al.
Pharmacology of Psychedelics Subjective Effects
on α oscillations, N170 visual-evoked potentials and visual hallucinations.
J. Neurosci. 33, 10544–10551. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3007-12.2013
Kometer, M., and Vollenweider, F. X. (2016). ‘‘Serotonergic hallucinogen-induced
visual perceptual alterations,’’ in Behavioral Neurobiology of Psychedelic
Drugs. Current Topics in Behavioral Neurosciences, eds A. L. Halberstadt,
F. X. Vollenweider and D. E. Nichols (Berlin: Springer), 1–26.
Kraehenmann, R., Pokorny, D., Aicher, H., Preller, K. H., Pokorny, T.,
Bosch, O. G., et al. (2017a). LSD increases primary process thinking via
serotonin 2A receptor activation. Front. Pharmacol. 8:814. doi: 10.3389/fphar.
2017.00814
Kraehenmann, R., Pokorny, D., Vollenweider, L., Preller, K. H., Pokorny, T.,
Seifritz, E., et al. (2017b). Dreamlike effects of LSD on waking imagery in
humans depend on serotonin 2A receptor activation. Psychopharmacology 234,
2031–2046. doi: 10.1007/s00213-017-4610-0
Landauer, T. K. (2006). Latent Semantic Analysis. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.
Landauer, T. K., and Dumais, S. (2008). Latent semantic analysis. Scholarpedia
3:4356. doi: 10.4249/scholarpedia.4356
Leskovec, J., Rajaraman, A., and Ullman, J. D. (2014). Mining of Massive Datasets.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Leung, A. Y., and Paul, A. G. (1968). Baeocystin and norbaeocystin: new analogs
of psilocybin from Psilocybe baeocystis. J. Pharmacol. Sci. 57, 1667–1671.
doi: 10.1002/jps.2600571007
López-Giménez, J. F., and González-Maeso, J. (2018). Hallucinogens and
serotonin 5-HT2A receptor-mediated signaling pathways. Curr. Top. Behav.
Neurosci. 36, 45–73. doi: 10.1007/7854_2017_478
Mannich, C., and Jacobsohn, W. (1910). Über oxyphenyl-alkylamine und
dioxyphenyl-alkylamine. Eur. J. Inorg. Chem. 43, 189–197. doi: 10.1002/cber.
19100430126
Manske, R. H. (1931). A synthesis of the methyltryptamines and some derivatives.
Can. J. Res. 5, 592–600. doi: 10.1139/cjr31-097
Markowitz, J. S., Brown, C. S., and Moore, T. R. (1999). Atypical antipsychotics
Part I: pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, and efficacy. Ann. Pharmacother. 33,
73–85. doi: 10.1345/aph.17215
Marona-Lewicka, D., Chemel, B. R., and Nichols, D. E. (2009). Dopamine
D4 receptor involvement in the discriminative stimulus effects in rats of LSD,
but not the phenethylamine hallucinogen. Psychopharmacology 203, 265–277.
doi: 10.1007/s00213-008-1238-0
Marona-Lewicka, D., and Nichols, D. E. (2007). Further evidence that the delayed
temporal dopaminergic effects of LSD are mediated by a mechanism different
than the first temporal phase of action. Pharm. Biochem. Behav. 87, 453–461.
doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2007.06.001
McDowell, D. M., and Kleber, H. D. (1994). MDMA: its history and pharmacology.
Psychiatr. Ann. 24, 127–130. doi: 10.3928/0048-5713-19940301-06
McKenna, D. J., Repke, D. B., Lo, L., and Peroutka, S. J. (1990). Differential
interactions
of
indolealkylamines
with
5-hydroxytryptamine
receptor
subtypes.
Neuropharmacology
29,
193–198.
doi:
10.1016/0028-3908(90)
90001-8
Moya, P. R., Berg, K. A., Gutiérrez-Hernandez, M. A., Sáez-Briones, P.,
Reyes-Parada, M., Cassels, B. K., et al. (2007). Functional selectivity of
hallucinogenic phenethylamine and phenylisopropylamine derivatives at
human 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)2A and 5-HT2C receptors. J. Pharmacol.
Exp. Ther. 321, 1054–1061. doi: 10.1124/jpet.106.117507
Muthukumaraswamy,
S.
D.,
Shaw,
A.
D.,
Jackson,
L.
E.,
Hall,
J.,
Moran, R., and Saxena, N. (2015). Evidence that subanesthetic doses of
ketamine cause sustained disruptions of NMDA and AMPA-mediated
frontoparietal
connectivity
in
humans.
J.
Neurosci.
35,
11694–11706.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0903-15.2015
Neubig, R. R., Spedding, M., Kenakin, T., and Christopoulos, A. (2003).
International union of pharmacology committee on receptor nomenclature and
drug classification. XXXVIII. Update on terms and symbols in quantitative
pharmacolog. Pharmacol. Rev. 55, 597–606. doi: 10.1124/pr.55.4.4
Nichols, D. E. (1976). Structural correlation between apomorphine and LSD:
involvement of dopamine as well as serotonin in the actions of hallucinogens.
J. Theoret. Biol. 59, 167–177. doi: 10.1016/s0022-5193(76)80030-6
Nichols, D. E. (1986). Differences between the mechanism of action of MDMA,
MBDB, and the classic hallucinogens. J. Psychoactive Drugs 18, 305–313.
doi: 10.1080/02791072.1986.10472362
Nichols, D. E. (2016). Psychedelics. Pharm. Rev. 68, 264–355. doi: 10.1124/pr.115.
011478
Nichols, D. E. (2017). ‘‘Chemistry and structure-activity relationships of
psychedelics,’’ in Behavioral Neurobiology of Psychedelic Drugs. Current Topics
in Behavioral Neurosciences, eds A. L. Halberstadt, F. X. Vollenweider and
D. E. Nichols (Berlin: Springer), 1–43.
Nichols, D. E., Frescas, S., Marona-Lewicka, D., and Kurrasch-Orbaugh, D. M.
(2002). Lysergamides of isomeric 2,4-dimethylazetidines map the binding
orientation of the diethylamide moiety in the potent hallucinogenic
agent
N,N-diethyllysergamide
(LSD).
J.
Med.
Chem.
45,
4344–4349.
doi: 10.1021/jm020153s
Nutt, D. J., King, L. A., and Nichols, D. E. (2013). Effects of Schedule I drug laws
on neuroscience research and treatment innovation. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 14,
577–585. doi: 10.1038/nrn3530
Paulke, A., Kremer, C., Wunder, C., Achenbach, J., Djahanschiri, B., Elias, A., et al.
(2013). Argyreia nervosa (Burm. f.): receptor profiling of lysergic acid amide
and other potential psychedelic LSD-like compounds by computational and
binding assay approaches. J. Ethnopharmacol. 148, 492–497. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.
2013.04.044
Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O.,
et al. (2011). Scikit-learn: machine learning in python. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 12,
2825–2830.
Popik, P., Layer, R. T., and Skolnick, P. (1995). 100 years of ibogaine:
neurochemical and pharmacological actions of a putative anti-addictive drug.
Pharmacol. Rev. 47, 235–253.
Preller, K. H., Herdener, M., Pokorny, T., Planzer, A., Kraehenmann, R.,
Stämpfli, P., et al. (2017). The fabric of meaning and aq effects in LSD-induced
states depend on serotonin 2A receptor activation. Curr. Biol. 27, 451–457.
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2016.12.030
Preller, K. H., and Vollenweider, F. X. (2018). Phenomenology, structure, and
dynamic of psychedelic states. Curr. Top. Behav. Neurosci. 36, 221–256.
doi: 10.1007/7854_2016_459
Quednow, B. B., Kometer, M., Geyer, M. A., and Vollenweider, F. X.
(2012).
Psilocybin-induced
deficits
in
automatic
and
controlled
inhibition are attenuated by ketanserin in healthy human volunteers.
Neuropsychopharmacology 37, 630–640. doi: 10.1038/npp.2011.228
Rabin, R. A., Regina, M., Doat, M., and Winter, J. C. (2002). 5-HT2A receptor-
stimulated phosphoinositide hydrolysis in the stimulus effects of hallucinogens.
Pharmacol.
Biochem.
Behav.
72,
29–37.
doi:
10.1016/s0091-3057(01)
00720-1
Rätsch, C. (2005). The Encyclopedia of Psychoactive Plants: Ethnopharmacology
and Its Applications. New York, NY: Simon and Schuster.
Ray, T. S. (2010). Psychedelics and the human receptorome. PLoS One 5:e9019.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009019
Repke, D. B., Ferguson, W. J., and Bates, D. K. (1977). Psilocin analogs. 1. Synthesis
of 3-[2-(dialkylamino) ethyl]-and 3-[2-(cycloalkylamino) ethyl] indol-4-ols.
J. Heterocycl. Chem. 14, 71–74. doi: 10.1002/jhet.5570140113
Repke, D. B., Grotjahn, D. B., and Shulgin, A. T. (1985). Psychotomimetic
N-methyl-N-isopropyltryptamines.Effects of variation of aromatic oxygen
substituents. J. Med. Chem. 28, 892–896. doi: 10.1021/jm00145a007
Rickli, A., Luethi, D., Reinisch, J., Buchy, D., Hoener, M. C., and Liechti, M. E.
(2015). Receptor interaction profiles of novel N-2-methoxybenzyl (NBOMe)
derivatives
of
2,5-dimethoxy-substituted
phenethylamines
(2C
drugs).
Neuropharmacology 99, 546–553. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.08.034
Rickli, A., Moning, O. D., Hoener, M. C., and Liechti, M. E. (2016). Receptor
interaction profiles of novel psychoactive tryptamines compared with classic
hallucinogens. Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol. 26, 1327–1337. doi: 10.1016/j.
euroneuro.2016.05.001
Roth, B. L., Baner, K., Westkaemper, R., Siebert, D., Rice, K. C., Steinberg, S.,
et al. (2002). Salvinorin A: a potent naturally occurring nonnitrogenous κ
opioid selective agonist. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 99, 11934–11939.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.182234399
Roth, B. L., Sheffler, D. J., and Kroeze, W. K. (2004). Magic shotguns versus magic
bullets: selectively non-selective drugs for mood disorders and schizophrenia.
Nat. Rev. Drug. Discov. 3, 353–359. doi: 10.1038/nrd1346
Sahlgren, M. (2008). The distributional hypothesis. Ital. J. Disab. Stud. 20, 33–53.
Sanders-Bush, E., Burris, K. D., and Knoth, K. (1988). Lysergic acid diethylamide
and 2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine are partial agonists at serotonin
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
20
November 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 54
 Zamberlan et al.
Pharmacology of Psychedelics Subjective Effects
receptors linked to phosphoinositide hydrolysis. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 246,
924–928.
Sanz, C., Zamberlan, F., Erowid, E., Erowid, F., and Tagliazucchi, E. (2018). The
experience elicited by hallucinogens presents the highest similarity to dreaming
within a large database of psychoactive substance reports. Front. Neurosci. 12:7.
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00007
Schartner, M. M., Carhart-Harris, R. L., Barrett, A. B., Seth, A. K., and
Muthukumaraswamy, S. D. (2017). Increased spontaneous MEG signal
diversity for psychoactive doses of ketamine, LSD and psilocybin. Sci. Rep.
7:46421. doi: 10.1038/srep46421
Schenberg, E. E., de Castro Comis, M. A., Alexandre, J. F. M., Tófoli, L. F.,
Chaves, B. D. R., and da Silveira, D. X. (2017). A phenomenological analysis
of the subjective experience elicited by ibogaine in the context of a drug
dependence treatment. J. Psychedelic Stud. 1, 74–83. doi: 10.1556/2054.01.
2017.007
Schenberg, E. E., de Castro Comis, M. A., Chaves, B. R., and da Silveira, D. X.
(2014). Treating drug dependence with the aid of ibogaine: a retrospective
study. J. Psychopharmacol. 28, 993–1000. doi: 10.1177/0269881114552713
Schultes, R. E., and Hofmann, A. (1979). Plants of the Gods: Origins of
Hallucinogenic Use. Rochester: Healing Arts Press.
Seeman, P., Ko, F., and Tallerico, T. (2005). Dopamine receptor contribution to
the action of PCP, LSD and ketamine psychotomimetics. Mol. Psychiatry 10,
877–883. doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001682
Seifert, R. (2013). Functional selectivity of G-protein-coupled receptors: from
recombinant systems to native human cells. Biochem. Pharmacol. 86, 853–861.
doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2013.07.029
Sheridan, R. P., Miller, M. D., Underwood, D. J., and Kearsley, S. K. (1996).
Chemical similarity using geometric atom pair descriptors. J. Chem. Inf.
Comput. Sci. 36, 128–136. doi: 10.1021/ci950275b
Shulgin,
A.
T.
(1964).
Psychotomimetic
amphetamines:
methoxy
3,4 dialkoxyamphetamines. Experientia 20, 366–367. doi: 10.1007/bf02147960
Shulgin, A. T., Bunnell, S., and Sargent, T. (1961). The psychotomimetic
properties
of
3,4,5-trimethoxyamphetamine.
Nature
189,
1011–1012.
doi: 10.1038/1891011a0
Shulgin, A. T., and Carter, M. F. (1979). N,N-Diisopropyltryptamine (DIPT)
and 5-methoxy-N,N-diisopropyltryptamine (5-MeO-DIPT). Two orally active
tryptamine analogs with CNS activity. Commun. Psychopharmacol. 4, 363–369.
Shulgin, A., and Shulgin, A. (1995). PIHKAL: A Chemical Love Story. Berkeley:
Transform Press.
Shulgin, A., and Shulgin, A. (1997). TIHKAL: The Continuation. Berkeley:
Transform Press.
Shulgin, A. T., Sargent, T., and Naranjo, C. (1969). Structure-activity relationships
of one-ring psychotomimetics. Nature 221, 537–541. doi: 10.1038/221537a0
Simmler, L. D., Buser, T. A., Donzelli, M., Schramm, Y., Dieu, L. H., Huwyler, J.,
et al. (2013). Pharmacological characterization of designer cathinones in vitro.
Br. J. Pharmacol. 168, 458–470. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2012.02145.x
Spath, E. (1919). Ueber die anhalonium-alkaloide. I. Anhalin und Mezcalin.
Monatsh. Chem. 40, 129–152.
Spencer, D. G. Jr., Glaser, T., and Traber, J. (1987). Serotonin receptor
subtype mediation of the interoceptive discriminative stimuli induced
by 5-methoxy-N,N dimethyltryptamine. Psychopharmacology 93, 158–166.
doi: 10.1007/bf00179927
Stephenson, R. P. (1956). A modification of receptor theory. Br. J. Pharmacol.
Chemother. 11, 379–393. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.1956.tb00006.x
Studerus, E., Gamma, A., Kometer, M., and Vollenweider, F. X. (2012).
Prediction of psilocybin response in healthy volunteers. PLoS One 7:e30800.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030800
Studerus, E., Gamma, A., and Vollenweider, F. X. (2010). Psychometric evaluation
of the altered states of consciousness rating scale (OAV). PLoS One 5:e12412.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012412
Sweetnam, P. M., Lancaster, J., Snowman, A., Collins, J. L., Perschke, S.,
Bauer, C., et al. (1995). Receptor binding profile suggests multiple mechanisms
of action are responsible for ibogaine’s putative anti-addictive activity.
Psychopharmacology 118, 369–376. doi: 10.1007/bf02245936
Urban, J. D., Clarke, W. P., von Zastrowm, M., Nichols, D. E., Kobilka, B.,
Weinstein, H., et al. (2007). Functional selectivity and classical concepts
of
quantitative
pharmacology.
J.
Pharmacol.
Exp.
Ther.
320,
1–13.
doi: 10.1124/jpet.106.104463
van Amsterdam, J., Opperhuizen, A., and van den Brink, W. (2011). Harm
potential of magic mushroom use: a review. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 59,
423–429. doi: 10.1016/j.yrtph.2011.01.006
Vidal,
D.,
and
Mestres,
J.
(2010).
In
silico
receptorome
screening
of
antipsychotic drugs. Mol. Inform. 29, 543–551. doi: 10.1002/minf.2010
00055
Vollenweider, F. X., Vollenweider-Scherpenhuyzen, M. F. I., Bäbler, A.,
Vogel, H., and Hell, D. (1998). Psilocybin induces schizophrenia-like psychosis
in humans via a serotonin-2 agonist action. Neuroreport 9, 3897–3902.
doi: 10.1097/00001756-199812010-00024
Wacker, D., Wang, S., McCorvy, J. D., Betz, R. M., Venkatakrishnan, A. J., Levit, A.,
et al. (2017). Crystal structure of an LSD-bound human serotonin receptor. Cell
168, 377.e12–389.e12. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.12.033
Wall, M. E., Rechtsteiner, A., and Rocha, L. M. (2003). ‘‘Singular value
decomposition and principal component analysis,’’ in A Practical Approach
to Microarray Data Analysis, eds D. P. Berrar W. Dubitzky and M. Granzow
(Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers), 91–109.
Watts, V. J., Lawler, C. P., Fox, D. R., Neve, K. A., Nichols, D. E.,
and Mailman, R. B. (1995). LSD and structural analogs: pharmacological
evaluation at D1 dopamine receptors. Psychopharmacology 118, 401–409.
doi: 10.1007/bf02245940
Willett, P. (2006). Similarity-based virtual screening using 2D fingerprints.
Drug
Discov.
Today
11,
1046–1053.
doi:
10.1016/j.drudis.2006.
10.005
Winter, J. C. (2009). Hallucinogens as discriminative stimuli in animals:
LSD, phenethylamines and tryptamines. Psychopharmacology 203, 251–263.
doi: 10.1007/s00213-008-1356-8
Winter, J. C., Eckler, J. R., and Rabin, R. A. (2004). Serotonergic/glutamatergic
interactions: the effects of mGlu 2/3 receptor ligands in rats trained with
LSD and PCP as discriminative stimuli. Psychopharmacology 172, 233–240.
doi: 10.1007/s00213-003-1636-2
Wise, R. A., Wang, B., and You, Z. B. (2008). Cocaine serves as a peripheral
interoceptive conditioned stimulus for central glutamate and dopamine release.
PLoS One 3:e2846. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002846
Wolbach, A. B. Jr., Miner, E. J., and Isbell, H. (1962). Comparison of psilocin
with psilocybin, mescaline and LSD-25. Psychopharmacologia 3, 219–223.
doi: 10.1007/bf00412109
Zhou, L., and Bohn, L. M. (2014). Functional selectivity of GPCR signaling
in animals. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 27, 102–108. doi: 10.1016/j.ceb.2013.
11.010
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 Zamberlan, Sanz, Martínez Vivot, Pallavicini, Erowid, Erowid
and Tagliazucchi. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of
the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the
copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
21
November 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 54
 Zamberlan et al.
Pharmacology of Psychedelics Subjective Effects
APPENDIX
Relationship Between Binding Affinity and Potency
As discussed in a paragraph concerning the limitations of the pharmacological data, binding affinities do not necessarily predict EC50
and IC50 values, as determined from dose-response curves, given that the drugs can present different intrinsic activities (or efficacies)
at each of the binding sites (Stephenson, 1956). We determined the correlation between pKi values and −log(EC50) values for the
5-HT2A receptor, and the correlation between pKi values and −log(IC50) values for monoamine transporters (NET, DAT, SERT) for
the compounds assayed in Rickli et al. (2015, 2016).
The results are presented in Figure A1. In (A), we show a scatter plot of log(EC50) and log(IC50) vs. log(Ki) values. It is clear
from these figure that both sets of measurements are in approximate direct proportion. The inset of this panel includes the Pearson’s
linear correlation coefficients for the compounds assayed in Rickli et al. (2015, 2016) at 5-HT2A, NET, DAT and SERT. In (B), we
randomly sampled log(EC50), log(IC50) and log(Ki) values (for which a normal distribution can be assumed) based on the confidence
intervals provided in Rickli et al. (2015, 2016)15. We then computed the correlation coefficient between the 10,000 randomly sampled
log(EC50)/log(IC50) and log(Ki) values. These distributions indicate an overall positive correlation between binding affinity and drug
potency.
FIGURE A1 | (A) Scatter plot of the log(EC50) and log(IC50) vs. log(Ki) values published in Rickli et al. (2015, 2016). The inset includes the linear correlation
coefficients between each set of measurements. (B) Estimated distributions of the correlation values between log(EC50) and log(IC50), and log(Ki), randomly sampled
(10.000 iterations) assuming normal distribution of the values, and using the confidence intervals provided in Rickli et al. (2015; upper panel) and Rickli et al. (2016;
lower panel).
Finally, based on activity measurements at 5-HT2A and 5-HT2C receptors reported in Ray (2010), we demonstrated a high
correlation between the binding affinities of the NIMH-PDSP assayed compounds and their log(EC50) values (R = 0.90 for 5-HT2A
and R = 0.86 for 5-HT2C).
15To convert confidence intervals from the linear to the logarithmic scale, we used the first order term of the Taylor series of the logarithmic function.
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
22
November 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 54
