 NMDAR inhibition-independent antidepressant actions of 
ketamine metabolites
Panos Zanosa, Ruin Moaddelh, Patrick J. Morrisi, Polymnia Georgioua, Jonathan Fischelld, 
Greg I. Elmera,c,g, Manickavasagom Alkondonb, Peixiong Yuanj, Heather J. Pributa, 
Nagendra S. Singhh, Katina S.S. Dossouh, Yuhong Fangi, Xi-Ping Huangk, Cheryl L. Mayog, 
Irving W. Wainerh,m, Edson X. Albuquerqueb,c,f, Scott M. Thompsona,d, Craig J. Thomasi, 
Carlos A. Zarate Jr.j, and Todd D. Goulda,c,e
aDepartment of Psychiatry, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
bDepartment of Epidemiology and Public Health, Division of Translational Toxicology, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
cDepartment of Pharmacology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
dDepartment of Physiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
eDepartment of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
MD, USA.
fDepartment of Medicine, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
gMaryland Psychiatric Research Center, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
MD, USA.
hBiomedical Research Center, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, 
MD, USA.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.Users may view, print, copy, and download text and 
data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://
www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to TDG (gouldlab@me.com).
mCurrent Address: Mitchell Woods Pharmaceuticals, Shelton, CT, USA.
Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.
Author Contributions: PZ, RM, PJM, IWW, CJT, CAZ, and TDG were responsible for the overall experimental design. PJM, YF, 
and CJT synthesised the ketamine metabolites and deuterated ketamine derivatives, and provided mass spectrometer confirmations. 
Bioanalytical quantitation of ketamine and metabolites were performed by RM, NSS, and KSSD. PZ, PG, and HJP conducted and 
analysed the results of the behavioural and EEG experiments. XPH supervised and analysed the results of the binding experiments. PY 
performed the western blot experiments. EXA, MA, JF, and SMT helped design and analyze the electrophysiology experiments, which 
were conducted by MA, JF, and SMT. GIE and CLM conducted and analysed the results of the i.v. self-administration. PZ and TDG 
outlined and wrote the paper, which was reviewed by all authors.
The authors declare competing financial interests: IWW, RM, and CAZ are listed as co-inventors on a patent for the use of (2R,6R)-
hydroxynorketamine, (S)-dehydronorketamine and other stereoisomeric dehydro- and hydroxylated metabolites of (R,S)-ketamine 
metabolites in the treatment of depression and neuropathic pain. IWW, CAZ, RM, TG, PZ, CT, and PM are listed as co-inventors on a 
patent application for the use of (2R,6R)-hydroxynorketamine and (2S,6S)-hydroxynorketamine in the treatment of depression, 
anxiety, anhedonia, suicidal ideation and post-traumatic stress disorders. IWW, CAZ, RM, CT, and PM have assigned their patent 
rights to the U.S. government but will share a percentage of any royalties that may be received by the government. TG and PZ have 
assigned their patent rights to the University of Maryland Baltimore but will share a percentage of any royalties that may be received 
by the University of Maryland Baltimore. All other authors declare no competing interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. ; 533(7604): 481–486. doi:10.1038/nature17998.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 iDivision of Preclinical Innovation, National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National 
Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, USA.
jExperimental Therapeutics and Pathophysiology Branch, Intramural Research Program, National 
Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
kNIMH Psychoactive Drug Screening Program, Department of Pharmacology and Division of 
Chemical Biology and Medicinal Chemistry, University of North Carolina Chapel Hill Medical 
School, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
Abstract
Major depressive disorder afflicts ~16 percent of the world population at some point in their lives. 
Despite a number of available monoaminergic-based antidepressants, most patients require many 
weeks, if not months, to respond to these treatments, and many patients never attain sustained 
remission of their symptoms. The non-competitive glutamatergic N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor 
(NMDAR) antagonist, (R,S)-ketamine (ketamine), exerts rapid and sustained antidepressant effects 
following a single dose in depressed patients. Here we show that the metabolism of ketamine to 
(2S,6S;2R,6R)-hydroxynorketamine (HNK) is essential for its antidepressant effects, and that the 
(2R,6R)-HNK enantiomer exerts behavioural, electroencephalographic, electrophysiological and 
cellular antidepressant actions in vivo. Notably, we demonstrate that these antidepressant actions 
are NMDAR inhibition-independent but they involve early and sustained α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-
methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid (AMPA) receptor activation. We also establish that (2R,6R)-
HNK lacks ketamine-related side-effects. Our results indicate a novel mechanism underlying 
ketamine’s unique antidepressant properties, which involves the required activity of a distinct 
metabolite and is independent of NMDAR inhibition. These findings have relevance for the 
development of next generation, rapid-acting antidepressants.
 Introduction
Severe depression afflicts approximately 16 percent of the world population at some point in 
their lives and is associated with serious health and socioeconomic consequences 1,2. 
Current pharmacotherapies, typically including monoaminergic-acting antidepressants, 
require prolonged administration (weeks if not months) for clinical improvement. This lag 
time, as well as a high non-response rate, emphasizes the need for better antidepressant 
medications 3. The non-competitive glutamatergic N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) 
antagonist, (R,S)-ketamine (ketamine), has demonstrated rapid and robust efficacy as an 
antidepressant by improving core depressive symptoms including depressed mood, 
anhedonia, and suicidal thoughts in treatment-refractory unipolar and bipolar depressed 
patients when administered at sub-anesthetic doses 4-8. Remarkably, these actions are 
observed within hours following a single administration, and persist for approximately one 
week. While discovery of the ketamine’s clinical antidepressant efficacy for the treatment of 
depression has elicited tremendous excitement in the field, its potential for widespread 
clinical use is limited due to its abuse liability and capacity to produce dissociative effects 
even when administered at low doses 9. There are also unanswered questions regarding how 
ketamine works as an antidepressant, which is typically assumed to depend on direct 
NMDAR inhibition. However, the results of human treatment trials indicate that alternate 
Zanos et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 NMDAR antagonists lack the robust, rapid, or sustained antidepressant properties of 
ketamine 10.
 Role of NMDAR inhibition in ketamine action
We compared the antidepressant-like effects of ketamine and the classical tricyclic 
antidepressant desipramine in the mouse forced-swim test (FST) at 1 hour (acute) and 24 
hours (sustained) after administration (Fig. 1a). A 10mg/kg dose of ketamine resulted in 
acute and long-lasting dose-dependent antidepressant effects in the FST, whereas the 
monoaminergic-acting antidepressant desipramine only decreased immobility time 1 hour 
post-injection. To date, most studies assessing ketamine’s antidepressant effects are based on 
a commonly accepted view that ketamine and its N-demethylated metabolite (R,S)-
norketamine are the active agents, whose clinical effects are due to inhibition of the 
NMDAR. Additional metabolites (Extended Data Figs. 1 and 2a,b) are considered clinically 
inactive since they do not induce anaesthesia 11. To elucidate whether NMDAR inhibition is 
the main mechanism underlying the antidepressant effects of ketamine, we assessed the 
effects of ketamine’s enantiomers (S)- and (R)-ketamine in the FST (Fig. 1b), novelty-
suppressed feeding (NSF; Fig. 1c) and learned helplessness (LH; Fig. 1d) tests. While the 
NMDAR hypothesis of ketamine action would predict greater efficacy of (S)-ketamine since 
it is a ~3-4 fold more potent inhibitor of the NMDAR than (R)-ketamine 12,13, our results, in 
accordance with a recent report 14, demonstrate a greater potency of (R)-ketamine in all 
three antidepressant-predictive tasks. Notably, this antidepressant effect does not result from 
higher brain levels of (R)-ketamine compared to (S)-ketamine (Extended Data Fig. 2c-e). 
Moreover, in contrast to ketamine, we demonstrated that the NMDAR antagonist MK-801, 
which binds at the same receptor site as ketamine, does not exert sustained (24-hour) 
antidepressant-like effects in the FST (Fig. 1e; also see 15,16), or reverse social interaction 
deficits induced by chronic social defeat stress (Fig. 1g; Extended Data Fig. 3). These 
findings indicate a likely NMDAR inhibition-independent mechanism underlying the 
antidepressant responses of ketamine.
 Antidepressant actions of HNK
Ketamine is stereoselectively metabolised into a broad array of metabolites, including 
norketamine, hydroxyketamines, dehydronorketamine, and the hydroxynorketamines 
(HNKs) 17,18 (Fig. 2a; Extended Data Fig. 1). Following ketamine administration, (2S,6S;
2R,6R)-HNK is the major HNK metabolite found in the plasma and brain of mice (Extended 
Data Fig. 2a, b), and plasma of humans 19. Similar to previous evidence revealing enhanced 
ketamine antidepressant responses in female rodents compared to males 20,21, we observed 
greater antidepressant potency of ketamine in female mice (Fig. 2b), which was not 
associated with sex differences in ketamine-induced hyperlocomotion (likely mediated by 
NMDAR inhibition 22; Extended Data Fig. 4a,b). In order to investigate whether these sex-
dependent antidepressant differences are explained by a different pharmacokinetic profile of 
ketamine in males versus females, we measured the levels of ketamine and its metabolites in 
the brains of mice following ketamine administration. While equivalent levels of ketamine 
and norketamine were found, (2S,6S;2R,6R)-HNK was approximately three-fold higher in 
the brain of female mice compared to males (Fig. 2c-e), suggesting a role of (2S,6S;2R,6R)-
Zanos et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 HNK in the antidepressant effects of ketamine. To directly determine if metabolism of 
ketamine to (2S,6S;2R,6R)-HNK is required for its antidepressant actions, we deuterated 
ketamine at the C6 position (6,6-dideuteroketamine; Extended Data Fig. 2f). This alteration 
would not change the pharmacological properties of un-metabolised ketamine, but may 
change the relative rate of metabolism 23. Indeed, 6,6-dideuteroketamine did not change 
NMDAR binding affinity (Extended Data Fig. 2g), or NMDAR-mediated hyperlocomotion 
(Extended Data Fig. 4c,d), but robustly hindered its metabolism to (2S,6S;2R,6R)-HNK, 
without changes to the levels of ketamine in the brain (Fig. 2f-h). Unlike ketamine, 
administration of 6,6-dideuteroketamine did not induce antidepressant actions in the FST 
(Fig. 2i) or LH (Fig. 2j) 24 hours after administration, indicating a critical role of (2S,6S;2R,
6R)-HNK in ketamine’s sustained antidepressant effects. Notably, published human data 
reveal a positive correlation between the antidepressant responses of ketamine and plasma 
(2S,6S;2R,6R)-HNK metabolite levels 19.
To determine whether (2S,6S)- or (2R,6R)-HNK exert antidepressant effects independent of 
ketamine administration, we compared their behavioural effects in the 24-hour (sustained) 
FST and LH paradigms. We observed more potent antidepressant effects following 
administration of the (2R,6R)-HNK metabolite (Fig. 2k,l), which is exclusively derived from 
(R)-ketamine, and thus consistent with the greater antidepressant actions of (R)-ketamine 
relative to (S)-ketamine (Fig. 1b-d). Moreover, (2R,6R)-HNK resulted in a dose-dependent 
antidepressant action in the LH, FST and NSF tests (Extended Data Fig. 5a,c,f). We note that 
(2S,6S)-HNK does also exert antidepressant actions at higher doses (Extended Data Fig. 
5b,d). The greater antidepressant effects of (2R,6R)-HNK do not result from higher brain 
levels of the drug compared to (2S,6S)-HNK (Extended Data Fig. 5e). Similar to ketamine, a 
single (2R,6R)-HNK administration induced persistent antidepressant effects in the FST, 
lasting for at least three days (Extended Data Fig. 5g). A single administration of (2R,6R)-
HNK also reversed chronic corticosterone-induced anhedonia as assessed in the sucrose 
preference and female urine sniffing behavioural tasks (Extended Data Fig. 5h,i), as well as 
social avoidance induced by chronic social defeat stress (Fig. 2m; Extended Data Fig. 5j,k).
 (2R,6R)-HNK effects on glutamate receptors
A prominent hypothesis for ketamine’s mechanism of action is that it acts via direct 
inhibition of NMDARs localized to interneurons. This is hypothesized to lead to 
disinhibition of glutamatergic neurons, which receive input from interneurons, and a 
resultant rapid increase in glutamate synaptic transmission in mood-relevant brain 
regions 24. However, in contrast to ketamine, (2R,6R)-HNK does not displace [3H]-MK-801 
binding to the NMDAR in vitro (Fig. 3a; also see 12) and does not functionally inhibit 
NMDARs localized to stratum radiatum interneurons in hippocampal slices (Fig. 2b,c). 
Instead, (2R,6R)-HNK induced a robust increase in AMPA receptor-mediated excitatory 
post-synaptic potentials (EPSPs) recorded from the CA1 region of hippocampal slices 
following stimulation of Schaffer collateral axons, which was sustained following washout 
of the drug (Fig. 3d-f). (2R,6R)-HNK also increased the frequency and amplitude of AMPA 
receptor-mediated excitatory post-synaptic currents (EPSCs) recorded from CA1 stratum 
radiatum interneurons (Extended Data Fig. 6a-j), which receive glutamatergic inputs from 
the Schaffer collaterals. To test the extent to which the antidepressant effect of (2R,6R)-
Zanos et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 HNK depends on AMPAR activation in vivo, mice were pre-treated with the AMPA receptor 
antagonist 2,3-dihydroxy-6-nitro-7-sulfamoyl-benzo[f]quinoxaline-2,3-dione (NBQX) 10 
min prior to treatment with ketamine or (2R,6R)-HNK. One hour or 24 hours after the 
treatment mice were assessed in the FST. Similar NBQX treatment has previously been 
shown to prevent the antidepressant actions of ketamine, without effects on other behaviours 
in rodents 15,25-27. Treatment with NBQX, prior to (2R,6R)-HNK, prevented both the 1- and 
24-hour antidepressant effects of (2R,6R)-HNK (Fig. 3g,h), indicating that its antidepressant 
actions require the acute activation of AMPA receptors.
A non-invasive method used to assess ketamine-activated circuitry in both humans and 
rodents is the quantitative electroencephalography (qEEG) measurement of gamma-band 
power, which is dependent upon activation of fast ionotropic excitatory receptors, including 
AMPA receptors 28-30. We show that, similar to ketamine, (2R,6R)-HNK administration 
acutely increases gamma power measured via surface electrodes in vivo (Fig. 3i,j), 
independent of locomotor activity changes, and without altering alpha, beta, delta or theta 
oscillations (Extended Data Fig. 7a-e). Importantly, pre-treatment with NBQX prevented 
(2R,6R)-HNK-induced increases in gamma power, thus further implicating AMPA receptors 
in (2R,6R)-HNK mechanism of action (Extended Data Fig. 7f-k), and validating a potential 
human translational biomarker of the CNS response to (2R,6R)-HNK.
Evidence indicates that mTOR signaling 25, protein synthesis through eEF2 
dephosphorylation 16, as well as BDNF increases 16,31, underlie ketamine’s antidepressant 
responses. We examined whether administration of (2R,6R)-HNK affects phosphorylation of 
mTOR (Ser 2448) and eEF2 (Thr 56), or BDNF levels in synaptoneurosome fractions of the 
hippocampus and prefrontal cortex. No differences were observed in mTOR phosphorylation 
following administration of ketamine or (2R,6R)-HNK in the hippocampus or the prefrontal 
cortex of mice (Extended Data Fig. 8a,b;c,d). However, ketamine induced a decrease in 
eEF2 phosphorylation in the hippocampus (but not the prefrontal cortex) 1 and 24 hours 
post-injection, and increased hippocampal BDNF at 24 hours (Fig. 4a-d). These effects were 
recapitulated by (2R,6R)-HNK administration (Fig. 4a-d; Extended Data Fig. 8e-h), and may 
be partially responsible for its sustained antidepressant actions.
It is noteworthy that (2R,6R)-HNK resulted in antidepressant actions (Fig. 2k-m; Extended 
Data Fig. 5) at time points (e.g. 24 hours) past when its brain levels are below detectable 
limits (e.g. 2 hours; Extended Data Fig. 5e). Synaptic plasticity changes involving AMPA 
receptors are thought to underlie such long-term antidepressant actions of ketamine 24,27. 
Here we show that while neither ketamine nor (2R,6R)-HNK administration altered the 
levels of GluA1 and GluA2 in hippocampal synaptoneurosomes 1 hour post-treatment (Fig. 
4e), they both increased GluA1 and GluA2 levels 24 hours post-treatment in mouse 
hippocampal (Fig. 4f), but not prefrontal cortex synaptoneurosomes (Extended Data Fig. 
8i,j). Consistent with an increase in synaptic AMPA receptors being involved in the 
sustained, 24-hour, antidepressant actions, administration of NBQX thirty minutes prior to 
the 24-hour FST (23.5 hours after antidepressant treatment; see timeline Fig. 4g) prevented 
the antidepressant actions of both ketamine and (2R,6R)-HNK (Fig. 4h). These findings 
implicate an AMPA receptor-mediated maintenance of synaptic potentiation to underlie the 
sustained antidepressant effects of (2R,6R)-HNK.
Zanos et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  (2R,6R)-HNK lacks ketamine’s side effects
Ketamine has abuse potential, as well as sensory-dissociation properties and other side-
effects, which limit its potential widespread use for the treatment of depression 9. While 
administration of ketamine (Extended Data Fig. 4a-d) and (2S,6S)-HNK (Fig. 5a) were 
associated with increased locomotor activity and motor incoordination (Fig. 5c,d), (2R,6R)-
HNK did not induce any significant change in locomotion, and did not affect coordination as 
measured with the accelerating rotarod test (Fig. 5b,d). We show that unlike ketamine, (2R,
6R)-HNK administration, even at high doses (375 mg/kg), did not affect sensory gating as 
assessed with pre-pulse inhibition (Fig. 5e) or startle amplitude (Extended Data Fig. 9a). 
Non-competitive NMDAR antagonists, including ketamine and phencyclidine, produce 
discriminative stimulus effects in drug discrimination protocols and manifest cross-drug 
substitution profiles at an antidepressant-relevant dose range 32. In ketamine-trained mice, 
(2R,6R)-HNK administration did not produce ketamine-related discrimination responses, 
whereas phencyclidine (PCP) did (Fig. 5f,g) without either of these drugs changing overall 
lever pressing response rates (Extended Data Fig. 9b,c), further supporting a non-NMDAR 
mechanism for (2R,6R)-HNK action including interoceptive effects, unlike the abused drugs 
ketamine and PCP. Since drug discrimination does not independently predict abuse potential 
per se, we further assessed the effects of ketamine and (2R,6R)-HNK in an intravenous drug 
self-administration paradigm, classically used for the evaluation of abuse/addiction liability. 
Intravenous ketamine was readily self-administered and resulted in a significant increase in 
drug intake (Fig. 5h; Extended Data Fig. 9d). In contrast, mice did not self-administer 
pharmacologically-relevant doses of (2R,6R)-HNK under the same conditions (Fig. 5h; 
Extended Data Fig. 9d). Overall, (2R,6R)-HNK administration revealed an innocuous side-
effect profile compared to ketamine.
 Discussion
Our data provide new evidence explaining the unique antidepressant effects of ketamine and 
implicate an NMDAR inhibition-independent mechanism. These findings reveal that 
production of a distinct metabolite of ketamine is necessary and sufficient to produces 
ketamine’s antidepressant actions. Overall, our data suggest that administration of (2R,6R)-
HNK induces an acute increase in glutamatergic signaling (as supported by our EPSP, 
EPSC, and qEEG measurements), followed by a long-term adaptation involving the up-
regulation of synaptic AMPA receptors, as evidenced by an increase in GluA1 and GluA2 in 
hippocampal synapses. This is supported by the finding that NBQX reverses both the acute 
(delivered prior to (2R,6R)-HNK) (Fig. 3g,h) and sustained (delivered after (2R,6R)-HNK; 
Fig 4g,h) antidepressant actions of (2R,6R)-HNK. Considering the lack of side effects, and 
the favourable physiochemical properties of HNKs 33, these findings have relevance for the 
development of next generation, rapid-acting antidepressants.
 Methods
 Animals
Mice and rats were acclimated to University of Maryland, Baltimore vivarium for at least 
seven days prior to experiments. Food and water were available ad libitum. CD-1 mice 
Zanos et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (males unless otherwise noted; 8-10 weeks old; Charles River Laboratories, MA, USA) were 
housed in groups of four-five per cage with a constant 12-hour light/dark cycle (lights on/off 
at 07:00/19:00). For the social defeat experiments, 8-9 week old male C57BL/6J mice 
(University of Maryland, Baltimore veterinary resources breeding colony) and retired male 
CD-1 breeders (Charles River Laboratories, MA, USA) were used. For the whole-cell and 
field potential electrophysiological recordings, male Sprague-Dawley rats (postnatal day 
24-35; Charles River, Wilmington, MA) were used. All experimental procedures were 
approved by the University of Maryland, Baltimore Animal Care and Use Committee and 
were conducted in full accordance with the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care 
and Use of Laboratory Animals.
 Drugs
(R,S)-ketamine, (S)-ketamine, desipramine, MK-801, phencyclidine (PCP) (Sigma-Aldrich, 
St. Louis, MO, USA), (R)-ketamine (Cayman Chemicals, Ann Arbor, MI, USA) and NBQX 
(National Institute of Mental Health Chemical Synthesis and Drug Supply Program) were 
dissolved in 0.9% saline. (2S,6S)-HNK, (2R,6R)-HNK, and 6,6-dideuteroketamine 
hydrochloride were synthesised and characterised both internally at the National Center for 
Advancing Translational Sciences and at SRI International (Menlo Park, CA, USA) as 
described in Supplementary Information. Absolute and relative stereochemistry for (2S,6S)-
HNK and (2R,6R)-HNK were confirmed by small molecule x-ray crystallography, as 
described in the Supplementary Information.
All drugs were dissolved in 0.9% saline, and administered intraperitoneally (i.p.) in a 
volume of 7.5 ml/kg of body mass by a male experimenter for the behavioural studies. 
Corticosterone (4-pregnen-11β, 21-diol-3, 20-dione 21-hemisuccinate; Steraloids, Newport, 
RI, USA) was dissolved in tap water. For the electrophysiology recordings, test drugs were 
diluted in artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF).
 Forced-swim test (FST)
Mice were tested in the FST 1 hour and/or 24 hours post-injection. During the FST, mice 
were subjected to a 6-min swim session in clear Plexiglass cylinders (30 cm height × 20 cm 
diameter) filled with 15 cm of water (23 ± 1°C). The FST was performed in normal light 
conditions (800 Lux). Sessions were recorded using a digital video-camera. Immobility 
time, defined as passive floating with no additional activity other than that necessary to keep 
the animal’s head above the water, was scored for the last 4 min of the 6-min test by a 
trained observer.
We conducted three different FST experiments where we utilized the AMPA receptor 
antagonist NBQX. In the first two experiments, we administered NBQX 10 minutes prior to 
ketamine, (2R,6R)-hydroxynorketamine, or vehicle and then tested the mice 1 hour and 24 
hours later to assessed whether AMPA receptor activity is necessary for the acute actions of 
these drugs, leading to both acute and sustained antidepressant effects. In the third 
experiment we first administered ketamine, (2R,6R)-HNK, or vehicle and then, 23.5 hours 
later mice received either NBQX or vehicle. Thirty minutes later we tested these mice in the 
FST, to assess effects of AMPA receptor activity on sustained antidepressant actions.
Zanos et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  Open-field test
Mice were placed into individual open-field arenas (50 cm length × 50 cm width × 38 cm 
height; San Diego Instruments, San Diego, CA, USA) for a 60-min habituation period. Mice 
then received an injection of the respective drug and assessed for locomotor activity for 
another 60 min. Distance travelled was analysed using TopScan v2.0 (CleverSys, Inc, 
Reston, VA, USA).
 Novelty-suppressed feeding (NSF)
Mice were singly housed and food-deprived for twenty-four hours in freshly-made home-
cages. Two normal chow diet pellets were placed on an inverted weighing-boat platform (10 
× 10 × 1.5 cm) in the center of an open-field arena (40 × 40 cm). Thirty or sixty min (see 
Figure captions) after drug administration, mice were introduced into a corner of the arena. 
The time needed for the mice to take a bite of food was recorded over a 10-min period by a 
trained observer. After the test, the mice were returned to their home cage containing pre-
weighed food pellets, and latency to start biting the pellet, as well as consumption was 
recorded for a period of 10 min. There was no significant change in home cage latency or 
consumption in any of our experiments (data not shown).
 Learned helplessness (LH)
The LH paradigm consisted of three different phases: inescapable shock training, LH 
screening, and the LH test. For the inescapable shock portion of the test (Day 1), the animals 
were placed in one side of two-chambered shuttle boxes (34 cm height × 37 cm width × 18 
cm depth; Coulbourn Instruments, PA, USA), with the door between the chambers closed. 
Following a five-min adaptation period, 120 inescapable foot-shocks (0.45 mA, 15 sec 
duration, randomised average inter-shock interval of 45 sec) were delivered through the 
floor. During the screening session (Day 2), the mice were placed in one of the two 
chambers of the apparatus for 5 min. A shock (0.45 mA) was then delivered, and the door 
between the two chambers was raised simultaneously. Crossing over into the second 
chamber terminated the shock. If the animal did not cross over, the shock terminated after 3 
sec. A total of 30 screening trials of escapable shocks were presented to each mouse with an 
average of 30-sec delay between each trial. Mice that developed helplessness behaviour (>5 
escape failures during the last 10 screening shocks) received the assigned drug 24 hours 
following screening (Day 3). During the LH test phase (Day 4), the animals were placed in 
the shuttle boxes and, after a 5-min adaptation period, a 0.45 mA shock was delivered 
concomitantly with door opening for the first five trials, followed by a 2-sec delay for the 
next 40 trials. Crossing over to the second chamber terminated the shock. If the animal did 
not cross over to the other chamber, the shock was terminated after 24 sec. A total of 45 
trials of escapable shocks were presented to each mouse with 30-sec inter-trial intervals. The 
number of escape failures was recorded for each mouse by an automated computer software 
(Graphic State v3.1; Coulbourn Instruments, Whitehall, PA, USA).
 Chronic social defeat stress and social interaction
The timeline for the social defeat experiments is presented in Extended Data Fig. 3a. Male 
C57BL/6J mice underwent a 10-day chronic social defeat stress paradigm, as described 
Zanos et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 elsewhere 34, with some modifications. Briefly, experimental mice were introduced to the 
home cage (43 cm length × 11 cm width × 20 cm height) of a resident aggressive retired 
CD-1 breeder, prescreened for aggressive behaviours, for 10 min. Following this physical 
attack phase, mice were transferred and housed in the opposite side of the resident’s cage 
divided by a Plexiglas perforated divider, in order to maintain continuous sensory contact. 
This process was repeated for 10 days. Experimental mice were introduced to a novel 
aggressive CD-1 mouse each day. On day 11, test mice were screened for susceptibility in a 
social interaction/avoidance choice test. The social interaction apparatus consisted of a 
rectangular three-chambered box (mouse conditioned-place preference chamber; Stoelting 
Co., Wood Dale, IL, USA), see Extended Data Fig.3b) comprised of two equal sized end-
chambers and a smaller central chamber. The social interaction/avoidance choice test 
consisted of two 5-min phases. During the habituation phase, mice explored the empty 
apparatus. During the test phase, two small wire cages (Galaxy Cup, Spectrum Diversified 
Designs, Inc., Streetsboro, OH, USA), one containing a “stranger” CD-1 mouse and the 
other one empty, were placed in the far corners of each chamber. The time spent interacting 
(nose within close proximity of the cage) with the “stranger” mouse versus the empty cage 
was analysed using TopScan video tracking software (CleverSys, Reston, Virginia). 
Locomotor activity (total distance moved over 5 min) and number of total crosses into and 
out of the central chamber were also measured. The social interaction ratio was calculated 
by dividing the time spent interacting with the “stranger” by the time spent with the empty 
cage. Mice having a social interaction ratio higher than 1.0 were considered resilient and 
mice with a social interaction ratio lower than 1.0 were considered susceptible. On day 13 
resilient and susceptible mice received an i.p. injection of either saline, (R,S)-KET (20 
mg/kg; chosen based upon dose previously effective in C57BL/6J mice 34), MK-801 (0.1 
mg/kg) or (2R,6R)-HNK (20 mg/kg). Mice were re-tested for social interaction/avoidance 
on day 15 (24 hours following treatment).
 Chronic corticosterone-induced anhedonia
 Sucrose preference test—For assessing the baseline sucrose preference, mice were 
singly housed for 24 hours and presented with two identical bottles containing either tap 
water or 1% sucrose solution. Following baseline sucrose measurement, mice were re-group 
housed (5 mice per cage) and treated for 4 weeks with corticosterone (25 μg/ml equivalent) 
given in water bottles. Prior to initiation of any behavioural measurements, animals were 
weaned off corticosterone treatment; 3 days corticosterone 12.5 μg/ml and 3 days 
corticosterone 6.25 μg/ml, followed by 1 week of complete withdrawal. Mice were 
subsequently singly-housed in freshly-made home cages and provided with two bottles 
containing either tap water or 1% sucrose solution. Twenty-four hours later, mice that 
developed the anhedonia phenotype (<70% sucrose preference) were treated with saline or 
(2R,6R)-HNK (10 mg/kg) and sucrose preference was measured after an additional 24 
hours.
 Female urine sniffing test—A separate cohort of mice was treated with the same 
chronic corticosterone administration paradigm as described above but assessed for female 
urine sniffing preference as a measure of hedonic behaviour 35. Mice were singly-housed in 
freshly-made home cages for a habituation period of 10 min. Subsequently, one plain cotton 
Zanos et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 tip was secured on the center of the cage wall and mice were allowed to sniff and habituate 
to the tip for a period of 30 min. Then, the plain cotton tip was removed and replaced by two 
cotton tip applicators, one infused with fresh female mouse estrus urine and the other with 
fresh male mouse urine. These applicators were presented and secured at the two corners of 
the cage wall simultaneously. Sniffing time for both female and male urine was scored by a 
trained observer for a period of three min. Twenty-four hours later, mice that developed 
anhedonia phenotype (<65% female urine preference; susceptible phenotype), as well as 
mice that did not develop the anhedonia phenotype (>75% female urine preference; resilient 
phenotype) were treated with either saline or (2R,6R)-HNK (10 mg/kg). Mice were re-tested 
for female urine preference 24 hours later.
 Pre-pulse inhibition (PPI)
Mice were individually tested in acoustic startle boxes (SR-LAB, San Diego Instruments). 
Following drug administration, mice were placed in the startle chamber for a 30-min 
habituation period. The experiment started with a further 5-min adaptation period during 
which the mice were exposed to a constant background noise (67 dB), followed by five 
initial startle stimuli (120 dB, 40 msec duration each). Subsequently, animals were exposed 
to four different trial types: pulse alone trials (120 dB, 40 msec duration), three pre-pulse 
trials of 76 and 81 of white noise bursts (20 msec duration) preceding a 120 dB pulse by 100 
msec, and background (67 dB) no-stimuli trials. Each of these trials was randomly presented 
five times. The dose of ketamine (30 mg/kg) was selected based on a dose-response 
experiment we performed in a previous study 36. The % pre-pulse inhibition (PPI) was 
calculated using the following formula: [(magnitude on pulse alone trial – magnitude on pre-
pulse + pulse trial)/magnitude on pulse alone trial] × 100.
 Drug discrimination
Mice were food-restricted until they reached 85% of their initial body weight and were 
maintained at 85% throughout the duration of the experiment. Animals were trained to lever 
press for food (20 mg sucrose pellets; TestDiet, St. Luis, MO, USA) in standard two-lever 
operant conditioning chambers (Coulbourn Instruments, Whitehall, PA, USA), under a 
fixed-ratio 5 schedule of reinforcement (FR5) in daily 30-min sessions. After stable 
responding was maintained over 3 consecutive sessions, mice were trained to discriminate 
ketamine (10 mg/kg) from saline under a double alternation schedule (i.e., ketamine, 
ketamine, saline, saline), which required on average 40 training sessions. Mice received 
either ketamine (10 mg/kg; i.p.) or saline 15 min prior to the start of the 30-min session. 
Responding to the correct lever resulted in the delivery of a reward, while incorrect 
responding reset the FR for correct lever-responding. Drug discrimination test sessions were 
conducted when mice reached the following criteria: (1) first FR5 completed on the correct 
lever, and (2) ≥85% correct lever responding over the entire session. During the 30-min test 
sessions mice received either saline, ketamine (10 mg/kg), phencyclidine (PCP; 3 mg/kg) or 
(2R,6R)-HNK (10 and 50 mg/kg). At this stage, completion of the FR5 schedule on either 
lever resulted in the delivery of food reward. Lever response and pellet delivery were 
monitored and controlled by an automated computer system (Graphic State v3.1; Coulbourn 
Instruments, Whitehall, PA, USA).
Zanos et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  Intravenous drug self-administration
 Apparatus—Each operant chamber was equipped with one lever, a dipper liquid 
delivery system, a 22ga. liquid swivel and a syringe pump (located outside the chamber). 
The lever was a balanced rocker arm that broke an infrared photo beam when 0.5 g of force 
was applied. Two stimulus lights were used; one was positioned to illuminate the translucent 
lever and the other was positioned above the liquid delivery recess. The lever light was 
illuminated during periods of water or drug availability; the second light was illuminated 
during water or drug delivery. The system was controlled by an integrated Coulbourn 
(Whitehall, PA) environmental control system and Med Associates interface (St. Albans, 
VT).
 Water Training—Mice were first trained to complete an operant response for water 
reinforcement. Completion of the response requirements on the lever illuminated stimulus 
lights above a spout and delivered a small amount of water. Initially, the response 
requirement was one lever press (FR1); after completion of each 50 reinforcements the fixed 
ratio requirement was increased by one (FRX + 1) to a maximum of FR4. Mice were trained 
24 hours/day for four days with free access to food.
 Surgery—Following completion of the water training, mice were surgically prepared 
with a catheter implanted in the jugular vein. Surgical procedures were performed under 
ketamine- (90 mg/kg, i.p.) and xylazine- (16 mg/kg, i.p.) induced anaesthesia. Silastic tubing 
(0.012″ i.d.) was implanted in the right jugular vein to the level of the atrium, passed 
subcutaneously and exited in the midscapular region. The catheter was connected to a tether/
swivel system that was mounted to the skull of the mouse with dental cement.
 IV Drug Self-administration—Seven days post-surgery, mice were placed in the 
operant chamber and given access (FR4) to 0.32, 1.0, 3.2, or 0 (saline) mg/kg drug per 
infusion for 5 days at each dose. Completion of each FR resulted in the illumination of the 
overhead house light and the stimulus light above the spout. Infusions of 5-8μl (based upon 
body weight) were given over a period of 15 sec. A 30 sec time-out period, during which 
house and stimulus lights were out, followed the completion of each infusion. Each mouse 
had access to drug for 6 hours/day and free access to food and water 24 hours/day. A 12-
hour light/dark cycle was maintained (lights on/off at 07:00/19:00). Each animal remained in 
its operant chamber for the duration of the experiment. A stimulus light illuminating the 
lever signaled drug availability. Only those animals with patent catheters at the end of the 
experiment were included in the analysis. The average number of reinforcements and drug 
intake during the last three days at each dose were used as dependent measures.
 Rotarod
The rotarod test was conducted to compare the effects of ketamine, (2S,6S)-HNK and (2R,
6R)-HNK on motor coordination. The experiment consisted of two phases: training phase (4 
days) and a test phase (1 day). On each of the training days five trials (trial time: 3 min) 
were conducted with an inter-trial interval of two min Mice were individually placed on the 
rotarod apparatus (IITC Life Science; Woodland Hills, CA, USA) and the rotor (3.75 inch 
diameter) accelerated from 5-20 RPM over a period of three minutes. Latency to fall was 
Zanos et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 recorded for each trial. Animals with an average of <100 sec of latency to fall during the last 
training day were excluded from the experiment. On the test day (day 5), mice received (i.p.) 
injections of saline, (R,S)-KET (10 mg/kg), (2S,6S)-HNK (25 or 125 mg/kg) or (2R,6R)-
HNK (25 or 125 mg/kg) and were tested in the rotating rod 5-, 10-, 15-, 20-, 30- and 60-min 
post-injection using the same procedure described for the training days.
 Tissue distribution and clearance measurements of ketamine and metabolites
At 10, 30, 60, or 240 minutes following drug administration mice were exposed to 3% 
isoflurane and subsequently decapitated. Trunk blood was collected in EDTA-containing 
tubes and centrifuged at 5938 × g for 6 min (4°C). Plasma was collected and stored at −80°C 
until analysis. Whole brains were simultaneously collected, rinsed with phosphate-buffered 
saline, immediately frozen in dry ice and stored at −80°C until analysis.
The concentrations of (R,S)-ketamine and 6,6-dideuteroketamine ((R,S)-d2-ketamine) and 
their respective metabolites in plasma and brain tissue were determined by achiral liquid 
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry following a previously described method 33, 
with slight modifications. The analysis was accomplished using an Eclipse XDB-C18 guard 
column (4.6 mm × 12.5 mm) and a Varian Pursuit XRs 5 C18 analytical column (250 mm × 
4.0 mm ID, 5 μm; Varian, Palo Alto, CA, USA). The mobile phase consisted of ammonium 
acetate [5 mM, pH 7.6] as component A and acetonitrile as component B. A linear gradient 
was run as follows: 0 min 20% B; 5 min 20% B; 15 min 80% B; 20 min 20% B at a flow 
rate of 0.4 ml/min. The total run time was 30 min per sample. For plasma and brain samples, 
the calibration standards ranged from 10,000 ng/ml to 19.5 ng/ml for (R,S)-ketamine, (R,S)-
norketamine, (2R,6R;2S,6S)-HNK, (R,S)-dehydronorketamine, (R,S)-d2-ketamine, (R,S)-d2-
norketamine and d-(2S,6S;2R,6R)-HNK. The quantitation of (R,S)-ketamine, (R,S)-d2-
ketamine and their respective metabolites was accomplished by calculating area ratios using 
d4-ketamine (10 μl of 10 μg/ml solution) as the internal standard. The MS/MS analysis was 
performed using a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer model API 4000 system from 
Applied Biosystems/MDS Sciex equipped with Turbo Ion Spray® (TIS) (Applied 
Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The data was acquired and analysed using Analyst 
version 1.4.2 (Applied Biosystems). Positive electrospray ionization data were acquired 
using multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) using the following transitions for (R,S)-
ketamine studies: 238 → 125 (ketamine); 224 → 125 (norketamine); 222 → 177 
(dehydronorketamine); 240 → 125 (HNK); 254 → 151 (HK) and (R,S)-d2-ketamine studies: 
240 → 125 (d2-ketamine); 226 → 125 (d2-norketamine); 223 → 178 (d-
dehydronorketamine); 241 → 125 (d-(2,6)-HNK); 242-125 (d2-(2,5)-HNK);(d2-(2,4)-HNK) 
and 255 → 151 (d-(2,6)-HK).
 MK-801 displacement binding
NMDAR binding assays were performed according to Chiu et al., 1999 37, with minor 
modifications. Rat brains were homogenised and membrane fractions were collected. 
Aliquoted membranes were stored at −80°C until use. Membrane pellets were washed 5 
times with an ice-cold buffer (20 mM HEPES, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.0) before use. The 
binding assays were set up in 96-well plates using 5 nM [3H]-MK-801 and rat brain 
membranes (100 μg/well) in a final volume of 125 μl/well in the NMDAR binding buffer (20 
Zanos et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mM HEPES, 1 mM EDTA, 100 μM Glutamate, 100 μM Glycine, pH 7.0). Test compounds 
were first distributed in 96-well plates (25 μl/well at 5× of final concentrations ranging from 
0.1 nM to 10 μM, 11 points) in triplicate. The radioligand, [3H]-MK-801 was added (50 μl/
well at 2.5× of final 5 nM) to all wells. Reactions started with the addition of 50 μl rat brain 
membrane and were incubated for 1 hour in the dark at room temperature. The reactions 
were harvested via rapid filtration onto Whatman GF/B glass fiber filters pre-soaked with 
0.3% polyethyleneimine using a 96-well Brandel harvester, followed by three quick washes 
each with 500 μl chilled wash buffer (50 mM Tris HCl, pH 7.4). Filters were microwave-
dried and scintillation cocktail was then melted onto the filter mates on a hot plate. The 
radioactivity retained on the filters was counted in a MicroBeta scintillation counter. All 
assays were performed in triplicates.
 Western blots
To purify synaptoneurosomes, mouse prefrontal cortex and hippocampi were dissected and 
homogenised in Syn-PER Reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA; Cat # 
87793) with 1X protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (ThermoFisher Scientific, 
Waltham, MA, USA; Cat # 78440). The homogenate was centrifuged for 10 min at 1,200 × 
g at 4 °C. The supernatant was centrifuged at 15,000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C. After 
centrifugation, the pellet (synaptosomal fraction) was re-suspended and sonicated in N-PER 
Neuronal Protein Extraction Reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA; Cat # 
87792). Protein concentration was determined via the BCA protein assay kit (ThermoFisher 
Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA; Cat # 23227). Equal amount of proteins (10-40 μg as 
optimal for each antibody) for each sample was loaded into NuPage 4-12% Bis-Tris gel for 
electrophoresis. Gel transfer was performed with the TransBlot Turbo Transfer System (Bio-
Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) Nitrocellulose membranes with transferred proteins were blocked 
with 5% milk in TBST (TBS + 0.1% Tween-20) for 1 hour and kept with primary antibodies 
overnight at 4 °C. The following primary antibodies were used: phospho-eEF2 (at Thr56; 
Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA; Cat # 2331), total eEF2 (Cell Signaling 
Technology, Danvers, MA, USA; Cat # 2332), phospho-mTOR (at Ser2448; Cell Signaling 
Technology, Danvers, MA, USA; Cat # 2971), total mTOR (Cell Signaling Technology, 
Danvers, MA, USA; Cat # 2983), GluA1 (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA; 
Cat # 2983), GluA2 (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA; Cat # 13607), BDNF 
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, Texas, USA; Cat # sc-546), and GAPDH (Abcam, 
Cambridge, MA, USA; Cat # ab8245). The next day, blots were washed three times in TBST 
and incubated with horseradish peroxidase conjugated anti-mouse or anti-rabbit secondary 
antibody (1:5000 to 1:10000) for 1 hour. After final three washes with TBST, bands were 
detected using enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) with the Syngene Imaging System 
(G:Box ChemiXX9). After imaging, the blots were incubated in the stripping buffer 
(ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA; Cat # 46430) for 10-15 min at room 
temperature followed by three time washes with TBST. The stripped blots were incubated in 
blocking solution for 1 hour and incubated with the primary antibody directed against total 
levels of the respective protein or GAPDH for loading control. Densitometric analysis of 
phospho- and total immunoreactive bands for each protein was conducted using Syngene’s 
GenTools software. The values for the phosphorylated forms of proteins were normalised to 
phosphorylation-independent levels of the same protein. Phosphorylation-independent levels 
Zanos et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of proteins were normalised to GAPDH. Fold change was calculated by normalisation to 
saline-treated control group for each protein or phosphoprotein.
 Electroencephalogram (EEG)
 Surgery—EEG experiments were performed according to Raver et al. 38, with minor 
modifications. Mice were anaesthetised with isoflurane (3.5%) and maintained under 
anaesthesia (2-2.5%) throughout the surgery. Mice received analgesia (carprofen, 5 mg/kg, 
i.p.) prior to the start of surgery. An F20-EET radio-telemetric transmitter (Data Sciences 
International, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was placed subcutaneously and its leads implanted 
over the dura above the frontal cortex (1.7 mm anterior to bregma) and the cerebellum (6.4 
mm posterior to bregma). Animals recovered from surgery for 7 days prior to recordings.
 EEG recordings—For comparisons between saline, ketamine, and (2R,6R)-HNK, mice 
were singly housed and acclimated to the behavioural room for 24 hours prior to EEG 
recordings. EEGs were recorded using the Dataquest A.R.T. acquisition system (Data 
Sciences International, Minneapolis, MN, USA) with frontal EEG recordings referenced to 
the cerebellum. Baseline EEG (30 min) recordings were followed by an i.p. injection of 
saline, ketamine (10 mg/kg) or (2R,6R)-HNK (10 mg/kg) and a further 60 min of post-
injection recordings. To assess effects of NBQX on (2R,6R)-HNK-induced changes in EEG 
oscillations, mice were acclimated to the behavioural room 1.5-2 hours prior to recordings. 
Baseline (30 min) recordings were followed by an i.p. injection of either saline or NBQX 
(10 mg/kg) and 30 min later mice received an injection (i.p.) of (2R,6R)-HNK (10 mg/kg) 
and recordings continued for 60 min post-injection.
 In Vivo Data Analysis—EEGs were analysed using custom-written MATLAB scripts 
(Version 2012a, Mathworks, MA) and the mtspecgramc routine in the Chronux Toolbox 
(http://chronux.org 39). Oscillation power in each bandwidth (delta=1–3 Hz; theta=4–7 Hz; 
alpha=8–12 Hz; beta=13–29 Hz; gamma=30–80 Hz) was computed in 10-min bins from 
spectrograms for each animal.
 Field recordings
Removal of the rat brains, as well as dissection of the hippocampi were performed in ice-
cold artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) bubbled with 95% O2/5% CO2. The ACSF 
contained in mM: 124 NaCl, 3 KCl, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 1.5 MgCl2, 2.5 CaCl2, 26 NaHCO3, and 
10 glucose. Hippocampal slices were cut at 400 μm using a vibratome and kept in a holding 
chamber at the interface of ACSF and humidified 95% O2/5% CO2 for at least 1 hour. For 
the field excitatory postsynaptic potentials (fEPSPs), slices were transferred to a 
submersion-type recording chamber and perfused with ACSF (1-2 ml/min; room 
temperature). Picrotoxin (0.1 mM), CGP52432 (2 μM) and APV (80 μM) were added to 
block GABAA, GABAB and NMDA receptors respectively. Concentric bipolar tungsten 
electrodes were placed in stratum radiatum to stimulate the Schaffer collateral (SC) 
afferents. Extracellular recording pipettes were filled with ACSF (3-5 MΩ) and placed in 
stratum radiatum of area CA1. Field potentials were evoked by monophasic stimulation (100 
μs duration) at 0.1 Hz. The stimulus intensity was set at 150% of threshold intensity, 
resulting in fEPSPs amplitude of 0.1 – 0.3 mV. A stable baseline was recorded for at least 10 
Zanos et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 min. Vehicle and (2R,6R)-HNK were applied by perfusion over a period of 1 hour followed 
by washout using ACSF. For AMPA receptor-mediated responses, peak fEPSP amplitudes 
and slopes, measured over a window of 1-4 msec following the rising phase of the response, 
are reported as % change from baseline. DNQX (50 μM) was bath-applied to ensure AMPA-
mediated responses. Experiments were performed and analysed blind to treatment groups, 
using pCLAMP software (Molecular Devices, Sunnylvale, CA, USA).
 Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings
Rats were euthanised by CO2 asphyxiation followed by decapitation. Removal of the brains, 
as well as dissection and slicing of the hippocampi were performed in an ice-cold solution 
consisting of a mixture of equal parts of regular ACSF and sucrose-containing ACSF. ACSF 
was composed of (in mM): 125 NaCl, 26 NaHCO3, 2.5 KCl, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 2 CaCl2, 1 
MgCl2, and 25 glucose. Sucrose-containing ACSF was composed of (in mM): 230 sucrose, 
2.5 KCl, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 26 NaHCO3, 0.5 CaCl2, 10 MgSO4, and 10 glucose. Hippocampal 
slices of 300-μm thickness were cut using a vibratome (Leica VT1000S; Leica 
Microsystems Inc., Bannockburn, IL) and transferred to an immersion chamber containing 
regular ACSF that was continuously bubbled with 95% O2/5% CO2 and maintained in a 
water bath at 30°C.
At the time of recordings, hippocampal slices were transferred to a 1-ml recording chamber, 
where they were superfused at 2 ml/min with ACSF that was continuously bubbled with 
95% O2/5% CO2. In all experiments, ACSF used to superfuse the slices contained the 
muscarinic antagonist atropine (0.5 μM) and the GABAA receptor antagonist picrotoxin (50 
μM). Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings were obtained from the soma of CA1 stratum 
radiatum interneurons in hippocampal slices according to standard patch-clamp techniques 
using an EPC9 amplifier (HEKA Elektronik, Lambrecht, Germany). The signals were 
filtered at 3 kHz and analysed using pCLAMP 10.3 or WinEDR v3.2.6 (University of 
Strathclyde, Glasgow, Scotland). The patch-clamp pipettes were pulled from a borosilicate 
glass capillary (1.2-mm OD) and had resistances between 3 and 5 MΩ when filled with 
internal solution. The internal pipette solution contained (in mM): 10 ethylene-glycol-bis(β-
amino-ethylether)-N-N’-tetraacetic acid, 10 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic 
acid, 130 Cs-methane sulfonate, 10 CsCl, 2 MgCl2, 5 lidocaine N-ethyl bromide, and 0.5% 
biocytin (pH adjusted to 7.3 with 340 mOsm CsOH). A specially adapted U-tube developed 
in the Albuquerque laboratory was used to apply NMDA (50 μM) to the neurons for the 
NMDA-evoked current experiments. NMDA-evoked currents and spontaneous AMPA-
mediated excitatory postsynaptic currents (sEPSCs) were recorded at −40 mV and 60 mV 
respectively. A single neuron was studied in each slice. All experiments were carried out at 
room temperature (20-22°C). The peak amplitude of NMDA-evoked currents was analysed 
using the pCLAMP v10.3 software, with baseline determined as the mean value obtained 
prior to drug application and the final (16 min) washout time point. Frequency and peak 
amplitude of AMPA sEPSCs were analysed using WinEDR v3.2.6.
 Statistical analyses
Required samples sizes were estimated based upon our past experience performing similar 
experiments. Experimentation and analysis were performed in a manner blind to treatment 
Zanos et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 assignments in all experiments with the exception of the whole-cell patch-clamp recordings 
and intravenous drug self-administration. For all blinded experiments, mice were randomly 
assigned to treatment groups. Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 
software v6. By pre-established criteria, values greater than 2 ± S.D. from individual group 
means were excluded from the analyses. All statistical tests were two-tailed, and 
significance was assigned at p < 0.05. Normality and equal variances between group samples 
were assessed using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov and Brown-Forsythe tests respectively. When 
normality and equal variance between sample groups was achieved, ANOVAs were followed 
by a Holm-Šídák post-hoc comparison when significance was reached, and significant 
results are indicated with asterisks in the Figures. As a secondary analysis, pairwise 
comparisons at each equivalent dose were performed followed by multiple comparison 
corrections, where appropriate. Where normality or equal variance of samples failed, non-
parametric one-way ANOVA’s (Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA on ranks or Friedman 
repeated measures one-way ANOVA on ranks) were performed, followed by Dunn’s 
correction. For assessment of the novelty-suppressed feeding results, Kaplan-Meier survival 
analysis was used followed by the Mantel-Cox log-rank test. The sample sizes, specific 
statistical tests used, and the main effects of our statistical analyses for each experiment are 
reported in Supplementary Information Table 1.
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Ketamine’s metabolic transformations in vivo
Ketamine is metabolised in vivo via P450 enzymatic transformations. (i) (R,S)-Ketamine 
(KET) is selectively demethylated to give (R,S)-norketamine (norKET). (ii) NorKET can be 
then dehydrogenated to give (R,S)-dehydronorketamine (DHNK). (iii) Alternatively, 
norKET can be hydroxylated to give the hydroxynorketamines (HNKs). (iv) (R,S)-KET can 
also be hydroxylated at the 6- position to give either the E-6-hydroxyketamine ((2S,6R;2R,
6S)-HK)) or Z-6-hydroxyketamine ((2S,6S;2R,6R)-HK)). (v) Demethylation of (2S,6R;2R,
6S)-HK yields the production of (2S,6R;2R,6S)-hydroxynorketamine (HNK). (vi) 
Demethylation of (2S,6S;2R,6R)-HK further gives (2S,6S;2R,6R)-hydroxynorketamine 
(HNK).
Zanos et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 2. Circulating levels of ketamine and its metabolites following i.p. 
administration in mice
a, Plasma and b, brain levels of ketamine (KET) and its metabolites following 
administration of (R,S)-KET (10 mg/kg) in mice. (c-d) Brain levels of c, KET, d, 
norketamine (norKET) and e, hydroxynorketamine (HNK) following administration of (S)- 
and (R)-KET. f, Chemical structure of (R,S)-6,6-dideuteroketamine ((R,S)-d2-KET), which 
g, displaces [3H]-MK-801 binding with a similar affinity to (R,S)-KET ((R,S)-KET: 
Zanos et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Ki=799nM (R,S)-d2-KET: Ki=883nM) (statistical analyses and n numbers see 
Supplementary Information Table 1).
Extended Data Figure 3. Additional social defeat stress data
a, Chronic social defeat stress and social interaction/avoidance test timeline. (b-c), 
Administration of (R,S)-ketamine (KET) or MK-801did not affect b, locomotor activity or c, 
total number of compartmental crosses in the social interaction apparatus. Data are means ± 
S.E.M. ***p<0.001. SAL, saline (statistical analyses and n numbers see Supplementary 
Information Table 1).
Zanos et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 4. Locomotor effects of (R,S)-ketamine and (R,S)-6,6-dideuteroketamine
After recording baseline activity for 60 min, mice received drug (marked by a vertical 
dashed line) and locomotor activity was monitored for another 1 hour. (a,b), Administration 
of (R,S)-KET (10 mg/kg), induced hyper-locomotor responses equally in both male and 
female mice. (c,d), (R,S)-ketamine (KET) and (R,S)-6,6-dideuteroketamine ((R,S)-d2-KET) 
were equally potent in inducing a hyper-locomotor response at the dose of 10 mg/kg. Data 
are means ± S.E.M. *p<0.05, **p<0.01. SAL, saline (statistical analyses and n numbers see 
Supplementary Information Table 1).
Zanos et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 5. Acute and sustained antidepressant and anti-anhedonic effects of (2R,
6R)- and (2S,6S)-hydroxynorketamine
a, A single injection of (2R,6R)-HNK resulted in dose-dependent antidepressant-like 
responses in the learned helplessness test at the doses of 5-75 mg/kg. b, A single injection of 
(2S,6S)-hydroxynorketamine (HNK) induced antidepressant-like effects in the learned 
helplessness test at the dose of 75 mg/kg. c, Administration of (2R,6R)-HNK induced dose-
dependent antidepressant effects in the 1- and 24-hour forced-swim test. d, Administration 
of (2S,6S)-HNK at the dose of 25 mg/kg induced antidepressant effects in the 1- and 24-
hour forced-swim test. e, Despite the greater antidepressant efficacy of (2R,6R)-HNK, 
administration of (2S,6S)-HNK (HNK) results in higher brain hydroxynorketamine levels 
compared to (2R,6R)-HNK. f, (2R,6R)-HNK manifested dose-dependent antidepressant-like 
effects in the novelty-suppressed feeding test. g, Similar to (R,S)-ketamine (KET), the 
antidepressant-like effects of (2R,6R)-HNK in the forced-swim test persisted for at least 3 
days post-treatment. h, A single administration of (2R,6R)-HNK reversed chronic 
corticosterone-induced decreases in sucrose preference. i, A single administration of (2R,
6R)-HNK reversed chronic corticosterone-induced decrease in female urine sniffing 
preference, specifically in mice that developed an anhedonic phenotype. Administration of 
(2R,6R)-HNK was not associated with changes in j, locomotor activity or k, total 
Zanos et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 compartmental crosses in the social interaction test following chronic social defeat stress. 
Data are means ± S.E.M. *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001. SAL, saline (statistical analyses 
and n numbers see Supplementary Information Table 1).
Extended Data Figure 6. (2R,6R)-hydroxynorketamine rapidly increases the frequency and 
amplitude of AMPA receptor spontaneous excitatory postsynaptic currents in the hippocampus
a, Representative traces of spontaneous excitatory postsynaptic currents (sEPSCs) mediated 
via AMPA receptors during baseline (before) and 20 min following drug administration 
(after) in b, example CA1 stratum radiatum interneuron recorded from a rat hippocampal 
slice. (c-j) Twenty-min exposure of (e,i), (2R,6R)-hydroxynorketamine (HNK), but not (c,g), 
(R,S)-ketamine (KET) or (d,h), (2S,6S)-HNK increased AMPA sEPSCs frequency and 
amplitude compared to baseline. Data are means ± S.E.M. *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001 
Zanos et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (statistical analyses and n numbers see Supplementary Information Table 1). Abbreviations: 
FST, forced-swim test; NBQX, 2,3-dihydroxy-6-nitro-7-sulfamoyl-benzo[f]quinoxaline-2,3-
dione; SAL, saline; SLM, stratum lacunosum-moleculare; SO, stratum oriens; SP, stratum 
pyramidale; SR, stratum radiatum.
Extended Data Figure 7. Administration of the AMPA receptor antagonist, NBQX, prevents (2R,
6R)-HNK-induced increases in gamma oscillations in vivo
a, Administration of (R,S)-ketamine (KET), but not (2R,6R)-hydroxynorketamine (HNK), 
increased locomotor home-cage activity of mice. Neither (R,S)-KET, nor (2R,6R)-HNK 
altered cortical b, alpha, c, beta, d, delta or e, theta oscillations in vivo. (f-k) Pre-treatment 
with the AMPA receptor antagonist, NBQX, did not change the f, locomotor activity, g, 
alpha, h, beta, j, delta or k, theta oscillations, but it i, prevented (2R,6R)-HNK-induced 
Zanos et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 increases of gamma oscillations in vivo. Data are means ± S.E.M. *p<0.05, **p<0.01 
(statistical analyses and n numbers see Supplementary Information Table 1). Abbreviations: 
NBQX, 2,3-dihydroxy-6-nitro-7-sulfamoyl-benzo[f]quinoxaline-2,3-dione; SAL, saline.
Extended Data Figure 8. Effects of (2R,6R)-hydroxynorketamine on synaptoneurosome protein 
and protein phosphorylation levels
A single administration of (R,S)-ketamine (KET, 10 mg/kg) or (2R,6R)-hydroxynorketamine 
(HNK, 10 mg/kg) (a,b), did not alter levels of mTOR or phosphorylated mTOR 1- or 24-
hours post-injection in the hippocampus of mice. (b-i), Administration of (R,S)-KET or (2R,
6R)-HNK did not alter levels of (c,d), mTOR/phosphorylated mTOR, (e,f), eEF2/
phosphorylated eEF2, (g,h), proBDNF/mBDNF, or (i,j), GluA1/GluA2 in the prefrontal 
cortex of mice. The values for the phosphorylated forms of proteins were normalised to 
phosphorylation-independent levels of the same protein. Phosphorylation-independent levels 
of proteins were normalised to GAPDH. Data are means ± S.E.M, and was normalised to the 
saline-treated control group for each protein. Images are cropped; see Supplementary Fig. 1 
for complete blot images *p<0.05 (statistical analyses and n numbers see Supplementary 
Information Table 1). Abbreviations: eEF2, eukaryotic translation elongation factor 2; 
GAPDH, Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase; mBDNF, mature brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; proBDNF, pro-brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor; SAL, saline.
Zanos et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 9. (2R,6R)-hydroxynorketamine administration does not alter startle 
amplitude, self-administration drug intake or drug discrimination response rate
a, Startle amplitude as measured in the pre-pulse inhibition task was not affected by 
administration of (R,S)-ketamine (KET) or (2R,6R)-hydroxynorketamine (HNK). (b,c), 
Response rate of overall lever pressing per sec in the drug discrimination paradigm was not 
changed by administration of b, (R,S)-KET, (2R,6R)-HNK or c, phencyclidine (PCP). d, 
Unlike ketamine, (2R,6R)-HNK did not alter drug intake in the self-administration task in 
mice. Data are means ± S.E.M. *p<0.05 (statistical analyses and n numbers see 
Supplementary Information Table 1). SAL, saline.
 Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Zanos et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  Acknowledgements
We thank Asaf Keller (University of Maryland, Baltimore) for his assistance with the EEG experiments, Mary Kay 
Lobo (University of Maryland, Baltimore) for assistance with the social defeat experiments, Bhagavathy Alkondon 
(University of Maryland, Baltimore) for the rat hippocampal slice preparation and biocytin processing, Victoria 
Meadows and Sam Krimmel (both University of Maryland, Baltimore) for assistance with behavioural experiments 
and manuscript review, Edna Pereira (University of Maryland, Baltimore) for critical comments on the manuscript 
and Figures, David Luckenbaugh (NIMH Intramural Research Program) for assistance with statistical analysis, and 
Curtis Moore (University of California, San Diego) for the small molecule X-ray crystallography. Research was 
supported by NIMH grants MH099345 and MH107615 to TDG and MH086828 to SMT, and the NIA (RM, IWW), 
NIMH (CAZ), and NCATS (CJT) NIH intramural research programs. Receptor binding profiles, Ki determinations, 
and functional assays were supported by the NIMH Psychoactive Drug Screening Program, Contract # 
HHSN-271-2008-025C, to Bryan L. Roth in conjunction with Ms. Jamie Driscoll (NIMH, Bethesda, MD, USA). 
Initial synthesis of the ketamine metabolites used in this study was supported by NIA Contract 
#HHSN271201000008I to IWW.
References
1. Kessler RC, et al. The epidemiology of major depressive disorder: results from the National 
Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R). JAMA. 2003; 289:3095–3105. [PubMed: 12813115] 
2. Trivedi MH, et al. Evaluation of outcomes with citalopram for depression using measurement-based 
care in STAR*D: implications for clinical practice. Am J Psychiatry. 2006; 163:28–40. [PubMed: 
16390886] 
3. Rush AJ, et al. Acute and longer-term outcomes in depressed outpatients requiring one or several 
treatment steps: a STAR*D report. Am J Psychiatry. 2006; 163:1905–1917. [PubMed: 17074942] 
4. Zarate CA Jr. et al. A randomized trial of an N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonist in treatment-resistant 
major depression. Archives of general psychiatry. 2006; 63:856–864. [PubMed: 16894061] 
5. Berman RM, et al. Antidepressant effects of ketamine in depressed patients. Biol Psychiatry. 2000; 
47:351–354. [PubMed: 10686270] 
6. Diazgranados N, et al. A randomized add-on trial of an N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonist in 
treatment-resistant bipolar depression. Archives of general psychiatry. 2010; 67:793–802. [PubMed: 
20679587] 
7. Lally N, et al. Anti-anhedonic effect of ketamine and its neural correlates in treatment-resistant 
bipolar depression. Transl Psychiatry. 2014; 4:e469. [PubMed: 25313512] 
8. Murrough JW, et al. Antidepressant efficacy of ketamine in treatment-resistant major depression: a 
two-site randomized controlled trial. Am J Psychiatry. 2013; 170:1134–1142. [PubMed: 23982301] 
9. Morgan CJ, Curran HV. Ketamine use: a review. Addiction. 2012; 107:27–38. [PubMed: 21777321] 
10. Newport DJ, et al. Ketamine and Other NMDA Antagonists: Early Clinical Trials and Possible 
Mechanisms in Depression. American Journal of Psychiatry. 2015; 172:950–966. [PubMed: 
26423481] 
11. Leung LY, Baillie TA. Comparative pharmacology in the rat of ketamine and its two principal 
metabolites, norketamine and (Z)-6-hydroxynorketamine. J Med Chem. 1986; 29:2396–2399. 
[PubMed: 3783598] 
12. Moaddel R, et al. Sub-anesthetic concentrations of (R,S)-ketamine metabolites inhibit 
acetylcholine-evoked currents in alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Eur J Pharmacol. 2013; 
698:228–234. [PubMed: 23183107] 
13. Ebert B, Mikkelsen S, Thorkildsen C, Borgbjerg FM. Norketamine, the main metabolite of 
ketamine, is a non-competitive NMDA receptor antagonist in the rat cortex and spinal cord. Eur J 
Pharmacol. 1997; 333:99–104. [PubMed: 9311667] 
14. Yang C, et al. R-ketamine: a rapid-onset and sustained antidepressant without psychotomimetic 
side effects. Transl Psychiatry. 2015; 5:e632. [PubMed: 26327690] 
15. Maeng S, et al. Cellular mechanisms underlying the antidepressant effects of ketamine: role of 
alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid receptors. Biol Psychiatry. 2008; 
63:349–352. [PubMed: 17643398] 
16. Autry AE, et al. NMDA receptor blockade at rest triggers rapid behavioural antidepressant 
responses. Nature. 2011; 475:91–95. [PubMed: 21677641] 
Zanos et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 17. Desta Z, et al. Stereoselective and regiospecific hydroxylation of ketamine and norketamine. 
Xenobiotica. 2012; 42:1076–1087. [PubMed: 22612619] 
18. Adams JD Jr. Baillie TA, Trevor AJ, Castagnoli N Jr. Studies on the biotransformation of ketamine. 
1-Identification of metabolites produced in vitro from rat liver microsomal preparations. Biomed 
Mass Spectrom. 1981; 8:527–538. [PubMed: 7317567] 
19. Zarate CA Jr. et al. Relationship of ketamine's plasma metabolites with response, diagnosis, and 
side effects in major depression. Biol Psychiatry. 2012; 72:331–338. [PubMed: 22516044] 
20. Carrier N, Kabbaj M. Sex differences in the antidepressant-like effects of ketamine. 
Neuropharmacology. 2013; 70:27–34. [PubMed: 23337256] 
21. Franceschelli A, Sens J, Herchick S, Thelen C, Pitychoutis PM. Sex differences in the rapid and the 
sustained antidepressant-like effects of ketamine in stress-naive and "depressed" mice exposed to 
chronic mild stress. Neuroscience. 2015; 290:49–60. [PubMed: 25595985] 
22. Irifune M, Shimizu T, Nomoto M, Fukuda T. Involvement of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) 
receptors in noncompetitive NMDA receptor antagonist-induced hyperlocomotion in mice. 
Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1995; 51:291–296. [PubMed: 7667342] 
23. Gant TG. Using deuterium in drug discovery: leaving the label in the drug. J Med Chem. 2014; 
57:3595–3611. [PubMed: 24294889] 
24. Duman RS, Aghajanian GK, Sanacora G, Krystal JH. Synaptic plasticity and depression: new 
insights from stress and rapid-acting antidepressants. Nat Med. 2016; 22:238–249. [PubMed: 
26937618] 
25. Li N, et al. mTOR-dependent synapse formation underlies the rapid antidepressant effects of 
NMDA antagonists. Science. 2010; 329:959–964. [PubMed: 20724638] 
26. Koike H, Iijima M, Chaki S. Involvement of AMPA receptor in both the rapid and sustained 
antidepressant-like effects of ketamine in animal models of depression. Behav Brain Res. 2011; 
224:107–111. [PubMed: 21669235] 
27. Koike H, Chaki S. Requirement of AMPA receptor stimulation for the sustained antidepressant 
activity of ketamine and LY341495 during the forced swim test in rats. Behav Brain Res. 2014; 
271:111–115. [PubMed: 24909673] 
28. Whittington MA, Traub RD, Kopell N, Ermentrout B, Buhl EH. Inhibition-based rhythms: 
experimental and mathematical observations on network dynamics. Int J Psychophysiol. 2000; 
38:315–336. [PubMed: 11102670] 
29. Cunningham MO, Davies CH, Buhl EH, Kopell N, Whittington MA. Gamma oscillations induced 
by kainate receptor activation in the entorhinal cortex in vitro. J Neurosci. 2003; 23:9761–9769. 
[PubMed: 14586003] 
30. Muthukumaraswamy SD, et al. Evidence that Subanesthetic Doses of Ketamine Cause Sustained 
Disruptions of NMDA and AMPA-Mediated Frontoparietal Connectivity in Humans. J Neurosci. 
2015; 35:11694–11706. [PubMed: 26290246] 
31. Lepack AE, Fuchikami M, Dwyer JM, Banasr M, Duman RS. BDNF release is required for the 
behavioral actions of ketamine. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2015:18.
32. De Vry J, Jentzsch KR. Role of the NMDA receptor NR2B subunit in the discriminative stimulus 
effects of ketamine. Behav Pharmacol. 2003; 14:229–235. [PubMed: 12799525] 
33. Moaddel R, et al. The distribution and clearance of (2S,6S)-hydroxynorketamine, an active 
ketamine metabolite, in Wistar rats. Pharmacol Res Perspect. 2015; 3:e00157. [PubMed: 
26171236] 
References (Methods)
34. Donahue RJ, Muschamp JW, Russo SJ, Nestler EJ, Carlezon WA Jr. Effects of striatal DeltaFosB 
overexpression and ketamine on social defeat stress-induced anhedonia in mice. Biol Psychiatry. 
2014; 76:550–558. [PubMed: 24495460] 
35. Malkesman O, et al. The female urine sniffing test: a novel approach for assessing reward-seeking 
behavior in rodents. Biol Psychiatry. 2010; 67:864–871. [PubMed: 20034613] 
Zanos et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 36. Zanos P, et al. The Prodrug 4-Chlorokynurenine Causes Ketamine-Like Antidepressant Effects, but 
Not Side Effects, by NMDA/GlycineB-Site Inhibition. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2015; 355:76–85. 
[PubMed: 26265321] 
37. Chiu J, et al. Chronic ethanol exposure alters MK-801 binding sites in the cerebral cortex of the 
near-term fetal guinea pig. Alcohol. 1999; 17:215–221. [PubMed: 10231169] 
38. Raver SM, Haughwout SP, Keller A. Adolescent cannabinoid exposure permanently suppresses 
cortical oscillations in adult mice. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2013; 38:2338–2347. [PubMed: 
23822952] 
39. Bokil H, Andrews P, Kulkarni JE, Mehta S, Mitra PP. Chronux: a platform for analyzing neural 
signals. J Neurosci Methods. 2010; 192:146–151. [PubMed: 20637804] 
Zanos et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. NMDA receptor inhibition does not explain the antidepressant actions of ketamine
Antidepressant-like responses of a, (R,S)-ketamine (KET) and desipramine (DSP) in the 
forced-swim test 1- and 24-hours post-treatment. (b-d) Compared to (S)-KET, (R)-KET 
showed greater and longer-lasting antidepressant-like effects in the b, forced-swim test, c, 
novelty-suppressed feeding and d, learned helplessness paradigms. (e-g), The alternative 
NMDAR antagonist MK-801 did not elicit e, 24-hour antidepressant actions in the forced-
swim test and (f,g) did not reverse social avoidance induced by chronic social defeat stress. 
Data are means ± S.E.M. *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001 (statistical analyses and n 
numbers see Supplementary Information Table 1).
Zanos et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Metabolism of ketamine to (2R,6R)-HNK is necessary and sufficient to exert ketamine-
related antidepressant actions
a, Simplified diagram of (R,S)-KET’s metabolism. b, Greater antidepressant-like actions of 
ketamine in female mice compared to males are associated with (c-e), higher brain levels of 
e, (2S,6S;2R,6R)-hydroxynorketamine (HNK), but not c, KET, or d, nor-KET. (f-h), Brain 
levels of f, KET, g, nor-KET and h, (2S,6S;2R,6R)-HNK following administration of (R,S)-
KET and 6,6-dideuteroketamine ((R,S)-d2-KET). (i-j), Effects of (R,S)-KET and (R,S)-d2-
KET in the i, 1- and 24-hours forced-swim and the j, learned helplessness tests. (k-l), 
Compared to (2S,6S)-HNK, (2R,6R)-HNK manifested greater potency and longer-lasting 
antidepressant-like effects in the k, forced-swim test and l, learned helplessness paradigms. 
m, (2R,6R)-HNK reversed chronic social defeat-induced social interaction deficits. Data are 
means ± S.E.M. *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001 (statistical analyses and n numbers see 
Supplementary Information Table 1).
Zanos et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Activation of AMPA receptors is necessary for the acute antidepressant effects of (2R,
6R)-HNK
a, (2R,6R)-hydroxynorketamine (HNK) does not displace [3H]-MK-801 binding. (b-c), 
(R,S)-ketamine inhibited, but (2S,6S)-HNK and (2R,6R)-HNK did not inhibit b, currents 
evoked by application of NMDA to stratum radiatum interneurons in rat hippocampal slices, 
quantified as c, percent inhibition (↓: 30-sec pulse). (d-e), Normalised d, fEPSP slope and e, 
amplitude from stimulation of the Schaffer collateral pathway in rat hippocampal slices. f, 
Representative field-potential traces in the same hippocampal slice before (baseline) and 60 
min after application of (2R,6R)-HNK. (g-h), Pre-treatment with the AMPA receptor 
inhibitor NBQX 10 minutes prior to (R,S)-ketamine (KET) and (2R,6R)-HNK prevented 
their antidepressant-like actions in the g, 1-hour or h, 24-hours forced-swim test. i, 
Representative EEG spectrograms for 10-min prior (baseline) and 1-hour after 
administration of (R,S)-ketamine or (2R,6R)-HNK (indicated by a dashed line). j, 
Normalised gamma power changes following administration of (R,S)-KET, (2R,6R)-HNK, 
Zanos et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 or vehicle. Data are means ± S.E.M. *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001(statistical analyses and 
n numbers see Supplementary Information Table 1).
Zanos et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Activation of AMPA receptors is required for the sustained antidepressant effects of 
(2R,6R)-HNK
(a-h) Protein and protein phosphorylation levels from hippocampal synaptoneurosomes. 
(a,b) A single administration of (R,S)-ketamine (KET) or (2R,6R)-hydroxynorketamine 
(HNK) decreased phosphorylation of eEF2, a, 1 hour and b, 24 hours post-injection. (c,d), 
While administration of (2R,6R)-HNK or (R,S)-KET did not alter the levels of proBDNF or 
mBDNF c, 1 hour post-injection, it increased mBDNF levels. d, 24 hours post-treatment. 
(e,f), (R,S)-KET and (2R,6R)-HNK did not change levels of GluA1 and GluA2 at e, 1-hour 
but did f, increase at 24-hours post-treatment. (g,h), Administration of the AMPA receptor 
inhibitor NBQX, 30 min prior to the 24-hour forced-swim test prevented the antidepressant 
effects of both (R,S)-KET and (2R,6R)-HNK administered 23.5 hours prior to NBQX. Data 
are means ± S.E.M. Images cropped; see Supplementary Fig. 1 for complete blot images. 
*p<0.05, **, p<0.01, ***p<0.001 (statistical analyses and n numbers see Supplementary 
Information Table 1). Abbreviations: : eEF2, eukaryotic translation elongation factor 2; FST, 
forced-swim test; GAPDH, Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase; mBDNF, mature 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor; NBQX, 2,3-dihydroxy-6-nitro-7-sulfamoyl-
benzo[f]quinoxaline-2,3-dione; proBDNF, pro-brain-derived neurotrophic factor; SAL, 
saline.
Zanos et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. (2R,6R)-HNK lacks ketamine-related side effects
(a,b) After recording baseline activity for 1 hour, mice received drug (dashed line) and 
locomotor activity was monitored for 1 hour. a, Administration of (2S,6S)-
hydroxynorketamine (HNK) dose-dependently changed locomotor activity, while 
administration of b, (2R,6R)-HNK did not. c, (2S,6S)-HNK, but not d, (2R,6R)-HNK, 
induced motor in-coordination in the rotarod. Unlike (R,S)-KET, (2R,6R)-HNK 
administration did not induce e, pre-pulse inhibition deficits, (f,g), (R,S)-KET-associated 
discriminative stimulus, or h, self-administration. Data are means ± S.E.M. *p<0.05, **, 
p<0.01, ***p<0.001, KET vs saline (SAL); for panel c, * (R,S)-KET, # (2S,6S)-HNK 
(statistical analyses and n numbers see Supplementary Information Table 1).
Zanos et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
