 C O M P U T A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E
Individualizing liver transplant immunosuppression
using a phenotypic personalized medicine platform
Ali Zarrinpar,1,2*† Dong-Keun Lee,3* Aleidy Silva,4* Nakul Datta,1 Theodore Kee,5 Calvin Eriksen,1
Keri Weigle,1 Vatche Agopian,1,2 Fady Kaldas,1 Douglas Farmer,1 Sean E. Wang,6
Ronald Busuttil,1,2 Chih-Ming Ho,2,4,5† Dean Ho2,3,5,7†
Posttransplant immunosuppressive drugs such as tacrolimus have narrow therapeutic ranges. Inter- and intra-
individual variability in dosing requirements conventionally use physician-guided titrated drug administration,
which results in frequent deviations from the target trough ranges, particularly during the critical postoperative
phase. There is a clear need for personalized management of posttransplant regimens to prevent adverse events
and allow the patient to be discharged sooner. We have developed the parabolic personalized dosing (PPD) plat-
form, which is a surface represented by a second-order algebraic equation with experimentally determined coeffi-
cients of the equation being unique to each patient. PPD uses clinical data, including blood concentrations of
tacrolimus—the primary phenotypic readout for immunosuppression efficacy—to calibrate these coefficients and
pinpoint the optimal doses that result in the desired patient-specific response. In this pilot randomized controlled
trial, we compared four transplant patients prospectively treated with tacrolimus using PPD with four control pa-
tients treated according to the standard of care (physician guidance). Using phenotype to personalize tacrolimus
dosing, PPD effectively managed patients by keeping tacrolimus blood trough levels within the target ranges. In a
retrospective analysis of the control patients, PPD-optimized prednisone and tacrolimus dosing improved tacrolimus
trough-level management and minimized the need to recalibrate dosing after regimen changes. PPD is inde-
pendent of disease mechanism and is agnostic of indication and could therefore apply beyond transplant medicine
to dosing for cancer, infectious diseases, and cardiovascular medicine, where patient response is variable and re-
quires careful adjustments through optimized inputs.
INTRODUCTION
Posttransplant survival has greatly improved in part because of less
toxic immunosuppression, improved drug monitoring protocols, and
refining of target therapeutic ranges of these immunosuppressant drugs
(1, 2). Transplant patients still need multiple therapeutic and prophy-
lactic medications, with distinct pharmacologic and metabolic profiles
and numerous interactions. Differences in absorption, metabolism,
genotype, and comorbidities and in addition to anatomic and physi-
ologic variations alter pharmacokinetics drastically (3–5).
In the absence of a unifying measure of immunosuppression, ther-
apeutic drug monitoring serves as a surrogate of immunosuppression.
However, even this simple measure fluctuates widely. Induction or in-
hibition of metabolic and transport enzymes, among other interactions,
results in highly unpredictable whole-blood drug concentrations with
inter- and intraindividual fluctuations that require close monitoring
and dose adjustment (6, 7). For example, tacrolimus, a mainstay of
solid organ transplantation, has a narrow therapeutic window and
wide pharmacokinetic variability (8). Underdosing of tacrolimus
may result in underimmunosuppression and acute rejection. Overdos-
ing puts patients at risk of considerable neuro- and nephrotoxicity (9).
Tacrolimus is a substrate of cytochrome P450 and P-glycoprotein,
both with genetically variable expression levels in liver and intestine.
These factors combine to yield very poor inter- and intraindividual
correlation between dosing and blood concentrations. In sum, dosing
is clinically challenging. The lack of a consistent relationship between
dose and blood concentration makes simple calculations of pharma-
cokinetic parameters invalid.
The standard of care is for a provider to adjust the dose of an im-
munosuppressant drug in response to a whole-blood trough con-
centration, making an educated guess about factors causing deviation
from the target range and the amount by which to adjust the dose in
response. These decisions are made largely on the basis of clinical expe-
rience, and patients frequently deviate from the target range, running
the alternate risks of toxicity or graft rejection. Models have been devel-
oped to predict tacrolimus pharmacokinetics in solid organ recipients
with multiple covariates and uncertainty regarding the importance of
each covariate. These include models based on population pharmaco-
kinetics (10), physiology-based pharmacokinetics (11, 12), genetics
(13, 14), and estimative forecasting (15, 16). Attempts to increase pre-
diction accuracy using these modeling approaches exclude complex
patients to prevent too many confounding effects upon disease-causing
mechanisms. These approaches have shown that drug combination per-
formance is dose-dependent and is largely influenced by drug in-
teractions. Although multidrug dose-modeling studies can examine
1Division of Liver and Pancreas Transplantation, Department of Surgery, David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
2Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 3Division of Oral Biology and Medicine and the Jane and
Jerry Weintraub Center for Reconstructive Biotechnology, School of Dentistry, Univer-
sity of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 4Department of
Mechanical Engineering, Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science,
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 5Department of
Bioengineering, Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science, University
of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 6Department of Biostatistics,
Fielding School of Public Health, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA
90095, USA. 7California NanoSystems Institute, University of California, Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author. E-mail: azarrinpar@mednet.ucla.edu (A.Z.); chihming@g.ucla.
edu (C.-M.H.); dean.ho@ucla.edu (D.H.)
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 April 2016
Vol 8 Issue 333 333ra49
1
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 the nonlinearity of drug-drug interactions (17–19), optimizing and
personalizing combination therapy by correlating input stimuli
(drug administration) directly with phenotype (efficacy) have not
yet been realized in the clinic.
We discovered that treatment efficacy for a given patient can be
related to drug dosing through a “response surface” represented by
a parabola; we called this mathematical phenotype–dose relationship
“parabolic personalized dosing” (PPD). PPD is a second-order alge-
braic equation based on coefficients specific to the application (in this
case, the patient) and initially unknown as treatment commences. This
approach adaptively individualizes an input on the basis of these spe-
cific coefficients. As a foundation for this clinical study, we have used
the PPD platform in vitro and in vivo preclinically for applications in
drug development (20–25). These studies showed that the parabolic
response can identify optimal drug administration conditions across
a broad spectrum of indications, from metabolic inhibitors to optimal
combinations of antiangiogenic medicines in cancer and stem cells.
We hypothesized that PPD could be extended to the clinic, specifically
in the context of posttransplant regimens, where patients respond var-
iably and a “one-size-fits-all” therapeutic paradigm is not desired.
According to most liver transplant immunosuppression proto-
cols, only the tacrolimus dose is adjusted on the basis of a patient’s
daily tacrolimus whole-blood trough concentration (or trough level).
Dosing of other immunosuppressants follows established protocols.
Patient-specific target ranges are based on clinical context, including
ethnicity, age, liver disease, disease severity, kidney function, comor-
bidities, concern for rejection, and use of other immunosuppressants.
Despite the multiple drugs coadministered with tacrolimus, PPD op-
timization of the single tacrolimus input ensures that the patient’s drug
levels are maintained in a target range. Patient-specific coefficients that
define the PPD are determined by calibrating the input doses to the
phenotypic outputs, which can include trough levels of drugs or bio-
markers as indicators of efficacy and safety.
In this pilot prospective randomized clinical study, PPD was used
to personalize tacrolimus administration to four liver transplant pa-
tients (PPD1 to PPD4) and was compared with four control patients
(C1 to C4) who received standard of care. Trough levels of tacrolimus
represented the phenotype that guided the PPD process. Patients treated
with PPD had significantly less variability in tacrolimus trough levels
compared with control patients with physician-guided dosing. In ad-
dition, retrospective PPD for control patients indicated the possibility
of better maintaining trough levels within the target range compared
to the standard of care that they received. This study therefore pro-
vides a clinical proof of principle and an early demonstration of fea-
sibility for posttransplant phenotypic personalized medicine (PPM).
RESULTS
Parabolic personalized dosing
A drug or drug combination represents an input administered to a pa-
tient. The patient then responds with phenotypic outputs, such as the
efficacy and/or toxicity of therapy. We have discovered that the drug
input and phenotypic output relationship is represented by a second-
order polynomial equation, that is, a parabolic surface (20–25). Here,
the trough level of tacrolimus was the “output”—which is measured rou-
tinely as part of any patient’s clinical care; the input was only a one-drug
dose, and three coefficients were determined using three consecutive
trough level data points (Fig. 1). Each patient response was character-
ized by a parabola. Barring any changes to the treatment protocol, this
parabola is a robust map that identifies drug doses (inputs) that ensure
that a patient will stay in a target tacrolimus range (phenotypic out-
put). In some cases, however, introducing new drugs or procedures
into the regimen, like antibiotics or hemodialysis, changes the patient’s
trough levels substantially. Establishing a new parabola, which we have
termed recalibration, can then identify the proper tacrolimus dose to
bring the trough levels back into the target range.
The PPD approach can be summarized as follows. A healthy pa-
tient is F(S), and a patient with disease is F(S′), where S represents the
patient’s normal network mechanisms and S′ the aberrant network
mechanisms (Eq. 1). The indicator of the patient’s physiological re-
sponse is the phenotype of interest that can be measured clinically,
such as trough level, tumor size, cell viability, or pathogen load. The
diseased patient phenotype includes the parameter C—the drug dose
and/or drug type (Eq. 1). Owing to the complexity of these mechanistic
networks, explicit forms of these functions—F(S), F(S′), and F(S′,C)—
are unknown. According to the Taylor expansion in mathematics,
F(S′,C) is related to F(S′) by the following expression:
FðS′;CÞ ¼ FðS′Þ þ x0 þ ∑xici þ ∑yiic2
i þ
∑zijcicj þ high‐order terms
ð1Þ
where xi is the patient response coefficient to drug i at concentration
ci, and zij is the patient response coefficient to the interaction of drug i
and drug j at their respective concentrations. Because the human body
responds to input in a nonlinear fashion with respect to drug i, yii repre-
sents a second-order response to the drug concentration ci. The values
of x0, xi, yii, and zij are experimentally determined by calibrating pheno-
typic outputs of a specific patient and the drug-dose inputs. Hence, the
optimized drug-dose combination is personalized to this specific patient.
We have previously demonstrated that the high-order terms are
much smaller than the first- and second-order terms (21, 25). There-
fore, by moving F(S′) to the left side of the equation and removing the
high-order terms, we arrive at the following Eq. 2, which is further
explained in movie S1:
RðCÞ ¼ FðS′;CÞ � FðS′Þ ¼ x0 þ∑xici þ ∑yiic2
i þ∑zijcicj
ð2Þ
The difference between the two unknown equations F(S′,C) and
F(S′) is the overall patient phenotypic response R(C) to treatment,
which can be approximated by a second-order algebraic equation of
drug concentrations alone, independent of the specific genomic and pro-
teomic mechanisms. Therefore, PPD is disease mechanism–independent
and disease indication–agnostic. Additionally, because experimental data
are needed to construct this response surface by calibrating the coeffi-
cients, PPD is not a model-based algorithm.
A simulated case study of PPD
We first simulated PPD to demonstrate the process (Fig. 1). In this
simulation, one drug, tacrolimus, was used to adjust the phenotypic
output, the tacrolimus trough level. The administered drug dose, or
input, is represented by c1. Each data point, or indicator of phenotype,
was represented by a daily trough level. On days 1, 2, and 3, the trough
levels were 2, 1, and 11 ng/ml, respectively, and were plotted against
the tacrolimus dose (mg) given. The phenotypic response (Eq. 2) was
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 April 2016
Vol 8 Issue 333 333ra49
2
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 a parabola represented by R(C) = 7 − 7c1 + 2c1
2 (Fig. 1A). Assuming
no regimen changes for the subsequent day (for example, no new
drugs administered, no hemodialysis, and changes in current drug do-
sages), according to the PPD equation above, the recommended dose
for day 4 would be 3.5 mg, predicting a trough level of 7 ng/ml, within
the target range (6 to 8 ng/ml) (Fig. 1A). In effect, this patient’s unique
set of response coefficients x0, x1, and y11 are 7, −7, and 2, respectively,
based on the individual PPD quadratic equation and were determined
exclusively from clinical data. The number of data points required to
determine the patient’s PPD equation is equal to the number of re-
sponse coefficients to be calibrated (Eq. 2 and movie S1).
Assuming no regimen changes, the parabola would allow accurate
dosing for several days, where the patient would continue with 3.5 mg.
However, in the event of a regimen change—for instance, antibiotics
administration, biliary drain capping, and prednisone dose change—
the patient’s response coefficients would be recalibrated by monitoring
the resulting change to the trough level; the parabola is shifted and
replotted to identify the new optimal drug dose (Fig. 1B). This could
be accomplished using trough levels from three additional days (days
5 to 7). The newly plotted parabola is represented by R(C) = 17.7 −
5.70c1 + 0.59c1
2, with all new coefficients. If no additional changes are
made to this patient’s regimen for the subsequent day, the recommended
Fig. 1. PPD process guiding tacrolimus dosing for liver transplant
patients. In this simulation, a patient after transplant was prescribed
tacrolimus and other medications. The patient’s PPD curve (blue in select
graphs) was calibrated using the trough levels from physician-guided
standard-of-care dosing on days D(1) to D(3). The PPD curve was used
to prospectively dose tacrolimus (red stars) to bring the patient’s trough
levels into the target range of 6 to 8 ng/ml (gray regions). The numbers
within the circles are the dosing days with the given tacrolimus doses
and the resulting trough levels. (A) Original PPD calibrated curve (blue)
using the trough levels from D(1) to D(3), with the recommended dose
for D(4) (red star). (B) Following regimen changes, the PPD curve was
recalibrated using the trough levels from three successive days after
the regimen changes. During PPD recalibration, tacrolimus doses for
the patient were preemptively selected on the basis of previous correla-
tions. The recalibrated PPD curve (red) using the trough levels from D(5)
to D(7) yielded D(8)’s recommended dose (red star). (C) 3D PPD tacrolimus
and prednisone surface calibrated using the patient’s tacrolimus doses,
prednisone doses, and trough levels from D(1) to D(11). Recommended
tacrolimus dose is identified on the surface as noted by the green
arrow.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 April 2016
Vol 8 Issue 333 333ra49
3
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 tacrolimus dose for day 8 would be 7.5 mg and would result in a trough
level of 7.5 ng/ml (Fig. 1B).
If a two-drug combination is administered, we can then use three-
dimensional (3D) PPD to optimize doses. In this simulated case, ad-
ministering six different dose combinations of two drugs produces six
coefficients (x0, x1, x2, y11, y22, and z12) (Eq. 2). The 3D PPD deter-
mines the recommended doses on day 8 as 7.5 mg of tacrolimus and
15 mg of prednisone, to achieve the tacrolimus trough level of 7.5 ng/ml,
within the target range (Fig. 1C). When the doses of two different
drugs, as opposed to one drug, are PPD-determined, more inputs (dif-
ferent dose combinations) comprehensively regulate the phenotypic
output. Also, when two-drug dose inputs are modulated, the need for
recalibration is minimized compared with using single-drug modulation
to optimize treatment outcomes.
PPD-assisted personalized immunosuppression
In the pilot study, for all eight patients, physician-guided standard-
of-care dosing was used for the first 10 days of tacrolimus dosing
after liver transplantation to avoid confounding effects from the clin-
ical protocol transitioning patients from methylprednisolone to pred-
nisone. For the PPD-assisted patients (PPD1 to PPD4), personalized
tacrolimus dosing started after these 10 days and was considered as dos-
ing day [D(1)]. Control patients continued to receive tacrolimus via phy-
sician guidance but also reset as day 1 [D(1)] when the trial started.
PPD patient 1. At the time of transplantation, PPD1 had a model
of end-stage liver disease (MELD) score of 40, which represents the high-
est acuity. MELD predicts patient mortality within 3 months without
transplantation, and its values range from 6 to 40. Drugs administered
to PPD1 included tacrolimus, prednisone, and mycophenolate mofetil
(MMF) (immunosuppressants); fluconazole and cotrimoxazole (anti-
fungal and antibiotic); and ganciclovir (antiviral). Hemodialysis was
performed multiple times during the treatment period. The tacrolimus
trough target range for this patient was from 6 to 8 ng/ml.
PPD was performed by plotting the trough levels 8.4, 5.3, and
4.5 ng/ml measured on D(−2) to D(0) (posttransplant tacrolimus dosing
days 7 to 9) against tacrolimus doses chosen by the physician. These
data resulted in a parabola corresponding to R(C) = 48.3 − 20.4c1 +
2.35c1
2 (Fig. 2A, blue). PPD recommended a dose of 7.5 mg for D(1),
but this did not result in a target trough level, likely owing to two simul-
taneous regimen changes—ciprofloxacin (400 to 0 mg) and capping
the biliary tube. PPD recalibration occurred after another regimen
change (hemodialysis from continuous to single-pass) on D(2). PPD
recommended the tacrolimus doses of 3.5, 3.75, 2, and 3 mg for D(2)
to D(5) to recalibrate the dosing. Although only three data points are
necessary for calibration, four data points [D(2) to D(5)] successfully
accounted for the multiple regimen changes on D(1) and D(2). The
recalibration process is represented by a shift (movie S1) from the blue
to the orange [R(C) = 30.0 − 21.4c1 + 4.39c1
2] parabolas in Fig. 2A.
The newly plotted orange parabola provided robust trough level con-
trol for 2 weeks at a steady tacrolimus dose of 3.25 mg. With antici-
pated ganciclovir dose changes on D(9) and D(12) for this patient,
PPD recommended an increased tacrolimus dose of 3.5 mg to mitigate
the resulting trough level deviation from the target range.
The time elapsed between the hemodialysis procedure and trough
level reading had a strong effect on trough levels, shown by the clustering
of D(6) to D(16) trough levels (Fig. 2A). Therefore, a correlation plot en-
abled preemptive tacrolimus dosing adjustments to prevent underdosing,
because hemodialysis typically resulted in substantially lower trough levels
than anticipated (Fig. 2B). This analysis indicated that the trough level
should be measured at least 10 hours after hemodialysis. The magnitude
of the impact of hemodialysis upon trough levels was patient-specific.
For PPD1, two regimen changes—hemodialysis and cotrimoxazole
dosing schedule—occurred on D(17) and D(18) (Fig. 2A). PPD recal-
ibration using D(19) to D(21) shifted the curve from the orange to
the red [R(C) = 13.8 − 4.7c1 + 0.6c1
2] parabolas in Fig. 2A. The pa-
tient’s trough levels converged toward and stayed within or near the
target range during the PPD treatment period until discharge from
the hospital on day 33 after transplant.
PPD patient 2. PPD2 had a MELD of 25 at time of transplant,
and initial target tacrolimus trough ranges were 7 to 9 ng/ml on D(−2)
and 8 to 10 ng/ml for D(−1) to D(5). The target range was later
changed to 9 to 11 ng/ml for D(6) to D(11) due to concerns of pos-
sible transplant rejection on the basis of elevated levels of liver enzymes
in the blood, signaling hepatocyte injury in the absence of signs of other
physiologic or anatomic causes. The patient’s posttransplant regimen
included tacrolimus, prednisone, MMF, fluconazole, ciprofloxacin,
cotrimoxazole, tenofovir, and ganciclovir (table S1). PPD2 did not re-
quire hemodialysis.
PPD was calibrated by plotting the trough levels 5.4, 6.3, and
7.7 ng/ml from D(−2) to D(0) against physician-determined tacrolimus
doses. These data resulted in a parabola corresponding to R(C) =
7.92 − 1.80c1 + 0.32c1
2 (Fig. 2C, blue). This parabola was used to iden-
tify tacrolimus doses for D(1) to D(3), which brought the trough levels
within the target range of 8 to 10 ng/ml. Several regimen changes
occurred on D(4), including a stepwise increase of MMF from 1000
to 2000 mg/day during D(4) to D(7). To compensate for the antici-
pated increase in the trough levels from the MMF dose increase, we
preemptively decreased the tacrolimus dose—per PPD recommendations—
from 5.5 mg on D(5) to 5 mg on D(6) to 4 mg on D(7); this was based
on a known correlation between MMF and tacrolimus for PPD2, not-
ed in table S4 (movie S2). Except for D(6), the trough levels from D(4)
to D(7) were close to or within the target range of 8 to 10 ng/ml and
9 to 11 ng/ml (Fig. 2C). PPD recalibration as a result of regimen
changes, using data from D(8) to D(10), created a new reference pa-
rabola, shifting from the blue to the red [R(C) = 18.8 − 6c1 + 0.8c1
2]
(Fig. 2C). The recalibrated PPD brought the D(11) trough level into
the target range. PPD2’s trough levels were near or within the target
range during the PPD period until the patient’s discharge from the
hospital on D(20).
PPD patient 3. PPD3 had a MELD of 9 at time of transplant and
a target trough range of 8 to 10 ng/ml. The patient’s posttransplant reg-
imen included tacrolimus, prednisone, MMF, fluconazole, cotrimoxazole,
ganciclovir, and valganciclovir (table S1). PPD3 did not require hemo-
dialysis. For this patient, a parabola corresponding to R(C) = 6.3 − 0.28c1 +
0.93c1
2 was constructed by plotting trough levels 6.4, 7.1, 7, 8.7, and
9.3 ng/ml from D(−2) to D(2) against physician-determined tacrolimus
dosages (Fig. 2D, blue). Owing to the repeated tacrolimus doses given,
five data points [D(−2) to D(2)] were needed to calibrate the PPD curve.
The PPD curve prospectively dosed D(3) within the target range. Despite
the multiple regimen changes—cotrimoxazole (0 to 480 mg), intravenous
to oral conversion of tacrolimus, fluconazole (200 to 0 mg), and ganciclovir
(450 to 0 mg)—during D(4) to D(9), the PPD recommendations main-
tained trough levels near or within the target range during the PPD
period (Fig. 2D and movie S3). PPD3 was discharged on D(10). Ad-
ditionally, as an outpatient on D(12), PPD3’s trough level was 9.6 ng/ml,
within the target range (Fig. 2D, red).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 April 2016
Vol 8 Issue 333 333ra49
4
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 PPD patient 4. PPD4 had a MELD of
40 at time of transplant, and a target range
of 4 to 6 ng/ml for D(−2) to D(5), 5 to
7ng/mlforD(6)toD(20),and6to8ng/ml
for D(21) until discharge. The patient’s
posttransplant regimen included tacroli-
mus, prednisone, MMF, cotrimoxazole,
gentamicin, linezolid, ganciclovir, and
valganciclovir (table S1). PPD4 required
hemodialysis. A parabola corresponding
to R(C) = 0.85 + 10.7c1 − 3.64c1
2 was con-
structed by plotting the trough levels 7.9,
9.6, 5.3, and 3.3 ng/ml from D(−2) to D(1)
against physician-determined tacrolimus
dosages (Fig. 2E, blue). After a regimen
change—ganciclovir (0 to 125 mg)—on
D(2), PPD recalibration using D(2) to D(5)
shifted the curve from the blue to the green
[R(C) = 3.8 − 3.4c1 + 2.4c1
2] parabolas in
Fig. 2E. This parabola was then used to
prospectively identify tacrolimus dose re-
commendations along the green dotted line
for D(6) to D(7), which brought trough
levels within the target ranges. Another regi-
menchange—fluconazole(400to200mg)—
occurred on D(8), and PPD recalibration
using D(8) to D(10) shifted the curve from
the green to the red [R(C) = 8.7 − 10c1 +
5.6c1
2] parabolas (Fig. 2E). For D(11) and
D(12),single-passhemodialysiswasstopped,
resulting in higher than expected PPD
trough levels.
The final regimen change for PPD4—
cotrimoxazole (320 to 160 mg)—occurred
on D(13), and PPD recalibration using
D(13) to D(21) trough levels shifted the
curve from the red to the orange [R(C) =
1.85 + 3.38c1 − 0.57c1
2] parabolas (Fig.
2E). This parabola brought trough levels
within the target range of 5 to 7 ng/ml.
For D(19), the linezolid dose was de-
creased (1200 to 600 mg), resulting in
a higher than expected PPD trough level,
but the linezolid dose was subsequently in-
creased to 1200 mg on D(20). On D(22),
valganciclovir dose increase from 0 to
450 mg, and late tacrolimus administra-
tion to the patient resulted in a higher than
expected PPD trough level. PPD4 was
discharged on D(23).
Physician-guided standard of
immunosuppression care:
Case study C1
Patient C1 had a MELD of 36 at the time
of transplantation and an initial tacrolimus
target range of 8 to 10 ng/ml that was
later lowered to 6.5 to 8.5 ng/ml due to
Fig. 2. PPD-assisted personalized immunosuppression for patients PPD1 to PPD4. PPD curves (blue
in select graphs) were calibrated for each patient using the trough levels from physician-guided standard-
of-care dosing on D(−2) to D(0). The PPD curve was used to prospectively dose tacrolimus into the tar-
get range (gray regions in select graphs). Following regimen changes, PPD curves were recalibrated using
the trough levels from at least three successive days after the regimen changes. During PPD recalibra-
tion, tacrolimus doses for PPD patients were preemptively selected on the basis of previous correla-
tions. The numbers within the circles are the dosing days with the given tacrolimus doses (mg) and
the resulting trough levels (ng/ml). (A) PPD1: Calibrated PPD curves using the trough levels from dos-
ing days D(−2) to D(21), with the target range of 6 to 8 ng/ml. First PPD calibrated curve: D(−2) to D(0)
(blue). PPD recalibration: A regimen change (green) for D(1), the recalibrated curve (orange) for D(2) to
D(5), regimen changes (pink) for D(17) and D(18), and the second recalibrated curve (red) for D(19) to
D(21). (B) PPD1 deviations between the trough levels and PPD-projected trough levels as a function of
time between hemodialysis and the measured blood trough level. The numbers within the circles
(blue) are the dosing days with hemodialysis performed before the trough level reading. (C) PPD2:
Calibrated PPD curves using the trough levels from dosing days D(−2) to D(11), with the target ranges
of 7 to 9 [D(2) only, not shown in gray], 8 to 10, and 9 to 11 ng/ml. First PPD calibrated curve for D(−2) to
D(0) (blue). PPD recalibration: Regimen changes (orange) for D(4) to D(7) and the recalibrated curve (red)
for D(8) to D(10). (D) PPD3: Calibrated PPD curves using the trough levels from dosing days D(−2) to D(9),
with the target range of 8 to 10 ng/ml. First PPD calibrated curve for D(−2) to D(3) (blue). PPD recalibration:
Regimen changes (orange and green) for D(4) to D(6) and regimen changes (red) for D(7) to D(9). D(12)
was the follow-up trough level after PPD3’s discharge from the hospital. (E) PPD4: Calibrated PPD curves
using the trough levels from dosing days D(−2) to D(22), with the target ranges of 4 to 6, 5 to 7, and 6 to
8 ng/ml. First PPD calibrated curve for D(−2) to D(1) (blue). PPD recalibration: The recalibrated curve
(green) for D(2) to D(7), the second recalibrated curve (red) for D(8) to D(12), and the third recalibrated
curve (orange) for D(13) to D(22).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 April 2016
Vol 8 Issue 333 333ra49
5
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 concerns for neurotoxicity and nephrotoxicity. The patient’s regimen
included tacrolimus, prednisone, MMF, fluconazole, cotrimoxazole,
ganciclovir, and valganciclovir (table S1). A tacrolimus dose of 6 mg ad-
ministered on D(−1) resulted in a trough level of 13.4 ng/ml (Fig. 3A);
as a result, subsequent tacrolimus dosing dropped to 1 mg for D(1).
Trough levels remained well below the target range during D(1) to D(8),
and tacrolimus doses were gradually increased daily by the con-
ventional titration process. The trough level eventually reached the
target range of 6.5 to 8.5 ng/ml on D(9) (Fig. 3A). The trough levels are
similarly plotted against the tacrolimus dose for control patients C2
(Fig. 3B), C3 (Fig. 3C), and C4 (Fig. 3D).
Comparing outcomes between PPD-assisted
and control patients
The trough levels were plotted over time for all PPD-assisted patients
(n = 4) and control patients (n = 4) to comprehensively compare the
treatment outcomes (Fig. 4). C1 trough levels were out of the target
range for 90% of the treatment period (Fig. 4A). The trough level
management of the control patients resulted in 72.6 ± 14.3% of trough
levels outside of the target range during their treatment periods, with
30.7 ± 29.2% of the trough levels ≥2 ng/ml outside of the target range
(Fig. 4A). By comparison, the PPD patients’ trough levels were out of
range 54.2 ± 4.27% of the time, with 10.8 ± 6.54% of the trough levels
≥2 ng/ml outside of the target range. The variability for controls is no-
tably greater, ranging from 61 to 90%; by comparison, PPD patients
stayed within a tighter range of 50 to 60%.
Calculations for the areas under the curves (AUCs) and statistical
analyses were performed using the data on the number of days ≥2 ng/ml
outside of the target range (table S2). Shapiro-Wilk normality tests as-
sessed the statistical significance of the variances observed between
PPD and control patients. PPD did not result in extended hospital
stays, because PPD subjects spent an average of 29.5 postoperative
days in the hospital compared with 48.8 for controls (Fig. 5A and table
S2). PPD subjects spent fewer days with substantial deviations from
the target range, defined as ≥2.0 ng/ml (median, 1.5 versus 4.0 days)
(Fig. 5B). PPD subjects also had a smaller ratio of substantial deviation
days to total treatment period (Fig. 5C). Ratios of AUC outside of the
target range to total AUC combined the number of substantial devia-
tion days to the magnitudes of those deviations. PPD subjects had a
smaller ratio of AUC outside of the target range to total AUC com-
pared to controls (Fig. 5D).
For the number of days in the hospital, days ≥2 ng/ml outside of
the target range, and ratio of these days to total treatment days, al-
though the averages were not statistically significant from control pa-
tients, PPD implementation resulted in significantly less interpatient
variance (P < 0.05, one-tailed F test, two-tailed Levene’s test), suggesting
that PPD can better manage individual patient outcomes. Therefore,
achieving significantly smaller variances in the treatment outcomes
for PPD patients compared to control patients is a key benefit of per-
sonalized treatment.
We noted substantial inter- and intrapatient variability in the
effect of regimen changes on tacrolimus trough levels. For example,
during the administration of additional antibiotic (cotrimoxazole),
antifungal (fluconazole), and/or anti-inflammatory drugs (predni-
sone), the trough levels changed substantially for both control and
PPD patients (figs. S1 to S3 and tables S3 and S4). For PPD1, the
highly convex surface indicated a synergistic tacrolimus-prednisone
interaction, mediating an increasing output. Patients PPD2 and C1
demonstrated convex surfaces, which indicated a weak tacrolimus-
prednisone interaction and decreasing output. However, the bulk
of the surface for C1 was nearly flat, indicating an additive effect
with no tacrolimus-prednisone interaction. For all patients, the 3D
tacrolimus-prednisone map indicated multiple dose combinations
that would bring trough levels within the target range, providing
Fig. 3. Physician-guided standard-of-care immunosuppression for control
patients C1 to C4. (A to D) Tacrolimus was dosed according to physician-guided
standard of care. The numbers of the dosing days within the circles for the given
tacrolimus doses and the resulting trough levels with the target ranges are
plotted. The colors of the circles correspond to the matching colored target
ranges. (A) C1: Trough levels from D(−2) to D(19) were plotted with the target
ranges of 8 to 10 ng/ml (pink) and 6.5 to 8.5 ng/ml (green). (B) C2: Trough levels
from D(−2) to D(33) were plotted with the target ranges of 6 to 8 ng/ml (green),
6.5 to 8.5 ng/ml (not shown), and 8 to 10 ng/ml (pink). (C) C3: Trough levels from
D(−2) to D(14) were plotted with the target ranges of 3.5 to 5.5 ng/ml (blue),
6 to 8 ng/ml (green), and 8 to 10 ng/ml (pink). (D) C4: Trough levels from D(−2)
to D(18) were plotted with the target range of 8 to 10 ng/ml (pink).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 April 2016
Vol 8 Issue 333 333ra49
6
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 a reference for how two drugs interact under patient-specific condi-
tions (fig. S2).
Intrapatient variability was exemplified by PPD4. The 2D tacrolimus-
cotrimoxazole interaction surface transitioned between saddle-like and
concave. The saddle-like surfaces constructed using treatment days 6
to 12 and 14 to 26 suggested that tacrolimus-cotrimoxazole interac-
tions are synergistic or antagonistic, depending on the doses. However,
the concave surfaces constructed using treatment days 6 to 15 and 14
to 23, for example, indicated antagonistic tacrolimus-cotrimoxazole
interactions (fig. S3). Such variability in drug-drug interactions con-
firms the need to personalize treatment.
Retrospective PPD for control patient C1
Retrospective PPD was conducted on patient C1 to examine whether
PPD could have rapidly identified tacrolimus doses to reach the target
ranges. First, we identified multiple regimen changes for C1 that
affected tacrolimus trough levels, such as increasing the MMF dose.
Three major regimen changes occurred during this period for patient
C1: no MMF for D(−2) to D(0); MMF dose increased to 500 mg for
D(1); and MMF dose increased to 1000 mg for D(2) to D(10). PPD
calibration used the trough levels of 10.9, 13.4, and 10.8 ng/ml from
D(−2) to D(0) when no MMF was given, and a parabola correspond-
ing to R(C) = −2.06 + 7.27c1 − 0.85c1
2 was obtained (Fig. 6A, blue). Two
regimen changes—MMF dose increase (0 to 500 then to 1000 mg)—
occurred on D(1) and D(2) (Fig. 6A, green). PPD recalibration using
trough levels from D(2) to D(10) shifted the curve from the blue to
red [R(C) = 3.45 − 0.0046c1 + 0.064c1
2] parabolas (Fig. 6A, red). The
recalibrated PPD yielded recommended tacrolimus doses of 9 and
9.5 mg for D(2) to D(8) to maintain
trough levels within the target range of
8 to 10 ng/ml (blue-shaded region) (Fig.
6, B and C). When the physician decreased
the target range from 6.5 to 8.5 ng/ml for
D(9) to D(10) (orange-shaded region), the
PPD yielded recommended doses of 7 and
7.5 mg of tacrolimus (Fig. 6, B and C). The
recalibrated PPD-identified tacrolimus
doses could have therefore brought the
trough levels into the target range, which
is further demonstrated by comparing the
retrospective ratios of [AUC inside of target
range] to [total AUC] for both PPD and
control patients (PPD, 0.99; control, 0.14)
(Fig. 6D).
Retrospective PPD for patients C1
and C2, for combination of
tacrolimus and prednisone dosing
Retrospective PPD for patients C1 and
C2 demonstrated that a two-drug input
(tacrolimus and prednisone) could have
eliminated the need for recalibration.
Specifically, by guiding multiple inputs to
preemptively account for regimen changes,
we could better regulate the phenotypic
output. We used a modified equation,
R(C) = xc1c2 − yc1
2 − zc2
2 [c1, tacrolimus
dose (mg); c2, prednisone dose (mg)]. For
C1, trough levels from D(−2) to D(3) (treatment days 7 to 12) were used
to construct a PPD corresponding to R(C) = 0.37c1c2 − 0.81c1
2 − 0.0086c2
2.
PPD-optimized trough levels (ng/ml) were immediately brought into
the target range on D(4) and maintained within the target range for
the rest of the treatment period (fig. S4A). Patient C2 frequently devi-
ated from the target range starting on D(12) because of multiple regi-
men changes that were not managed using titrated dosing (fig. S4B).
Trough level readings from D(−2) to D(12) were used to calibrate and
construct the PPD for C2 corresponding to R(C) = −2.82 + 8.60c1 −
0.27c2 − 0.68c1c2 − 0.23c1
2 − 0.08c2
2. The PPD-optimized tacrolimus
and prednisone doses brought the trough levels into the target range
on D(13) and maintained the desired trough levels through the re-
maining treatment period (fig. S4B).
A comparison between AUC inside and AUC outside of the target
range for patient C1 demonstrated a substantial improvement in treat-
ment outcomes when using retrospective PPD optimization compared
to clinically observed values (fig. S4C). Similarly, retrospective PPD op-
timization substantially improved the dosing outcomes of patient C2
compared to clinically observed values (fig. S4D).
DISCUSSION
Transplant patients undergo combination therapy with a substantial
number of drugs and procedures. This regimen is changed constantly
to account for infection, inflammation, rejection, and kidney
function, among other factors, and patients respond uniquely to their
constantly changing regimens. We therefore developed a clinical approach
Fig. 4. PPD-treated and clinical standard control-treated patients’ outcomes. (A and B) Recorded
trough levels (ng/ml) were plotted against the date for each patient along with corresponding target
ranges (gray regions) for control patients receiving the standard of care (A) and PPD-treated patients (B).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 April 2016
Vol 8 Issue 333 333ra49
7
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 to personalizing drug dosing and demonstrated proof of concept
in eight patients in a prospective randomized controlled study
administering tacrolimus for posttransplant liver immunosup-
pression. Clinical data generated by standard-of-care dosing during
the initial treatment period were used to calibrate patient-specific co-
efficients to construct a parabolic map, called PPD, to guide the
immunosuppression-dosing process. Patients treated using PPD
had significantly less variability in tacrolimus trough levels compared
with control patients with physician-guided standard-of-care dosing.
In addition, retrospective PPD for control patients indicated the pos-
sibility of better maintaining trough levels within the target range
compared to the standard of care that patients received. Regardless
of the dosing approach, all eight patients revealed intra- and inter-
patient variability as a result of drug-drug interactions and proce-
dures, further supporting the need for such phenotypic platforms
in personalized medicine.
Our PPD approach is broadly applicable, as we have demonstrated
previously in vitro and in vivo in animals (20–25). This clinical study
has shown that this parabolic surface represents patient phenotypic re-
sponses to monotherapy and combination therapies well, serving as a
powerful foundation for expanding the PPD process toward other in-
dications. The PPD 3D drug interaction map may provide further in-
sight into the effects of patient-specific drug additivity, synergism, or
antagonism on drug levels to assist with clinical decision-making. No-
tably, PPD is not a pharmacogenomic or pharmacokinetic predictive
modeling approach. Instead, PPD uses phenotypic outputs such as clin-
ical efficacy and/or safety to plot the
parabolic surface. The phenotype in-
nately accounts for molecular and phar-
macokinetic determinants, serving as the
foundation for the disease mechanism–
independent and indication-agnostic
nature of PPD. This also differentiates
PPD from systems biology approaches
(26–28).
With PPD, we can visualize the
phenotypic effects of drug-drug inter-
actions and procedural changes on
trough levels. For example, hemodialysis
alters total body water and can therefore
affect tacrolimus redistribution during
and after dialysis (29). There is also
an unpredictable correlation between
MMF dose and tacrolimus levels (change
in absorption levels and in intestinal
transit time). Both tacrolimus and MMF
absorption and metabolism are affected
by cytochrome P450 and P-glycoprotein.
Such interactions could be further eval-
uated in humans using PPD to opti-
mize dosing regimens. This pilot study
guided tacrolimus dosing only; there-
fore, a recalibration process addressed
regimen changes to maintain trough
levels within target ranges. Although
the recalibration process managed
trough levels, retrospective PPD modu-
lated multidrug dosing to eliminate re-
calibration altogether (which would reduce the incidence of target
range deviations). Specifically, when a regimen change—change in
drug dose, hemodialysis, etc.—is anticipated, deviations from target
ranges are typically imminent because modifying tacrolimus dosing
alone is not sufficient to account for changes in dosages of other
drugs or the introduction of additional drugs into the regimen.
This preliminary study was based on four patients, where mean
analysis of the outcomes was not statistically significant but the reduc-
tion of interpatient variance was statistically significant. Continued
PPD scale-up for widespread clinical application should focus on en-
hancing preemptive management of trough levels or novel immuno-
suppression markers with personalized multidrug dosing. Scale-up
would also include integrating PPD with outpatient immunosuppres-
sion to assess long-term patient response, because high levels of calcineur-
in trough level variability adversely affect graft outcomes (30). For
this initial validation of PPD, we chose to limit our study to the inpatient
setting to facilitate data collection, to ensure that the patients are receiving
the drugs that they are prescribed, and to allow for the incorporation of as
broad a range of clinical data as possible.
This study also raises the question of whether a second-order poly-
nomial is more effective in dosage guidance compared to a line. The
clinical drug titration standard is based on the linear approach. This
is evident for patient C1, where for most of the treatment period, the ta-
crolimus trough level was not in the target range; with the parabolic re-
sponse surface, as shown by retrospective PPD optimization, the target
trough level would have been reached much more quickly. The parabola
Fig. 5. Comparing PPD and control patients’ outcomes. Individual PPD (red-striped) and control pa-
tients’ (blue-striped) outcomes are shown. Green-shaded regions: Mean PPD (red solid) and control
(blue solid) patients’ outcomes are shown. Data are means ± SEM (n = 4). (A) Number of postoperative
days in the hospital until discharge. P values were determined by F test and Welch t test. (B) Number of
days with trough level ≥2 ng/ml outside of the target range. P values were determined by Levene’s test
and Wilcoxon rank sum test. (C) Ratio of the number of days with trough level ≥2 ng/ml outside of the
target range to the total number of days of tacrolimus treatment. P values were determined by F test
and Welch t test. (D) Ratio of the AUC outside of the target range to the total AUC. P values were deter-
mined by F test and Student’s t test.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 April 2016
Vol 8 Issue 333 333ra49
8
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 may also intersect the tacrolimus target range at two points to identify two
possible dose suggestions; a line cannot accomplish this and therefore
may prevent optimized dosing. The linear approach is, at best, an approx-
imation of one side of a parabola, whereas Eq. 2 (PPD) shows that the
efficacy-dose response surface is inherently parabolic (20–25).
The current clinical practice is to personalize immunosuppression
for each recipient by setting the tacrolimus target range according to
the clinical scenario. An alternative indicator could be CD4+ T cell ac-
tivation, which the Cylex ImmuKnow assay was designed to measure.
This assay was never embraced clinically, because its utility was never
definitively demonstrated (31, 32). Therefore, in the absence of a clini-
cally useful and validated measure of immunosuppression, the tacroli-
mus trough level has become the standard. Factors such as kidney
function, comorbidities, race, and disease severity are therefore taken
into account in this determination. However, PPD could be adapted
to any novel indicator of immunosuppression that may be more effec-
tive than trough levels (for instance, T cell alloreactivity or donor-
specific anti–human leukocyte antigen antibodies) (33, 34).
The PPD platform implemented in this study is markedly different
from the clinical standard of care that relies on titration or incremental
dosing using educated guesses. PPD has thus far not been automated so
that the clinician is given the final say in approving dosing orders, to
minimize patient risk. PPD is embedded with upper and lower dosing
limits to prevent over- and underdosing,
so automation is possible depending on
the indication. PPD implementation
could be completed within minutes,
allowing one person to manage many
patients. PPD can also be implemented
in an outpatient setting where tacrolimus
levels are recorded every few days, and
dosing prescriptions can be given to pa-
tients through their outpatient care pro-
vider. Therefore, PPD could maximize
patient benefit and turnaround time, as
well as financial considerations, such as
reimbursement, associated with reducing
treatment complications and duration of
postoperative hospitalization. In sum,
this parameter was used to demonstrate
that PPD implementation did not result
in apparent adverse events, complica-
tions in administrating PPD, or other
barriers that required prolonged hospital-
ization. Our preliminary clinical study of
a phenotypic medicine approach will
serve as a foundation for the expansion
of PPD toward other disease indications,
such as cancer, infectious diseases, and car-
diovascular disorders, where dosing could
be better controlled and personalized.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
This study was conducted to compare
the effectiveness of a PPM approach
toward optimized tacrolimus dosing with conventional physician-
guided dosing. To assess the broad applicability of the PPM process,
no exclusion criteria were implemented. Eight patients consented and
were enrolled and randomized in this study at the University of Califor-
nia, Los Angeles (UCLA)–Dumont Liver Transplant Center under Insti-
tutional Review Board no. 14-001682 approved by the UCLA Office of
the Human Research Protection Program. Four patients were randomly
assigned to the PPD-assisted immunosuppression dosing arm, and the
other four received standard-of-care immunosuppression dosing.
The number of recruited patients was determined to eliminate
overlap with other ongoing studies while also serving an adequate test
population for a series where a substantially different multidrug regi-
men was administered to each patient and each regimen was opti-
mized using the personalized medicine approach. The trough level
was selected as the primary efficacy (phenotypic) result for this study.
The MELD score was calculated for each patient on the basis of serum
bilirubin and creatinine levels and international normalized ratio. The
target range for each patient was assigned by the primary surgeon on
the basis of ethnicity, age, etiology of liver disease, disease severity, kid-
ney function, comorbidities, and the use of other immunosuppres-
sants. Data collection was stopped at the point of patient discharge
or at a physician-determined time point when discharge was imminent.
Metrics to compare PPD with controls included the number of days
Fig. 6. Retrospective PPD: PPD-guided dosing optimization
of tacrolimus for C1. Retrospective PPD was conducted on C1
using the observed clinical doses and the measured trough levels
to calibrate PPD curves and to identify the regimen changes. C1
retrospective PPD curves identified the tacrolimus dosages that
could have brought the trough levels within the target ranges.
(A) C1 calibrated PPD curves (blue, green, and red) using the
trough levels from dosing days D(−2) to D(10). The numbers with-
in the circles (blue, green, and red) are dosing days with the given
tacrolimus doses (mg) and the resulting trough levels (ng/ml). The shaded regions (orange and blue)
are the target ranges 8 to 10 ng/ml and 6.5 to 8.5 ng/ml. (B and C) PPD-optimized (red) and clinically
observed (blue) trough levels (ng/ml) (B) and tacrolimus doses (mg) (C) plotted against the dosing
days. The gray-shaded region is the target range. (D) PPD (red) and clinically observed control (blue)
ratios of the AUC inside of the target range to the total AUC.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 April 2016
Vol 8 Issue 333 333ra49
9
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 that trough levels were ≥2 ng/ml outside of the target range and the
number of postoperative days in the hospital; from these, ratios and
patient intra- and intervariability were also calculated. Postoperative
days in the hospital vary substantially between treatment centers and
are not typically used as outcome metrics, but the Dumont–UCLA Liv-
er Transplant Center consistently has the highest median MELD score
at transplant in the United States, and patient acuity is among the high-
est, if not the highest, in the country. Thus, these patients’ experiences
were ideal for presenting challenging situations for PPD.
Prospective and retrospective clinical PPD process
Trough levels, drug regimen dosages, and other events such as hemo-
dialysis were obtained every morning before analysis. To project op-
timal dosages, a second-order polynomial fit for each patient was
made from linear regression with mainly two variables, such as trough
level (ng/ml) and tacrolimus dose (mg), and it was calibrated using at
least three previous data points from the specific patient. Additionally,
the effect and degree of drug-drug interactions on individual patients
obtained during the prospective study were considered when recom-
mending the better dosage regimen. PPD 2D and 3D drug interaction
maps were plotted using MATLAB R2014a (MathWorks Inc.), with a
matrix input of the drug concentration values correlated to the trough
levels. AUCs were calculated using MATLAB R2014a (MathWorks
Inc.), with a matrix input of the trough levels and the target ranges.
Additional information pertaining to retrospective multidrug optimi-
zation can be found in the Supplementary Methods.
Statistical analysis
Normal distribution was determined by the Shapiro-Wilk normality
test. In the case of parametric (normal) distributions, one-tailed F test
was used to compare variances, and the appropriate two-tailed Welch
t test or Student’s t test was used to compare means. In the case of non-
parametric (nonnormal) distributions, two-tailed Levene’s test was used
to compare variances, and two-tailed Wilcoxon rank sum test was used
to compare medians. a was set at 0.05, and P < 0.05 was considered
significant. We performed all statistical analyses using R version 3.1.1.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/8/333/333ra49/DC1
Subject clinical details
Methods
Fig. S1. The effect of cotrimoxazole and fluconazole dosing on patients’ trough levels.
Fig. S2. PPD tacrolimus-prednisone interaction plots for patients PPD1, PPD2, and C1.
Fig. S3. PPD tacrolimus-cotrimoxazole interaction plots for patient PPD4.
Fig. S4. Retrospective PPD-guided tacrolimus and prednisone dosing optimization for patients
C1 and C2.
Table S1. Clinical summaries of control patients (C1 to C4) and PPD-guided patients (PPD1 to PPD4).
Table S2. Data used for statistical comparisons in Fig. 5.
Table S3. Patient-specific antibiotic and antifungal dosing changes and corresponding tacrolimus
trough levels.
Table S4. Patient-specific anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant dosing changes and
corresponding trough levels.
Movie S1. Introduction to PPD and patient recalibration.
Movie S2. Patient PPD2 recalibration tutorial.
Movie S3. Patient PPD3 recalibration tutorial.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. A. Zarrinpar, R. W. Busuttil, Liver transplantation: Past, present and future. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol.
Hepatol. 10, 434–440 (2013).
2. T. E. Starzl, S. Iwatsuki, B. W. Shaw Jr., R. D. Gordon, C. O. Esquivel, Immunosuppression and
other nonsurgical factors in the improved results of liver transplantation. Semin. Liver Dis.
5, 334–343 (1985).
3. S. D. Nimer, A. L. Milewicz, R. E. Champlin, R. W. Busuttil, Cyclosporine bioavailability in
heart-lung transplant candidates with cystic fibrosis. Transplantation 49, 821–822
(1990).
4. M. Uesugi, S. Masuda, T. Katsura, F. Oike, Y. Takada, K. Inui, Effect of intestinal CYP3A5 on post-
operative tacrolimus trough levels in living-donor liver transplant recipients. Pharmacogenet.
Genomics 16, 119–127 (2006).
5. S. Yu, L. Wu, J. Jin, S. Yan, G. Jiang, H. Xie, S. Zheng, Influence of CYP3A5 gene polymorphisms
of donor rather than recipient to tacrolimus individual dose requirement in liver transplanta-
tion. Transplantation 81, 46–51 (2006).
6. A. Lampen, U. Christians, F. P. Guengerich, P. B. Watkins, J. C. Kolars, A. Bader, A. K. Gonschior,
H. Dralle, I. Hackbarth, K. F. Sewing, Metabolism of the immunosuppressant tacrolimus in the
small intestine: Cytochrome P450, drug interactions, and interindividual variability. Drug
Metab. Dispos. 23, 1315–1324 (1995).
7. K. S. Lown, R. R. Mayo, A. B. Leichtman, H.-l. Hsiao, D. K. Turgeon, P. Schmiedlin-Ren, M. B. Brown,
W. Guo, S. J. Rossi, L. Z. Benet, P. B. Watkins, Role of intestinal P-glycoprotein (mdr1) in inter-
patient variation in the oral bioavailability of cyclosporine. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 62, 248–260
(1997).
8. European FK506 Multicentre Liver Study Group, Randomised trial comparing tacrolimus
(FK506) and cyclosporin in prevention of liver allograft rejection. Lancet 344, 423–428
(1994).
9. W. J. Jusko, W. Piekoszewski, G. B. Klintmalm, M. S. Shaefer, M. F. Hebert, A. A. Piergies,
C. C. Lee, P. Schechter, Q. A. Mekki, Pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus in liver transplant patients.
Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 57, 281–290 (1995).
10. E. Størset, N. Holford, S. Hennig, T. K. Bergmann, S. Bergan, S. Bremer, A. Åsberg, K. Midtvedt,
C. E. Staatz, Improved prediction of tacrolimus concentrations early after kidney transplan-
tation using theory-based pharmacokinetic modelling. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 78, 509–523
(2014).
11. C. Gérard, J. Stocco, A. Hulin, B. Blanchet, C. Verstuyft, F. Durand, F. Conti, C. Duvoux, M. Tod,
Determination of the most influential sources of variability in tacrolimus trough blood con-
centrations in adult liver transplant recipients: A bottom-up approach. AAPS J. 16, 379–391
(2014).
12. N. Han, S. Ha, H.-y. Yun, M. G. Kim, S.-I. Min, J. Ha, J. I. Lee, J. M. Oh, I.-W. Kim, Population
pharmacokinetic–pharmacogenetic model of tacrolimus in the early period after kidney
transplantation. Basic Clin. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 114, 400–406 (2014).
13. S.-Y. Chen, J.-L. Li, F.-H. Meng, X.-D. Wang, T. Liu, J. Li, L.-S. Liu, Q. Fu, M. Huang, C.-X. Wang,
Individualization of tacrolimus dosage basing on cytochrome P450 3A5 polymorphism–A
prospective, randomized, controlled study. Clin. Transplant. 27, E272–E281 (2013).
14. C. Passey, A. K. Birnbaum, R. C. Brundage, W. S. Oetting, A. K. Israni, P. A. Jacobson, Dosing
equation for tacrolimus using genetic variants and clinical factors. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 72,
948–957 (2011).
15. C. Willis, C. E. Staatz, S. E. Tett, Bayesian forecasting and prediction of tacrolimus concen-
trations in pediatric liver and adult renal transplant recipients. Ther. Drug Monit. 25, 158–166
(2003).
16. K. Benkali, A. Prémaud, N. Picard, J.-P. Rérolle, O. Toupance, G. Hoizey, A. Turcant, F. Villemain,
Y. Le Meur, P. Marquet, A. Rousseau, Tacrolimus population pharmacokinetic-pharmacogenetic
analysis and Bayesian estimation in renal transplant recipients. Clin. Pharmacokinet. 48,
805–816 (2009).
17. S. Loewe, The problem of synergism and antagonism of combined drugs. Arzneimittelforschung
3, 285–290 (1953).
18. T.-C. Chou, P. Talalay, Quantitative analysis of dose-effect relationships: The combined
effects of multiple drugs or enzyme inhibitors. Adv. Enzyme Regul. 22, 27–55 (1984).
19. C. I. Bliss, The calculation of microbial assays. Bacteriol. Rev. 20, 243–258 (1956).
20. P. K. Wong, F. Yu, A. Shahangian, G. Cheng, R. Sun, C.-M. Ho, Closed-loop control of cellular
functions using combinatory drugs guided by a stochastic search algorithm. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 5105–5110 (2008).
21. H. Wang, D.-K. Lee, K.-Y. Chen, J.-Y. Chen, K. Zhang, A. Silva, C.-M. Ho, D. Ho, Mechanism-
independent optimization of combinatorial nanodiamond and unmodified drug delivery
using a phenotypically driven platform technology. ACS Nano 9, 3332–3344 (2015).
22. H. Tsutsui, B. Valamehr, A. Hindoyan, R. Qiao, X. Ding, S. Guo, O. N. Witte, X. Liu, C.-M. Ho, H. Wu,
An optimized small molecule inhibitor cocktail supports long-term maintenance of human
embryonic stem cells. Nat. Commun. 2, 167 (2011).
23. A. Weiss, X. Ding, J. R. van Beijnum, I. Wong, T. J. Wong, R. H. Berndsen, O. Dormond, M. Dallinga,
L. Shen, R. O. Schlingemann, R. Pili, C.-M. Ho, P. J. Dyson, H. van den Bergh, A. W. Griffioen,
P. Nowak-Sliwinska, Rapid optimization of drug combinations for the optimal angiostatic
treatment of cancer. Angiogenesis 18, 233–244 (2015).
24. M. B. Mohd Abdul Rashid, T. B. Toh, A. Silva, L. Nurrul Abdullah, C.-M. Ho, D. Ho, E. K.-H. Chow,
Identification and optimization of combinatorial glucose metabolism inhibitors in hepato-
cellular carcinomas. J. Lab. Autom. 20, 423–437 (2015).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 April 2016
Vol 8 Issue 333 333ra49
10
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 25. I. Al-Shyoukh, F. Yu, J. Feng, K. Yan, S. Dubinett, C.-M. Ho, J. S. Shamma, R. Sun, Systematic
quantitative characterization of cellular responses induced by multiple signals. BMC Syst. Biol.
5, 88 (2011).
26. A. Persidis, Cancer multidrug resistance. Nat. Biotechnol. 17, 94–95 (1999).
27. P. K. Kreeger, Y. Wang, K. M. Haigis, D. A. Lauffenburger, Integration of multiple signaling
pathway activities resolves K-RAS/N-RAS mutation paradox in colon epithelial cell response to
inflammatory cytokine stimulation. Integr. Biol. 2, 202–208 (2010).
28. H. Li, G. Glusman, H. Hu, J. Caballero, R. Hubley, D. Witherspoon, S. L. Guthery, D. E. Mauldin,
L. B. Jorde, L. Hood, J. C. Roach, C. D. Huff, Relationship estimation from whole-genome
sequence data. PLOS Genet. 10, e1004144 (2014).
29. N. Karamperis, J. V. Povlsen, C. Højskov, J. H. Poulsen, A. R. Pedersen, K. A. Jørgensen,
Comparison of the pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus and cyclosporine at equivalent molec-
ular doses. Transplant. Proc. 35, 1314–1318 (2003).
30. J. A. O’Regan, M. Canney, D. M. Connaughton, P. O’Kelly, Y. Williams, G. Collier, D. G. deFreitas,
C. M. O’Seaghdha, P. J. Conlon, Tacrolimus trough-level variability predicts long-term allogrfat
survival following kidney transplantation. J. Nephrol. 29, 269–276 (2016).
31. S. Gupta, J. D. Mitchell, D. W. Markham, P. P. A. Mammen, P. C. Patel, P. A. Kaiser, P. Stastny,
W. S. Ring, J. M. DiMaio, M. H. Drazner, Utility of the Cylex assay in cardiac transplant reci-
pients. J. Heart Lung Transplant. 27, 817–822 (2008).
32. G. E. Malat, C. Culkin, A. Palya, K. Ranganna, M. S. A. Kumar, African American kidney trans-
plantation survival: The ability of immunosuppression to balance the inherent pre- and post-
transplant risk factors. Drugs 69, 2045–2062 (2009).
33. L. Ruggeri, M. Capanni, M. Casucci, I. Volpi, A. Tosti, K. Perruccio, E. Urbani, R. S. Negrin,
M. F. Martelli, A. Velardi, Role of natural killer cell alloreactivity in HLA-mismatched hemato-
poietic stem cell transplantation. Blood 94, 333–339 (1999).
34. J. G. O’Leary, H. Kaneku, B. M. Susskind, L. W. Jennings, M. A. Neri, G. L. Davis, G. B. Klintmalm,
P. I. Terasaki,. High mean fluorescence intensity donor‐specific anti‐HLA antibodies asso-
ciated with chronic rejection postliver transplant. Am. J. Transplant. 11, 1868–1876 (2011).
Acknowledgments: We thank the patients enrolled in this study and their families, as well as
the clinical staff at UCLA Ronald Reagan Hospital; Division of Liver and Pancreas Transplanta-
tion, Department of Surgery; and Dumont–UCLA Liver Transplant Center. We thank J. Kupiec-Weglinski
for helpful discussions, C. Y. Lim (Department of Statistics, Seoul National University) for discus-
sions regarding statistical analysis, and V. Chang (Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology,
UCLA) for critical review of the manuscript. Funding: D.H. acknowledges support from the NSF
CAREER Award (CMMI-1350197), Center for Scalable and Integrated Nanomanufacturing (DMI-
0327077), CMMI-0856492, DMR-1343991, V Foundation for Cancer Research Scholars Award,
Wallace H. Coulter Foundation Translational Research Award, National Cancer Institute
(U54CA151880), Society for Laboratory Automation and Screening Endowed Fellowship, and
Beckman Coulter Life Sciences. C.-M.H. acknowledges support from Ben Rich–Lockheed Martin
Professor endowment fund. Author contributions: A.Z., N.D., C.E., K.W., V.A., F.K., D.F., and R.B.
performed the surgeries and postoperative patient management that included patient
monitoring, determination of additional procedures required, implementation of drug admin-
istration protocols, clinical data collection, final drug dosing approvals, and selection of patient
target tacrolimus ranges; wrote the patient clinical assessment portions of the manuscript; and
critically revised the manuscript. A.Z., D.-K.L., A.S., N.D., T.K., S.E.W., C.-M.H., and D.H. used the
anonymized collected clinical data provided by the clinical team to perform the PPD experi-
mental analysis and optimization studies; constructed the drug-drug interaction landscapes,
data analysis, and interpretation; wrote the nonpatient clinical assessment portions of the
manuscript; and critically revised the manuscript. Competing interests: A.Z., D.-K.L., A.S., N.D.,
T.K., C.-M.H., and D.H. are coinventors of a pending provisional patent pertaining to phenotypic
personalized medicine. C.-M.H. is a coinventor of pending patent WO2015017449 entitled “Real-
time feedback system control technology platform with dynamically changing stimulations” and
pending patent WO2014113714 entitled “Rapid identification of optimized combinations of input
parameters for a complex system.” Data and materials availability: All data and materials are
available here.
Submitted 20 May 2015
Accepted 29 February 2016
Published 6 April 2016
10.1126/scitranslmed.aac5954
Citation: A. Zarrinpar, D.-K. Lee, A. Silva, N. Datta, T. Kee, C. Eriksen, K. Weigle, V. Agopian,
F. Kaldas, D. Farmer, S. E. Wang, R. Busuttil, C.-M. Ho, D. Ho, Individualizing liver transplant
immunosuppression using a phenotypic personalized medicine platform. Sci. Transl. Med. 8,
333ra49 (2016).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
6 April 2016
Vol 8 Issue 333 333ra49
11
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 medicine platform
Individualizing liver transplant immunosuppression using a phenotypic personalized
Fady Kaldas, Douglas Farmer, Sean E. Wang, Ronald Busuttil, Chih-Ming Ho and Dean Ho
Ali Zarrinpar, Dong-Keun Lee, Aleidy Silva, Nakul Datta, Theodore Kee, Calvin Eriksen, Keri Weigle, Vatche Agopian,
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aac5954
, 333ra49333ra49.
8
Sci Transl Med 
patients.
independent of disease mechanism or drug of choice and could thus personalize regimens for many types of
combinations. The PPD approach will have broad applicability beyond transplant medicine, because it is 
patients and will expand the PPD equation to represent a 3D parabolic surface, which will factor in drug
controls, suggesting that the equation was predicting next doses accurately. Future studies will involve more 
than
physician guidance. The PPD patients were out of trough range less frequently and for shorter periods of time 
distribution within the body. The PPD approach was tested in four patients and compared to the standard of care,
or as the patient undergoes additional clinical procedures, such as hemodialysis, which can interfere with drug 
away,
that indicates the next dose that the patient should receive. The parabola shifts as drugs are added or taken 
mapping patient response over the course of treatment, the equation produces a two-dimensional (2D) parabola
phenotype (in this case, trough level of an immunosuppressant, tacrolimus) to input (tacrolimus concentration). By 
guesswork. Their approach, called parabolic personalized dosing (PPD), relies on algebraic equations to relate
drug-drug interactions. Now, Zarrinpar and colleagues have come up with a mathematical approach to remove the 
but also use educated guesses in choosing dose, to account for variability in patient response to the drugs and
graft is not rejected. Currently, physicians use dosing guidelines for drugs meant to suppress the immune system, 
After organ transplant, patients are on a merry-go-round of medicines and procedures to make sure that the
Personalizing drug dosing
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/333/333ra49
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2016/04/04/8.333.333ra49.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/424/eaam8645.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/356/6337/491.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/4/158/158rv11.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/3/90/90ra59.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/5/187/187ps9.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/7/285/285ra61.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/324/324ra15.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/5/213/213ra165.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/6/242/242ra81.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/7/280/280rv2.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/333/333ra49#BIBL
This article cites 34 articles, 4 of which you can access for free
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
