 Glial scars are permeable to the neurotoxic environment of 
chronic stroke infarcts
Jacob C. Zbeskoa, Thuy-Vi V. Nguyena,b, Tao Yange, Jennifer Beischel Fryea, Omar 
Hussaina, Megan Hayesa, Amanda Chunga, W. Anthony Dayd, Kristina Stepanovica, Maj 
Krumbergera, Justine Monaa, Frank M. Longoe, and Kristian P. Doylea,b,c,*
aDepartment of Immunobiology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85719, USA
bDepartment of Neurology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85719, USA
cArizona Center on Aging, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85719, USA
dArizona Health Sciences Center Imaging Core Facility, Arizona Research Labs, University of 
Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85719, USA
eDepartment of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA
Abstract
Following stroke, the damaged tissue undergoes liquefactive necrosis, a stage of infarct resolution 
that lasts for months although the exact length of time is currently unknown. One method of repair 
involves reactive astrocytes and microglia forming a glial scar to compartmentalize the area of 
liquefactive necrosis from the rest of the brain. The formation of the glial scar is a critical 
component of the healing response to stroke, as well as other central nervous system (CNS) 
injuries. The goal of this study was to evaluate the toxicity of the extracellular fluid present in 
areas of liquefactive necrosis and determine how effectively it is segregated from the remainder of 
the brain. To accomplish this goal, we used a mouse model of stroke in conjunction with an 
extracellular fluid toxicity assay, fluorescent and electron microscopy, immunostaining, tracer 
injections into the infarct, and multiplex immunoassays. We confirmed that the extracellular fluid 
present in areas of liquefactive necrosis following stroke is toxic to primary cortical and 
hippocampal neurons for at least 7 weeks following stroke, and discovered that although glial 
scars are robust physical and endocytic barriers, they are nevertheless permeable. We found that 
molecules present in the area of liquefactive necrosis can leak across the glial scar and are 
removed by a combination of paravascular clearance and microglial endocytosis in the adjacent 
tissue. Despite these mechanisms, there is delayed atrophy, cytotoxic edema, and neuron loss in 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).
*Corresponding author at: Department of Immunobiology, University of Arizona, Tucson, 1656 E. Mabel Street, Tucson, AZ 85719, 
USA. doylekr@email.arizona.edu (K.P. Doyle). 
Ethical approval
All applicable international, national, and/or institutional guidelines for the care and use of animals were followed. As such, all 
experiments were conducted in accordance with protocols approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of 
Arizona and were performed based on the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Neurobiol Dis. 2018 April ; 112: 63–78. doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2018.01.007.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 regions adjacent to the infarct for weeks following stroke. These findings suggest that one 
mechanism of neurodegeneration following stroke is the failure of glial scars to impermeably 
segregate areas of liquefactive necrosis from surviving brain tissue.
Keywords
Chronic stroke; Neurodegeneration; Liquefactive necrosis; Glial scar; Inflammation
1. Introduction
Activated astrocytes respond rapidly to ischemic stroke by upregulating genes for 
intermediate filaments such as glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), calcium-binding protein 
B (S100B), vimentin, and nestin (Pekny and Nilsson, 2005; Farina et al., 2007; 
Cekanaviciute and Buckwalter, 2016). These changes in gene expression are accompanied 
by proliferation and migration towards the injured area. The injury is then walled off by a 
front line of reactive astrocytes interspersed with activated microglia/macrophages, resulting 
in a glial scar. The physical barrier function of the glial scar is reinforced by the production 
of extracellular matrix proteins such as fibronectin, laminin, and chondroitin sulphate 
proteoglycans (Cekanaviciute and Buckwalter, 2016). Together, these mechanisms create a 
barrier that corrals inflammatory cells present within the core of the injury (Bush et al., 
1999; Wanner et al., 2013). However, it is currently unknown how effectively glial scars 
sequester the potentially neurotoxic extracellular fluid present within chronic CNS infarcts.
The extracellular fluid within chronic CNS infarcts is potentially neurotoxic because of the 
unique way in which infarcts within the CNS resolve. Unlike other tissues, the brain 
responds to ischemia by undergoing liquefactive necrosis. Liquefactive necrosis occurs in 
abscesses throughout the body, and is usually caused by an inflammatory response to 
infection. However, liquefactive necrosis occurs in the brain in response to stroke or other 
trauma, even in the absence of infection (Robbins et al., 2010).
Liquefactive necrosis is characterized by the degradation of tissue, and its transformation to 
a liquefactive mass. It persists for many months following stroke and other brain injuries, is 
largely uncharacterized in terms of its constituents and toxicity to surrounding brain regions, 
and the exact time frame of its resolution is unknown. The eventual outcome of liquefactive 
necrosis is cystic encephalomalacia, the term given to the end stage of infarct resolution 
when all that remains is an area of astrogliosis and a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) filled cavity 
(Nguyen et al., 2016).
Until the stage of cystic encephalomalacia is reached, how effectively stroke infarcts are 
compartmentalized away from uninfarcted tissue has relevance for stroke recovery. This is 
because more than one-third of stroke survivors subsequently develop dementia (Barba et 
al., 2000; Leys et al., 2005; Bejot et al., 2011) and the cause or causes of this dementia are 
unclear. One potential mechanism that has not been investigated before is the possibility that 
glial scars only partially segregate neurotoxic extracellular fluid present within areas of 
liquefactive necrosis from the rest of the brain during recovery.
Zbesko et al.
Page 2
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Although the stage of liquefactive necrosis is largely uncharacterized, it is known that in 
both mice and humans, infarcts at the stage of liquefactive necrosis are sites of chronic 
inflammation (Doyle et al., 2015; Nguyen et al., 2016). In C57BL/6 mice we recently 
demonstrated with our colleagues that this inflammation includes a chronic B-lymphocyte 
response in the infarct and an increased concentration of antibodies in the surrounding brain 
tissue for months after the injury (Doyle et al., 2015). We replicated this finding in multiple 
mouse models of stroke. Importantly, in one of these models, in which the infarct is located 
adjacent, but not incorporating the hippocampus, mice developed delayed cognitive deficits 
(Doyle et al., 2015).
As an indication to how effectively infarcts in the CNS are compartmentalized away from 
uninfarcted tissue, we did not detect B-lymphocytes and plasma cells in the brain outside of 
the stroke infarct in any of the stroke models we evaluated (Doyle et al., 2015). However, 
although the B-lymphocytes and plasma cells remained within the infarcts, it appeared that 
the antibodies produced by the plasma cells crossed the glial scar and infiltrated the 
surrounding brain tissue in the weeks after stroke. These results suggest that glial scars fail 
to completely contain potentially neurodegenerative molecules being produced, or otherwise 
present within CNS infarcts such as autoreactive antibodies (Ankeny et al., 2009; Ankeny 
and Popovich, 2010).
The failure of glial scars to successfully contain neurodegenerative factors present in areas 
of liquefactive necrosis has important implications for individuals recovering from a CNS 
injury. It suggests that glial scar permeability may be a significant cause of the delayed brain 
atrophy and dementia seen in some patients following stroke. Therefore, in this study, we 
evaluated the toxicity of the extracellular fluid present in areas of liquefactive necrosis 
following stroke, and determined how effectively, and by which mechanisms, 
neurodegenerative factors present in areas of liquefactive necrosis are sequestered from the 
surviving brain tissue.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Mice
Adult 3–5-month-old C57BL/6 and BALB/c male mice were purchased from the Jackson 
Laboratory. Animals were housed under a 12-hour light/dark schedule with ad libitum 
access to food and water. All procedures met the National Institute of Health guidelines with 
approval from the University of Arizona Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. For 
euthanasia, mice were intraperitoneally injected with a cocktail of 100 mg/kg ketamine, 20 
mg/kg xylazine, and 3 mg/kg acepromazine, followed by intracardial perfusion with 0.9% 
saline. Brains were extracted, and either snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for biochemical 
assays, post-fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) and cryoprotected in 30% sucrose for 
sectioning on a freezing microtome, or immersed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde and 2% PFA for 
electron microscopy.
Zbesko et al.
Page 3
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2.2. Stroke surgeries
Distal middle cerebral artery occlusion (DMCAO) plus hypoxia (DH stroke) was performed 
on C57BL/6 mice, as previously described (Doyle et al., 2012; Nguyen et al., 2016). Mice 
were anesthetized by isoflurane inhalation, and an incision was made to expose the 
temporalis muscle. A pocket was created in the muscle to expose the skull underneath, and 
the right MCA identified. A microdrill was used to expose the underlying MCA. The 
meninges were cut, and the vessel cauterized using a small vessel cauterizer. The wound was 
then closed using surgical glue. Immediately following surgery, mice were placed in a large 
chamber containing 9% oxygen and 91% nitrogen for 45 min. Sham mice underwent the 
same surgical steps, except for cauterization of the MCA, and were also given 9% oxygen 
and 91% nitrogen for 45 min immediately after surgery. Core body temperature was 
maintained at 37 °C throughout surgery and hypoxia. Mice were randomly allocated into 
stroke and sham experimental groups. This stroke model creates a large infarct comprising 
approximately 25% of the stroked hemisphere, has little variability, and excellent long-term 
survivability (Doyle et al., 2012). Hypoxia is necessary with this model because C57BL/6 
mice that undergo DMCAO without hypoxia have significantly smaller infarcts (Doyle et al., 
2012). BALB/c mice underwent DMCAO without hypoxia, as previously described (Doyle 
et al., 2012; Nguyen et al., 2016). DMCAO by itself generates an infarct in BALB/c mice 
that is equivalent in size and location to the infarct generated by DH stroke in C57BL/6 mice 
(Doyle et al., 2012). To induce photothrombotic stroke, C57BL/6 mice were injected 
intraperitoneally with 100 mg/kg Rose Bengal (Millipore Sigma, Cat. No. 330000) dissolved 
in 0.9% saline. Thirty minutes following injection, mice were anesthetized by isoflurane 
inhalation, and an incision was made on the top of the head to expose the skull. An optic 
cable connected to a metal halide fiber optic illuminator (Dolan-Jenner MH-150; Edmund 
Optics) was then placed on top of the skull using a stereotactic frame, and the light source 
was turned on for 20 min.
2.3. Immunostaining
Coronal sections (40 μm) were taken through the entire brain using a freezing Microm HM 
450 sliding microtome (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Free floating sections were then 
immunostained using standard techniques (Doyle et al., 2015; Nguyen et al., 2016). The 
following primary antibodies were used: immunoglobulin (IgG; Vector Laboratories, Cat. 
No. BA2000, RRID: AB2313571), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP; Millipore Sigma, 
Cat. No. AB5541, RRID: AB177521), CD68 (Bio-Rad, Cat. No. MCA1957GA, RRID: 
AB324217), claudin-5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat. No. 352588, RRID: AB2532189), 
B220 (BD Biosciences, Cat. No. 553085, RRID: AB394615), CD3 (BD Biosciences, Cat. 
No. 550277, RRID: AB393573), lysosomal associated membrane protein-1 (LAMP-1; 
abcam, Cat. No. AB25245, RRID: AB449893), ionized calcium-binding adapter molecule 1 
(Iba1; Wako, Cat. No. 019-19741, RRID: AB839504), matrix me-tallopeptidase (MMP)-9 
(abcam, Cat. No. AB38898, RRID: AB776512), chondroitin sulphate proteoglycan (NG2; 
Millipore Sigma, Cat. No. AB5320, RRID: AB11213678), CD31 (abcam, Cat. No. 28364, 
RRID: AB726362), neuronal nuclei (NeuN) (Millipore Sigma, Cat. No. MAB377, RRID: 
AB2298772), and choline acetyltransferase (ChAT; Millipore Sigma, Cat. No. AB144P, 
RRID: AB2079751). Sections were then labeled with the appropriate secondary antibody in 
conjunction with ABC Vector Elite and 3,3′-diaminobenzidine kits (Vector Laboratories) for 
Zbesko et al.
Page 4
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 visualization under a Motic BA410 light microscope coupled with a MoticamPro 282A 
camera or a Keyence BZ-X700 digital microscope with phase contrast, light, and 
fluorescence capabilities. For confocal or epifluorescence imaging, sections were incubated 
in Alexa Fluor secondary antibodies (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and captured with a Leica 
SP5-II laser scanning confocal microscope or a Leica DMI6000 epifluorescence microscope.
2.4. Nissl staining
Mounted, dehydrated tissue sections were cleared in xylenes, rehydrated, immersed in 0.5% 
cresyl violet acetate (Millipore Sigma, Cat. No. C5042) solution for 1 min, rinsed with 
distilled water, differentiated in 0.25% acetic alcohol, dehydrated through graded ethanol 
series, cleared, and coverslipped.
2.5. Quantification of neovascularization following stroke
Tissue sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E; VWR, Cat. No. 95057-844 
and 95057-848) according to standard techniques. Two sections per mouse (n = 4 mice per 
experimental group) were analyzed. Blood vessel density (per μm2 of infarct) was then 
assessed by manually counting the number of blood vessels within each infarct per mouse, 
using a 20× objective, at bregma −1.94 and −0.02 mm, as well as the equivalent area in the 
somatosensory cortex on the contralateral hemisphere.
2.6. Determination of blood brain barrier permeability
To evaluate blood brain barrier (BBB) integrity following stroke, mice (n = 5 per 
experimental group) were intraperitoneally injected with 2% Evans Blue (Millipore Sigma, 
Cat. No. E2129) dissolved in 0.1 M phosphate buffer saline (PBS) at 24 h, 1 week, or 7 
weeks following stroke or sham surgery. Mice were perfused 3 h later. Brains were 
photographed, and extravasation into each brain hemisphere was measured colorimetrically, 
as previously described (Radu and Chernoff, 2013).
2.7. Electron microscopy
2.7.1. Mouse brain tissue—Brains used for transmission and scanning electron 
microscopy (EM) were fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde and 2% PFA in 0.1 M Pipes buffer for 
1 h at room temperature, or overnight at 4 °C. Following washes in 0.05 M Pipes buffer and 
0.05 M glycine, and washes in 0.1 M Pipes buffer, dissected stroke regions from each brain 
were then post-fixed in 1% osmium tetroxide for 1 h. After fixation, samples underwent 
washes in deionized water (DIW). Samples for transmission EM were then block stained in 
2% aqueous uranyl acetate, washed in DIW, dehydrated through a graded series of alcohols, 
infiltrated with 1:1 alcohol and Spurr’s resin overnight, and then embedded in 100% Spurr’s 
resin overnight at 60 °C. Samples for scanning EM were dehydrated, incubated in 
hexamethyldisilazan, and then air dried. Sections for transmission EM were viewed under an 
FEI Tecnai Spirit microscope operated at 100 kV. Eight-bit TIFF images were captured 
using an AMT 4 Mpixel camera. Sections for scanning EM were gold coated, and viewed 
under a FEI Company Inspect S microscope operated at 30 kV.
Zbesko et al.
Page 5
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2.7.2. Human brain tissue—A chronic stroke infarct dissected from fresh frozen brain 
tissue (5-gram block) was obtained from the Banner Sun Health Research Institute (Sun 
City, AZ) (Beach et al., 2015). Chronic stroke was confirmed by both a clinical and 
neuropathological diagnosis. The sample was processed for EM, as described for mouse 
samples.
2.8. Multiplex immunoassays
Snap-frozen brain tissue samples were sonicated in ice-cold 0.1 M PBS containing 1% 
triton-X and 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (1:100; Millipore 
Sigma), and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 2 (1:100; Millipore Sigma). Following 
centrifugation, the total protein concentration of each supernatant was measured using a 
Direct Detect Infrared Spectrometer (Millipore Sigma). Total immunoglobulin G (IgG), 
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), albumin, and cytokines and chemokines were then 
quantified using mouse multiplex magnetic bead kits purchased from Thermo Fisher 
Scientific and Millipore Sigma, and used according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. 
Each lysate sample, standard, and quality control was measured in duplicate. Plates were 
read using a MAGPIX instrument (Luminex), and results were analyzed using MILLIPLEX 
Analyst 5.1 software (Millipore Sigma).
2.9. Extracellular fluid isolation
Under aseptic conditions and performed quickly on ice, extracellular fluid was harvested by 
dissecting (i) the 7-week-old infarct and (ii) the equivalent area of the contralateral cortex 
from C57BL/6 mice (n = 10) that had undergone DH stroke, and placing the dissected tissue 
into two sterile 15 ml conical centrifuge tubes containing 750 μl of the same cell culture 
media that was used for the subsequent primary neuron cultures (serum-free Neurobasal 
media, 1× B27 supplement, L-glutamine, and penicillin/streptomycin, without protease/
phosphatase inhibitors; Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each region, the dissected tissue from 
each C57BL/6 mouse was pooled into one conical tube, which eventually contained 10 
dissected infarcts from all 10 mice; the second conical tube contained the dissected 
equivalent area of the contralateral cortex from all 10 mice. The pooled tissue was gently 
triturated by passage through a sterile P1000 micropipette (cut with 3 size openings: 30 
times passage through the largest size opening, 20 times passage through the medium size 
opening, and 20 times passage through the smallest size opening). Dissociated cells were 
centrifuged at 300 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. 10 μl of the supernatant was pipetted onto a 
hemocytometer to confirm the absence of cells under phase contrast microscopy. The 
remaining supernatant was collected and transferred into a new conical tube. The pellet was 
re-suspended in 750 μl of fresh culture media, followed by gentle trituration with a P1000 
pipet (10 times passage through the largest size opening), and re-centrifuged at 300 rpm for 
10 min at 4 °C. 10 μl of this supernatant was pipetted onto a microscope slide and viewed 
under phase contrast to confirm once again the absence of cells. The remaining supernatant 
was collected and combined with the supernatant from the first trituration. The pellet was 
resuspended in fresh culture media, and 10 μl was treated with a LIVE/DEAD viability/
cytotoxicity assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat. No. L3224), according to the 
manufacturer’s directions, to quantify the percentage of cell lysis resulting from the 
trituration process. We found that mechanical dissociation caused an average of 7.7% cell 
Zbesko et al.
Page 6
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 death (stained by ethidium homodimer-1 as a marker for cell death and calcein-AM as a 
marker for cell viability) in the pellets generated from the infarcts, and an average of 8.6% 
cell death in the pellets generated from the equivalent areas of the control contralateral 
cortices. The protein concentrations of the infarct supernatant and the contralateral cortex 
supernatant were then measured via a Direct Detect spectrometer, and normalized to 4 
mg/ml of total protein. The extracellular fluid samples were then stored at −80°C until 
treatment. The isolation of extracellular fluid was repeated in three separate experiments (n 
= 3 sets of biological samples), with the exception that for the second and third repeat, the 
infarct and contralateral cortex were dissected from 5 mice and triturated in 350 μl of culture 
media.
2.10. Primary neuronal cultures and cell survival assays
Primary cortical and hippocampal neuron cultures were prepared from timed-pregnant 
C57BL/6 mice on embryonic day 16 (E16) and allowed to mature for 7 days, as previously 
described (Yang et al., 2006; Yang et al., 2008; Yang et al., 2016), before experimentation. 
Tissue culture wells were coated with 10 μg/mL poly-L-lysine in 0.1 M PBS. Cells were 
incubated in DMEM/F12 containing 10% fetal bovine serum for the first 2–4 h, and 
subsequently maintained in serum-free Neurobasal media with 1× B27 supplement, L-
glutamine, and penicillin/streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Neurons were seeded in 
24-well plates at a density of 30,000–40,000 cells per well, and allowed to mature for 7 
days. Cell survival following 4 hour exposure to extracellular fluid isolated from either the 
chronic stroke infarcts or the equivalent area of the contralateral cortex was measured by 
using the ViaLight Plus Bioassay kit (Lonza, Cat. No. LT07), according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. This highly sensitive assay allows for the bioluminescent 
detection of cellular ATP as a measure of viability (i.e., the number of living cells in 
culture). Cortical neurons received a 1:4 dilution of each of the 4 mg/ml extracellular fluid 
samples. Hippocampal neurons received either a 1:1, 1:4, or 1:9 dilution of each of the 4 
mg/ml extracellular fluid samples. Control wells were treated with culture media as a 
negative control, and 500 μM (for the 1:1 dilution) of monosodium glutamate (MSG) as a 
positive control. Samples were run in quadruplicate and the cell survival assay experiment 
was repeated in 3 independent neuron preparations.
2.11. Dextran injections
To determine the permeability of the glial scar, 7-week-old and 12-week-old DH stroke 
infarcts (n = 3 mice per experimental group) were stereotactically injected with 1 μl FITC-
labeled dextrans (0.1 mg/μl) at a rate of 0.1 μl/min, penetrating 0.2 mm into the area of 
liquefactive necrosis (molecular weights: 10,000 and 70,000 Da; Thermo Fisher Scientific). 
These dextrans have covalently bound lysine residues that permit them to be conjugated to 
surrounding biomolecules by 4% PFA mediated fixation for subsequent detection by 
fluorescence microscopy. The injection was performed surgically through the original 
craniotomy while mice were under general anesthesia. Mice were sacrificed at 6 h, 12 h, and 
24 h post-injection. Mice (n = 7) that underwent photothrombotic stroke were also injected 
with the 10,000 dalton dextran at 7 weeks post-stroke through a new craniotomy exposing 
the infarct. These mice were sacrificed at 12 h post-injection. To determine the permeability 
of the blood vessels in the peri-infarct location, mice (n = 3–4 per group) were also injected 
Zbesko et al.
Page 7
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 into the circulation via intraperitoneal injection with 250 μl Texas Red-labeled dextrans (8 
mg/ml) (molecular weight: 10,000 Da; Thermo Fisher Scientific), and were sacrificed at 20 
min, 6 h, 12 h, and 24 h post-injection following 7 weeks post-stroke. Post-hoc Nissl 
staining was used to confirm that the stereotaxic injection into the infarct through the 
original craniotomy did not damage or penetrate the glial scar. To quantify dextran 
endocytosis in the glial scar, dextran positive cells were counted, and the percentage that 
were double positive for either GFAP or Iba1 was determined. Counts from multiple fields 
of view within the glial scar for each animal were averaged to generate a single value per 
mouse.
2.12. Quantitative evaluations of brain atrophy, hippocampal enlargement, and neuron loss
Atrophy of the ipsilateral hemisphere was evaluated by calculating the volume of each 
hemisphere through manual tracing using ImageJ analysis software (NIH) in 6 brain sections 
(40 μm thick and 1 mm apart) per mouse (n = 3–7 mice per experimental group) that 
underwent DH stroke or sham surgery, or were untreated (naive). Stroked mice were 
euthanized at 3 days, 1 week, or 12 weeks following surgery, and sham mice were 
euthanized at 12 weeks following surgery. Data is presented as the ratio of the volume of the 
ipsilateral hemisphere/contralateral hemisphere. To quantify hippocampal enlargement, 
measurements of hippocampal regions CA1–3 in Nissl stained tissue were obtained (n = 3–7 
mice per experimental group). To quantify neuron loss, ChAT+ neurons were counted with 
an automated (Analyze Particles) function using ImageJ analysis software in the cortex 
adjacent to the infarct, as well as in the equivalent contralateral cortical region. Two sections 
per mouse (n = 3–7 mice per experimental group), and one 10× field containing the motor/
somatosensory areas of each hemisphere between bregma −0.46 mm and −1.94 mm per 
section were analyzed. Data is presented as the ratio of the number of ChAT+ neurons in the 
ipsilateral/contralateral hemisphere. As an additional measure of neuron loss, the ratio of the 
percentage of the area stained by NeuN+ cells in multiple peri-infarct locations (peri-infarct 
cortex, hippocampus, striatum, and external capsule) was measured using ImageJ analysis 
software and compared to the equivalent locations on the contralateral hemisphere. Both the 
peri-infarct cortex and striatum were measured at bregma 0.02, while the hippocampus and 
external capsule were measured at −1.94 (n = 4–6 mice per experimental group).
2.13. Statistical analysis
Multiplex immunoassays were performed with blinding to experimental condition. However, 
blinding was not possible for immunostaining experiments because of the infarct being 
visible in stroked mice. Data are expressed as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). 
Statistical analyses were performed with Prism 6.0 software (GraphPad), with the level of 
significance set at p < .05. Differences in blood vessel density were analyzed using a one-
way ANOVA, in conjunction with Tukey’s multiple comparisons post hoc method. 
Measurement of Evans Blue extravasation was assessed by a Student’s t-test. For multiplex 
immunoassay experiments, differences in protein concentrations in experiments with two 
experimental groups were analyzed by a Student’s t-test. Differences in protein 
concentrations in experiments with three or more experimental groups were analyzed by 
one-way ANOVA. For the extracellular fluid toxicity experiment, the data were analyzed 
using a one-way ANOVA per dilution, followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons post hoc 
Zbesko et al.
Page 8
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 test. Measurements of dextran leakage and endocytosis in the glial scar were analyzed using 
a two-way ANOVA, followed by Sidak’s multiple comparisons post hoc method. Atrophy of 
the ipsilateral hemisphere in the weeks following DH stroke was assessed by one-way 
ANOVA, followed by Sidak’s multiple comparisons post hoc method. ChAT 
immunohistochemistry data were analyzed using a Student’s t-test and NeuN 
immunohistochemistry data were analyzed using one-way ANOVA.
3. Results
3.1. Neovascularization following stroke results in a population of leaky microvessels
Prior to assessing the overall toxicity of the extracellular fluid present in areas of liquefactive 
necrosis, and the barrier properties of glial scars following a stroke model of CNS injury, we 
sought to further characterize the stage of liquefactive necrosis, with the goal of evaluating 
what potentially neurotoxic factors are present during this stage of chronic infarction.
A study by Yu and colleagues using an alternative stroke model reported that stroke results 
in the formation of a network of leaky blood vessels within the infarct (Yu et al., 2007). To 
confirm this finding using our DH stroke (DMCAO plus hypoxia) model, we performed both 
H&E histological staining (Fig. 1A) and anti-CD31 (platelet endothelial cell adhesion 
molecule-1, PECAM-1; Fig. 1B) immunostaining to assess neovascularization following 
stroke. An Evans Blue permeability assay was then performed to assess the extent to which 
the new blood vessels are leaky (Fig. 1D). Both H&E staining (Fig. 1A) and CD31 
immunoreactivity (Fig. 1B) confirmed that a network of microvessels forms in the infarct in 
the first week after DH stroke. Quantitation revealed that although there was significant 
regression of these vessels between 1 week and 2 weeks, vessel density was still 
significantly increased at 7 weeks compared to 24 h following stroke (Fig. 1C, left graph). 
There was no significant change in blood vessel density in the contralateral hemisphere at 
any time point following stroke (Fig. 1C, right graph).
To determine whether the newly formed blood vessels mature into vessels with full BBB 
competency, mice were injected intraperitoneally with Evans Blue at 24 h, 1 week, and 7 
weeks following stroke, and then perfused with 0.9% saline 3 h following injection. Evans 
Blue binds to albumin (67 kDa), and therefore its concentration in the brain is a measure of 
albumin extravasation (Radu and Chernoff, 2013). Evans Blue concentration in the infarcted 
hemisphere compared to the equivalent area of the contralateral hemisphere, as measured by 
visual inspection and colorimetric assay, revealed that although the integrity of the BBB was 
largely restored between 24 h (left graph and image) and 1 week (middle graph and image) 
after stroke, a small, but significant amount of Evans Blue/albumin still leaks into the 
ipsilateral hemisphere when injected 7 weeks (right graph and image) after stroke (Fig. 1D). 
These results suggest that chronic stroke infarcts may contain molecules and proteins present 
in the circulation that are associated with neurodegeneration when their entry into the CNS 
is dysregulated. Examples of circulating factors associated with neurodegeneration include 
albumin, homocysteine, complement proteins, cholesterol, autoantibodies, and transferrin 
(Zecca et al., 2004; Koudinov and Koudinova, 2005; Obeid and Herrmann, 2006; Ankeny et 
al., 2009; Hooper et al., 2009; Iadecola, 2010).
Zbesko et al.
Page 9
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Next, we sought to determine the cause of why blood vessels within stroke infarcts are 
chronically leaky to molecules present in the plasma. Astrocytic end-feet typically provide 
complete coverage of the cerebral microvasculature in the normal, intact brain (Mathiisen et 
al., 2010), and are important for neurovascular unit function (Abbott et al., 2006). However, 
although chronic infarcts are encapsulated by astrocytes, GFAP+ staining showed that they 
contain very few astrocytes within (Fig. 2A). Therefore, blood vessels that form in the 
infarct in the aftermath of stroke appear to be largely devoid of astrocyte support. We also 
performed an NG2 immunostain to determine whether NG2+ pericytes are present on the 
blood vessels that form within the area of liquefactive necrosis following stroke. Although 
there was extensive NG2+ labeling throughout the brain of both pericytes and 
polydendrocytes, there was very little NG2+ staining within the core of the infarct (Fig. 2B).
Moreover, levels of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which are known to disrupt tight 
junctions (Yang et al., 2007), were significantly elevated in chronic stroke infarcts (Fig. 2C). 
Specifically, we discovered high concentrations of MMP2, MMP3, and MMP8 in stroke 
infarcts at 7 weeks following stroke by multiplex immunoassays. Furthermore, we also 
observed high expression of MMP9 in stroke infarcts at 7 weeks following stroke by 
immunostaining (Fig. 2D). Immunostaining for claudin-5, a constituent of tight junctions in 
the CNS, provided additional support that there is a paucity of tight junctions in blood 
vessels within chronic stroke infarcts (Fig. 2E).
Together, these findings demonstrate that stroke infarcts contain leaky blood vessels for at 
least 7 weeks following stroke, and that the leakiness of these vessels correlates with a lack 
of astrocyte support, a scarcity of tight junctions, and elevated expression of MMPs, which 
are known to interfere with tight junction formation and function. In short, areas of 
liquefactive necrosis are areas of chronic BBB compromise.
3.2. Stroke infarcts are sites of chronic inflammation
We recently provided evidence that infarcts at the stage of liquefactive necrosis are sites of 
chronic inflammation (Doyle et al., 2015; Nguyen et al., 2016). Here, we validated these 
findings, while also including additional markers of neuroinflammation, by performing 
immunostaining and multiplex immunoassays on brain tissue harvested from mice 7 weeks 
following stroke. As shown in Fig. 3A, LAMP-1 and Iba1 immunofluorescence confirmed 
that even at 7 weeks following stroke, infarcts are sites of chronically activated microglia/
macrophages. Additionally, the presence of substantial CD3 and B220 immunoreactivity in 
the infarcts corroborated that they are also sites of chronic T-lymphocyte (Fig. 3B) and B-
lymphocyte (Fig. 3C) responses, respectively. Multiplex immunoassays confirmed that 
chronic infarcts are also sites of sustained pro-inflammatory cytokine and chemokine 
expression (Fig. 3D). Specifically, there was significant elevation of IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-3, 
IP-10, IL-5, TGFβ, IL-12 (p40), IL-12 (p70), IL-17, IL-13, RANTES, IFNγ, GM-CSF, 
TNFα, MIP-1α, MCP-3, EOTAXIN, and MCP-1 levels within the infarct of the stroked 
mice compared to the equivalent area of the cortex in sham mice. Of these, IL-1, IP-10, 
IL-17, IL-13, IFNγ, TNFα, EOTAXIN, and MCP-1 (CCL2) have all been linked to 
cytotoxicity in neurons (Gelbard et al., 1993; Sui et al., 2006; Takeuchi et al., 2006; 
Zbesko et al.
Page 10
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Thornton et al., 2006; Mizuno et al., 2008; Tzartos et al., 2008; Park et al., 2009; Shichita et 
al., 2009; Yang et al., 2011; Kang et al., 2012; Parajuli et al., 2015) (Table 1).
Our data thus far, coupled with previously published findings (Yu et al., 2007; Doyle et al., 
2015; Nguyen et al., 2016), demonstrate that not only are chronic stroke infarcts sites of 
leaky neovascularization, which is associated with neurodegeneration (Iadecola, 2010), but 
also sites of sustained pro-inflammatory responses, including the expression of multiple 
cytokines and chemokines linked to neurodegeneration. Therefore, stroke infarcts at the 
stage of liquefactive necrosis are environments rich in numerous factors connected with 
neurotoxicity and neurodegeneration.
3.3. The extracellular fluid in areas of liquefactive necrosis is neurotoxic
To directly test the neurotoxicity of the extracellular milieu present in areas of liquefactive 
necrosis, we isolated the extracellular fluid from 7-week-old stroke infarcts, and compared 
its toxicity to the toxicity of the extracellular fluid isolated from the equivalent area of the 
contralateral cortex. The extracellular fluid was isolated from each brain region using a 
combination of gentle trituration and low speed centrifugation, and was verified to be cell 
free by visualization with a hemocytometer under phase contrast microscopy. To control for 
cell lysis caused by the isolation procedure, we quantified cell death using markers of cell 
membrane integrity and enzymatic activity in the remaining pellet with a standard LIVE/
DEAD viability/cytotoxicity assay, and ascertained that our technique resulted in an average 
of 7.7% cell death in the infarct samples, and an average of 8.6% cell death in the control 
samples.
The toxicity of each extracellular fluid sample was then tested separately in both primary 
cortical and hippocampal neurons after they were allowed to mature for 7 days in culture. 
Bioluminescent measurement of cellular ATP, using a cell cytotoxicity bioassay, revealed 
that within 4 h of treatment, the extracellular fluid isolated from the area of liquefactive 
necrosis was significantly more toxic to cortical (Fig. 4A) and hippocampal neurons (Fig. 
4B) compared to the same dilution (1:1, 1:4, and/or 1:9) of extracellular fluid isolated from 
the contralateral cortex.
3.4. Glial scars are permeable barriers
It is unlikely that tight junctions connect glial scar astrocytes. This is because despite 
decades of research into the localization of tight junctions within the CNS, glial scar 
astrocytes have yet to be reported to connect to each other via this mechanism. If glial scar 
astrocytes do not connect to each other with tight junctions, then glial scars are unlikely to 
form an impermeable physical barrier to neurodegenerative factors present within chronic 
stroke infarcts. Therefore, we next evaluated the ultrastructure of the glial scar to visualize 
how the astrocytes that comprise the physical front line of glial scars are inter-connected.
Scanning EM revealed glial scars in mice to be primarily comprised of twisted bundles of 
hypertrophied astrocytic processes, oriented parallel to the infarct, as previously described 
(Fig. 5A) (Wanner et al., 2013). Scanning EM in conjunction with CD3 immunostaining also 
revealed that glial scars contain T-lymphocytes (Fig. 5B). This supports a previous finding 
by Wanner and colleagues who demonstrated that glial scars corral CD45+ inflammatory 
Zbesko et al.
Page 11
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cells (Wanner et al., 2013). As expected, we found no evidence of tight junctions between 
astrocytes in the location of glial scars by transmission EM (Fig. 5C). Scanning EM of 
human stroke tissue demonstrated that the structure of the glial scar in humans is similar to 
the structure of the glial scar in mice. The human glial scar is also comprised of twisted 
bundles of hypertrophied processes oriented parallel to the infarct (Fig. 5D).
Having confirmed by transmission EM that glial scars are not tight junction barriers, we 
proceeded to assess the extent to which they are permeable to molecules present within areas 
of liquefactive necrosis. Previously, we demonstrated that within 7 weeks of stroke, isotype 
switched plasma cells are present within the infarct, and antibodies accumulate in the 
hippocampus adjacent to the infarct (Doyle et al., 2015). We provided evidence that the 
antibodies that leak into the uninfarcted tissue are from plasma cells in the infarct by 
showing that the ratio of the different antibody isotypes in the parenchyma matches the ratio 
of the isotypes in the area of liquefactive necrosis, but is different from the ratio of the 
isotypes in the plasma (Doyle et al., 2015). We also showed that the ratio of the isotypes in 
the parenchyma changes between 1 week and 7 weeks following stroke, suggesting that 
antibody leakage into uninfarcted brain regions from areas of liquefactive necrosis is a 
continuous process (Doyle et al., 2015).
To corroborate these findings, we performed immunostaining for IgG on tissue harvested at 
1 week and 7 weeks following DH stroke. As previously shown in Fig. 3C, B-lymphocytes 
were restricted to the location of the infarct and were not present in the adjacent brain tissue. 
However, IgG immunoreactivity appeared as a diffuse cloud around the area of liquefactive 
necrosis at both time points (Fig. 6A). The radiation of IgG from the area of liquefactive 
necrosis was also apparent in another strain, BALB/c mice, following DMCAO without 
hypoxia (Fig. 6B). These findings suggest that antibodies leak into the brain from areas of 
liquefactive necrosis.
To quantify the extent of putative antibody leakage across the glial scar, we performed a 
multiplex immunoassay on tissue harvested from C57BL/6 mice at 7 weeks following DH 
stroke. Results revealed that the concentration of total IgG was approximately 3-fold higher 
in the area adjacent to the infarct at 7 weeks following stroke compared to the contralateral 
hemisphere (Fig. 6C). The data also revealed that the concentration of IgG in the infarct was 
4.5-fold higher than the concentration in the area adjacent to the infarct (Fig. 6C). These 
findings suggest that while glial scars are permeable to antibodies, they are still robust 
physical barriers to their diffusion.
Additionally, we performed an immunoassay to quantify the extent of putative albumin 
leakage across the glial scar on tissue harvested at 7 weeks following DH stroke. 
Quantitation showed that the concentration of albumin was significantly increased in the 
area adjacent to the infarct at 7 weeks following stroke compared to the equivalent location 
in the contralateral hemisphere (Fig. 6D).
To determine if leakage from blood vessels in the peri-infarct location could be the source of 
the increased IgG and albumin present in the area adjacent to the infarct, we injected a 10 
kDa Texas Red-labeled dextran into the circulation of C57BL/6 mice at 7 weeks post-DH 
Zbesko et al.
Page 12
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 stroke and evaluated the extent of leakage from peri-infarct blood vessels at 20 min, 6 h, 12 
h, and 24 h following injection. Although we observed that a diffuse cloud of the Texas Red-
labeled dextran localized to peri-infarct vessels at the 6 hour, 12 hour, and 24 hour time 
points (Fig. 6E), we were unable to ascertain whether this diffusion effect was due to direct 
leakage from peri-infarct blood vessels, or alternatively was due to leakage from blood 
vessels within the infarct, followed by secondary leakage across the glial scar.
Therefore, to directly test how effectively glial scars segregate areas of liquefactive necrosis 
from adjacent brain tissue, mice were injected with a 10 kDa dextran into the area of 
liquefactive necrosis at 7 weeks following stroke, and were then euthanized 6, 12, and 24 h 
later. Nissl staining was performed on serial sections to confirm that the injections, which 
were performed through the original craniotomy, did not puncture the glial scar. Mice were 
excluded if there was visual evidence that the injection needle had penetrated into the 
parenchyma.
At each time point, the 10 kDa dextran was evident on the parenchymal side of the glial scar 
(Fig. 7A), suggesting that glial scars are permeable barriers. However, the 10 kDa dextran 
was concentrated at the location of the scar at the 6-hour and 12-hour time points (Fig. 7B). 
This observation provides further evidence that glial scars nevertheless perform a robust 
physical barrier function. The 10 kDa dextran was also concentrated at the location of the 
external capsule at the 12-hour time point suggesting that drainage through this less dense 
region of white matter fiber tracts occurs (Fig. 7A). Quantitation of the dextran indicated 
significant clearance of dextran from the parenchyma by 24 h post-injection (Fig. 7C).
To confirm that glial scar permeability is not stroke model specific, C57BL/6 mice also 
underwent photothrombotic stroke followed by 7 weeks of recovery. The 10 kDa dextran 
was injected into the infarct and mice were sacrificed 12 h later. Once more, the dextran was 
apparent on the parenchymal side of the glial scar (Fig. 7D).
To validate that larger molecules such as albumin (67 kDa) are capable of crossing glial 
scars, a separate group of mice were injected with a 70 kDa dextran into the area of 
liquefactive necrosis. For this experiment, mice were injected at 12 weeks following stroke, 
and then euthanized 24 h later. The 70 kDa dextran was detectable on the parenchymal side 
of the glial scar, with increased penetration in areas where the glial scar was comprised of 
fewer astrocytes (Fig. 7E).
3.5. Glial scars are endocytic barriers
Our transmission EM data suggested that glial scars may be endocytic barriers (Fig. 5C). To 
explore this observation in depth, we performed immunostaining with an antibody for 
scavenger receptor class D member 1 (CD68) to survey for endocytic vesicles within the 
glial scar (Fig. 8A). CD68 is also a member of the lysosomal/endosomal-associated 
membrane glycoprotein family (LAMP). CD68 immunostaining confirmed the presence of 
abundant lysosomes/endosomes within glial scars (Fig. 8A). Confocal microscopy of the 
glial scar from each mouse injected with the 10 kDa or 70 kDa dextrans also indicated that 
glial scars are endocytic barriers (Fig. 8B). Quantification of the colocalization of the 10 
kDa dextran with GFAP+ and Iba1+ cells within the glial scar, visualized by confocal 
Zbesko et al.
Page 13
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 microscopy, revealed that both of these cell types had endocytosed the dextran, albeit the 
microglia/macrophages had endocytosed the dextran to a significantly greater extent than the 
astrocytes at every time point (Fig. 8C). Furthermore, LAMP-1 immunostaining (Fig. 8D) 
and quantitation (Fig. 8E) confirmed a significant increase in LAMP-1 expression within 
both glial scar astrocytes and glial scar microglia/macrophages.
3.6. Material leaking across the glial scar is cleared by both the paravascular clearance and 
microglial endocytosis
To elucidate the mechanism(s) of clearance of material leaking across the glial scar, we next 
tracked the localization of the 10 kDa dextran within the parenchyma at 6, 12, and 24 h 
following injection (Fig. 9A). At each time point, the dextran localized to the paravascular 
space in between the lumen of blood vessels and the astrocytes that envelope them. This 
particular localization of the dextran indicates that parenchymal diffusion coupled to 
convective or dispersive flow in the paravascular spaces is a mechanism of clearance (Fig. 
9B) (Iliff et al., 2013; Smith et al., 2017). A representative scanning EM image of an 
astrocyte/blood vessel interface in the ipsilateral hemisphere at 7 weeks following stroke is 
provided in Fig. 9C. At each time point, the dextran also localized to within parenchymal 
microglia, indicating microglial endocytosis is a second mechanism of clearance (Fig. 9D).
3.7. Delayed neurodegeneration occurs in brain regions surrounding areas of liquefactive 
necrosis
The preceding evidence indicates that factors associated with neurodegeneration leak into 
the brain through permeable glial scars for months following stroke. Although there are 
mechanisms of clearance, neurons in the parenchyma still come into contact with these 
factors. Therefore, we investigated whether leakage across the glial scar correlates with 
ongoing neurodegeneration in the weeks following DH stroke.
Brain sections from mice sacrificed at 72 h, 1 week, or 12 weeks post-stroke were stained 
with Nissl, and the ratio of the volume of the ipsilateral/contralateral hemisphere was 
calculated. The data revealed that there is significant atrophy of the ipsilateral hemisphere 
between 1 week and 12 weeks following stroke (Fig. 10A & B). This finding is particularly 
evident in the area of the ipsilateral cortex (motor/somatosensory cortex, layers I–VI) 
adjacent to the infarct, where substantial thinning occurs between these time points.
Nissl staining also revealed significant swelling of neuronal cell bodies in the ipsilateral 
hippocampus compared to the contralateral hippocampus of stroked mice, or the 
hippocampus of naive mice at 12 weeks post-stroke (Fig. 10C & D). This finding is 
indicative of cytotoxic edema. The hippocampus is not infarcted by DH stroke (Doyle et al., 
2012; Doyle et al., 2015), therefore chronic edema in the hippocampus following DH stroke 
may be a premorbid cellular response resulting from failure of the glial scar to sequester 
neurotoxic factors present within the infarct (Liang et al., 2007).
To further assess for delayed neurodegeneration in the weeks following stroke, a ChAT 
immunostain for cholinergic neurons was performed on tissue from mice sacrificed at 1 
week and 7 weeks following stroke. Cholinergic neurons and their projections to cortical and 
hippocampal targets are critical for attention and cognition, and are particularly vulnerable 
Zbesko et al.
Page 14
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 in aging, neurodegenerative disease, and dementia (Davies and Maloney, 1976; Whitehouse 
et al., 1982). We found significant loss of ChAT+ neurons in the cortex adjacent to the 
infarct between 1 week and 7 weeks (Fig. 10E & F), indicating a delayed loss of cholinergic 
neurons in the motor/somatosensory cortex adjacent to the infarct. Neurodegeneration in the 
weeks following DH stroke was further confirmed by NeuN immunostaining. We saw a 
reduction of NeuN + staining in the peri-infarct cortex and external capsule, but not the 
striatum or hippocampus, between 1 week and 8 weeks following stroke (Fig. 10G & H), 
which was confirmed by quantitation (Fig. 10I).
Together, these data demonstrate that leakage of factors associated with neurodegeneration 
into the brain through permeable glial scars correlates with degeneration of neurons in 
adjacent brain regions in the weeks following stroke.
4. Discussion
Glial scars encircle damaged tissue after stroke and other injuries in the CNS, and are 
essential for repair (Wanner et al., 2013). They can take longer than two weeks to fully 
encapsulate infarcted tissue, and although they were long viewed as a barrier to regeneration, 
recent evidence indicate that they actually help rather than inhibit axonal regeneration 
(Anderson et al., 2016). The primary cellular constituents of glial scars are astrocytes and 
microglia/macrophages, with the border zone that interfaces with the infarct comprised of a 
frontline of elongated, hypertrophied astrocytes (Wanner et al., 2013).
The tissue enclosed by glial scars undergoes liquefactive necrosis (Robbins et al., 2010). 
Much less is known about the liquefactive necrosis stage of infarction than the acute stage of 
infarction, and infarcts are more typically referred to as chronic infarcts at this stage. 
However, there is a spectrum of pathology at the chronic stage of infarction and the term 
liquefactive necrosis allows differentiation between the stage when microglia/macrophages 
and proteolytic enzymes predominate, and the stage of cystic encephalomalacia, when all 
that is left is a CSF filled cavity surrounded by a glial scar border.
How long it takes for stroke infarcts to transition from the stage of liquefactive necrosis to 
the stage of cystic encephalomalacia is unknown, and the fact that up to one-third of stroke 
sufferers develop dementia raises the possibility that insufficient containment of the milieu 
in areas of liquefactive necrosis may be a cause of neurodegeneration in areas surrounding 
stroke infarcts (Kalaria et al., 2016). Although previous studies demonstrate that glial scars 
are effective at corralling CD45+ inflammatory cells (Wanner et al., 2013), how effectively 
they contain the extracellular fluid was undetermined.
Therefore, the first objective of this study was to further characterize the extracellular fluid 
present within chronic stroke infarcts during the stage of liquefactive necrosis, and to 
determine whether it is neurotoxic. The second objective was to determine how effectively 
glial scars seal the area of liquefactive necrosis following stroke, and to identify the cellular 
and molecular mechanisms involved. To accomplish these objectives, we used a mouse 
model of stroke in conjunction with an extracellular fluid toxicity assay, fluorescence and 
Zbesko et al.
Page 15
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 electron microscopy, immunohistochemistry, tracer injections into the infarct, and multiplex 
immunoassays.
There was a strong rationale for the hypothesis that the extracellular milieu within areas of 
liquefactive necrosis is neurotoxic. Tissue around chronic stroke infarcts atrophies in the 
weeks and months following stroke (Skriver and Olsen, 1986; Skriver et al., 1990), there is 
BBB dysfunction in the infarct for months following stroke (Wardlaw et al., 2009; Topakian 
et al., 2010; Yang and Rosenberg, 2011), and in the mouse model of stroke that we used, in 
which the infarct is located adjacent to the hippocampus, the hippocampus develops a 
delayed deficit in long-term potentiation in the weeks following stroke (Doyle et al., 2015).
To isolate the extracellular fluid from the area of liquefactive necrosis, we developed a novel 
procedure designed to minimize cellular lysis and the release of DAMPs and endogenous 
proteases. Nevertheless, our isolation procedure resulted in approximately 8% cell death 
during the isolation in both the cells separated from the extracellular fluid in the area of 
liquefactive necrosis, and the cells separated from the extracellular fluid in the control 
cortex. While this demonstrates that the isolation procedure was similarly damaging to both 
types of tissue, each region consists of different cell populations. Therefore, the actual 
amount of DAMPs and proteases released by the extraction of the extracellular fluid from 
each region is likely to be discordant. With this limitation as a caveat, the extracellular fluid 
isolated from the area of liquefactive necrosis was substantially more toxic to neurons than 
the control extracellular fluid isolated from an equivalent area of the contralateral 
hemisphere using the same procedure.
The validity of our finding that the extracellular fluid present in the area of liquefactive 
necrosis is neurotoxic is bolstered by two probable explanations. First, we found that 
neovasculogenesis in the infarct results in a leaky population of microvessels in this location. 
This finding replicates results from other stroke models, where it has been proposed that 
neovascularization following stroke facilitates the transportation of peripheral immune cells 
to the area of damage to participate in the breakdown and removal of dead tissue 
(Manoonkitiwongsa et al., 2001; Yu et al., 2007). Although it has been proposed that this 
population of vessels is transient, the data we present here, as well as published data (Yu et 
al., 2007), demonstrate that their resorption following CNS injury is very gradual.
The presence of leaky blood vessels in the area of liquefactive necrosis signifies that the 
extracellular fluid in this location contains plasma. The dysregulated entry of plasma solutes 
into the brain is neurotoxic. For example, leakage of albumin into the brain is associated 
with epileptogenesis (Ivens et al., 2007; Weissberg et al., 2015). This finding is relevant to 
glial scar function because for a chronic undefined time period following CNS injury, blood 
vessels in areas of liquefactive necrosis leak plasma proteins, which then have a route into 
the brain through permeable glial scars. In support of the likelihood that this phenomenon 
happens in the weeks following stroke, we demonstrated here that (i) albumin leaks into 
areas of liquefactive necrosis for at least 7 weeks following stroke, (ii) a 70 kDa tracer with a 
similar molecular weight to albumin can leak across the glial scar, and (iii) the concentration 
of albumin in brain tissue adjacent to an area of liquefactive necrosis is higher than the 
concentration of albumin in an equivalent area in the contralateral hemisphere.
Zbesko et al.
Page 16
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The presence of leaky blood vessels within chronic infarcts and permeable glial scars 
surrounding chronic infarcts has important implications for drug delivery following stroke. It 
suggests that drugs or compounds that target the prolonged inflammatory response within 
the infarct, as well as the vulnerable neurons that surround the infarct, can be delivered by 
systemic injection for months following stroke. Furthermore, because our data indicate that 
blood vessels in areas of liquefactive necrosis may be leaky due to high levels of MMP 
expression, these MMPs could be exploited for MMP activated drug targeting (Vartak and 
Gemeinhart, 2007). Additional experiments are required to determine the pharmacokinetics 
of drug penetration into areas of liquefactive necrosis, drug diffusion across glial scars, and 
to determine if the presence of MMPs can be exploited to help drug delivery to this location.
The second probable explanation for why the extracellular fluid in areas of liquefactive 
necrosis is more toxic to neurons than extracellular fluid isolated from control brain tissue, is 
that we show that this fluid contains MMPs, antibodies, and multiple cytokines and 
chemokines associated with neurotoxicity. A summary of their putative mode of toxicity is 
provided in Table 1. Most of these proteins, with the exception of antibodies, are between 10 
and 70 kDa in size, which are the sizes of the fluorescent (dextran) tracers used in our 
experiments to evaluate glial scar permeability. It remains to be determined how the 
composition and toxicity of the extracellular fluid in the area of liquefactive necrosis 
changes over time, and how it is impacted by genetics and different stroke comorbidities.
With regard to glial scar permeability, we have shown that despite glial scars being both 
robust physical and endocytic barriers, they do not form a perfect seal. They are permeable 
to a 10 and 70 kDa tracer injected into the area of liquefactive necrosis for at least 12 weeks 
following stroke. With regard to the fate of molecules, such as these tracers, which leak 
across the glial scar, our data show that they are both endocytosed by microglia/
macrophages in the adjacent tissue, as well as removed by a paravascular clearance 
mechanism. Importantly, even with these removal mechanisms, neurons in areas adjacent to 
sites of liquefactive necrosis are under a continuous mild assault for months following 
stroke. We propose that this is one cause of delayed neurodegeneration and brain atrophy 
following stroke.
It is of course unlikely that this is the only cause of delayed neurodegeneration following 
stroke. Physical disruption caused by the stroke disconnects many neurons and may cause 
transneuronal degeneration (Fornito et al., 2015). Physical disruption may also reduce the 
effectiveness of the paravascular space to remove metabolic waste products and other 
potentially neurotoxic interstitial solutes from the interstitial fluid in the ipsilateral 
hemisphere (Wang et al., 2017). These mechanisms almost certainly also contribute to 
delayed neurodegeneration following stroke.
The containment of the area of liquefactive necrosis is potentially improvable by therapeutic 
intervention. Following spinal cord injury, signaling by IL-6 and phosphorylated (p) STAT3 
in reactive astrocytes is required for proper establishment of the glial scar (Okada et al., 
2004; Wanner et al., 2013). Conversely, SOCS3 signaling interferes with the establishment 
of the glial scar (Okada et al., 2006; Hackett et al., 2016). It is likely that the pSTAT3/
SOCS3 pathway also modulates formation of the glial scar in the brain following stroke. 
Zbesko et al.
Page 17
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Indeed, in support of this possibility, multiple research groups have reported a coordinated 
and long-lasting upregulation of gp130 mRNA and STAT3 activation in reactive astrocytes 
following cerebral ischemia (Suzuki et al., 2001; Choi et al., 2003; Raible et al., 2014). 
Therefore, targeting pSTAT3/SOCS3 signaling in the brain following stroke could be a 
method of accelerating and enhancing formation of the glial scar, and consequently creating 
a more robust barrier to sequester areas of liquefactive necrosis from uninfarcted tissue. 
Evidence that enhancing this containment may improve recovery comes from converse 
studies using mice in which proliferating astrocytes have been conditionally ablated. These 
mice have impaired recovery following CNS injury (Myer et al., 2006).
This study has several potential limitations. For example, we have not determined if the 
containment function of the glial scar is impacted by age. Whether age has an impact is 
significant because the average age of stroke sufferers is 68 years (Kissela et al., 2012). 
Future studies are needed to address whether older animals build a more robust glial scar, or 
if alternatively, glial scar formation is less coordinated and allows increased leakage of 
neurotoxic factors from the infarct into the surviving brain tissue. There is evidence for both 
possibilities. Although expression of the reactive astrocyte marker GFAP increases with 
aging (Nichols et al., 1993; Lee et al., 2000), as does reactive astrogliosis after injury (Badan 
et al., 2003), recovery from stroke is poorer in older animals (Badan et al., 2003).
Another possible limitation is that we have yet to interrogate the barrier function of each of 
the different extracellular matrix molecules present within glial scars. For example, 
astrocytes can produce four different types of proteoglycan: heparan sulphate proteoglycan, 
dermatan sulphate proteoglycan, keratan sulphate proteoglycan, and chondroitin sulphate 
proteoglycan (Silver and Miller, 2004), each of which may play a different role in 
sequestering the area of liquefactive necrosis from the rest of the brain during recovery from 
stroke. More research is needed to delineate the role of each component of the extracellular 
matrix in the containment function of glial scars.
In summary, these findings demonstrate that glial scars are not perfect repairs, and the 
incomplete sealing of sites of liquefactive necrosis allows entry of neurotoxic factors present 
in stroke infarcts into the surrounding parenchyma for months following stroke. To our 
knowledge this significant defect has not been previously explicitly recognized or 
investigated, and we propose that it has substantial implications for the delayed 
neurodegeneration and brain dysfunction seen months to years after stroke, as well as after 
other types of CNS injury.
Acknowledgments
This work was funded by NIH K99NR013593 (KPD), NIH R01NS096091 (KPD), NIH F31NS105455 (JCZ), the 
Phoenix Chapter of ARCS Foundation, Inc. (JCZ), and start-up funding provided by the University of Arizona, 
Tucson. We are grateful to the Banner Sun Health Research Institute for providing the human tissue sample. The 
Brain and Body Donation Program is supported by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke 
(U24 NS072026 National Brain and Tissue Resource for Parkinson’s Disease and Related Disorders), the National 
Institute on Aging (P30 AG19610 Arizona Alzheimer’s Disease Core Center), the Arizona Department of Health 
Services (contract 211002, Arizona Alzheimer’s Research Center), the Arizona Biomedical Research Commission 
(contracts 4001, 0011, 05-90, and 1001 to the Arizona Parkinson’s Disease Consortium), and the Michael J. Fox 
Foundation for Parkinson’s Research.
Zbesko et al.
Page 18
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
Abbott NJ, Ronnback L, Hansson E. Astrocyte-endothelial interactions at the blood-brain barrier. Nat 
Rev Neurosci. 2006; 7:41–53. [PubMed: 16371949] 
Anderson MA, Burda JE, Ren Y, Ao Y, O’Shea TM, Kawaguchi R, Coppola G, Khakh BS, Deming 
TJ, Sofroniew MV. Astrocyte scar formation aids central nervous system axon regeneration. Nature. 
2016; 532:195–200. [PubMed: 27027288] 
Ankeny DP, Popovich PG. B cells and autoantibodies: complex roles in CNS injury. Trends Immunol. 
2010; 31:332–338. [PubMed: 20691635] 
Ankeny DP, Guan Z, Popovich PG. B cells produce pathogenic antibodies and impair recovery after 
spinal cord injury in mice. J Clin Invest. 2009; 119:2990–2999. [PubMed: 19770513] 
Badan I, Buchhold B, Hamm A, Gratz M, Walker LC, Platt D, Kessler C, Popa-Wagner A. Accelerated 
glial reactivity to stroke in aged rats correlates with reduced functional recovery. J Cereb Blood 
Flow Metab. 2003; 23:845–854. [PubMed: 12843788] 
Barba R, Martinez-Espinosa S, Rodriguez-Garcia E, Pondal M, Vivancos J, Del Ser T. Poststroke 
dementia: clinical features and risk factors. Stroke. 2000; 31:1494–1501. [PubMed: 10884443] 
Beach TG, et al. Arizona study of aging and neurodegenerative disorders and Brain and Body 
Donation Program. Neuropathology. 2015; 35:354–389. [PubMed: 25619230] 
Bejot Y, Aboa-Eboule C, Durier J, Rouaud O, Jacquin A, Ponavoy E, Richard D, Moreau T, Giroud M. 
Prevalence of early dementia after first-ever stroke: a 24-year population-based study. Stroke. 2011; 
42:607–612. [PubMed: 21233464] 
Bush TG, Puvanachandra N, Horner CH, Polito A, Ostenfeld T, Svendsen CN, Mucke L, Johnson MH, 
Sofroniew MV. Leukocyte infiltration, neuronal degeneration, and neurite outgrowth after ablation 
of scar-forming, reactive astrocytes in adult transgenic mice. Neuron. 1999; 23:297–308. [PubMed: 
10399936] 
Cekanaviciute E, Buckwalter MS. Astrocytes: integrative regulators of neuroinflammation in stroke 
and other neurological diseases. Neurotherapeutics. 2016; 13:685–701. [PubMed: 27677607] 
Choi JS, Kim SY, Cha JH, Choi YS, Sung KW, Oh ST, Kim ON, Chung JW, Chun MH, Lee SB, Lee 
MY. Upregulation of gp130 and STAT3 activation in the rat hippocampus following transient 
forebrain ischemia. Glia. 2003; 41:237–246. [PubMed: 12528179] 
Davies P, Maloney AJ. Selective loss of central cholinergic neurons in Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet. 
1976; 2:1403.
Doyle KP, Buckwalter MS. Does B lymphocyte-mediated autoimmunity contribute to post-stroke 
dementia? Brain Behav Immun. 2016; 64:1–8. [PubMed: 27531189] 
Doyle KP, Fathali N, Siddiqui MR, Buckwalter MS. Distal hypoxic stroke: a new mouse model of 
stroke with high throughput, low variability and a quantifiable functional deficit. J Neurosci 
Methods. 2012; 207:31–40. [PubMed: 22465679] 
Doyle KP, Quach LN, Sole M, Axtell RC, Nguyen TV, Soler-Llavina GJ, Jurado S, Han J, Steinman L, 
Longo FM, Schneider JA, Malenka RC, Buckwalter MS. B-lymphocyte-mediated delayed 
cognitive impairment following stroke. J Neurosci. 2015; 35:2133–2145. [PubMed: 25653369] 
Farina C, Aloisi F, Meinl E. Astrocytes are active players in cerebral innate immunity. Trends 
Immunol. 2007; 28:138–145. [PubMed: 17276138] 
Fornito A, Zalesky A, Breakspear M. The connectomics of brain disorders. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2015; 
16:159–172. [PubMed: 25697159] 
Fujimoto M, Takagi Y, Aoki T, Hayase M, Marumo T, Gomi M, Nishimura M, Kataoka H, Hashimoto 
N, Nozaki K. Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases protect blood-brain barrier disruption in focal 
cerebral ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2008; 28:1674–1685. [PubMed: 18560439] 
Gelbard HA, Dzenko KA, DiLoreto D, del Cerro C, del Cerro M, Epstein LG. Neurotoxic effects of 
tumor necrosis factor alpha in primary human neuronal cultures are mediated by activation of the 
glutamate AMPA receptor subtype: implications for AIDS neuropathogenesis. Dev Neurosci. 
1993; 15:417–422. [PubMed: 7835247] 
Hackett AR, Lee DH, Dawood A, Rodriguez M, Funk L, Tsoulfas P, Lee JK. STAT3 and SOCS3 
regulate NG2 cell proliferation and differentiation after contusive spinal cord injury. Neurobiol 
Dis. 2016; 89:10–22. [PubMed: 26804026] 
Zbesko et al.
Page 19
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Hooper C, Pinteaux-Jones F, Fry VA, Sevastou IG, Baker D, Heales SJ, Pocock JM. Differential effects 
of albumin on microglia and macrophages; implications for neurodegeneration following blood-
brain barrier damage. J Neurochem. 2009; 109:694–705. [PubMed: 19187440] 
Iadecola C. The overlap between neurodegenerative and vascular factors in the pathogenesis of 
dementia. Acta Neuropathol. 2010; 120:287–296. [PubMed: 20623294] 
Iliff JJ, Wang M, Zeppenfeld DM, Venkataraman A, Plog BA, Liao Y, Deane R, Nedergaard M. 
Cerebral arterial pulsation drives paravascular CSF-interstitial fluid exchange in the murine brain. 
J Neurosci. 2013; 33:18190–18199. [PubMed: 24227727] 
Ivens S, Kaufer D, Flores LP, Bechmann I, Zumsteg D, Tomkins O, Seiffert E, Heinemann U, 
Friedman A. TGF-beta receptor-mediated albumin uptake into astrocytes is involved in neocortical 
epileptogenesis. Brain. 2007; 130:535–547. [PubMed: 17121744] 
Kalaria RN, Akinyemi R, Ihara M. Stroke injury, cognitive impairment and vascular dementia. 
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016; 1862:915–925. [PubMed: 26806700] 
Kang Z, Liu L, Spangler R, Spear C, Wang C, Gulen MF, Veenstra M, Ouyang W, Ransohoff RM, Li 
X. IL-17-induced Act1-mediated signaling is critical for cuprizone-induced demyelination. J 
Neurosci. 2012; 32:8284–8292. [PubMed: 22699909] 
Kang Z, Wang C, Zepp J, Wu L, Sun K, Zhao J, Chandrasekharan U, DiCorleto PE, Trapp BD, 
Ransohoff RM, Li X. Act1 mediates IL-17-induced EAE pathogenesis selectively in NG2+ glial 
cells. Nat Neurosci. 2013; 16:1401–1408. [PubMed: 23995070] 
Kissela BM, Khoury JC, Alwell K, Moomaw CJ, Woo D, Adeoye O, Flaherty ML, Khatri P, Ferioli S, 
De Los Rios La Rosa F, Broderick JP, Kleindorfer DO. Age at stroke: temporal trends in stroke 
incidence in a large, biracial population. Neurology. 2012; 79:1781–1787. [PubMed: 23054237] 
Koudinov AR, Koudinova NV. Cholesterol homeostasis failure as a unifying cause of synaptic 
degeneration. J Neurol Sci. 2005; 229–230:233–240.
Lee CK, Weindruch R, Prolla TA. Gene-expression profile of the ageing brain in mice. Nat Genet. 
2000; 25:294–297. [PubMed: 10888876] 
Leys D, Henon H, Mackowiak-Cordoliani MA, Pasquier F. Poststroke dementia. Lancet Neurol. 2005; 
4:752–759. [PubMed: 16239182] 
Liang D, Bhatta S, Gerzanich V, Simard JM. Cytotoxic edema: mechanisms of pathological cell 
swelling. Neurosurg Focus. 2007; 22:E2.
Manoonkitiwongsa PS, Jackson-Friedman C, McMillan PJ, Schultz RL, Lyden PD. Angiogenesis after 
stroke is correlated with increased numbers of macrophages: the clean-up hypothesis. J Cereb 
Blood Flow Metab. 2001; 21:1223–1231. [PubMed: 11598500] 
Mathiisen TM, Lehre KP, Danbolt NC, Ottersen OP. The perivascular astroglial sheath provides a 
complete covering of the brain microvessels: an electron microscopic 3D reconstruction. Glia. 
2010; 58:1094–1103. [PubMed: 20468051] 
Mizuno T, Zhang G, Takeuchi H, Kawanokuchi J, Wang J, Sonobe Y, Jin S, Takada N, Komatsu Y, 
Suzumura A. Interferon-gamma directly induces neurotoxicity through a neuron specific, calcium-
permeable complex of IFN-gamma receptor and AMPA GluR1 receptor. FASEB J. 2008; 
22:1797–1806. [PubMed: 18198214] 
Mroczko B, Groblewska M, Barcikowska M. The role of matrix metalloproteinases and tissue 
inhibitors of metalloproteinases in the pathophysiology of neurodegeneration: a literature study. J 
Alzheimers Dis. 2013; 37:273–283. [PubMed: 23792694] 
Myer DJ, Gurkoff GG, Lee SM, Hovda DA, Sofroniew MV. Essential protective roles of reactive 
astrocytes in traumatic brain injury. Brain. 2006; 129:2761–2772. [PubMed: 16825202] 
Nguyen TV, Frye JB, Zbesko JC, Stepanovic K, Hayes M, Urzua A, Serrano G, Beach TG, Doyle KP. 
Multiplex immunoassay characterization and species comparison of inflammation in acute and 
non-acute ischemic infarcts in human and mouse brain tissue. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2016; 
4:100. [PubMed: 27600707] 
Nichols NR, Day JR, Laping NJ, Johnson SA, Finch CE. GFAP mRNA increases with age in rat and 
human brain. Neurobiol Aging. 1993; 14:421–429. [PubMed: 8247224] 
Obeid R, Herrmann W. Mechanisms of homocysteine neurotoxicity in neurodegenerative diseases with 
special reference to dementia. FEBS Lett. 2006; 580:2994–3005. [PubMed: 16697371] 
Zbesko et al.
Page 20
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Okada S, Nakamura M, Mikami Y, Shimazaki T, Mihara M, Ohsugi Y, Iwamoto Y, Yoshizaki K, 
Kishimoto T, Toyama Y, Okano H. Blockade of interleukin-6 receptor suppresses reactive 
astrogliosis and ameliorates functional recovery in experimental spinal cord injury. J Neurosci Res. 
2004; 76:265–276. [PubMed: 15048924] 
Okada S, Nakamura M, Katoh H, Miyao T, Shimazaki T, Ishii K, Yamane J, Yoshimura A, Iwamoto Y, 
Toyama Y, Okano H. Conditional ablation of Stat3 or Socs3 discloses a dual role for reactive 
astrocytes after spinal cord injury. Nat Med. 2006; 12:829–834. [PubMed: 16783372] 
Parajuli B, Horiuchi H, Mizuno T, Takeuchi H, Suzumura A. CCL11 enhances excitotoxic neuronal 
death by producing reactive oxygen species in microglia. Glia. 2015; 63:2274–2284. [PubMed: 
26184677] 
Park KW, Baik HH, Jin BK. IL-13-induced oxidative stress via microglial NADPH oxidase contributes 
to death of hippocampal neurons in vivo. J Immunol. 2009; 183:4666–4674. [PubMed: 19752235] 
Pekny M, Nilsson M. Astrocyte activation and reactive gliosis. Glia. 2005; 50:427–434. [PubMed: 
15846805] 
Radu M, Chernoff J. An in vivo assay to test blood vessel permeability. J Vis Exp. 2013:e50062. 
[PubMed: 23524912] 
Raible DJ, Frey LC, Brooks-Kayal AR. Effects of JAK2-STAT3 signaling after cerebral insults. 
JAKSTAT. 2014; 3:e29510. [PubMed: 25105066] 
Robbins, SL., Kumar, V., Cotran, RS. Robbins and Cotran Pathologic Basis of Disease. 8. Saunders/
Elsevier; Philadelphia, PA: 2010. 
Shichita T, Sugiyama Y, Ooboshi H, Sugimori H, Nakagawa R, Takada I, Iwaki T, Okada Y, Iida M, 
Cua DJ, Iwakura Y, Yoshimura A. Pivotal role of cerebral interleukin-17-producing gammadeltaT 
cells in the delayed phase of ischemic brain injury. Nat Med. 2009; 15:946–950. [PubMed: 
19648929] 
Silver J, Miller JH. Regeneration beyond the glial scar. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2004; 5:146–156. [PubMed: 
14735117] 
Skriver EB, Olsen TS. Edema and atrophy following cerebral stroke. A prospective and consecutive 
study. Acta Radiol Suppl. 1986; 369:43–45. [PubMed: 2980518] 
Skriver EB, Olsen TS, McNair P. Mass effect and atrophy after stroke. Acta Radiol. 1990; 31:431–438. 
[PubMed: 2261285] 
Smith AJ, Yao X, Dix JA, Jin BJ, Verkman AS. Test of the ‘glymphatic’ hypothesis demonstrates 
diffusive and aquaporin-4-independent solute transport in rodent brain parenchyma. elife. 2017:6.
Sui Y, Stehno-Bittel L, Li S, Loganathan R, Dhillon NK, Pinson D, Nath A, Kolson D, Narayan O, 
Buch S. CXCL10-induced cell death in neurons: role of calcium dysregulation. Eur J Neurosci. 
2006; 23:957–964. [PubMed: 16519660] 
Suzuki S, Tanaka K, Nogawa S, Dembo T, Kosakai A, Fukuuchi Y. Phosphorylation of signal 
transducer and activator of transcription-3 (Stat3) after focal cerebral ischemia in rats. Exp Neurol. 
2001; 170:63–71. [PubMed: 11421584] 
Takeuchi H, Jin S, Wang J, Zhang G, Kawanokuchi J, Kuno R, Sonobe Y, Mizuno T, Suzumura A. 
Tumor necrosis factor-alpha induces neurotoxicity via glutamate release from hemichannels of 
activated microglia in an autocrine manner. J Biol Chem. 2006; 281:21362–21368. [PubMed: 
16720574] 
Thornton P, Pinteaux E, Gibson RM, Allan SM, Rothwell NJ. Interleukin-1-induced neurotoxicity is 
mediated by glia and requires caspase activation and free radical release. J Neurochem. 2006; 
98:258–266. [PubMed: 16805812] 
Topakian R, Barrick TR, Howe FA, Markus HS. Blood-brain barrier permeability is increased in 
normal-appearing white matter in patients with lacunar stroke and leucoaraiosis. J Neurol 
Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2010; 81:192–197. [PubMed: 19710048] 
Tzartos JS, Friese MA, Craner MJ, Palace J, Newcombe J, Esiri MM, Fugger L. Interleukin-17 
production in central nervous system-infiltrating T cells and glial cells is associated with active 
disease in multiple sclerosis. Am J Pathol. 2008; 172:146–155. [PubMed: 18156204] 
Vartak DG, Gemeinhart RA. Matrix metalloproteases: underutilized targets for drug delivery. J Drug 
Target. 2007; 15:1–20. [PubMed: 17365270] 
Zbesko et al.
Page 21
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Waisman A, Hauptmann J, Regen T. The role of IL-17 in CNS diseases. Acta Neuropathol. 2015; 
129:625–637. [PubMed: 25716179] 
Wang M, Ding F, Deng S, Guo X, Wang W, Iliff JJ, Nedergaard M. Focal solute trapping and global 
glymphatic pathway impairment in a murine model of multiple microinfarcts. J Neurosci. 2017; 
37:2870–2877. [PubMed: 28188218] 
Wanner IB, Anderson MA, Song B, Levine J, Fernandez A, Gray-Thompson Z, Ao Y, Sofroniew MV. 
Glial scar borders are formed by newly proliferated, elongated astrocytes that interact to corral 
inflammatory and fibrotic cells via STAT3-dependent mechanisms after spinal cord injury. J 
Neurosci. 2013; 33:12870–12886. [PubMed: 23904622] 
Wardlaw JM, Doubal F, Armitage P, Chappell F, Carpenter T, Munoz Maniega S, Farrall A, Sudlow C, 
Dennis M, Dhillon B. Lacunar stroke is associated with diffuse blood-brain barrier dysfunction. 
Ann Neurol. 2009; 65:194–202. [PubMed: 19260033] 
Weissberg I, Wood L, Kamintsky L, Vazquez O, Milikovsky DZ, Alexander A, Oppenheim H, 
Ardizzone C, Becker A, Frigerio F, Vezzani A, Buckwalter MS, Huguenard JR, Friedman A, 
Kaufer D. Albumin induces excitatory synaptogenesis through astrocytic TGF-beta/ALK5 
signaling in a model of acquired epilepsy following blood-brain barrier dysfunction. Neurobiol 
Dis. 2015; 78:115–125. [PubMed: 25836421] 
Whitehouse PJ, Price DL, Struble RG, Clark AW, Coyle JT, Delon MR. Alzheimer’s disease and senile 
dementia: loss of neurons in the basal forebrain. Science. 1982; 215:1237–1239. [PubMed: 
7058341] 
Yang Y, Rosenberg GA. Blood-brain barrier breakdown in acute and chronic cerebrovascular disease. 
Stroke. 2011; 42:3323–3328. [PubMed: 21940972] 
Yang T, Massa SM, Longo FM. LAR protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor associates with TrkB and 
modulates neurotrophic signaling pathways. J Neurobiol. 2006; 66:1420–1436. [PubMed: 
17013927] 
Yang Y, Estrada EY, Thompson JF, Liu W, Rosenberg GA. Matrix metalloproteinase-mediated 
disruption of tight junction proteins in cerebral vessels is reversed by synthetic matrix 
metalloproteinase inhibitor in focal ischemia in rat. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2007; 27:697–709. 
[PubMed: 16850029] 
Yang T, Knowles JK, Lu Q, Zhang H, Arancio O, Moore LA, Chang T, Wang Q, Andreasson K, 
Rajadas J, Fuller GG, Xie Y, Massa SM, Longo FM. Small molecule, non-peptide p75 ligands 
inhibit Abeta-induced neurodegeneration and synaptic impairment. PLoS One. 2008; 3:e3604. 
[PubMed: 18978948] 
Yang G, Meng Y, Li W, Yong Y, Fan Z, Ding H, Wei Y, Luo J, Ke ZJ. Neuronal MCP-1 mediates 
microglia recruitment and neurodegeneration induced by the mild impairment of oxidative 
metabolism. Brain Pathol. 2011; 21:279–297. [PubMed: 21029241] 
Yang T, Massa SM, Tran KC, Simmons DA, Rajadas J, Zeng AY, Jang T, Carsanaro S, Longo FM. A 
small molecule TrkB/TrkC neurotrophin receptor co-activator with distinctive effects on neuronal 
survival and process outgrowth. Neuropharmacology. 2016; 110:343–361. [PubMed: 27334657] 
Yu SW, Friedman B, Cheng Q, Lyden PD. Stroke-evoked angiogenesis results in a transient population 
of microvessels. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2007; 27:755–763. [PubMed: 16883352] 
Zecca L, Youdim MB, Riederer P, Connor JR, Crichton RR. Iron, brain ageing and neurodegenerative 
disorders. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2004; 5:863–873. [PubMed: 15496864] 
Zbesko et al.
Page 22
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 1. 
Post-stroke angiogenesis results in a population of leaky microvessels. (A) Hematoxylin and 
eosin (H&E) staining demonstrates that a new network of blood vessels (arrowheads) forms 
within the infarct during the first week following DH stroke. Scale bar, 100 μm. (B) Anti-
CD31 immunostaining demonstrates that the new blood vessels persist within the infarct for 
at least 7 weeks following stroke. Scale bar, 250 μm. (C) Quantitation of the blood vessel 
density within the infarct (left graph), as well as in the equivalent area of the somatosensory 
cortex of the contralateral hemisphere (right graph). Data represent mean ± SEM from n = 4 
mice per experimental group. *p < .05, **p < .01, and ****p < .0001 by one-way ANOVA 
followed by post hoc Tukey’s testing. (D) Measurement of Evans Blue extravasation at 24 h, 
1 week, and 7 weeks after stroke or sham surgery demonstrates that the blood vessels within 
the infarct are chronically leaky. Photographic insets show representative images of Evans 
Blue extravasation. Data represent mean ± SEM from n = 5 mice per experimental group. *p 
< .05 by Student’s t-test.
Zbesko et al.
Page 23
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 2. 
Blood vessels within chronic infarcts lack astrocyte support, NG2+ pericytes, and tight 
junctions. (A) Anti-GFAP immunostaining demonstrates that chronic infarcts are largely 
devoid of astrocytes. A representative stitched image (from 8 mice) of a brain section (left 
image) and magnified inset (right image) of GFAP+ immunolabeled astrocytes at 7 weeks 
post-DH stroke. Scale bar, 100 μm. (B) Anti-NG2 immunostaining demonstrates that 
chronic infarcts and the glial scar are also devoid of NG2+ pericytes and NG2+ 
polydendrocytes. Scale bar, 200 μm. The inset is an image of a polydendrocyte taken from 
the adjacent hippocampus as an antibody positive control. Scale bar, 25 μm. (C) There is a 
significant increase in expression of MMP2, MMP3, and MMP8 in the area of liquefactive 
necrosis 7 weeks following stroke compared to the equivalent area in the cortex from sham 
mice (n = 4 per experimental group). Data represent mean ± SEM. MMPs that are 
significantly different between stroke and sham mice are denoted in the graphs by asterisks. 
*p < .05 by multiple t-tests. (D) Representative images (from 6 mice) demonstrate that there 
is also increased MMP9 immunoreactivity (arrowheads) in chronic infarcts 7 weeks 
following stroke (representative of 5 mice). The black dotted line in the left image indicates 
the location of the glial scar separating the infarct from the surviving tissue. Scale bar, 100 
μm for left image; scale bar, 25 μm for right image. (E) There is also a lack of claudin-5 
immunofluorescence, a component of tight junctions, within areas of liquefactive necrosis 7 
weeks following stroke. A representative image (from 4 mice) is provided showing tight 
junction protein claudin-5 (green, arrowheads), astrocytes (GFAP, magenta), and nucleic 
acid marker DAPI (blue) at 7 weeks post-stroke. Scale bar, 100 μm.
Zbesko et al.
Page 24
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 3. 
Infarcts are sites of chronic inflammation. (A) A representative image (from 5 mice) 
showing the lysosomal marker LAMP-1 (red), microglia/macrophages (Iba1, green), 
astrocytes (GFAP, magenta), and the nucleic marker DAPI (blue) reveals substantial 
LAMP-1 and Iba1 immunoreactivity in a chronic infarct at 7 weeks following DH stroke. 
(B) A representative image (from 5 mice) revealing abundant CD3+ T-lymphocytes within a 
chronic infarct at 7 weeks following stroke. (C) A representative image (from 5 mice) 
revealing abundant B220+ B-lymphocytes within a chronic infarct at 7 weeks following 
stroke. Scale bar, 100 μm for A–C. (D) Multiplex immunoassays demonstrate that multiple 
cytokines and chemokines associated with neurotoxicity are present within chronic infarcts 
(n = 7 mice per stroke group; n = 3 mice per sham group), and are significantly elevated (18 
cytokines and chemokines out of 23) in stroke mice compared to sham mice. Data are 
expressed as a fold-change relative to age matched Sham control values. Data represent 
mean ± SEM. *p < .05 by Student’s t-test.
Zbesko et al.
Page 25
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 4. 
Extracellular fluid isolated from the area of liquefactive necrosis is neurotoxic. After 
allowing primary cortical (A) and hippocampal (B) neurons to mature for 7 days in culture, 
they were treated with 4 mg/ml extracellular fluid (EF) isolated from either chronic stroke 
infarcts or the equivalent area on the contralateral hemisphere at indicated dilutions. After 4 
h of treatment, neuron survival was determined by the bioluminescent detection of cellular 
ATP as a measure of viability. Cultures were also treated with 500 μM (for dilution 1:1) 
monosodium glutamate (MSG) as a positive control. The graph in A shows the combined 
data from 3 independent experiments (with 3 separate EF sample sets) for dilution 1:4, while 
the graph in B shows data from 1 experiment for dilutions 1:1 and 1:9, and the combined 
data from 3 independent experiments (with 3 separate EF sample sets) for dilution 1:4. Data 
represent mean ± SEM. *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001, and ****p < .0001 by one-way 
ANOVA followed by post hoc Tukey’s testing.
Zbesko et al.
Page 26
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 5. 
The ultrastructure of the glial scar. (A) Scanning EM reveals the ultrastructure of the glial 
scar at 7 weeks following DH stroke. The glial scar is primarily comprised of hypertrophied 
astrocytic processes oriented parallel to the area of liquefactive necrosis (representative of 3 
mice). Scale bar, 50 μm. Right panel: Higher magnification pseudo-colored version of the 
same field showing probable lymphocytes (orange) corralled by the glial scar (pink). Scale 
bar, 25 μm. (B) Anti-CD3 immunostaining suggests that these are T-lymphocytes 
(representative of 8 mice). Scale bar, 100 μm. (C) Transmission EM reveals that the glial 
scar is devoid of tight junctions at 7 weeks following stroke (representative of 4 mice). For 
this analysis, the infarct was identified by the presence of foamy macrophages, the peri-
infarct location was identified by the presence of myelinated axons, and the glial scar was 
identified as the area between these two locations. Scale bar, 10 μm. (D) The ultrastructure 
of the human glial scar. Top: original scanning EM image. Bottom: pseudo-colored scanning 
EM image showing the glial scar in pink, the infarct in yellow, and uninfarcted tissue in 
blue. Scale bar, 150 μm.
Zbesko et al.
Page 27
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 6. 
Evidence that antibodies and albumin leak across the glial scar and into the brain. (A & B) 
Representative (from 6 to 8 mice) stitched images of brain sections from (A) C57BL/6 and 
(B) BALB/c mice immunostained with an IgG antibody to demonstrate that a cloud of 
antibodies radiates out from the stroke infarct at both 1 week and 7 weeks following DH 
stroke. (C) IgG concentration by multiplex immunoassay is significantly increased in the 
ipsilateral hemisphere adjacent to the infarct (peri-infarct) compared to the equivalent area of 
the contralateral hemisphere at 7 weeks following stroke (n = 20 mice per experimental 
group). Data represent mean ± SEM. *p < .05, ****p < .0001 by one-way ANOVA followed 
by post hoc Tukey’s testing. (D) Albumin concentration is increased in the area adjacent to 
the infarct (peri-infarct) compared to an equivalent area of the contralateral hemisphere (n = 
20 mice per experimental group). Data represent mean ± SEM. **p < .01 by paired t-test. 
(E) A representative image showing that a 10 kDa Texas Red-labeled dextran injected 
intraperitoneally into the circulation after 7 weeks post-stroke is found around peri-infarct 
blood vessels at 6 h following injection. However, it is difficult to discriminate if it has 
leaked from peri-infarct blood vessels, or from infarct blood vessels and then diffused across 
the glial scar. Scale bar, 100 μm.
Zbesko et al.
Page 28
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 7. 
Glial scars do not prevent 10 kDa or 70 kDa tracers injected into the area of liquefactive 
necrosis from leaking into the brain. (A) Representative (from 3 mice per experimental 
group) fluorescent images of DAPI (blue) stained brain sections from mice injected with a 
10 kDa FITC labeled dextran (green) into the area of liquefactive necrosis at 7 weeks 
following DH stroke. These images reveal a cloud of dextran emanating from the infarct at 6 
h (left image) and 12 h (middle image) post-injection, with substantial clearance by 24 h 
(right image) post-injection. (B) Representative (from 3 mice per experimental group) higher 
magnification fluorescent images of GFAP (magenta) immunostained brain sections from 
mice injected with a 10 kDa FITC labeled dextran (green) into the area of liquefactive 
necrosis at 7 weeks following stroke, and sacrificed at 6 h (left image), 12 h (middle image), 
and 24 h (right image) post-injection. Scale bar, 100 μm. (C) Quantitation of significant 
Zbesko et al.
Page 29
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 dextran leakage and clearance in the parenchyma (n = 3 mice per experimental group). Data 
are expressed as a percentage occupied by dextran fluorescence. Data represent mean ± 
SEM. **p < .01 by two-way ANOVA followed by post hoc Sidak’s testing. (D) 
Representative fluorescent images of DAPI (blue) and GFAP (magenta) stained brain 
sections from mice sacrificed 7 weeks following photothrombotic stroke and 12 h post-
injection with a 10 kDa FITC labeled dextran (green) into the area of liquefactive necrosis. 
Bottom image is a higher magnification field from the top image. Scale bars; 1000 μm (top) 
250 μm (bottom). (E) Glial scars are permeable to a 70 kDa dextran. Mice were injected into 
the area of liquefactive necrosis with a 70 kDa FITC labeled dextran (green) at 12 weeks 
following DH stroke, and euthanized 24 h later. Astrocytes are labeled with GFAP 
(magenta). Comparison of FITC fluorescence in conjunction with GFAP immunostaining 
between the ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres demonstrates that the glial scar is also 
permeable to molecules 70 kDa in size (representative of 3 mice). Scale bar, 200 μm.
Zbesko et al.
Page 30
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 8. 
Glial scars are endocytic barriers. (A) A representative (from 8 mice) image showing the 
presence of CD68+ cells within the glial scar at 7 weeks following stroke. Scale bar, 200 
μm. (B) Anti-GFAP immunostaining (magenta) of the glial scar at 24 h following injection 
with the 10 kDa FITC labeled dextran (green) suggests that glial scars are endocytic barriers 
(a representative image from 3 mice). Scale bar, 200 μm. (C) Quantitation of the 
colocalization of the 10 kDa FITC labeled dextran with GFAP+ and Iba1+ cells within the 
glial scar (n = 3 mice per experimental group). Data are expressed as a percentage occupied 
by dextran + cells. Data represent mean ± SEM. *p < .05 and **p < .01 by two-way ANOVA 
followed by Sidak’s post hoc testing. (D) A representative image showing the lysosomal 
marker LAMP-1 (red), astrocytes (GFAP, white), microglia/macrophages (Iba1, green), and 
nuclei marker DAPI (blue) at 7 weeks post-stroke. Scale bar, 50 μm. (E) Quantitation of 
LAMP-1 demonstrates a significant increase in LAMP-1 expression within the glial scar 
compared to the adjacent area to the infarct. Data are expressed as a percentage occupied by 
LAMP-1 staining. Data represent mean ± SEM. ***p < .001 by Student’s t-test.
Zbesko et al.
Page 31
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 9. 
Molecules leaking across glial scars are cleared by both microglial endocytosis and 
paravascular clearance. (A) Representative (from 3 mice per experimental group) low 
magnification images showing localization of the 10 kDa FITC labeled (green) dextran 
within the parenchyma at 6 h (left image), 12 h (middle image) and 24 h (right image) 
following injection after DH stroke. GFAP+ astrocytes are shown in magenta, and the nuclei 
marker DAPI is seen in blue. Scale bar, 200 μm. (B) A representative (from 9 mice) image 
showing that the dextran (green) localizes to the paravascular space (arrowhead, right 
image). GFAP+ astrocytes are shown in magenta. Scale bar, 20 μm. (C) Scanning EM 
reveals astrocyte complexity, as well as the ultrastructure of an astrocyte surrounding a blood 
vessel in the parenchyma adjacent to the glial scar (arrowhead) Scale bar, 20 μm. (D) A 
representative image (from 9 mice) showing that the dextran (green) colocalizes within the 
parenchyma (arrowhead, right most image) with Iba1+ microglia/macrophages (magenta). 
Scale bar, 50 μm.
Zbesko et al.
Page 32
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 10. 
Delayed neurodegeneration occurs in regions adjacent to the area of liquefactive necrosis. 
(A) A representative image of a brain section stained by Nissl at 12 weeks following DH 
stroke. An area of ipsilateral cortical atrophy is highlighted with double sided arrows in 
comparison to the contralateral hemisphere. (B) Quantitation of the ipsilateral and 
contralateral hemispheres demonstrates that atrophy in the form of shrinkage of the 
ipsilateral hemisphere is significant between 1 week and 12 weeks post-stroke (n = 3–7 mice 
per experimental group). Data are expressed as the ratio of the ipsilateral versus contralateral 
hemisphere. Data represent mean ± SEM. Sham mice were sacrificed at 12 weeks following 
sham surgery. *p < .05 by one-way ANOVA, followed by post hoc Sidak’s testing. (C) 
Representative Nissl images showing cytotoxic edema in CA3 pyramidal cells adjacent to 
the glial scar in mice at 12 weeks post-stroke compared to CA3 pyramidal cells in the 
contralateral hemisphere and in naive mice. Scale bar, 25 μm. (D) Measurements of 
hippocampal regions CA1–3 in Nissl stained brain tissue reveal significant enlargement of 
the ipsilateral side of the hippocampus (n = 3–7 mice per experimental group). Data is 
expressed as the area of each hippocampal region. Data represent mean ± SEM. *p < .05 by 
one-way ANOVA, followed by post hoc Tukey’s testing. (E) Representative images of ChAT
+ labeled cholinergic neurons (arrowheads) in the ipsilateral cortex from stroke (left and 
middle images) and sham (right image) mice at 1 week and 7 weeks post-stroke. Scale bar, 
200 μm. (F) There is significant loss of ChAT+ neurons in the ipsilateral cortex between 1 
week and 7 weeks following stroke (n = 3–7 mice per experimental group). Data are 
expressed as relative number of ChAT+ neurons or the ratio of ChAT+ neurons in the 
ipsilateral versus contralateral motor-somatosensory cortex. Data represent mean ± SEM. *p 
< .05 by Student’s t-test. (G) Representative images of brain sections immunostained with 
anti-NeuN at 1 week and 8 weeks following DH stroke. (H) Representative images showing 
the loss of NeuN immunoreactivity in the peri-infarct cortex and external capsule in naive 
Zbesko et al.
Page 33
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 C57BL/6 mice and mice at 1 week and 8 weeks post-stroke. Scale bar, 100 μm. (I) 
Quantitation of NeuN immunoreactivity in the peri-infarct cortex, external capsule, striatum, 
and hippocampus in the weeks following DH stroke. Data represent mean ± SEM. *p < .05, 
**p < .01, ***p < .001, and ****p < .0001 by one-way ANOVA, followed by post hoc 
Tukey’s testing.
Zbesko et al.
Page 34
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Zbesko et al.
Page 35
Table 1
Factors associated with neurotoxicity and neurodegeneration present in areas of liquefactive necrosis.
Factors present in 
areas of 
liquefactive 
necrosis 
associated with 
neurotoxicity
Approx. 
molecular 
weight (kDa)
Putative mode of neurotoxicity
Selected references
MMP2, MMP3, 
MMP8, MMP9
72 (MMP2), 54 
(MMP3), 65 
(MMP8), 92 
(MMP9)
Apoptosis induction, blood brain barrier disruption, and 
demyelination.
(Fujimoto et al., 2008; Mroczko et al., 
2013)
Albumin
67
Excitatory synaptogenesis through astrocytic TGF-β 
signaling leading to epileptogenesis.
(Ivens et al., 2007; Weissberg et al., 
2015)
Antibodies
150–900
Antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC), 
stimulation of complement, inhibition of signal transduction, 
and direct induction of apoptosis.
(Ankeny and Popovich, 2010; Doyle 
and Buckwalter, 2016)
IL-1α, IL-1β
31
IL-1 type 1 receptor activation in astrocytes leads to the 
production of free radicals and the induction of caspase 
dependent neuronal death.
(Thornton et al., 2006)
IP-10
10
Treatment of neuronal cultures with exogenous IP-10 
produces elevations in intracellular calcium, leading to 
mitochondrial membrane permeabilization, cytochrome C 
release, and apoptosis.
(Sui et al., 2006)
IL-17
21
IL-17 can induce cell apoptosis in the CNS in an Act1 and 
FADD dependent pathway.
(Tzartos et al., 2008; Shichita et al., 
2009; Kang et al., 2012; Kang et al., 
2013; Waisman et al., 2015)
IL-13
10
IL-13 has been shown to trigger microglial NADPH 
oxidase-derived oxidative stress, leading to the degeneration 
of hippocampal neurons in vivo.
(Park et al., 2009)
IFNγ
18
IFNγ receptor can form a neuron-specific, calcium-
permeable receptor complex with the AMPA receptor 
subunit GluR1. Through this receptor complex IFNγ 
increases calcium influx, decreases ATP production, and 
leads to neuronal dysfunction.
(Mizuno et al., 2008)
TNFα
17
TNFα can induce excitotoxicity by triggering glutamate 
release from activated microglia.
(Gelbard et al., 1993; Takeuchi et al., 
2006)
Eotaxin
8
Eotaxin can enhance excitotoxic neuronal death by inducing 
microglial production of reactive oxygen species.
(Parajuli et al., 2015)
MCP-1
13
MCP-1 is an activator of microglial mediated neuronal 
death.
(Yang et al., 2011)
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
