 Mutational Landscape of Metastatic Cancer Revealed from 
Prospective Clinical Sequencing of 10,000 Patients
A full list of authors and affiliations appears at the end of the article.
Abstract
Tumor molecular profiling is a fundamental component of precision oncology, enabling the 
identification of genomic alterations in genes and pathways that can be targeted therapeutically. 
The existence of recurrent targetable alterations across distinct histologically-defined tumor types, 
coupled with an expanding portfolio of molecularly-targeted therapies, demands flexible and 
comprehensive approaches to profile clinically significant genes across the full spectrum of 
cancers. We established a large-scale, prospective clinical sequencing initiative utilizing a 
comprehensive assay, MSK-IMPACT, through which we have compiled matched tumor and 
normal sequence data from a unique cohort of more than 10,000 patients with advanced cancer 
and available pathological and clinical annotations. Using these data, we identified clinically 
relevant somatic mutations, novel non-coding alterations, and mutational signatures that were 
shared among common and rare tumor types. Patients were enrolled on genomically matched 
clinical trials at a rate of 11%. To enable discovery of novel biomarkers and deeper investigation 
into rare alterations and tumor types, all results are publicly accessible.
Over the last decade, oncology has served as a paragon for the application of clinical 
genomics to the diagnosis and treatment of disease.1,2 In certain tumor types, such as lung 
cancer and melanoma, it has become standard practice to profile tumors for recurrent 
targetable mutations.3,4 Moreover, genomically-guided clinical trials have begun to evaluate 
the efficacy of approved and investigational molecularly-targeted therapies across distinct 
tumor types with shared genetic features.5
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*Correspondence to: Michael F. Berger (bergerm1@mskcc.org).
#These authors contributed equally.
Current addresses: Donavan T. Cheng: Illumina, Inc., San Francisco, CA. Raghu Chandramohan: Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX.
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
AZ, RB, and MFB wrote the manuscript. RB, JS, JC, RB, IJK, AR, JBS, LS, TB, and KAM generated the genomic data. AZ, RB, 
RHS, SM, HRK, PS, SMD, MH, SD, DSR, JFH, DFD, JY, DLM, DTC, RC, ASM, RNP, GJ, KN, LB, PJ, NC, MTC, HHW, BST, NS, 
DMH, MEA, DBS, ML, and MFB reviewed and analyzed the genomic data. MDH, DB, AMS, HAA, EV, JW, ME, SBT, SMG, DNR, 
JG, RED, RC, WA, AC, DRF, MMG, AAH, JJH, GI, YYJ, EJJ, CMK, MAL, LGTM, AMO, NR, PR, ANS, NS, TES, AMV, RY, 
DMH, and DBS provided clinical data. AZ, AS, JG, DC, DTC, MP, MHS, ABR, ZYL, AAA, AVP, BEG, RK, ZJH, HWC, SP, HZ, 
JW, AO, BST, and NS created bioinformatics tools and systems to support data analysis, annotation, and dissemination. JC, BB, GJR, 
LBS, HIS, PJS, DSK, JTB, and DBS provided support for the MSK-IMPACT sequencing initiative. MER, DMH, and DBS developed 
the institutional molecular profiling protocol. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Med. 2017 June ; 23(6): 703–713. doi:10.1038/nm.4333.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 While molecular pathology has historically relied upon low-throughput approaches to 
interrogate a single allele in a single sample, massively parallel “next generation” 
sequencing (NGS) has enabled a dramatic expansion in the content and throughput of 
diagnostic testing. Clinical laboratories are increasingly developing and deploying NGS 
tests, ranging from targeted “hotspot” panels to comprehensive genome-scale platforms.6–10 
However, the complexity of clinical NGS testing has prevented many laboratories from 
achieving sufficiently large-scale implementation to maximize the benefits of tumor 
genomic profiling for large populations of patients. Further, the nature of genomic 
alterations observed in patients with advanced metastatic cancer, who are most likely to 
benefit from mutational profiling, may differ substantially from what has been characterized 
in primary untreated cancers through research initiatives including The Cancer Genome 
Atlas (TCGA). Finally, the true clinical utility of mutation profiling remains uncertain, 
requiring careful evaluation of the degree to which molecular results are influencing 
therapeutic decisions in different clinical contexts.
At Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, we developed and implemented MSK-
IMPACT, a hybridization capture-based NGS panel capable of detecting all protein-coding 
mutations, copy number alterations (CNAs), and selected promoter mutations and structural 
rearrangements in 341 (and more recently, 410) cancer-associated genes.11 Since 
establishing MSK-IMPACT in our CLIA-compliant Molecular Diagnostics Service 
laboratory, we have prospectively sequenced tumors from more than 10,000 cancer patients, 
spanning a vast array of solid tumor types. A key feature of our process is the use of patient-
matched normal controls, enabling us to compile a comprehensive catalog of definitively 
somatic (i.e., tumor-specific) mutations for every tumor sequenced. Through these efforts, 
we have produced an unparalleled dataset of matched tumor and normal DNA sequence 
from advanced cancer patients with associated pathological and clinical data.
Here we demonstrate the feasibility and utility of large-scale prospective clinical sequencing 
of matched tumor-normal pairs to guide clinical management. Using our dataset of 10,945 
tumors, we explored the genomic landscape of metastatic cancer as encountered in clinical 
practice and performed an analysis of clinical utility through the prevalence of actionable 
mutations and the ability to match patients to molecularly targeted therapy. To facilitate 
biomarker discovery, development of molecularly based clinical trials, and integration with 
other genomic profiling efforts, we have made the full dataset publicly available through the 
cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics (http://cbioportal.org/msk-impact).12
RESULTS
Description of the Sequencing Cohort
Between January 2014 and May 2016, we obtained 12,670 tumors from 11,369 patients for 
prospective MSK-IMPACT sequencing (Supplementary Table 1). DNA isolated from tumor 
tissue and, in 98% of cases, matched normal peripheral blood was subjected to hybridization 
capture and deep-coverage NGS to detect somatic mutations, small insertions and deletions, 
CNAs and chromosomal rearrangements, all of which were manually reviewed and reported 
to patients and physicians in the electronic medical record (Fig. 1). We achieved an average 
Zehir et al.
Page 2
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 throughput of 563 cases per month over the last 12 months of this study, with a median 
turnaround time of <21 days (Supplementary Fig. 1).
Given the diversity of cases and specimen types submitted, including archival material 
obtained from outside hospitals, samples exhibited a range of tissue and DNA quality 
metrics (Supplementary Fig. 2). Tissues with insufficient tumor content (n=328; 3%) or 
DNA yield (n=793; 6%) were reported as inadequate, and we excluded samples that did not 
meet strict post-sequencing quality control criteria (n=604; 5%) (Supplementary Fig. 3). 
DNA input and sample age influenced sequencing performance (Supplementary Fig. 4). For 
technical failures, we attempted to sequence a replacement sample, achieving a rescue rate 
of 75% when additional specimens were available. Altogether, we successfully sequenced 
10,945 tumor samples from 10,336 patients (91%).
Our cohort of successfully sequenced tumors encompasses 62 principal tumor types and 
>300 detailed tumor types, representative of the diversity of metastatic solid cancer patients 
treated at our institution (Fig. 2a, Supplementary Table 2). 43% of all specimens were 
obtained from metastatic sites, most commonly liver, lymph node, and bone (Supplementary 
Fig. 5). Two panels were used throughout this study, encompassing 341 genes (2,809 
tumors, 26%) and 410 genes (8,136 tumors, 74%), with all 341 genes included in the latter 
expanded panel (Supplementary Table 3). Tumors were sequenced to deep coverage 
(mean=718X) to ensure high sensitivity for detecting genomic alterations in heterogeneous 
and low purity specimens (Supplementary Fig. 6). Altogether, we detected 78,066 non-
synonymous mutations, with a median variant allele fraction of 0.21 (Supplementary Fig. 7), 
as well as 22,989 CNAs and 1,875 rearrangements. The number of mutations and CNAs per 
sample tended to be inversely proportional (Supplementary Fig. 8).13
The breadth and depth of MSK-IMPACT, and the analysis of patient-matched normal DNA, 
allowed us to detect important genomic alterations that would have been missed by other 
approaches (Supplementary Fig. 9). 81% (n=63,184) of all mutations fell outside the 
combined target regions of commercially available amplicon-based “hotspot” panels, which 
are also unsuited for detecting most CNAs and rearrangements.6,14 Moreover, compared to 
whole exome sequencing (WES) where coverage depth is typically limited, downsampling 
our data revealed that at least 9% of all mutations would have been missed by WES to a 
mean target depth of 150X, including therapeutically targetable alterations in BRAF, EGFR, 
and MET. Further, while WES is capable of detecting many more mutations throughout the 
genome and is better suited to the characterization of certain mutation signatures, MSK-
IMPACT produces more uniform coverage across the most clinically relevant genes and can 
also detect targetable gene fusions due to the inclusion of breakpoint-containing introns 
absent from current WES methods. Finally, as 69% of somatic mutations detected by MSK-
IMPACT were not previously reported in the COSMIC database (v78)15, these mutations 
would have been difficult to distinguish from rare inherited variants in the absence of a 
patient-matched normal. In summary, our results represent a rich, comprehensive and unique 
genomic dataset of patients with metastatic cancer.
Zehir et al.
Page 3
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Landscape of Somatically Altered Genes
To compare how our results derived from patients with advanced or metastatic cancer who 
were often pretreated compared to untreated primary tumors characterized by TCGA, we 
considered TCGA results from 16 common tumor types.16–19 Overall, the MSK-IMPACT 
results were highly consistent with TCGA, exhibiting strong concordance in the identities 
and population frequencies of the mutations detected (Fig. 2b, Supplementary Fig. 10). 
However, we observed important differences between both cohorts, indicative of the distinct 
clinical features of the patients studied. To identify mutations associated with metastasis 
and/or treatment, we calculated the enrichment of mutations in each gene and tumor type in 
the MSK-IMPACT cohort compared to the TCGA cohort. We found that many genes 
originally identified as significant in TCGA studies were even more frequently mutated in 
the MSK-IMPACT cohort. Principal among these was TP53, which was significantly 
enriched in four tumor types (prostate cancer, kidney chromophobe, glioblastoma, and 
gastric cancer) as compared to TCGA. In prostate cancer alone, the frequency of TP53 
mutations was >4-fold greater in MSK-IMPACT than TCGA (29% versus 7%), consistent 
with previously-noted associations between TP53 status and more clinically aggressive 
disease.20 We also observed frequent mutations in genes that were not significant in TCGA, 
including AR (androgen receptor) in prostate cancer (18% versus 1%) and ESR1 (estrogen 
receptor) in breast cancer (11% versus 4%), consistent with their known role in promoting 
resistance to hormone therapy. The most common AR mutations in our cohort were L702H 
and H875Y (10 patients each), both of which have been described as acquired mutations 
conferring resistance to androgen receptor inhibitors.21 ESR1 mutations were observed at 
recurrent hotspots in both breast and endometrial cancers, almost exclusively in metastatic 
tumors arising after hormone treatment (Supplementary Fig. 11).22,23
The most frequently altered gene in the MSK-IMPACT cohort was TP53 (41% of samples; 
Fig. 2c). TP53 mutations occurred most often in high-grade serous ovarian cancer (98%), 
esophageal adenocarcinoma (89%), and small cell lung cancer (85%) and were largely 
inactivating through truncation or disruption to splicing. Altogether TP53 was altered in 
>10% of cases for 43/62 principal tumor types. KRAS was the second most frequently 
altered gene (15% of samples). KRAS mutations were most prevalent in pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma (90%) and colon adenocarcinoma (44%). KRAS also harbored the most 
frequently altered codon among tumors sequenced (G12), accounting for 80% of all KRAS 
mutations and 12% of all patients. The next most commonly mutated codons were PIK3CA 
H1047, PIK3CA E545, and BRAF V600 (Supplementary Table 4), each observed in more 
than 20 principal tumor types, indicative of positive selection across lineages.24 Tumor-type 
differences in the location of mutations within genes were observed. For example, in EGFR, 
mutations in glioma were localized to the extracellular N-terminal domain, while mutations 
in lung cancer arose mainly in the kinase domain (Supplementary Fig. 12).
Genomic rearrangements, many of which produced putative gene fusions, were reported in 
1,597 patients (15%). The most commonly observed rearrangements were TMPRSS2-ERG 
(n=151), EGFRvIII (deletion of exons 2–7; n=65), EML4-ALK (n=38), and EWSR1-FLI1 
(n=25). Additional alterations, including cryptic rearrangements involving TMPRSS2 
Zehir et al.
Page 4
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 detected in 23 prostate cancers, were suggestive of gene fusions produced by complex 
processes such as chromoplexy not easily discerned by targeted sequencing.25
While some genes were mutated at similar rates across many tumor types (e.g., TP53 and 
PIK3CA), others were highly enriched in only one or two cancer lineages (e.g., VHL, APC, 
and IDH1). Certain gene fusions were also exclusive to particular lineages, such as 
TMPRSS2-ERG in prostate cancer, EWSR1-FLI1 in Ewing Sarcoma, and DNAJB1-
PRKACA in fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma. Nevertheless, excluding hypermutated 
tumors, 97% of the genes in our 410-gene panel were mutated at least once in five or more 
principal tumor types, reinforcing the potential benefit of broad mutation profiling regardless 
of lineage.
TERT Promoter Mutations
In addition to the coding regions of the aforementioned cancer genes, MSK-IMPACT also 
captures the promoter of TERT. Mutations at two highly recurrent hotspots in the TERT 
promoter have been shown to create novel consensus binding sites for ETS family 
transcription factors, leading to upregulated telomerase expression and decreased cell 
death.26,27 Yet these hotspots are absent from most genomic studies because the TERT 
promoter is typically not covered by WES analysis. The MSK-IMPACT results thus provide 
by far the largest analysis of somatic mutations in the TERT promoter across all tumor types 
reported to date. Consistent with prior reports, G-to-A substitutions at positions −124 or 
−146 relative to the TERT transcription start site were the most common alterations (96.3%), 
and were observed in 43 principal tumor types (Fig. 3a).28 However, we observed 10 
additional sites of recurrent TERT promoter mutation, including position −138, which alone 
was mutated in 21 distinct patients and created a presumptive ETS binding site 
(Supplementary Table 5). All novel recurrent TERT mutations were clustered within 100 bp 
of the transcription start site. TERT promoter mutations were most commonly observed in 
bladder cancer (70%), glioma (67%), thyroid cancer (60%), and melanoma (49%), 
predominantly cutaneous melanoma (Fig. 3b). We observed a consistent trend towards 
shorter survival for patients with altered TERT promoters (Fig. 3c). While the clinical 
relevance of TERT promoter mutations remains incompletely understood, our results 
reaffirm the high prevalence of these alterations in patients with advanced solid tumors and 
suggest an association with progression and poor outcome29–31, which can be further 
characterized as longitudinal clinical data accumulate.
Kinase Fusions and Rearrangements
Of all gene fusions identified by MSK-IMPACT, 35% (n=268) involved kinase genes and 
encompassed all or part of the kinase domain (Supplementary Table 6). While certain kinase 
fusions were enriched in particular lineages (e.g., ALK, RET, and ROS1 fusions in lung 
adenocarcinoma), others occurred widely across cancers (Fig. 4a).32 We also detected many 
known recurrent gene fusions in tumor types where they had not previously been reported. 
For example, gene fusions involving ALK, RET, and ROS1, for which effective targeted 
therapies exist in lung cancer, were found in 11 additional tumor types. Further, we 
identified 51 kinase fusions involving novel partner genes. In most cases, these fusions 
occurred in tumors lacking other clear driver mutations, supporting a bona fide functional 
Zehir et al.
Page 5
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 role and underscoring the importance of methods capable of detecting multiple partner genes 
to ensure that all therapeutically actionable fusions are detected.
Among all kinases, BRAF fusions occurred in the greatest number of tumor types. 
Altogether we detected 33 BRAF fusions across 11 principal tumor types involving 18 
distinct partner genes (10 novel), including a novel recurrent fusion gene, CDK5RAP2-
BRAF, detected in two independent melanomas lacking other clear driver mutations (Fig. 
4b, Supplementary Fig. 13). All fusions involved the complete kinase domain and were 
predicted to be in-frame. We also confirmed 4 additional fusions transcripts associated with 
complex BRAF rearrangements using an independent RNA-based fusion assay (see 
Methods). These results, together with another set of 55 BRAF fusions recently identified 
from a parallel clinical sequencing effort33, indicate that the full spectrum of BRAF fusions 
in human cancers remains incomplete and highlight the need to continue to broadly profile 
fusions in solid tumors, especially given recent reports of clinical activity with MEK 
inhibitors in patients harboring BRAF fusions.34
Additionally, seven cases harbored intragenic multi-exon deletions in BRAF (Fig. 4c). All 
seven deletions were predicted to produce in-frame transcripts similar (and in some cases 
equivalent) to aberrant splicing isoforms previously reported in BRAF V600E mutant 
melanomas in the setting of acquired resistance to BRAF inhibition.35 By eliminating the 
RAS-binding domain, these splicing isoforms enable RAS-independent BRAF dimerization 
and MAPK pathway activation. While this is a recurrent mechanism of acquired resistance 
to RAF inhibition, to our knowledge no underlying genomic basis has previously been 
described. Interestingly, only 3/7 cases with intragenic deletions detected by MSK-IMPACT 
harbored BRAF V600E mutations and had received prior BRAF inhibitor therapy (one lung 
adenocarcinoma, one colorectal adenocarcinoma, and one melanoma). The other 4 cases 
received no BRAF-directed therapy, suggesting that this alteration can also arise de novo as 
an independent driver of tumor initiation and progression. Patients harboring these BRAF 
deletions, either acquired or de novo, may potentially benefit from novel drugs that inhibit 
RAF dimerization.36
Mutation Signatures and Somatic Hypermutation
Beyond individual somatic mutations, the presence of mutation signatures may inform the 
etiology of a patient’s disease and predict the likelihood of response to new therapies 
including immune checkpoint inhibitors. To determine whether mutation signatures could be 
inferred from targeted capture data, we first calculated the distribution of mutation rates for 
each cancer type (Fig. 5a). Comparisons to matched WES data from 106 tumors in this 
cohort revealed high correlation (R2=0.76; Supplementary Fig. 14), confirming that MSK-
IMPACT results were representative of genome-wide processes and thus potentially capable 
of revealing signatures associated with biological processes that produce high mutation 
rates.
Using the pattern and nucleotide context of all observed silent and non-silent substitutions in 
994 cases (9%) with elevated mutation rates (>13.8 mut/Mb, Fig. 5b), we assigned the 
mutations in each sample to constituent mutation signatures from the set of 30 signatures 
described previously.37 Using this approach, we identified tumors with intrinsic defects in 
Zehir et al.
Page 6
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 DNA repair (e.g., DNA polymerase ε (POLE) associated hypermutation, mismatch repair 
(MMR) deficiency), exposure to exogenous mutagens (e.g., ultraviolet radiation, cigarette 
smoke), and exposure to prior therapy (e.g., temozolomide) in representative tumor types 
(Fig. 5c, Supplementary Table 7). As expected, signatures associated with ultraviolet 
radiation, temozolomide, and cigarette smoke predominated in melanoma, glioma, and lung 
cancer, respectively (Fig. 5d). POLE and MMR signatures predominated in colorectal cancer 
and endometrial cancer and were associated with underlying loss-of-function somatic 
mutations. Furthermore, the MMR samples also had an overall increased indel-to-
substitution ratio compared to tumors with POLE or other signatures (median 0.46 versus 
0.06, p<0.001), and 89% of samples had evidence of microsatellite instability (MSI) 
according to an orthogonal bioinformatics approach, MSIsensor.38
Altogether we identified 102 patients across 11 tumor types harboring both a dominant 
MMR signature and MSI classification by MSIsensor (Fig. 5e), 45% of whom were not 
previously tested for MMR deficiency. Notably, this analysis may underestimate the 
prevalence of the MSI phenotype in our cohort as it is restricted to the patients with the 
highest mutation burden. As MSI status is increasingly being used as a biomarker for 
response to immune checkpoint inhibitors and an enrollment criterion for immuno-oncology 
basket clinical trials39, our results suggest that comprehensive genomic profiling may 
significantly expand the number of patients who could potentially benefit from 
immunotherapy. Among MSI patients in our cohort, responses to immunotherapy (i.e., 
radiographic stable disease or regression) were observed in colorectal, endometrial, gastric, 
prostate, and bladder cancer. In one case of a 55-year-old patient with prostate cancer, where 
conventional MSI testing is rarely performed, MSK-IMPACT revealed an unanticipated 
MMR signature without a clear underlying somatic or germline pathway lesion. As a result, 
the patient was enrolled on a clinical trial of an anti-PD-L1 immunotherapy regimen and has 
exhibited a marked response (Fig. 5f).
Clinical Actionability and Utility
Encouraged by such anecdotes, we attempted to broadly and systematically evaluate the 
clinical utility of prospective molecular profiling to guide treatment decisions. We used 
OncoKB, a curated knowledge base of the oncogenic effects and treatment implications of 
somatic mutations, to group all mutations into tiers of clinical actionability (http://
oncokb.org)40. Mutations were classified in a tumor type-specific manner according to the 
level of evidence that the mutation is a predictive biomarker of drug response. Altogether, 
36.7% of patients (n=3,792) harbored at least one actionable alteration (Fig. 6a). The tumor 
types with the highest proportion of actionable mutations were gastrointestinal stromal 
tumor (76%), thyroid cancer (60%), breast cancer (57%), and melanoma (56%) (Fig. 6b). 
While mutations in additional oncogenes such as KRAS have been considered actionable in 
other analyses41,42 and may soon become targetable by treatment modalities under 
investigation43,44, we utilized stricter criteria acknowledging current limited ability to 
therapeutically intervene in KRAS mutations with drugs currently in the clinic.
We expected that only a subset of patients with potentially actionable alterations would 
receive genomically matched therapy due to medical and logistical considerations. To begin 
Zehir et al.
Page 7
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 to evaluate the clinical utility of MSK-IMPACT testing, we first examined the rate of 
enrollment on genomically-matched clinical trials based on tumor genotype. Acknowledging 
that not enough time has elapsed to assess how many patients may eventually receive 
targeted therapy during their full treatment course, we considered 5,009 patients tested by 
MSK-IMPACT at least one year prior to this analysis. 527 (11%) patients were enrolled on 
at least one of 197 trials involving molecularly targeted agents at our institution, based on a 
target aberration in their tumor. While the most common targets belonged to the MAPK and 
PI3K signaling pathways, patients were matched to trials on the basis of alterations in >50 
separate genes (Fig. 6c).
We next considered additional cases where standard therapy was administered on the basis 
of genotypes revealed by MSK-IMPACT. As an example, BRAF V600 mutations were 
detected in 77 patients with melanoma, where they are FDA-approved biomarkers. Among 
these patients, 41/77 (53%) were treated with BRAF inhibitors as a single agent or in 
combination, with the remaining patients largely receiving first-line immunotherapy. 
Moreover, BRAF V600 mutations were detected in 211 patients with non-melanoma 
histologies, of which 75/211 (36%) received BRAF targeted therapy on- or off-trial. While 
the proportion of non-melanoma patients receiving BRAF inhibitors was smaller, the rate of 
clinical benefit assessed by radiographic measurement among non-melanoma and melanoma 
patients was identical (71%), reaffirming the potential efficacy of targeted therapies in 
diverse clinical contexts and the importance of broad molecular profiling across tumor types.
DISCUSSION
We report the overall experience of a large institution-wide, prospective clinical sequencing 
effort to guide the selection of genomically matched therapies for patients spanning all solid 
tumor malignancies. We demonstrate that enterprise-scale sequencing of tumors and patient-
matched blood samples using a comprehensive cancer panel is feasible and achievable 
within a turnaround time that permits clinical interpretation and utilization. Through this 
initiative, we have generated an expansive dataset of manually reviewed mutations, CNAs, 
and genomic rearrangements in 10,945 tumors from 10,336 patients. Unlike most large-scale 
genome characterization efforts, our cohort was composed almost exclusively of patients 
with advanced disease, frequently heavily treated, and representative of the population most 
likely to be considered for molecularly targeted therapies. Further, our cohort encompasses 
>300 detailed tumor types, providing an improved understanding of the prevalence of driver 
alterations across all cancers and allowing for the detection of uncommon and unanticipated 
clinically actionable mutations. With maturing clinical annotation of treatment response and 
disease-specific outcome, this dataset will prove a transformative resource for identifying 
novel biomarkers to inform prognosis and predict response and resistance to therapy.
Given the diversity of tumor types that can harbor potentially actionable mutations, broad 
molecular profiling is necessary to provide all patients the opportunity to receive a 
genomically matched therapy. Novel, flexible clinical trial designs are needed to test the 
efficacy of molecularly targeted therapies in different cancer types. So called “basket trials”, 
in which patients are enrolled on the basis of a specific genetic alteration irrespective of 
histology, have emerged as an efficient way to evaluate the degree to which responses are 
Zehir et al.
Page 8
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 determined by disease context.5 To facilitate patient identification and enrollment for 
genomically-guided clinical trials at our institution, we have established a process whereby 
all MSK-IMPACT results are transmitted to an institutional database for integration with 
other clinical and pharmacological data, and clinicians are automatically alerted in real-time 
to the presence of patients with selected mutations pertinent to their studies.45
While our results provide novel insights into the biological processes that govern cancer 
progression and metastasis, the true value of prospective clinical sequencing is measured 
according to its ability to influence treatment decisions and improve outcomes for patients. 
We observed that 37% of patients harbored a clinically relevant alteration, and 11% of the 
first 5,009 patients to receive MSK-IMPACT testing were subsequently enrolled on a 
genomically matched clinical trial. This gap reflects systemic shortcomings in the 
availability and geographical accessibility of relevant trials as well as patient preferences. 
Additionally, many patients may have been too debilitated to qualify for a clinical trial and, 
conversely, others who may later receive from targeted therapy continued to benefit from 
conventional treatment protocols. Nevertheless, our results are encouraging in light of prior 
studies reporting lower rates of enrollment on clinical trials following NGS-based tumor 
profiling.9,41,46,47 Further, these results do not account for several hundred additional 
patients who received FDA-approved targeted therapies outside of clinical trials. We expect 
that the clinical utility of broad, prospective clinical sequencing will continue to increase 
with the proliferation of molecularly driven clinical trials, the approval of novel targeted 
therapies, and reductions in turnaround time of testing.
Further enriching the clinical utility of our approach is the inclusion of patient-matched 
normal DNA for every tumor that is profiled. By sequencing DNA from both tumor and 
normal blood, we were able to unambiguously call somatic mutations with greater 
sensitivity and specificity through the elimination of rare germline variants.48,49 This 
allowed us to accurately determine the overall mutation burden for each patient and detect 
distinct mutation signatures in highly mutated tumors, thereby identifying patients who 
stood to benefit from immunotherapy. Moreover, direct analysis of the normal DNA can 
reveal pathogenic germline alleles, which may mediate response to therapy in patients (e.g., 
PARP inhibition in patients with DNA repair defects) and suggest cancer susceptibility in 
their family members.50 We have thus established an IRB-approved process for prospective 
germline analysis whereby inherited pathogenic variants detected by MSK-IMPACT are 
reported to patients who wish to receive this information.
While this study represents a first step towards evaluating the clinical impact of large-scale 
prospective tumor sequencing, more systematic studies are needed to assess the long-term 
effects of clinical cancer genomics on patient outcomes. These studies will require detailed, 
longitudinal follow-up. Additionally, data sharing across laboratories and institutions 
engaged in tumor sequencing is paramount in order to realize the full discovery potential of 
the resulting datasets. To this end, we have deposited our full dataset into the cBioPortal for 
Cancer Genomics. It is our hope and expectation that this and other data-sharing efforts will 
enable the identification of promising drug targets and the development and extension of 
more effective treatment options to benefit more patients suffering from cancer.
Zehir et al.
Page 9
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ONLINE METHODS
Patient consent and accrual
MSK-IMPACT™ testing for patients with advanced cancer was ordered by the treating 
physician to identify clinically relevant genomic alterations that could potentially inform 
treatment decisions. Patients undergoing MSK-IMPACT testing signed a clinical consent 
form or, in >85% of cases, enrolled on an institutional IRB-approved research protocol 
(NCT01775072), permitting return of results from clinical sequencing and broader genomic 
characterization of banked specimens for research. All MSK-IMPACT testing that was not 
submitted for reimbursement by insurance was paid for using institutional and philanthropic 
funds. Following consent, either archival or new tumor samples were obtained, and blood 
was drawn as a source of normal (germline) DNA. In total, MSK-IMPACT testing was 
requested for 11,369 unique patients across 62 principal tumor types between January 2014 
and May 2016. To ensure uniform nomenclature of tumor types, tumors were annotated 
according to an institutional classification system, OncoTree (http://www.cbioportal.org/
oncotree/).
MSK-IMPACT sequencing workflow
MSK-IMPACT is a custom hybridization-capture based assay encompassing all genes that 
are druggable by approved therapies or are targets of experimental therapies being 
investigated in clinical trials at MSKCC, as well as frequently mutated genes in human 
cancer (somatic and germline). MSK-IMPACT is capable of detecting sequence mutations, 
small insertions and deletions, copy number alterations, and select structural rearrangements, 
and has been validated and approved for clinical use by the New York State Department of 
Health Clinical Laboratory Evaluation Program. Two different MSK-IMPACT panels 
containing 341 genes and, more recently, 410 genes were used in this study. Synthetic DNA 
probes were designed to capture all protein-coding exons of target genes, the promoter of 
TERT, and selected introns of 17 recurrently rearranged genes.
All samples received for MSK-IMPACT testing were accessioned by the CLIA-compliant 
Molecular Diagnostics Service laboratory where they were assigned a unique molecular 
accession number, a detailed description of the specimen submitted, and the number of 
submitted unstained sections. Tumor and patient-matched normal blood samples were 
matched for simultaneous sequencing using a patient-unique medical record number (MRN). 
Once accessioned, a hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained slide was reviewed by a 
molecular pathology fellow and annotated for relevant specimen information including 
tumor type, tumor purity, and whether macrodissection of the indicated tumor region was 
necessary prior to nucleic extraction.
Genomic DNA extraction was performed on the Chemagic STAR instrument (Hamilton) 
from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumors and patient-matched normal blood 
using the chemagen magnetic bead technology (PerkinElmer). FFPE tissues were 
deparaffinized using mineral oil followed by digestion with the proteinase K enzyme, and 
blood samples were lysed followed by digestion with a protease enzyme to catalyze the 
breakdown of detrimental proteins. DNA was isolated utilizing the chemagen extraction 
Zehir et al.
Page 10
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 chemistry, allowing for the high affinity binding of nucleic acids to M-PVA magnetic beads 
and subsequent elution. Extracted DNA samples were then transferred to the clinical next-
generation sequencing laboratory for further quality control, library preparation and 
sequencing.
DNA samples were normalized to yield 50–250 ng input and diluted in 55 μl on the Biomek 
FXP Laboratory Automation Workstation (Beckman Coulter), prior to shearing on the 
Covaris instrument. Sequence libraries were prepared on the Biomek FXP through a series of 
enzymatic steps including shearing, end-repair, A-base addition, ligation of barcoded 
sequence adaptors, and low-cycle PCR amplification (Kapa Biosystems). Tumors and 
matched normal were combined in pools of 24–36 libraries for multiplexed captures using 
custom-designed biotinylated probes (Nimblegen). Captured DNA fragments were 
sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq2500 as paired-end 100-base pair reads. Tumor samples 
were sequenced to a mean unique depth of coverage of 718X.
Sequencers were monitored by an automated data management system, which initiates the 
analysis pipeline upon end of sequencing run. Sequence reads were aligned to human 
genome (hg19) using BWA MEM.51 ABRA was used to realign reads around indels to 
reduce alignment artifacts, and the Genome Analysis Toolkit was used to recalibrate base 
quality scores.52,53 Duplicate reads were marked for removal, and the resulting BAM files 
were used for variant discovery. The union calls made by MuTect54, Pindel55, and Somatic 
Indel Detector52 were further subjected to automated filtering to generate a complete list of 
somatic mutation calls including single nucleotide variants, short and long indels. Copy 
number alterations were identified using an in-house developed algorithm, and structural 
variants were detected using Delly.56 Germline variants were eliminated through the use of 
patient-matched blood DNA. Each alteration identified by the pipeline was manually 
reviewed to ensure that no false positives were reported, complex events identified 
separately were merged and represented properly, and mutation annotations were Human 
Genome Variation Society (HGVS, http://varnomen.hgvs.org) compliant. Following curation 
and review of MSK-IMPACT data, sequencing results were stored in a clinical-grade 
database and reported back to patients and physicians through the electronic medical record. 
The detailed laboratory protocol and bioinformatics analysis were described previously.11
A total of 12,670 tumor samples from 11,369 unique patients were submitted for MSK-
IMPACT sequencing between January 2014 and May 2016. Cases were deemed insufficient 
for sequencing according to low tumor purity (<10%) based on histopathology review and 
low DNA yield (<50ng) following DNA extraction. Out of 11,549 cases that qualified for 
sequencing, 604 failed one of multiple quality control metrics, including average unique 
sequence coverage (<50X) and evidence of sample contamination. Samples with no 
detectable alterations (including silent mutations) were also excluded if the estimated tumor 
purity was <20% or the average unique sequence coverage was <200X due to the risk of 
false negatives. In total, 10,945 cases were successfully sequenced for a final assay success 
rate of 86%.
Re-sequencing of failed cases due to either low coverage (<50X) or obvious sample 
contamination was attempted whenever possible. New specimens were obtained either from 
Zehir et al.
Page 11
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the same surgical block used in the initial extraction or from a different block, if available. 
The overall rescue rate of failed cases by repeating DNA extraction, library preparation, 
capture, and sequencing was 75%.
Comparison to other tumor profiling strategies
To compare MSK-IMPACT results to those attainable from ampllicon-based sequencing 
assays, the union of all targets of Illumina TruSeq Amplicon Cancer Panel and Ion 
AmpliSeq Cancer Hotspot Panel (v2) was considered. Each mutation identified by MSK-
IMPACT was classified according to whether its location fell within the combined target 
region.
To compare MSK-IMPACT results to those attainable from whole exome sequencing 
(WES), we downsampled the underlying sequence reads supporting each mutation identified 
by MSK-IMPACT by the following factor: (Simulated coverage/Mean sample coverage). 
Exome sample coverage levels of 300X, 250X, 200X, 150X, and 100X were simulated. 
Downsampled total coverage and mutated allele coverage were determined for each 
mutation. To match the stringency of our MSK-IMPACT variant calling filters, we required a 
minimum total coverage of 20X unique reads, a minimum mutant allele coverage of 8X 
unique reads, and a minimum variant allele fraction of 0.05.
Comparison to mutational landscape of primary tumors
MSK-IMPACT results were compared to TCGA studies for the corresponding tumor sub-
types. Coding mutations and indels excluding silent mutations were considered. Mutations 
in individual patient samples were aggregated to obtain gene-level alteration frequencies for 
each of the genes in the MSK-IMPACT panel. Chi-squared tests were performed to compare 
gene-level alteration frequencies between MSK-IMPACT and TCGA results. Correction for 
multiple hypothesis testing was performed using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. Genes 
that fell below an adjusted p-value cutoff of 0.05, and were altered in greater than 1% and 5 
individual patients in either cohort, were reported as significant. Residual sum of square 
(RSS) values were calculated for individual tumor types (Supplementary Fig. 10).
TERT promoter mutation status and survival
The association between somatic TERT promoter mutations and overall survival was 
evaluated by the log-rank test and Kaplan-Meier survival curves within select tumor types. 
Overall survival was defined as the time between the procedure date when the tumor 
specimen was collected and the date of death or last follow up. Only cases where the 
procedure occurred within one year prior to MSK-IMPACT sequencing were included in the 
analysis.
Novel genomic rearrangements
Somatic structural variants (SVs) were identified by DELLY (v0.6.1)56 based on the 
detection of read-pairs and split-reads supporting the underlying rearrangement. Deletions, 
duplications, and inversions were filtered if the length was <500 bp. Candidate 
rearrangements were flagged for manual review if the tumor harbored ≥3 discordant reads 
with mapping quality of ≥5 and the normal harbored ≤3 discordant reads (sites of known 
Zehir et al.
Page 12
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 recurrent rearrangements), or if the tumor harbored ≥5 discordant reads with mapping 
quality of ≥20 and the normal harbored ≤1 discordant reads (novel rearrangement sites). All 
candidate somatic structural rearrangements were annotated using in-house tools, and 
manually reviewed using the Integrative Genomics Viewer.57 The current framework can be 
found at https://github.com/rhshah/IMPACT-SV.
To identify novel fusion partners, we used COSMIC (v77)15, TCGA fusion database58, as 
well as literature review33 to determine if the partner was known. For the analysis of kinase 
fusions, 521 protein kinases were considered.59 To determine the involvement of kinase 
domains in predicted kinase fusions, we downloaded the RefSeq and Uniprot tracks for 
GRCh37/hg19 from the UCSC table browser.60 RefSeq was used to determine the transcript 
orientation and Uniprot was used to determine the genomic location of the kinase domain 
with respect to the breakpoint at which the structural variant was called.
RNA fusion detection
For complex DNA rearrangements where the identity of the fusion partner gene was not 
clear, total RNA extracted from FFPE material was analyzed using the MSK-Solid Fusion 
assay, a custom targeted RNA-based panel that utilizes the Archer Anchored Multiplex PCR 
(AMP™) technology61 and next generation sequencing to detect genes fusions. 
Unidirectional gene specific primers (GSPs) were designed to target specific exons in 35 
genes known to be involved in chromosomal rearrangements. GSPs, in combination with 
adapter-specific primers, enrich for known and novel fusion transcripts. Final targeted 
amplicons are sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq. Data was analyzed using the Archer™ 
Software (V4.0.10). This custom assay has been validated and approved for clinical use at 
MSKCC by the New York State Department of Health Clinical Laboratory Evaluation 
Program.
Comparison of mutation rates for MSK-IMPACT and WES
Libraries for 106 tumor samples were re-captured using the Agilent Exome Kit (v3) and 
sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 to an average coverage of 240X. Sequencing reads 
were aligned to the human genome (hg19) using BWA MEM followed by post-processing 
using the Picard MarkDuplicates tool and GATK. Variants were identified using MuTect and 
GATK HaplotypeCaller. The analysis pipeline can be found at https://github.com/soccin/
BIC-variants_pipeline. Candidate mutations were filtered for various criteria including 
recurrence in historical normals, total and allele-level coverage, and known systematic 
artifacts. Tumor mutation burden (TMB) was calculated using the total number of non-
synonymous mutations divided by the total genomic target region captured with the exome 
assay. Similarly, TMB from MSK-IMPACT was calculated by dividing the number of 
sequence mutations reported by MSK-IMPACT assay by the total genomic area where 
mutations were reported, according to the version of the assay that was used.
Mutational signatures
The overall TMB distribution was used to identify a threshold for considering highly 
mutated tumors suitable for the identification of mutational signatures, using the following 
Zehir et al.
Page 13
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 formula: median(TMB) + 2*IQR(TMB), where IQR is interquartile range. Samples with a 
mutation burden greater than 13.8 non-synonymous mutations/Mb were analyzed.
Contributions of different mutation signatures were identified for each sample according to 
the distribution of the 6 substitution classes (C>A, C>G, C>T, T>A, T>C, T>G) and the 
bases immediately 5′ and 3′ of the mutated base, producing 96 possible mutation subtypes. 
These mutations were resampled 1000 times and then subjected to decomposition analysis in 
which the KL-divergence is minimized between the sample signature and the approximation 
built up from previously described 30 signatures37 such that each signature is assigned a 
weight that corresponds to the percentage of mutations explained by each given signature. A 
sample was determined to have a dominant signature if >40% of observed mutations were 
attributable to that signature.
For the analyses in the manuscript, we focused on 8 main signatures: Aging (Signature 1); 
APOBEC (Signatures 2 and 13); Smoking (Signature 4), BRCA1/2 (Signature 3); MMR 
(Signatures 6, 15, 20 and 26); UV (Signature 7); POLE (Signature 10) and TMZ (Signature 
11). For each sample, we identified somatic mutations in POLE and mutations in MMR 
pathway genes, automatically retrieved smoking status from our institutional database, and 
calculated the ratio of indels-to-SNVs. We also analyzed each sample using the MSIsensor 
algorithm, which identifies the percentage of microsatellite loci that are unstable in the 
tumor genome compared to its matched normal.
Clinical assessment and matching to clinical trials
To assess clinical actionability of mutations detected by MSK-IMPACT, we annotated 
sequence mutations, copy number alterations, and rearrangements according to OncoKB, a 
curated knowledge base of the oncogenic effects and treatment implications of somatic 
mutations (http://oncokb.org)40. Mutations were classified in a tumor type-specific manner 
according to the level of evidence that the mutation is a predictive biomarker of drug 
response. Briefly, mutations were classified according to whether they are FDA-recognized 
biomarkers (Level 1), predict response to standard-of-care therapies (Level 2), or predict 
response to investigational agents in clinical trials (Level 3). Levels 2 and 3 were subdivided 
according to whether the evidence exists for the pertinent tumor type (2A, 3A) or a different 
tumor type (2B, 3B). Tumor samples were annotated according to the highest level of 
evidence for any mutation identified by MSK-IMPACT.
To determine the rate of enrollment to genomically matched clinical trials, we obtained a list 
of 850 clinical trials open at MSKCC on which any patient tested by MSK-IMPACT was 
ever enrolled up to September 2016. After reviewing the enrollment criteria and mechanism 
of action of each therapy, 197/850 clinical trials were deemed to have a target aberration. A 
patient was considered to be “matched” if he/she harbored at least one alteration considered 
to be a target for at least one clinical trial on which they were enrolled. Only patients whose 
tumors were sequenced during the first 18 months of the MSK-IMPACT sequencing 
initiative (prior to July 2015) were considered, given that utilization of molecular profiling 
results and changes to treatment regimens may not occur for many months (or longer) after 
testing. Of 5,009 patients tested by MSK-IMPACT prior to July 2015, 1,894 (38%) were 
enrolled on any clinical trial, 811 (16%) were enrolled on a clinical trial with a targeted 
Zehir et al.
Page 14
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 agent, and 527 (11%) harbored genomic alterations matching the drug target. 72% of all 
matches occurred after the MSK-IMPACT reports were issued, with the remaining matches 
based on the results of prior molecular testing.
Clinical responses for patients receiving immunotherapy and targeted BRAF-directed 
therapy were assessed by detailed chart review. Response was defined as radiographic stable 
disease or tumor regression at or near 3 months from the initiation of therapy.
Statistical analyses
Survival analyses based on TERT promoter mutations were performed using R (v3.2) with 
survival package. Log-rank test was used to calculate p-values, and Kaplan Meier curves 
were used to compare survival between different stratified groups. cor.test() function from R 
was used to calculate Pearson correlation of TMB between MSK-IMPACT and WES 
samples. Comparisons of indel-to-SNV ratios between samples with and without the MMR 
signature were evaluated using the Wilcoxon rank test.
Data Availability
All genomic results and associated clinical data for all patients in this study are publically 
available in the cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics at the following URL: http://cbioportal.org/
msk-impact.
Code Availability
The MSK-IMPACT data analysis pipeline can be found here: https://github.com/rhshah/
IMPACT-Pipeline. The mutational signature decomposition code can be found here: https://
github.com/mskcc/mutation-signatures. The whole exome sequencing data analysis pipeline 
can be found here: https://github.com/soccin/BIC-variants_pipeline.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Authors 
Ahmet Zehir1,#, Ryma Benayed1,#, Ronak H. Shah1, Aijazuddin Syed1, Sumit 
Middha1, Hyunjae R. Kim1, Preethi Srinivasan1, Jianjiong Gao2, Debyani 
Chakravarty2, Sean M. Devlin3, Matthew D. Hellmann4, David A. Barron5, Alison M. 
Schram4, Meera Hameed1, Snjezana Dogan1, Dara S. Ross1, Jaclyn F
. Hechtman1, 
Deborah F
. DeLair1, JinJuan Yao1, Diana L. Mandelker1, Donavan T. Cheng1, 
Raghu Chandramohan1, Abhinita S. Mohanty1, Ryan N. Ptashkin1, Gowtham 
Jayakumaran1, Meera Prasad1, Mustafa H. Syed1, Anoop Balakrishnan Rema1, 
Zhen Y. Liu1, Khedoudja Nafa1, Laetitia Borsu1, Justyna Sadowska1, Jacklyn 
Casanova1, Ruben Bacares1, Iwona J. Kiecka1, Anna Razumova1, Julie B. Son1, 
Lisa Stewart1, Tessara Baldi1, Kerry A. Mullaney1, Hikmat Al-Ahmadie1, Efsevia 
Vakiani1, Adam A. Abeshouse3, Alexander V. Penson3,11, Philip Jonsson3,11, 
Niedzica Camacho1, Matthew T. Chang3,11, Helen H. Won1, Benjamin E. Gross2, 
Ritika Kundra2, Zachary J. Heins2, Hsiao-Wei Chen2, Sarah Phillips2, Hongxin 
Zehir et al.
Page 15
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Zhang2, Jiaojiao Wang2, Angelica Ochoa2, Jonathan Wills6, Michael Eubank6, 
Stacy B. Thomas6, Stuart M. Gardos6, Dalicia N. Reales7, Jesse Galle7, Robert 
Durany7, Roy Cambria7, Wassim Abida4, Andrea Cercek4, Darren R. Feldman4, 
Mrinal M. Gounder4, A. Ari Hakimi8, James J. Harding4, Gopa Iyer4, Yelena Y. 
Janjigian4, Emmet J. Jordan4, Ciara M. Kelly4, Maeve A. Lowery4, Luc G.T. Morris8, 
Antonio M. Omuro9, Nitya Raj4, Pedram Razavi4, Alexander N. Shoushtari4, Neerav 
Shukla10, Tara E. Soumerai4, Anna M. Varghese4, Rona Yaeger4, Jonathan 
Coleman8, Bernard Bochner8, Gregory J. Riely4, Leonard B. Saltz4, Howard I. 
Scher4, Paul J. Sabbatini4, Mark E. Robson4, David S. Klimstra1, Barry S. 
Taylor2,3,11, Jose Baselga4,11, Nikolaus Schultz2,3,11, David M. Hyman4, Maria E. 
Arcila1, David B. Solit2,4,11, Marc Ladanyi1,11, and Michael F
. Berger1,2,11,*
Affiliations
1Department of Pathology, MSKCC, New York, NY
2Marie-Josée and Henry R. Kravis Center for Molecular Oncology, MSKCC, New 
York, NY
3Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, MSKCC, New York, NY
4Department of Medicine, MSKCC, New York, NY
5Department of Radiation Oncology, MSKCC, New York, NY
6Information Systems, MSKCC, New York, NY
7Clinical Research Administration, MSKCC, New York, NY
8Department of Surgery, MSKCC, New York, NY
9Department of Neurology, MSKCC, New York, NY
10Department of Pediatrics, MSKCC, New York, NY
11Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, MSKCC, New York, NY
Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the MSK Cancer Center Support Grant (P30 CA008748), Cycle for Survival, the 
Farmer Family Foundation, and the Marie-Josée and Henry R. Kravis Center for Molecular Oncology. We 
gratefully acknowledge Christine England, Joshua Somar, Tamim Malbari, Paulo Salazar, Shadia Islam, Elise 
Gallagher, Ivelise Rijo, Nana Mensah, Georgi Lukose, Talia Mitchell, Angela Yannes, Yvonne Chekaluk, George 
Jour, Navid Sadri, Ken Tian, Carlos Pagan, J. Keith Killian, Deepu Alex, Juan Gomez-Gelvez, Caleb Ho, Sandy 
Naupari, Jessica Arlequin, Carolina Carvajal, Luz Tovar Ramirez, Jake Bakas, Purvil Sukhadia, Ederlinda Paraiso, 
and Julia Rudolph for their important contributions.
References
1. Garraway LA. Genomics-driven oncology: framework for an emerging paradigm. J Clin Oncol. 
2013; 31:1806–14. [PubMed: 23589557] 
2. Varghese AM, Berger MF. Advancing clinical oncology through genome biology and technology. 
Genome Biol. 2014; 15:427. [PubMed: 25198155] 
3. Lindeman NI, et al. Molecular testing guideline for selection of lung cancer patients for EGFR and 
ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitors: guideline from the College of American Pathologists, International 
Zehir et al.
Page 16
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Association for the Study of Lung Cancer, and Association for Molecular Pathology. J Mol Diagn. 
2013; 15:415–53. [PubMed: 23562183] 
4. Chapman PB, et al. Improved survival with vemurafenib in melanoma with BRAF V600E mutation. 
N Engl J Med. 2011; 364:2507–16. [PubMed: 21639808] 
5. Hyman DM, et al. Vemurafenib in Multiple Nonmelanoma Cancers with BRAF V600 Mutations. N 
Engl J Med. 2015; 373:726–36. [PubMed: 26287849] 
6. Singh RR, et al. Clinical validation of a next-generation sequencing screen for mutational hotspots 
in 46 cancer-related genes. J Mol Diagn. 2013; 15:607–22. [PubMed: 23810757] 
7. Roychowdhury S, et al. Personalized oncology through integrative high-throughput sequencing: a 
pilot study. Sci Transl Med. 2011; 3:111ra121.
8. Frampton GM, et al. Development and validation of a clinical cancer genomic profiling test based 
on massively parallel DNA sequencing. Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31:1023–31. [PubMed: 24142049] 
9. Beltran H, et al. Whole-Exome Sequencing of Metastatic Cancer and Biomarkers of Treatment 
Response. JAMA Oncol. 2015; 1:466–74. [PubMed: 26181256] 
10. Sholl LM, et al. Institutional implementation of clinical tumor profiling on an unselected cancer 
population. JCI Insight. 2016; 1:e87062. [PubMed: 27882345] 
11. Cheng DT, et al. Memorial Sloan Kettering-Integrated Mutation Profiling of Actionable Cancer 
Targets (MSK-IMPACT): A Hybridization Capture-Based Next-Generation Sequencing Clinical 
Assay for Solid Tumor Molecular Oncology. J Mol Diagn. 2015; 17:251–64. [PubMed: 25801821] 
12. Cerami E, et al. The cBio cancer genomics portal: an open platform for exploring multidimensional 
cancer genomics data. Cancer Discov. 2012; 2:401–4. [PubMed: 22588877] 
13. Ciriello G, et al. Emerging landscape of oncogenic signatures across human cancers. Nat Genet. 
2013; 45:1127–33. [PubMed: 24071851] 
14. Simen BB, et al. Validation of a next-generation-sequencing cancer panel for use in the clinical 
laboratory. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2015; 139:508–17. [PubMed: 25356985] 
15. Forbes SA, et al. COSMIC: somatic cancer genetics at high-resolution. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016
16. Kandoth C, et al. Mutational landscape and significance across 12 major cancer types. Nature. 
2013; 502:333–9. [PubMed: 24132290] 
17. Cancer Genome Atlas Research N. Integrated genomic characterization of papillary thyroid 
carcinoma. Cell. 2014; 159:676–90. [PubMed: 25417114] 
18. Cancer Genome Atlas Research N. Comprehensive molecular characterization of gastric 
adenocarcinoma. Nature. 2014; 513:202–9. [PubMed: 25079317] 
19. Davis CF, et al. The somatic genomic landscape of chromophobe renal cell carcinoma. Cancer 
Cell. 2014; 26:319–30. [PubMed: 25155756] 
20. Powell E, Piwnica-Worms D, Piwnica-Worms H. Contribution of p53 to metastasis. Cancer Discov. 
2014; 4:405–14. [PubMed: 24658082] 
21. Watson PA, Arora VK, Sawyers CL. Emerging mechanisms of resistance to androgen receptor 
inhibitors in prostate cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2015; 15:701–11. [PubMed: 26563462] 
22. Toy W, et al. ESR1 ligand-binding domain mutations in hormone-resistant breast cancer. Nat 
Genet. 2013; 45:1439–45. [PubMed: 24185512] 
23. Robinson DR, et al. Activating ESR1 mutations in hormone-resistant metastatic breast cancer. Nat 
Genet. 2013; 45:1446–51. [PubMed: 24185510] 
24. Chang MT, et al. Identifying recurrent mutations in cancer reveals widespread lineage diversity and 
mutational specificity. Nat Biotechnol. 2016; 34:155–63. [PubMed: 26619011] 
25. Baca SC, et al. Punctuated evolution of prostate cancer genomes. Cell. 2013; 153:666–77. 
[PubMed: 23622249] 
26. Horn S, et al. TERT promoter mutations in familial and sporadic melanoma. Science. 2013; 
339:959–61. [PubMed: 23348503] 
27. Huang FW, et al. Highly recurrent TERT promoter mutations in human melanoma. Science. 2013; 
339:957–9. [PubMed: 23348506] 
28. Killela PJ, et al. TERT promoter mutations occur frequently in gliomas and a subset of tumors 
derived from cells with low rates of self-renewal. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 110:6021–6. 
[PubMed: 23530248] 
Zehir et al.
Page 17
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 29. Gao K, et al. TERT promoter mutations and long telomere length predict poor survival and 
radiotherapy resistance in gliomas. Oncotarget. 2016; 7:8712–25. [PubMed: 26556853] 
30. Melo M, et al. TERT promoter mutations are a major indicator of poor outcome in differentiated 
thyroid carcinomas. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014; 99:E754–65. [PubMed: 24476079] 
31. Piscuoglio S, et al. Massively parallel sequencing of phyllodes tumours of the breast reveals 
actionable mutations, and TERT promoter hotspot mutations and TERT gene amplification as 
likely drivers of progression. J Pathol. 2016; 238:508–18. [PubMed: 26832993] 
32. Stransky N, Cerami E, Schalm S, Kim JL, Lengauer C. The landscape of kinase fusions in cancer. 
Nat Commun. 2014; 5:4846. [PubMed: 25204415] 
33. Ross JS, et al. The distribution of BRAF gene fusions in solid tumors and response to targeted 
therapy. Int J Cancer. 2016; 138:881–90. [PubMed: 26314551] 
34. Menzies AM, et al. Clinical activity of the MEK inhibitor trametinib in metastatic melanoma 
containing BRAF kinase fusion. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2015; 28:607–10. [PubMed: 
26072686] 
35. Poulikakos PI, et al. RAF inhibitor resistance is mediated by dimerization of aberrantly spliced 
BRAF(V600E). Nature. 2011; 480:387–90. [PubMed: 22113612] 
36. Yao Z, et al. BRAF Mutants Evade ERK-Dependent Feedback by Different Mechanisms that 
Determine Their Sensitivity to Pharmacologic Inhibition. Cancer Cell. 2015; 28:370–83. 
[PubMed: 26343582] 
37. Alexandrov LB, et al. Signatures of mutational processes in human cancer. Nature. 2013; 500:415–
21. [PubMed: 23945592] 
38. Niu B, et al. MSIsensor: microsatellite instability detection using paired tumor-normal sequence 
data. Bioinformatics. 2014; 30:1015–6. [PubMed: 24371154] 
39. Le DT, et al. PD-1 Blockade in Tumors with Mismatch-Repair Deficiency. N Engl J Med. 2015; 
372:2509–20. [PubMed: 26028255] 
40. Chakravarty D, et al. OncoKB: A Precision Oncology Knowledge Base. J Clin Oncol Precision 
Oncology. 2017
41. Meric-Bernstam F, et al. Feasibility of Large-Scale Genomic Testing to Facilitate Enrollment Onto 
Genomically Matched Clinical Trials. J Clin Oncol. 2015; 33:2753–62. [PubMed: 26014291] 
42. Ross JS, et al. Comprehensive Genomic Profiling of Carcinoma of Unknown Primary Site: New 
Routes to Targeted Therapies. JAMA Oncol. 2015; 1:40–9. [PubMed: 26182302] 
43. Zhu Z, et al. Inhibition of KRAS-driven tumorigenicity by interruption of an autocrine cytokine 
circuit. Cancer Discov. 2014; 4:452–65. [PubMed: 24444711] 
44. Manchado E, et al. A combinatorial strategy for treating KRAS-mutant lung cancer. Nature. 2016; 
534:647–51. [PubMed: 27338794] 
45. Eubank MH, et al. Automated eligibility screening and monitoring for genotype-driven precision 
oncology trials. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2016; 23:777–81. [PubMed: 27016727] 
46. Schwaederle M, et al. On the Road to Precision Cancer Medicine: Analysis of Genomic Biomarker 
Actionability in 439 Patients. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015; 14:1488–94. [PubMed: 25852059] 
47. Stockley TL, et al. Molecular profiling of advanced solid tumors and patient outcomes with 
genotype-matched clinical trials: the Princess Margaret IMPACT/COMPACT trial. Genome Med. 
2016; 8:109. [PubMed: 27782854] 
48. Jones S, et al. Personalized genomic analyses for cancer mutation discovery and interpretation. Sci 
Transl Med. 2015; 7:283ra53.
49. Garofalo A, et al. The impact of tumor profiling approaches and genomic data strategies for cancer 
precision medicine. Genome Med. 2016; 8:79. [PubMed: 27460824] 
50. Schrader KA, et al. Germline Variants in Targeted Tumor Sequencing Using Matched Normal 
DNA. JAMA Oncol. 2016; 2:104–11. [PubMed: 26556299] 
51. Li H, Durbin R. Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler transform. 
Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:1754–60. [PubMed: 19451168] 
52. McKenna A, et al. The Genome Analysis Toolkit: a MapReduce framework for analyzing next-
generation DNA sequencing data. Genome Res. 2010; 20:1297–303. [PubMed: 20644199] 
Zehir et al.
Page 18
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 53. Mose LE, Wilkerson MD, Hayes DN, Perou CM, Parker JS. ABRA: improved coding indel 
detection via assembly-based realignment. Bioinformatics. 2014; 30:2813–5. [PubMed: 24907369] 
54. Cibulskis K, et al. Sensitive detection of somatic point mutations in impure and heterogeneous 
cancer samples. Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31:213–9. [PubMed: 23396013] 
55. Ye K, Schulz MH, Long Q, Apweiler R, Ning Z. Pindel: a pattern growth approach to detect break 
points of large deletions and medium sized insertions from paired-end short reads. Bioinformatics. 
2009; 25:2865–71. [PubMed: 19561018] 
56. Rausch T, et al. DELLY: structural variant discovery by integrated paired-end and split-read 
analysis. Bioinformatics. 2012; 28:i333–i339. [PubMed: 22962449] 
57. Thorvaldsdottir H, Robinson JT, Mesirov JP. Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV): high-
performance genomics data visualization and exploration. Brief Bioinform. 2013; 14:178–92. 
[PubMed: 22517427] 
58. Yoshihara K, et al. The landscape and therapeutic relevance of cancer-associated transcript fusions. 
Oncogene. 2015; 34:4845–54. [PubMed: 25500544] 
59. Manning G, Whyte DB, Martinez R, Hunter T, Sudarsanam S. The protein kinase complement of 
the human genome. Science. 2002; 298:1912–34. [PubMed: 12471243] 
60. Karolchik D, et al. The UCSC Table Browser data retrieval tool. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004; 
32:D493–6. [PubMed: 14681465] 
61. Zheng Z, et al. Anchored multiplex PCR for targeted next-generation sequencing. Nat Med. 2014; 
20:1479–84. [PubMed: 25384085] 
Zehir et al.
Page 19
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Overview of MSK-IMPACT clinical workflow. Patients provide informed consent for paired 
tumor-normal sequence analysis, and a blood sample is collected as a source of normal 
DNA. DNA is extracted from tumor and blood samples using automated protocols, and 
sequence libraries are prepared and captured using hybridization probes targeting all coding 
exons of 410 genes and select introns of recurrently rearranged genes. Following 
sequencing, paired reads are analyzed through a custom bioinformatics pipeline that detects 
multiple classes of genomic rearrangements. Results are loaded into an in-house developed 
genomic variants database, MPath, upon which they are manually reviewed for quality and 
accuracy. Genomic alterations are reported in the electronic medical record, transmitted to 
an institutional database (Darwin) that facilitates automated clinical trial matching, and 
automatically uploaded to the cBioPortal for data mining and interpretation.
Zehir et al.
Page 20
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Overview of the MSK-IMPACT cohort. (a) Distribution of tumor types among cases 
successfully sequenced from 10,336 patients. Cases represented 62 principal tumor types 
encapsulating 361 detailed tumor types. (b) Frequency of gene alterations in TCGA and 
MSK-IMPACT cohorts. Genes that were statistically significantly mutated in TCGA studies 
are displayed, and genes that show a significant difference between the two cohorts are 
labeled. (c) Recurrent somatic alterations across common tumor types. Genes with a cohort-
level alteration frequency of ≥5% or a tumor type-specific alteration frequency of ≥30% are 
displayed. Bars indicate the percent of cases within each tumor type harboring different 
classes of genomic alterations.
Zehir et al.
Page 21
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Spectrum of TERT promoter mutations in cancer. (a) Location of all TERT promoter 
mutations relative to the transcription start site (+1). Observed nucleotide changes leading 
presumptive ETS transcription binding sites are shown for the three most common 
mutational hotspots. Inset shows the distribution of cancer types harboring mutations at each 
individual hotspot. (b) Bar plot depicting the percentage of cases in each common principal 
tumor type (left) and melanoma sub-types (right) harboring a TERT promoter mutation. (c) 
Kaplan-Meier survival curves for the most prominent detailed tumor types belonging to the 
principal tumor types with the highest prevalence of TERT promoter mutations. Survival 
was measured starting from the date of the procedure to obtain the specimen sequenced. 
Cases where specimens were obtained more than 12 months prior to MSK-IMPACT 
sequencing were excluded from this analysis.
Zehir et al.
Page 22
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Spectrum of kinase fusions identified by MSK-IMPACT. (a) Kinase genes recurrently 
rearranged to form putative gene fusions including the kinase domain, displayed across 
principal tumor types. (b) List of fusions containing BRAF gene. * novel fusion partner; † 
complex fusion resolved using an orthogonal RNAseq based assay. (c) In-frame intragenic 
deletions observed in BRAF, encompassing 5 - 9 exons upstream of the kinase domain.
Zehir et al.
Page 23
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
Mutational signatures derived from MSK-IMPACT targeted sequencing data. (a) 
Distribution of the somatic tumor mutation burden (TMB), defined as non-synonymous 
coding mutations per Megabase, for common principal tumor types. (b) Distribution of 
observed mutation rates across all tumors sequenced was used to identify a threshold of 13.8 
mutations/Mb, indicative of high mutation burden. (c) Dominant mutation signatures 
identified in cases with high mutation burden. The percent of cases harboring a dominant 
mutation signature is shown for each principal tumor type. POLE: DNA Polymerase ε; 
MMR: Mismatch repair deficiency; UV: Ultraviolet light; TMZ: Temozolomide. (d) 
Individual tumors harboring dominant mutation signatures. Bar charts display the total 
number of coding mutations (gray) and the fraction of mutations explained by the major 
signature (colored). Tracks below the bar charts indicate: i) POLE mutation status, ii) MMR 
pathway mutation status, iii) MSIsensor score, iv) indel to SNV ratio, v) reported smoking 
status, and vi) cancer type. (e) Tumor type distribution for samples with a high mutation 
burden, dominant MMR signature, and inferred MSI. (f) 55-year-old with castrate and 
enzalutamide resistant prostate cancer with an MMR signature (19 mutations, including 6 
frameshift indels) and no clear underlying somatic or germline MMR pathway lesion. A 
pathogenic germline MUTYH variant was detected, which may contribute to the MSI 
phenotype. Upon initiation of treatment on an anti-PD-L1 immunotherapy regimen, 
significant tumor regression was observed. Line charts show the relative tumor size based on 
RECIST criteria and serum PSA levels. MRI images show the decreasing tumor size at 
indicated time points (scale bar = 10 cm).
Zehir et al.
Page 24
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. 
Clinical actionability of somatic alterations revealed by MSK-IMPACT. (a) Alterations were 
annotated based on their clinical actionability according to OncoKB, and samples were 
assigned the level of the most significant alteration. Briefly, levels of evidence varied 
according to whether mutations are FDA-recognized biomarkers (Level 1), predict response 
to standard-of-care therapies (Level 2), or predict for response to investigational agents in 
clinical trials (Level 3). Levels 2 and 3 were subdivided according to whether the evidence 
existed for the pertinent tumor type (2A, 3A) or a different tumor type (2B, 3B). The 
distribution of the highest level of actionability across all patients is displayed. (b) 
Distribution of levels of actionability across tumor types (GNET: gastrointestincal 
neuroendocrine tumor). (c) Number of patients enrolled on genomically-matched clinical 
trials on the basis of different gene alterations.
Zehir et al.
Page 25
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
