 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
C O M M E N TA R Y
1 6 2 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
Salt and water: not so simple
Mark L. Zeidel
Nephrology Division and Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
Maintaining salt and  
water balance
The great French biologist Claude Ber­
nard equated the body fluids with the 
ancient oceans that we all evolved from 
and asserted that the “constancy of the 
internal milieu is the condition of a free 
and independent existence,” that is, the 
ability to live on land, apart from the pri­
mal seas (1). Since the time of Bernard, 
physiologists and physicians have worked 
to understand how we maintain stable 
osmolality and overall circulatory volume 
in the face of massive shifts in salt intake. 
On the basis of classical balance studies 
in humans and experimental animals (2), 
generations of renal physiologists viewed 
osmotic homeostasis during salt loading 
as a passive, reactive process. In this view, 
salt loading stimulates thirst by increasing 
blood osmolality, which in turn is sensed in 
the subfornical organ (SFO) of the brain­
stem. Along with the salt load, increased 
water intake raises extracellular fluid vol­
ume, elevates cardiac preload and cardiac 
output, and increases renal plasma flow 
and the glomerular filtration rate, there­
by driving sufficient renal salt excretion 
to rebalance extracellular volume. As the 
kidney excretes the salt load, antidiur­
etic hormone–driven (ADH­driven) distal 
nephron free water reabsorption main­
tains osmotic homeostasis.
Two companion articles in this issue 
upend this classical narrative and reveal 
a complex interplay between the regu­
lated metabolism of salt, water, protein, 
and fat, all of which are required for the 
maintenance of salt balance and osmotic 
homeostasis in the face of a chronic salt 
load. In the first study, Rakova et al. (3) 
took advantage of the planned isolation 
of Russian cosmonauts for a simulated 
long­duration space flight to evaluate, 
over the long term, the impact of chang­
es in salt intake on water and salt excre­
tion. The authors were startled to find 
that chronic high salt intake resulted in 
less, not more, fluid intake and that salt 
and water balance were influenced by 
rhythmic variations in glucocorticoid and 
mineralocorticoid release. Salt excretion 
was accompanied by free water retention, 
and while salt excretion rose, excretion of 
urea and potassium was reduced. Rakova 
and colleagues concluded that urea and 
potassium substituted for sodium in the 
medullary interstitium as the osmotic 
drivers of water reabsorption in the cos­
monauts. The second study by Kitada et 
al. (4) replicated these findings in mice to 
explore the mechanisms behind the find­
ings of Rakova and colleagues. Increased 
salt intake in mice similarly augment­
ed salt excretion and failed to increase 
water intake. In the face of increased salt 
excretion, the free water retention need­
ed for osmotic homeostasis was achieved 
by increased accumulation of urea in the 
renal medulla, which, in turn, arose from 
increased protein intake and catabolism, 
as well as through an upregulation of renal 
urea transporters.
The findings of these combined stud­
ies are important, because the careful 
measurements describe in detail the phys­
iological events underlying chronic salt 
regulation in humans. Moreover, this work 
reveals the complex orchestration of adre­
nal hormone release, sympathetic nerve 
outflow, metabolism in muscle, fat, and 
liver, and renal handling of salt and water 
needed for excretion of a major salt load 
while maintaining stable blood osmolality.
In some respects, the lack of increase 
in water intake in response to the salt 
load is not surprising. Studies in normal 
humans have shown that acute increases 
in serum osmolality effected by infusion 
of hypertonic saline reliably result in rapid 
increases in ADH release, while the per­
ception of thirst is variable and occurs at a 
higher serum osmolality (5). In this regard, 
it is interesting that urine osmolalities in 
the cosmonauts on high­salt diets did not 
rise to maximal levels, suggesting that 
serum osmolalities rarely rose to a level 
     Related Articles: pp. 1932 and 1944
Conflict of interest: The author has declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2017;127(5):1625–1626. https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI94004.
It has long been viewed that the maintenance of osmotic balance in 
response to high salt intake is a passive process that is mediated largely by 
increased water consumption to balance the salt load. Two studies in this 
issue of the JCI challenge this notion and demonstrate that osmotic balance 
in response to high salt intake involves a complex regulatory process that 
is influenced by hormone fluctuation, metabolism, food consumption, 
water intake, and renal salt and water excretion. Rakova et al. report the 
unexpected observation that long-term high salt intake did not increase 
water consumption in humans but instead increased water retention. 
Moreover, salt and water balance was influenced by glucocorticoid and 
mineralocorticoid fluctuations. Kitada et al. extend upon these findings in 
mouse models and determined that increased urea and a corresponding 
increase in urea transporters in the renal medulla as the result of increased 
protein intake promote the water retention that is needed to achieve 
osmotic homeostasis. Together, the results of these two studies lay the 
groundwork for future studies to determine how, in the face of chronic 
changes in salt intake, humans maintain volume and osmotic homeostasis.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
C O M M E N TA R Y
1 6 2 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
Acknowledgments
The author’s work is supported by the NIH 
(P20 DK 108276 and RO-1 DK 113030). 
The author thanks Martin Pollak, Brad 
Lowell, Ananth Karumanchi, Seth Alp­
er, Warren Hill, Bryce MacIver, and John 
Mathai (all from Department of Medicine, 
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 
USA) for their helpful comments.
Address correspondence to: Mark L. Zeidel, 
Nephrology Division and Department of 
Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical 
Center and Harvard Medical School, 330 
Brookline Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 
02215, USA. Phone: 617.667.5260; E­mail: 
mzeidel@bidmc.harvard.edu.
 1. Bernard C. Leçons Sur Les Propriétés Physiologiques 
Et Les Altérations Pathologiques Des Liquides De 
L’organisme. Paris, France: J.B. Bailleère; 1859.
 2. Hall JE, Guyton AC, Smith MJ, Coleman TG. 
Blood pressure and renal function during chron­
ic changes in sodium intake: role of angiotensin. 
Am J Physiol. 1980;239(3):F271–F280.
 3. Rakova N, et al. Increased salt consumption 
induces body water conservation and  
decreases fluid intake. J Clin Invest. 2017; 
127(5):1932–1943.
 4. Kitada K, et al. High salt intake reprior­
itizes osmolyte and energy metabolism 
for body fluid conservation. J Clin Invest. 
2017;127(5):1944–1959.
 5. Zerbe RL, Robertson GL. Osmoregulation 
of thirst and vasopressin secretion in human 
subjects: effect of various solutes. Am J Physiol. 
1983;244(6):E607–E614.
 6. Roth BL. DREADDs for neuroscientists. Neuron. 
2016;89(4):683–694.
 
7. Rajasethupathy P, Ferenczi E, Deisseroth K. Tar­
geting neural circuits. Cell. 2016;165(3):524–534.
 8. Campbell JN, et al. A molecular census of arcu­
ate hypothalamus and median eminence cell 
types. Nat Neurosci. 2017;20(3):484–496.
 9. Fenselau H, et al. A rapidly acting glutamatergic 
ARC→PVH satiety circuit post synaptically regu­
lated by α­MSH. Nat Neurosci. 2017;20(1):42–51.
 10. Vetrivelan R, et al. Melanin­concentrating 
hormone neurons specifically promote rapid 
eye movement sleep in mice. Neuroscience. 
2016;336:102–113.
 11. Hou XH, et al. Central control circuit for 
context­dependent micturition. Cell. 
2016;167(1):73–86.
 12. Zimmerman CA, et al. Thirst neurons anticipate 
the homeostatic consequences of eating and 
drinking. Nature. 2016;537(7622):680–684.
 13. Mandelblat­Cerf Y, et al. Bidirectional anticipa­
tion of future osmotic challenges by vasopressin 
neurons. Neuron. 2017;93(1):57–65.
which can then be targeted genetically 
(8). Using these approaches, investigators 
have mapped with increasing definition 
the control within brain neurons of appe­
tite and satiety (9), sleep and wakeful­
ness (10), bladder function (11), as well as 
thirst and ADH release (12, 13).
Recent studies on the control of SFO 
neurons that regulate thirst revealed that 
the level of activation of these neurons is 
determined by serum osmolality, which 
they sense directly, and, at much high­
er sensitivity, by their estimate of the 
impact that drinking water or eating food 
will have on serum osmolality (12). Thus, 
water deprivation activates SFO neurons, 
and initiation of drinking reduces this 
activation, long before water ingestion 
alters serum osmolality. Additionally, 
food intake almost immediately activates 
SFO neurons, long before food ingestion 
alters serum osmolality. Similarly, ADH­ 
releasing neurons in the hypothalamus 
are activated immediately by eating and 
are inhibited immediately by drinking and 
by the anticipation of drinking (13). Thus, 
we are beginning to understand how the 
brain integrates environmental cues with 
the homeostatic needs of the organism, so 
that in the future we can begin to explain, 
for example, why the cosmonauts did not 
drink more in response to salt loading, but 
instead accelerated catabolism and renal 
free water reabsorption.
The studies by Rakova et al. and Kit­
ada et al. demonstrate that controlling 
salt excretion and osmotic homeostasis 
in the face of wide variations in salt load 
engages the release of hormones such as 
glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids, 
alters filtration and tubular handling 
of sodium and water in the nephron, 
changes protein and fat metabolism, and 
alters drinking and eating. The neural 
circuits that adapt intake and excretion, 
as well as metabolism, to the ongoing 
needs of the organism in its environ­
ment are just being revealed. As these 
pathways become clearer, therapies tar­
geted to the control of specific neural 
circuits may be possible and will permit 
improved treatment of conditions like 
hypertension, congestive heart failure, 
and hyponatremia.
high enough to stimulate maximal ADH 
release and may not have risen enough 
to drive thirst (3). Sleep provides another 
example of the primacy of ADH release 
over thirst in response to small increases in 
serum osmolality. During sleep, insensible 
water loss starts to raise serum osmolality, 
which triggers ADH release, and increas­
es renal reabsorption of free water, which 
corrects serum osmolality without the 
need for arousal and thirst to drive drink­
ing. Similarly, in chronically salt­loaded 
mice and humans, the kidney’s ability to 
concentrate urine, coupled with the gener­
ation of free water from increased protein 
and fat metabolism, was more than suffi­
cient to maintain stable blood osmolality 
during salt loading (3, 4).
Unanswered questions
If osmolality must rise quite substantially 
before thirst is engaged, then how is thirst 
meshed with the fine control of serum 
osmolality? For that matter, where and 
how do organisms orchestrate the multiple 
control mechanisms (hormone release, 
metabolism, and excretion of renal salt 
and water) shown by the two articles 
in this issue? Can future studies define 
these control mechanisms with clarity? 
The brainstem, hypothalamus, and struc­
tures of the lamina terminalis (organum 
vasculosum laminae terminalis [OVLT], 
median preoptic nucleus [MnPO], and 
SFO) control salt balance and osmotic 
homeostasis and integrate external envi­
ronmental stimuli to manage nearly all 
aspects of homeostasis. Because these 
regions have so many different neurons in 
such close proximity, it has been difficult 
to map out neural control circuits in them. 
Newer methods that combine genetic 
targeting with stereotactic localization of 
interventions and measurements permit 
monitoring and manipulation of specific 
neuronal types in specific locations, often 
in conscious, freely moving mice (6, 7). 
The very recent use of high­throughput 
single­cell transcriptomic technologies, 
such as Drop­seq, to define with great 
precision the different populations of 
neurons within anatomic regions of the 
brain will likely lead to the identification 
of ever more specific neuron populations, 
