 Intra-Articular Administration of Autologous
Micro-Fragmented Adipose Tissue in Dogs with
Spontaneous Osteoarthritis: Safety, Feasibility,
and Clinical Outcomes
OFFER ZEIRA,a
SIMONE SCACCIA,a LETIZIA PETTINARI,a ERICA GHEZZI,a NIMROD ASIAG,a
LAURA MARTINELLI,a DANIELE ZAHIRPOUR,a MARIA P. DUMAS,a MARTIN KONAR,a DAVIDE M. LUPI,a
LAURENCE FIETTE,b LUISA PASCUCCI,c LEONARDO LEONARDI,c ALISTAIR CLIFF,d GIULIO ALESSANDRI,e
AUGUSTO PESSINA,f DANIELE SPAZIANTE,g MARINA ARALLAa
ABSTRACT
Similar to the disease affecting humans, osteoarthritis (OA) is a painful musculoskeletal condition
affecting 20% of the adult canine population. Several solutions have been proposed, but the
results achieved to date are far from being satisfactory. New approaches, such as intra-articular
delivery of cells (including mesenchymal stromal cells), have been proposed. Among the many
sources, the adipose tissue is considered very promising. We evaluated the safety, feasibility,
and efficacy of a single intra-articular injection of autologous and micro-fragmented adipose tis-
sue (MFAT) in 130 dogs with spontaneous OA. MFAT was obtained using a minimally invasive
technique in a closed system and injected in the intra- and/or peri-articular space. Clinical out-
comes were determined using orthopedic examination and owners’ scores for up to 6 months.
In 78% of the dogs, improvement in the orthopedic score was registered 1 month after treat-
ment and continued gradually up to 6 months when 88% of the dogs improved, 11% did not
change, and 1% worsened compared with baseline. Considering the owners’ scores at 6 months,
92% of the dogs significantly improved, 6% improved only slightly, and 2% worsened compared
with baseline. No local or systemic major adverse effects were recorded. The results of this study
suggest that MFAT injection in dogs with OA is safe, feasible, and beneficial. The procedure is
time sparing and cost-effective. Post injection cytological investigation, together with the clinical
evidence, suggests a long-term pain control role of this treatment. The spontaneous OA dog
model has a key role in developing successful treatments for translational medicine. STEM
CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2018;7:819–828
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT
This study evaluates the safety, feasibility, and clinical efficacy of using autologous and micro-
fragmented adipose tissue for the treatment of spontaneous osteoarthritis in dogs. The proce-
dure is simple, time sparing, cost-effective, minimally invasive, one-step, and eliminates the
need for complex and time intensive cell culture processing. The lack of any complications and
the long lasting successful results are of considerable importance for the use in human
medicine.
INTRODUCTION
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a painful musculoskeletal
condition, often secondary to structural abnor-
malities or ligament injury leading to articular
instability and modifications of the normal carti-
lage matrix resulting in pain, joint stiffness, and
muscular atrophy [1, 2]. When surface erosion,
bone sclerosis, and osteophyte production are
severe enough to be clinically recognized, they
are likely to be irreversible when treated with
current therapies [3]. OA is the most common
cause of disability in the elderly population with
an incidence of 10% in humans aged 60 years
and older [4] and remains a huge concern to pub-
lic health, in terms of both health-related quality
of life and the financial burden caused by the dis-
ease. A critical step toward understanding and
mitigating the effects of this disease is transla-
tional research. Using animal models provides an
extremely practical and clinically relevant way to
study the natural history and response to treat-
ment of OA, and the dog is probably the closest
to a gold standard model for OA [5, 6]. OA affects
20% of the adult canine population [7], with sig-
nificant welfare implications. The disease affects
aSan Michele Veterinary
Hospital, Tavazzano con
Villavesco (LO), Italy; bUnité
d’Histopathologie Humaine
et Modèles Animaux,
Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France; cDepartment of
Veterinary Medicine,
University of Perugia, Italy;
dCrown Vets Referrals,
Inverness, United Kingdom;
eDepartment of
Cerebrovascular Diseases,
IRCCS Besta Neurological
Institute, Milan, Italy;
fDepartment of Biomedical,
Surgical and Dental
Sciences, University of
Milan, Italy; gFuturavet,
Tolentino (MC), Italy
Correspondence: Offer Zeira,
D.V.M., Ph.D., San Michele Vet-
erinary Hospital, Via Primo
Maggio 37, Tavazzano con Villa-
vesco (LO), Italy. Telephone:
39-0371-760479; e-mail:
offer@ospedalesanmichele.it
Received January 24, 2018;
revised April 23, 2018; accepted
for publication May 25, 2018;
first published July 23, 2018.
http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/sctm.18-0020
This is an open access article
under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivs
License, which permits use and
distribution in any medium,
provided the original work is
properly cited, the use is non-
commercial and no modifica-
tions or adaptations are made.
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2018;7:819–828 www.StemCellsTM.com
© 2018 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
TISSUE ENGINEERING AND REGENERATIVE MEDICINE
 dogs of all ages, sizes, and breeds [8], with large-breeds develop-
ing more severe clinical signs.
A variety of treatments for the management of OA in dogs
have been proposed (alternative therapies, functional food, intra-
articular agents, nutraceutical agents, pharmacological agents,
physical therapies, surgical techniques, and weight control) with
variable
success
rates
[3,
9].
Recently,
new
therapeutic
approaches, such as the use of cellular therapies, including mes-
enchymal stromal cells (MSCs), have been introduced [10–15]
and adipose tissue is a very useful source of these naturally occur-
ring regenerative cells because of its abundance and easy access.
MSCs have been reported to have a perivascular origin and to be
able to activate and influence the microenvironment by serving
as “a site-regulated drug store” [16]. Through trophic, mitogenic,
anti-scarring, anti-apoptotic, immunomodulatory [17], and antimi-
crobial actions, produced by a large amount of bioactive ele-
ments, growth factors and cytokines, these cells sense and signal
changes in the microenvironment where they reside [17–20].
The use of purified adipose-derived MSCs has recently cre-
ated a huge interest in the context of cartilage regeneration
[21, 22] and both in vitro and in vivo studies demonstrated
their anti-inflammatory and regenerative properties [23]. Nev-
ertheless, enzymatic treatment and/or cell expansion have
complex regulatory concerns related to good manufacturing
practice (GMP) guidelines [24–29] and the requirement for a
biological license from the U.S. FDA. Hence, the availability of
minimally manipulated autologous adipose tissue as a thera-
peutic option would have remarkable clinical relevance. For
this reason, we employed a commercially available system
(Lipogems®) that intraoperatively provides micro-fragmented
adipose tissue (MFAT) in a short time, without cell expansion,
enzymatic treatment or other major manipulations [30, 31].
With this study, we evaluated the safety, feasibility, and
clinical efficacy of autologous MFAT injections in dogs affected
by spontaneous OA.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study Design and Population
This is a multicenter prospective observational and independent
study. One hundred and thirty client-owned dogs with sponta-
neous OA were treated with autologous MFAT injections from
2014 to 2017 in seven private veterinary hospitals in Italy, Swe-
den, Israel, and U.K. Inclusion criteria for the participation in the
study were OA diagnosed based on history, clinical signs, and
radiographic evidence of arthritis in one or more joints. No age,
sex, or weight limits were applied, but the dogs were required
to be free from systemic diseases, have a normal complete
blood count (CBC) and serum biochemical analysis and not
enrolled in other clinical studies. Dogs with major comorbidities
that could interfere or modify the results of the study, with
radiographic evidences of joint mouse (intended as completely
detached fragment of cartilage floating around the joint) and/or
infected synovial fluid, or treated with systemic nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or corticosteroids within
10 days and/or local intra-articular medications 30 days before
the treatment were excluded from the study. Participation in
the study was interrupted in cases of any complication or lack of
the owner to cooperate with procedures or restrictions. In case
of death due to natural causes or owner request for euthanasia,
dogs underwent autopsy and the treated joint/s underwent
histological examinations. Each participating veterinary hospital
followed guidelines established for Good Clinical Practice.
Pretreatment and Post-Treatment Clinical Examination
To assess lameness and pain, detailed history from all dogs
was obtained and gait was observed and recorded by video.
The patients underwent general physical examination followed
by orthopedic examination. Each joint was manipulated for
pain, synovial effusion, crepitus, or altered range of motion
with the intention to identify one or more affected joints.
Because it is essential to have scoring methods that allow for
reduced variability between various users and across multiple
hospital settings [32], our follow-up included both orthopedic
examination at 2 weeks, 1, 3, and 6 months after treatment
and monthly owner’s pain assessments for up to 24 months
with the Helsinki chronic pain index (HCPI) [33]. To assess
baseline severity of OA, disease progression and benefits of
treatment, lameness scores were assigned using a modified
numerical rating scale (NRS) ranging from 1 (clinically sound)
to 4 (cannot be more lame) [34, 35]. For the owner’s pain
assessments (HCPI), 11 items, divided between a simple
descriptive scale for behavior and locomotion and the visual
analog scale for pain, are scored 0–4. To better compare the
HCPI with the lameness score, we multiplied the latter by
11 to obtain a customized score, the orthopedic score (OS),
which was classified in normal (score = 11), mild (score = 22),
moderate (score = 33), and severe (score = 44).
Radiographic Exam
Dogs underwent radiographic exams of the affected joints
before treatment, 3 and 6 months after treatment or when-
ever a notable clinical change was reported. Anteroposterior,
lateral, medial and, if necessary, oblique projections of the
joints were used according to the anatomic region. Routine
assessment parameters included joint capsular distention due
to effusion, soft tissue thickening, intra-articular mineraliza-
tion, narrowed joint spaces, subchondral sclerosis, and osteo-
phyte formation and progression [36]. The dogs were graded
according to I–IV numeric scale: I normal, II mild changes, III
moderate changes, and IV severe radiographic changes.
Advanced Imaging Diagnostic
Computed tomography (CT) (Presto 4 slice, Hitachi, Japan and
Somatom 16 slice, Siemens, Germany) provided improved accu-
racy for evaluation of articular abnormalities. Sagittal and dor-
sal reformatted images were used in conjunction with imaging
in the transversal plane. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
(Vet-MR Grande 0.25T, Esaote Spa, Genova, Italy) was used to
assess additional bony, ligamentous, and soft-tissue abnormali-
ties since it is more sensitive in detecting early changes [37].
T1-weighted
pre-
and
post-contrast
enhancement
and
T2-weighted sequences were used in sagittal, dorsal, and trans-
versal planes. Those methods were used for assessment of
both extra- and intra-articular structures although not routinely
used in the initial evaluation of arthropathies, rather for resolv-
ing uncertain findings on conventional radiographs. Examples
for such conditions are anterior cruciate ligament injuries,
osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) and coronoid process fragmen-
tation. Altogether, 68 patients underwent MRI and/or CT.
© 2018 The Authors. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
820
Micro-Fragmented Fat in Dogs with Osteoarthritis
 Synovial Fluid Examination
Each patient underwent a synovial fluid examination within
1 week before the treatment. Skin over the joint was prepared
as for any sterile invasive procedure. The choice of needle
diameter and length depended upon the joint involved and
the size of the patient. Color, turbidity, viscosity, and quantity
of synovial fluid were assessed. Cell count was done by CBC
machine, whereas interpretation of fluid samples of low vol-
ume, was aided by methodical manual counting of cells on
direct smears. Differential cell counts were done by MGG
QUICK stain (Bio-Optica Milano Spa, Milano, Italy) and micro-
scopic examination [38]. Protein concentration was measured
by refractometer, paying attention to avoid small sample vol-
umes in large amounts of EDTA (falsely high protein concen-
trations). The synovial fluid was classified in normal when cell
count was <3,000 cells/μl (rare synoviocytes and lymphocytes);
dogs were considered affected by a degenerative arthropathy
when cell count was between 3,000 and 5,000 cells/μl (syno-
viocytes, macrophages, and lymphocytes). An inflammatory
arthropathy was diagnosed when cell count was >5,000 cells/
μl (mainly degenerated non-granulocytes). In cases of sus-
pected infectious arthropathy, a sample of synovial fluid was
sent to the laboratory for bacterial culture.
Adipose Tissue Harvesting and Processing
The entire procedure was performed in a certified operating
room. The harvesting procedure in humans has been exten-
sively described [30], whereas in dogs, no previous experience
has been published. Patients were sedated with medetomidine
1 μg/kg and metadone 0.2 mg/kg IM and then anesthetized by
propofol 2–3 mg/kg IV ad effect until tracheal intubation was
achieved. Anesthesia was maintained by isofluorane 1.2%.
Each dog was placed in sternal recumbency. The procedure
was performed making a single cutaneous hole, using an 18G
needle, on the central line of the lumbar region above the
fifth lumbar vertebra (Fig. 1). Through the cutaneous hole, a
disposable 18G blunt cannula was inserted into the fat layer
and the fat was infiltrated with a mixture of sterile saline
4 ml/kg b.wt. and adrenalin 0.05 mg/10 ml NaCl solution. The
fat was then harvested by connecting a 16G blunt cannula to a
Vaclock® (apex) 20-ml syringe and then injected into the
Lipogems® (apex) device (Lipogems International SpA, Milan,
Italy), a disposable product that progressively reduces the size
of the adipose tissue clusters while eliminating oily substances
and blood residues with proinflammatory properties. The
entire process, carried out in one surgical step, was performed
in complete immersion in physiological solution minimizing
any trauma to the cells. The resulting MFAT was collected in a
60-cc syringe, positioned for decanting the excess saline solu-
tion and then transferred into several 10-cc syringes to be
injected in the patient. Randomly, every 10 patients, a sample
of MFAT was sent to the laboratory for morphological and
microbiological quality control.
MFAT Injection and Postoperative Care
In 90% of the patients, MFAT was injected in the intra-articular
space. In details, the needle was introduced into the joint, syno-
vial fluid aspirated and MFAT injected through the same needle.
The amount and site of injected material depended on patient’s
dimension, type of joint, type of arthropathy, and availability of
material. Ideally, dogs >30 kg b.wt. had a 2 ml injection in or
around each treated joint, dogs 15–30 kg had 1.5 ml, and dogs
1–14 kg had 1 ml. In cases of very small joints or massive osteo-
phytes, MFAT was injected in the peri-articular space (10% of
the patients). The cutaneous hole was medicated with antibiotic
cream and covered by plaster. The patient was sent home few
hours after the procedure with Tramadol 2 mg/kg twice a day
for 2 days. Owners were instructed to restrict the dog’s activity
for 5 days and encouraged to report to the personal veterinary
surgeon any observed abnormality (pain, bleeding, infection, or
others). HCPI survey compilation was explained to the owners
together with the importance of client adherence to the follow-
up protocol. Finally, the possibility to forward films of the dog
between the clinical controls was verified.
Histological Examinations
Histological examination was performed on the treated joints of
two patients who died of natural causes not related to the pri-
mary articular disease 8 months after treatment and one
patient who died 11 months after treatment. At necropsy, the
articulations were taken and fixed in 4% phosphate buffered
formalin. The bones were then routinely decalcified. Samples
were taken after decalcification, embedded in paraffin and
4 μm sections were stained with hematoxylin–eosin (H&E),
Masson trichrome and Alcian blue and examined microscopi-
cally. The expression of collagen I, II, III, and X was assessed by
immunohistochemistry. Briefly, after dewaxing, slides were
hydrated through a descending ethanol series and then rinsed
in distilled water. Endogenous peroxidase was inactivated with
3% hydrogen peroxide in tris-phosphate buffered saline (TBS) at
room temperature. Antigen retrieval was achieved incubating
the sections in a microwave oven with 10 mM citric acid solu-
tion (pH 6.0). Nonspecific reactivity was blocked with normal
serum for 30 minutes. Slides were then incubated overnight
with the following primary antibodies: rabbit polyclonal anti-
body to collagen I (Byorbit, Cambridge, U.K.; dilution 1:50);
mouse monoclonal antibody to collagen II (Thermo Fisher, Wal-
tham, MA, U.S., dilution 1:100) rabbit polyclonal antibody to
collagen III (Byorbit, Cambridge, U.K.; dilution 1:50); rabbit poly-
clonal antibody to collagen X (Gene Tex, Irvine, CA; dilution
1:50). Sections were then respectively incubated with goat anti-
rabbit and goat anti-mouse biotinylated antibody, followed by
avidin-biotin complex (ABCL-2, Abcam, Cambridge, U.K.). Immu-
nostaining was revealed with 3-amino-9ethyl-carbazole and
Figure 1.
Operative scheme: lipoaspiration procedure in the dog.
www.StemCellsTM.com
© 2018 The Authors. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
Zeira, Scaccia, Pettinari et al.
821
 nuclei were counterstained with hematoxylin. Negative controls
were performed by omitting the primary antibody.
MFAT morphology, for quality control purposes, was also
evaluated. Thirteen samples were analyzed by means of light
microscopy (LM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and
scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Specifically, MFAT was
fixed in formalin and embedded in paraffin for observation at
light microscope. Five μm thick sections were stained with
H&E and with Masson trichrome. For TEM, MFAT was fixed in
glutaraldehyde, postfixed in osmium tetroxide and embedded
in epoxy resin. Ultrathin sections were examined with a Philips
EM 208 transmission electron microscope. For SEM, MFAT was
fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde, dehydrated, coated with gold to
a thickness of 15 nm and observed with a Philips XL30 scan-
ning electron microscope.
Safety Assessment
To assess the safety of the procedure, serial blood samples
were taken once a month, up to 6 months, for CBC and serum
biochemical analysis.
Statistical Analysis
To guarantee standard operating procedures, all dogs were
operated by the same surgeon (OZ). Clinical evaluations at any
follow-up time were performed in each center independently.
Results are expressed as mean and standard deviation. Statisti-
cal analysis was performed using Graphpad Prism v7.04 soft-
ware (GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA). One-way analysis
of variance (ANOVA) for repeated measures with Dunnett’s
post hoc test was used to analyze the data obtained at the dif-
ferent time points and for the comparison of data sets from
each time point with the baseline values. Two-way ANOVA for
repeated measures was applied to test the influences of ani-
mal size and OA severity on owner’s (HCPI) and orthopedic
(OS) scores at the different time points. A p < .05 was consid-
ered statistically significant.
Ethics
For ethical reasons, the use of NSAIDs (mostly Robenacoxib
2 mg/kg per sid) during the study was allowed and limited to
the shortest possible period. The owners of the dogs were
thoroughly informed about the entire procedure and signed a
formal agreement in acceptance of both anesthesia and ther-
apy. They also accepted that their dogs would undergo post-
mortem examination of the joints.
RESULTS
The 130 patients (49 breeds, 50.8% males, and 49.2% females)
ranged in age from <1 to 13 years, with a mean age of six
(SD 3.7). Considering the dog size, 10.8% of the dogs were small
(<15 kg), 22.3% medium (15–25 kg), and 66.9% large (>25 kg).
Three hundred forty-six joints of eight types were treated with
hips, elbows and stifles representing the majority (85%). On
average, 35.6 ml (SD 10.5) of lipoaspirate and 7.3 ml (SD 4.3) of
MFAT was obtained from each patient. Based on the pretreat-
ment synovial fluid cytological examination, 10.0% of the dogs
resulted normal (although presenting clinical signs of OA),
80.9% showed signs compatible with a degenerative arthropa-
thy and 9.1% presented findings of an inflammatory non-septic
Table 1. Background data of the population
Characteristic
Value
Gender
M
50.8%
F
49.2%
Size
Small
10.8%
Medium
22.3%
Large
66.9%
Breeds
49
Age
Mean
6.0 yr.o.
SD
3.7
Total joints
346
Tarsus
1.0%
Carpus
5.0%
Metacarpus
1.0%
Shoulder
8.0%
Hip
37.0%
Stifles
21.0%
Paravertebral muscle
2.0%
Elbow
27.0%
Harvested fat
Mean
32.6 ml
SD
10.6 ml
Obtained MFAT
Mean
7.3 ml
SD
4.3 ml
Volumea of injected MFAT
Tarsus
0.5–2 ml
Carpus
0.5–2 ml
Metacarpus
0.3–1 ml
Shoulder
0.5–2 ml
Hip
0.5–3 ml
Stifles
0.5–3 ml
Paravertebral muscle
1–4 ml
Elbow
0.5–2 ml
Synovial fluid
NORMAL
10.0%
DEG OA
81.0%
INFL OA
9.0%
Grade OA
I
1.5%
II
30.0%
III
47.7%
IV
20.8%
aMinimum and maximum volume depending on the animal size.
Abbreviations: DEG, degenerative; F, female; INFL, inflammatory;
M, male; MFAT, micro-fragmented adipose tissue; OA, osteoarthritis;
SD, standard deviation.
© 2018 The Authors. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
822
Micro-Fragmented Fat in Dogs with Osteoarthritis
 arthropathy. Regarding the severity of OA, detected by radio-
graphic examination and/or advanced imaging diagnostic, 1.5%
of the dogs were grade I, 30.0% grade II, 47.7% grade III, and
the remaining 20.8% grade IV (Table 1).
HCPI and OS scores both improved significantly at each
time point with respect to baseline (p < .0001, Fig. 2). In 78%
of the dogs, improvement in the OS was clear 1 month after
MFAT injection and continued gradually up to 6 months. At
6 months, 88% of the dogs improved and 11% did not change
compared to baseline. Only 1% worsened, presumably because
of iatrogenic septic arthritis (Staphylococcus spp.) in the trea-
ted joint and treatment with antimicrobial drugs was success-
ful. Considering the HCPI, based on the owner’s knowledge of
the dog’s “normal” versus “abnormal” behaviors, gait and
other typical activities [33, 39], at 6 months 63% of the dogs
considerably improved (Δt6-t0HCPI > 10), 29% significantly
improved (Δt6-t0HCPI ≥ 5 and ≤10), 6% improved only slightly
(Δt6-t0HCPI < 5), and 2% worsened compared to baseline evalua-
tion (Fig. 2). Possible correlations between improvements in the
clinical outcomes at 3 and 6 months and specific patient’s cate-
gories such as sex, size, age, type of synovial fluid, severity of
OA determined by imaging, owner’s and orthopedic scores were
also evaluated. Sex, age, and synovial fluid characteristics did not
influence the outcomes. Conversely, OA severity influenced both
OS and HCPI scores changes during time. In detail, dogs with OA
grade III and IV showed more improvements compared to dogs
with grade I and II (Δt6-t0HCPI −14.2 vs. −9.4, p = .0001 and
Δt6-t0OS −14.0 vs. −10.4, p = .0092, Fig. 3).
We observed the same trend for patients with an OS at
baseline of moderate/severe that at 6 months showed a Δt6-t0
HCPI of −14.5 versus the −8.3 of the patients starting from a
normal/mild OS (p = 3.14E-7) and a Δt6-t0 OS of −15.4 versus
the −6.9 (p = 2.18E-10, Fig. 4).
The size of animal influenced the HCPI in relation to the
time of observation, whereas OS values changings over time
were
independent
from
this
parameter.
Nevertheless,
medium/large animals improved more compared to small ani-
mals (Δt6-t0HCPI −13.3 vs. −9.3, p = .02 and Δt6-t0OS −14.4
vs. −9.4, p = .03, Fig. 5). The improvements at each time point
were confirmed in all different categories, in terms of animal
size and gender.
Post-treatment radiographic assessment at 3 and 6 months
showed variable increase in osteophyte dimension in adult
dogs, in which hip, stifle, and shoulder joints were involved.
However, in some cases osteophytes presented blunt extremity
compared to pretreatment (Supporting information Fig. 1). In
young dogs, mainly affected by OCD, the cartilage lesion
became filled and covered by hyperdense material (Supporting
information Fig. 2). In cases of stifle OA, post-treatment MRI
showed mildly decreased joint effusion, with bone marrow
edema-like lesions around the origin of the cranial cruciate
Figure 2.
Trend of functional improvement from baseline to
6 months’ follow-up. (Top): Helsinki chronic pain index. (Bottom):
Orthopedic score. The severity of osteoarthritis is classified in nor-
mal (11 points), mild (22 points), moderate (33 points) and severe
(44 points). Results are expressed as mean and standard devia-
tion. A p < .01 was considered statistically significant (##).
Figure 3.
Change in the scores at 3 and 6 months’ follow-up
depending on the grade of radiographic osteoarthritis at baseline.
(Top): Helsinki chronic pain index. (Bottom): Orthopedic score.
Grey bars: OA grade I and II; black bars: OA grade III and
IV. Results are expressed as mean and standard deviation. (##)
p < .01 Δt3,6-t0 grade III and IV versus I and II.
www.StemCellsTM.com
© 2018 The Authors. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
Zeira, Scaccia, Pettinari et al.
823
 ligament and a meniscus less clearly delineable, especially in
the corpus/cranial horn transition area.
Clinical examinations at 1 month and every 3 months con-
firmed no local or systemic short- or long-term major adverse
effects. In addition, CBC and serum biochemical analysis did
not show any significant abnormality.
The histological examination of a joint 11 months after
treatment revealed an uneven articular surface. Various stages
of degenerative lesions of the articular cartilage were observed
and multiple foci of cell proliferation (chondrocyte clusters
and/or disorientation of chondrocytes) were associated with
these changes. Large eosinophilic polymorphic cells with cyto-
plasmic vacuoles were observed in multiple foci free within the
articular cavity and lining the fibrous cartilage or the synovial
membrane, suggesting the presence of the injected adipose tis-
sue 11 months before (Supporting information Fig. 3).
Immunohistochemistry assessment showed that collagen
expression varied significantly in the different areas. The wid-
est area of immunostaining for type I collagen was observed in
fibrocartilage and in fibrous-like tissue; in these sites, collagen
I was moderately but homogeneously expressed. In contrast,
where hyaline cartilage was predominant, almost no staining
for type I was detected. Collagen type II was abundantly
expressed in preserved hyaline cartilage whereas collagen II
immunostaining was mild and restricted to the lower regions
of fibrocartilage. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated some
immunopositivity for type III collagen in fibrocartilage while
almost no staining for this type of collagen was seen in hyaline
cartilage. Finally, immunoreactions to collagen X gave rise to a
mild
multifocally
pericellular
staining
in
fibrocartilage
(Supporting information Fig. 4).
The morphological analysis of 13 samples of MFAT by
means of LM and SEM revealed the adipocytes as empty struc-
tures due to the alcohol treatment that had removed the
abundant lipid component and had preserved adipocyte mem-
branes. A network of connective reticular tissue embedded by
adipocytes and microvessels was observed (Fig. 6). At LM and
TEM, different cell types were detected: empty adipocytes
(Fig. 6A, 6B), red blood cells aligned within capillaries (Fig. 6E,
6G, 6H), long flat endothelial cells lined along the capillaries
(Fig. 6G), large globular cells of possible stromal nature located
in the interstices or close to vessel walls, and with an arrange-
ment resembling the one described for pericytes (Fig. 6D, 6G,
6I). Neither medium nor large vessels were observed. No sub-
stantial differences were observed between samples taken
from superficial or deep adipose tissue. Microbiological analy-
sis confirmed the sterility of the injected MFAT.
Figure 4.
Change in the scores at 3 and 6 months’ follow-up
depending on the severity of osteoarthritis at baseline assessed by
the orthopedic score. (Top): Helsinki chronic pain index. (Bottom):
Orthopedic score. Grey bars: normal/mild; black bars: moderate/
severe. Results are expressed as mean and standard deviation.
(##) p < .01 Δtx-t0 moderate/severe versus normal/mild.
Figure 5.
Change in the scores at 3 and 6 months’ follow-up
depending on the size of the animal. (Top): Helsinki chronic pain
index. (Bottom): Orthopedic score. White bars (S): small size
(<15 kg); grey bars (M): medium size (15–25 kg); black bars (L):
large size (>25 kg). Results are expressed as mean and standard
deviation. (#) p < .05 Δtx-t0 medium versus small and (*) p < .05
Δtx-t0 large versus small.
© 2018 The Authors. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
824
Micro-Fragmented Fat in Dogs with Osteoarthritis
 DISCUSSION
This study assessed the safety, feasibility, and potential benefits
of using autologous and micro-fragmented adipose tissue in the
treatment of OA in dogs. Animal models provide practical and
clinically relevant ways to study both the natural history and
response to treatment of OA and dog is probably the closest to
a gold standard animal model for OA currently available.
Indeed, similar to human medicine, OA is a painful musculoskel-
etal condition in dogs and once the degenerative process initi-
ates, it becomes a vicious cycle and the released substances
result in inflammation, pain, and further damage. A variety of
treatments has been proposed for the management of OA, with
variable success rates but none capable of long-term resolution.
A systematic review on randomized or semi-randomized con-
trolled clinical trials comparing intra-articular corticosteroids
with sham injection or no treatment in humans with knee OA
revealed that the therapeutic effects in terms of pain, physical
function and quality of life decrease over time and provided no
evidence that an effect remains 6 months after a corticosteroid
injection [40]. A prospective, randomized, double-blinded trial
comparing outcomes in dogs with bilateral elbow OA treated
with hyaluronic acid plus methylprednisolone (HA + S) or autol-
ogous conditioned plasma (ACP) showed improvements in activ-
ity, lameness and pain with HA + S and ACP suggesting that
both treatments have beneficial effects up to 6 months [41].
Similar results were observed in human medicine [42]. In the
long run, intra-articular MSCs transplantation without scaffolds
is a more attractive option for the treatment of OA. Through
direct cell–cell interaction or the secretion of various factors,
MSCs can initiate endogenous reparative activities in the osteo-
arthritic joint [13, 14, 16–20, 23, 43]. Regarding the mechanism
by which MFAT exerts its action within the joint, we hypothe-
size a strong analgesic, anti-inflammatory, and trophic activity.
Furthermore, the long-lasting mesenchymal components may
also exert a reparative action. This hypothesis is well supported
Figure 6.
Micro-fragmented adipose tissue obtained from canine lipoaspirate analyzed by light microscopy (LM), transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). (A): Lacunar spaces depict empty adipocytes surrounded by a network of
reticular connective tissue (LM) (B): See A. High magnification. (C): Empty adipocytes surrounded by connective tissue (SEM). (D, E):
Micro-fragmented adipose tissue stromal vascular fraction: note the presence of micro-vessels containing typically aligned red blood cells
(arrow). Abundant stromal cells (arrowheads) may be detected within the connective fiber network (green). Masson trichrome staining.
(F): A micro-vessel embedded in connective tissue (SEM). (G): Micrograph showing red blood cells aligned within capillaries (white
arrows), long and flat cells located along capillaries and referable to endothelial cells (black arrowheads); largest roundish cells located
close to vessels’ wall, referable to pericytes (black arrows). Masson Trichrome staining (H): Electron micrograph (TEM) showing red blood
cells typically aligned within a capillary (arrow). (I): A pericyte embracing a microvessel (TEM).
www.StemCellsTM.com
© 2018 The Authors. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
Zeira, Scaccia, Pettinari et al.
825
 by the various components of MFAT, as described by the histo-
logical examination [31, 44, 45].
The subjective nature of assessing pain in dogs makes it diffi-
cult to obtain useful, reliable, non-biased, and repeatable data.
Indeed, many outcome measures have been used, but there is
no clear consensus on what is the most useful outcome and/or
which is the best assessment method [46]. In our study, we used
both the lameness score and the HCPI because it is easy to use
and validated [33]. Our results demonstrated that MFAT injec-
tion significantly improved function and reduced pain and symp-
toms for at least 6 months with a trend of steady increase
during time. Furthermore, we found that patients starting from
a severe condition at baseline, mainly medium and large animals,
showed greater improvements at 6 months compared to
patients starting from a less severe condition, in line with a
recent report investigating the therapeutic response in dogs with
naturally occurring OA that revealed that dogs with a mild lame-
ness are less prone to improve [47]. Pretreatment and post-
treatment radiographic assessment indicated variable increase in
osteophyte dimension and conformation at 3 and 6 months, in
line with published data in which multiple injections of leukore-
duced platelet rich plasma (PRP) were used in a canine model of
cranial cruciate ligament and meniscal deficiency showing that
radiographic OA significantly increased over time [48]. However,
in some cases osteophytes presented blunt extremity compared
to pretreatment, which might be the result of improved range of
movements. Notably, radiographic OA severity often did not cor-
relate with the clinical severity of the joint, as previously
described [49–51]. Indeed, some post-treatment stifle MRIs
showed progressive damage of the ligaments although the clini-
cal status improved (Supporting information Fig. 5). In a study on
the radiographic progression of osteoarthritis of the stifle joint,
secondary to cranial cruciate ligament deficiency, all OA features
were characterized by significant changes over time, but osteo-
phytosis had the greatest degree of change. In addition, 40% of
contralateral joints showed progressive osteophytosis [36]. These
results justify the use of MFAT also in the contralateral joint,
even though both radiographic and clinical signs were less exten-
sive compared to the interested joint. Regarding the site of injec-
tion, we could not find any difference between intra- or peri-
articular injections in either small or large dogs.
In the treated joints of patients died of natural causes not
related to the primary articular disease 8–11 months after
treatment, morphological examination revealed the coexis-
tence of severe changes of the articular cartilage together with
wide areas covered by continuous cartilage. Cartilage was hya-
line or fibrous or, more often, hybrid (hyaline and fibrous) as it
showed a great deal of overlapping regions positive for colla-
gen types I, II, and III. The presence of a hybrid cartilage cover-
ing the damaged areas of the articular surface supports the
idea that MFAT may determine the formation of a tissue that
certainly does not display the same mechanical properties of
normal hyaline cartilage nor the same durability, but that par-
tially restores joint function and minimizes pain. In our study,
we observed a mild expression collagen X, a marker of chon-
drocyte hypertrophy usually expressed only in the growing
skeleton, at the level of the growth plate. It has been demon-
strated that MSCs retain a differentiation attitude that is ana-
log to endochondral bone formation [52]. In the long-term,
increased collagen X expression could become an adverse
event. However, the very limited presence of the hypertrophic
phenotype and the histological features observed in this
study lead to exclude this occurrence at the time of the
observation.
It is worthwhile to note that the reduced pain and func-
tional impairment we observed in our study with MFAT injec-
tion is similar to those achieved in most of the PRP studies.
However, no PRP studies with such a large number of dogs
have been performed and multiple intra-articular injections
of PRP are needed rather than the single injection of MFAT.
Regarding the long-term results, most of the clinical trials
report a follow up of 6 months, whereas in our study, owners
continued to forward HCPI reports and films of their dogs
showing the improvements were maintained up to 24 months
(not shown).
Our conclusions are tempered by some limitations, such as
the lack of a concurrent and randomized control group.
Indeed, at least from the owners’ HCPI score side, the results
could be attributed to a placebo effect. However, a number of
randomized, controlled trials demonstrated variable efficacy of
the major treatments (HA, PRP, or NSAIDS) in both dogs and
humans [40–43, 53–61]. Furthermore, we have additional
unpublished data regarding the use of bone marrow-derived
MSCS in dogs affected by spontaneous OA where, despite
good clinical results, extended culture time, the need for spe-
cialized facilities, and high-costs make it more limited com-
pared to MFAT. Other limitations of our study include the lack
of quantitative outcome measures, such as a pressure sensi-
tive walkway to assess lameness and concentrations of
selected cartilage biomarkers in the synovial fluid that are
promising tools for objectively monitoring OA [62]. However,
these limits are compensated by the high number of enrolled
patients and by the absence of concomitant treatments during
the follow-up period.
Finally, it is important to highlight that no side effects of
either adipose tissue harvest or delivery were detected, except
for iatrogenic septic arthritis in 1% of the cases, indicating that
intra-articular and/or peri-articular injection of MFAT is a safe
treatment.
CONCLUSION
The results of this study suggest that intra-articular and/or peri-
articular injection of autologous, micro-fragmented adipose tissue
is a safe, feasible, and beneficial option for the treatment of OA
in dogs. The procedure is simple, time sparing, cost-effective, min-
imally invasive, one-step, and eliminates the need for complex
and time intensive cell culture processing. For at least 6 months,
the results were very satisfactory and promising. The lack of any
complications in the dog should be taken into account when con-
sidering this treatment in other species, including man. The study
of spontaneous, naturally occurring OA in dogs is a model that
provides a valuable role in developing successful, innovative treat-
ment regimens for translational medicine facilitating the transfer
of knowledge from the “bench” to the “bedside”.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
O.Z.: conception and design of the study, provision of study
patients, data analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing
and final approval of the manuscript; S.S., L.P., N.A., L.M., D.Z.,
© 2018 The Authors. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
826
Micro-Fragmented Fat in Dogs with Osteoarthritis
 and M.P.D.: collection of data; E.G., M.K., and D.M.L.: collection
and assembly of data, data analysis and interpretation; L.F., L.P.,
L.L., G.A., and A.P.: data analysis and interpretation; D.S. and
A.C.: provision of patients; M.A.: collection of data, data analysis
and interpretation and final approval of the manuscript.
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
O.Z., G.A., L.P., and A.P. are scientific consultants of Lipogems
International SpA. The other authors indicated no potential
conflicts of interest.
REFERENCES
1
Martinez
SA.
Congenital
conditions
that lead to osteoarthritis in the dog. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 1997;27:735–758.
2
Martinez SA, Coronado GS. Acquired
conditions that lead to osteoarthritis in the
dog. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
1997;27:759–775.
3
Sanderson R, Beata C, Flipo R et al.
Systematic
review
of
the
management
of canine osteoarthritis. Vet Rec 2009;164:
418–424.
4
Peat G, McCarney R, Croft P. Knee pain
and osteoarthritis in older adults: A review of
community burden and current use of primary
health care. Ann Rheum Dis 2001;60:91–97.
5
Gregory MH, Capito N, Kuroki K et al.
A review of translational animal models for
knee osteoarthritis. Arthritis 2012;2012:1–14.
6
Pond
M,
Nuki
G.
Experimentally-
induced osteoarthritis in the dog. Ann Rheum
Dis 1973;32:387–388.
7
Johnston SA. Osteoarthritis: Joint anat-
omy, physiology, and pathobiology. Vet Clin N
Am Small Anim Pract 1997;27:699–723.
8
Rychel JK. Diagnosis and treatment of
osteoarthritis. Top Companion Anim Med
2010;25:20–25.
9
Johnston
SA,
McLaughlin
RM,
Budsberg SC. Nonsurgical management of
osteoarthritis in dogs. Vet Clin N Am Small
Anim Pract 2008;38:1449–1470.
10
De
Siena
R,
Balducci
L,
Blasi
A
et al. Omentum-derived stromal cells improve
myocardial regeneration in pig post-infarcted
heart through a potent paracrine mechanism.
Exp Cell Res 2010;316:1804–1815.
11
Wh L, Fq S, Ln R et al. The multiple
functional roles of mesenchymal stem cells in
participating in treating liver diseases. J Cell
Mol Med 2015;19:511–520.
12
Plock JA, Schnider JT, Zhang W et al.
Adipose-and bone marrow–derived mesen-
chymal stem cells prolong graft survival in
vascularized
composite
allotransplantation.
Transplantation 2015;99:1765–1773.
13
Ude CC, Sulaiman SB, Min-Hwei N
et al. Cartilage regeneration by chondrogenic
induced adult stem cells in osteoarthritic
sheep model. PLoS One 2014;9:e98770.
14
Bajada S, Mazakova I, Richardson JB
et al. Updates on stem cells and their applica-
tions in regenerative medicine. J Tissue Eng
Regen Med 2008;2:169–183.
15
Muir P, Hans EC, Racette M et al.
Autologous bone marrow-derived mesenchy-
mal stem cells modulate molecular markers
of inflammation in dogs with cruciate liga-
ment rupture. PLoS One 2016;11:e0159095.
16
Caplan AI, Correa D. The MSC: An
injury drugstore. Cell Stem Cell 2011;9:
11–15.
17
Kean TJ, Lin P, Caplan AI et al. MSCs:
Delivery
routes
and
engraftment,
cell-
targeting strategies, and immune modulation.
Stem Cells Int 2013;2013:1–13.
18
Caplan AI, Dennis JE. Mesenchymal
stem cells as trophic mediators. J Cell Bio-
chem 2006;98:1076–1084.
19
da
Silva
Meirelles
L,
Fontes
AM,
Covas DT et al. Mechanisms involved in the
therapeutic properties of mesenchymal stem
cells. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 2009;20:
419–427.
20
English K. Mechanisms of mesenchy-
mal stromal cell immunomodulation. Immu-
nol Cell Biol 2013;91:19–26.
21
Black LL, Gaynor J, Gahring D et al.
Effect of adipose-derived mesenchymal stem
and regenerative cells on lameness in dogs
with chronic osteoarthritis of the coxofemoral
joints: A randomized, double-blinded, multi-
center controlled trial. Vet Ther 2007;8:272.
22
Guercio A, Marco P, Casella S et al.
Production of canine mesenchymal stem cells
from adipose tissue and their application in
dogs
with
chronic
osteoarthritis
of
the
humeroradial joints. Cell Biol Int 2012;36:
189–194.
23
Chamberlain
G,
Fox
J,
Ashton
B
et al. Concise review: Mesenchymal stem
cells: Their phenotype, differentiation capac-
ity, immunological features, and potential for
homing. STEM CELLS 2007;25:2739–2749.
24
U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services
Food
and
Drug
Administration
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research
Center for Devices and Radiological Health
Office of Combination Products November
2017.
25
Ährlund-Richter
L,
De
Luca
M,
Marshak DR et al. Isolation and production of
cells suitable for human therapy: Challenges
ahead. Cell Stem Cell 2009;4:20–26.
26
Arcidiacono JA, Blair JW, Benton KA. US
Food and Drug Administration international
collaborations for cellular therapy product reg-
ulation. Stem Cell Res Ther 2012;3:1.
27
Lysaght T, Campbell AV. Regulating
autologous adult stem cells: The FDA steps
up. Cell Stem Cell 2011;9:393–396.
28
Riis S, Zachar V, Boucher S et al. Critical
steps
in
the
isolation
and
expansion
of
adipose-derived stem cells for translational
therapy. Expert Rev Mol Med 2015;17:e11.
29
Sensebé L, Bourin P, Tarte K. Good
manufacturing practices production of mes-
enchymal stem/stromal cells. Hum Gene Ther
2010;22:19–26.
30
Bianchi F, Maioli M, Leonardi E et al. A
new nonenzymatic method and device to
obtain a fat tissue derivative highly enriched
in pericyte-like elements by mild mechanical
forces from human lipoaspirates. Cell Trans-
plant 2013;22:2063–2077.
31
Ceserani V, Ferri A, Berenzi A et al.
Angiogenic and anti-inflammatory properties
of micro-fragmented fat tissue and its derived
mesenchymal stromal cells. Vasc Cell 2016;8:3.
32
Sharkey M. The challenges of assessing
osteoarthritis and postoperative pain in dogs.
AAPS J 2013;15:598–607.
33
Hielm-Björkman AK, Rita H, Tulamo
R-M. Psychometric testing of the Helsinki
chronic pain index by completion of a ques-
tionnaire in Finnish by owners of dogs with
chronic signs of pain caused by osteoarthritis.
Am J Vet Res 2009;70:727–734.
34
Impellizeri JA, Tetrick MA, Muir P.
Effect of weight reduction on clinical signs of
lameness in dogs with hip osteoarthritis. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 2000;216:1089–1091.
35
Welsh E, Gettinby G, Nolan A. Compar-
ison of a visual analogue scale and a numeri-
cal rating scale for assessment of lameness,
using sheep as a model. Am J Vet Res 1993;
54:976–983.
36
Innes J, Costello M, Barr F et al. Radio-
graphic progression of osteoarthritis of the
canine stifle joint: A prospective study. Vet
Radiol Ultrasound 2004;45:143–148.
37
D’ANJOU MA, Moreau M, Troncy E
et al. Osteophytosis, subchondral bone scle-
rosis, joint effusion and soft tissue thickening
in canine experimental stifle osteoarthritis:
Comparison between 1.5 T magnetic reso-
nance imaging and computed radiography.
Vet Surg 2008;37:166–177.
38
Raskin R, Meyer D. In: Edra ed. Citologia
diagnostica del cane e del gatto, 2016.
39
Wiseman M, Nolan A, Reid J et al. Pre-
liminary study on owner-reported ehaviour
changes associated with chronic pain in dogs.
Vet Rec 2001;149:423–424.
40
Jüni P, Hari R, Rutjes AW et al.
Intra-articular corticosteroid for knee osteoar-
thritis. Cochrane Libr 2015;10:1–99.
41
Franklin SP, Cook JL. Prospective trial
of autologous conditioned plasma versus hya-
luronan plus corticosteroid for elbow osteoar-
thritis in dogs. Can Vet J 2013;54:881.
42
Kon E, Mandelbaum B, Buda R et al.
Platelet-rich plasma intra-articular injection
versus hyaluronic acid viscosupplementation
as treatments for cartilage pathology: From
early degeneration to osteoarthritis. Arthrosc:
J Arthrosc Relat Surg 2011;27:1490–1501.
43
Qi Y, Feng G, Yan W. Mesenchymal
stem
cell-based
treatment
for
cartilage
defects in osteoarthritis. Mol Biol Rep 2012;
39:5683–5689.
44
Bosetti
M,
Borrone
A,
Follenzi
A
et
al.
Human
lipoaspirate as
autologous
injectable active scaffold for one-step repair
of cartilage defects. Cell Transplant 2016;25:
1043–1056.
45
Russo A, Condello
V,
Madonna V
et
al.
Autologous
and
micro-fragmented
www.StemCellsTM.com
© 2018 The Authors. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
Zeira, Scaccia, Pettinari et al.
827
 adipose tissue for the treatment of diffuse
degenerative knee osteoarthritis. J Exp Ortho-
paed 2017;4:33.
46
Belshaw Z, Asher L, Dean RS. System-
atic review of outcome measures reported in
clinical Canine osteoarthritis research. Vet
Surg 2016;45:480–487.
47
Gagnon A, Brown D, Moreau M et al.
Therapeutic response analysis in dogs with
naturally occurring osteoarthritis. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2017;44:1373–1381.
48
Cook JL, Smith PA, Bozynski CC et al.
Multiple injections of leukoreduced platelet rich
plasma reduce pain and functional impairment
in a canine model of ACL and meniscal defi-
ciency. J Orthop Res 2016;34:607–615.
49
Morgan JP, Voss K, Damur DM et al.
Correlation of radiographic changes after tib-
ial tuberosity advancement in dogs with cra-
nial cruciate-deficient stifles with functional
outcome. Vet Surg 2010;39:425–432.
50
Boyd DJ, Miller CW, Etue SM et al.
Radiographic and functional evaluation of
dogs at least 1 year after tibial plateau level-
ing osteotomy. Can Vet J 2007;48:392.
51
Gordon WJ, Conzemius MG, Riedesel E
et al. The relationship between limb function
and radiographic osteoarthrosis in dogs with sti-
fle osteoarthrosis. Vet Surg 2003;32:451–454.
52
Scotti C, Tonnarelli B, Papadimitropoulos
A et al. Recapitulation of endochondral bone for-
mation using human adult mesenchymal stem
cells as a paradigm for developmental engineer-
ing. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2010;107:7251–7256.
53
Arrich J, Piribauer F, Mad P et al.
Intra-articular hyaluronic acid for the treat-
ment of osteoarthritis of the knee: Systematic
review and meta-analysis. Can Med Assoc J
2005;172:1039–1043.
54
Bannuru RR, Vaysbrot EE, Sullivan MC
et al. Relative efficacy of hyaluronic acid in
comparison with NSAIDs for knee osteoarthri-
tis: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Seminars
in
Arthritis
and
Rheumatism.
New York: Elsevier, 2014:593–599.
55
Görmeli G, Görmeli CA, Ataoglu B et al.
Multiple PRP injections are more effective than
single injections and hyaluronic acid in knees
with early osteoarthritis: A randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial. Knee Surg Sports
Traumatol Arthrosc 2017;25:958–965.
56
Innes
JF, Clayton J, Lascelles
BDX.
Review of the safety and efficacy of long-term
NSAID use in the treatment of canine osteoar-
thritis. Vet Rec 2010;166:226–230.
57
Kon E, Mandelbaum B, Buda R et al.
Platelet-rich
plasma intra-articular
injection
versus hyaluronic acid viscosupplementation
as treatments for cartilage pathology: From
early degeneration to osteoarthritis. Arthros-
copy 2011;27:1490–1501.
58
Lajeunesse
D,
Martel-Pelletier
J,
Fernandes J et al. Treatment with licofelone
prevents abnormal subchondral bone cell
metabolism in experimental dog osteoarthri-
tis. Ann Rheum Dis 2004;63:78–83.
59
Lo
GH,
LaValley
M,
McAlindon
T
et al. Intra-articular hyaluronic acid in treat-
ment of knee osteoarthritis: A meta-analysis.
JAMA 2003;290:3115–3121.
60
Raeissadat
SA,
Rayegani
SM,
Hassanabadi H et al. Knee osteoarthritis
injection choices: Platelet-rich plasma (PRP)
versus hyaluronic acid (a one-year random-
ized clinical trial). Clin Med Insights Arthritis
Musculoskeletal Disord 2015;8:1–8. CMAMD.
S17894.
61
Wang C-T, Lin J, Chang C-J et al. Thera-
peutic effects of hyaluronic acid on osteoar-
thritis
of
the
knee:
A
meta-analysis
of
randomized controlled trials. J Bone Joint
Surg Am 2004;86:538–545.
62
Lindhorst E, Vail T, Guilak F et al. Lon-
gitudinal characterization of synovial fluid
biomarkers
in
the
canine
meniscectomy
model of osteoarthritis. J Orthop Res 2000;
18:269–280.
See www.StemCellsTM.com for supporting information available online.
© 2018 The Authors. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
828
Micro-Fragmented Fat in Dogs with Osteoarthritis
