 Edible Ginger-Derived Nanoparticles: A Novel Therapeutic 
Approach for the Prevention and Treatment of Inflammatory 
Bowel Disease and Colitis-Associated Cancer
Mingzhen Zhang1,2,*, Emilie Viennois1,2, Meena Prasad3,4, Yunchen Zhang1,2, Lixin 
Wang1,2,3, Zhan Zhang1,2, Moon Kwon Han1,2, Bo Xiao1,2,5, Changlong Xu1,2,6, Shanthi 
Srinivasan3,4, and Didier Merlin1,2,3
1Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA 30303, USA
2Center for Diagnostics and Therapeutics, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA 30303, USA
3Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Decatur, GA, USA
4Emory University, Department of Medicine
5Institute for Clean Energy and Advanced Materials, Faculty for Materials and Energy, Southwest 
University, Chongqing, 400715, P
. R. China
6The 2nd Affiliated Hospital & Yuying Children’s Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, 
Wenzhou, 325027, P
. R. China
Abstract
There is a clinical need for new, more effective treatments for chronic and debilitating 
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), including Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis. In this study, 
we characterized a specific population of nanoparticles derived from edible ginger (GDNPs 2) and 
demonstrated their efficient colon targeting following oral administration. GDNPs 2 had an 
average size of ~230 nm and exhibited a negative zeta potential. These nanoparticles contained 
high levels of lipids, a few proteins, ~125 microRNAs (miRNAs), and large amounts of ginger 
bioactive constituents (6-gingerol and 6-shogaol). We also demonstrated that GDNPs 2 were 
mainly taken up by intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) and macrophages, and were nontoxic. Using 
different mouse colitis models, we showed that GDNPs 2 reduced acute colitis, enhanced intestinal 
repair, and prevented chronic colitis and colitis-associated cancer (CAC). 2D-DIGE/MS analyses 
further identified molecular target candidates of GDNPs 2 involved in these mouse models. Oral 
administration of GDNPs 2 increased the survival and proliferation of IECs and reduced the pro-
inflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-1β), and increased the anti-inflammatory cytokines 
(IL-10 and IL-22) in colitis models, suggesting that GDNPs 2 has the potential to attenuate 
damaging factors while promoting the healing effect. In conclusion, GDNPs 2, nanoparticles 
Corresponding author: Mingzhen, Zhang, Ph.D., Center for Diagnostics and Therapeutics, Institute for Biomedical Science, Georgia 
State University, Atlanta, 30303, USA Telephone: +1 (404) 413 3597, Fax: +1 (404) 413 3580, mzhang21@gsu.edu. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Biomaterials. 2016 September ; 101: 321–340. doi:10.1016/j.biomaterials.2016.06.018.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 derived from edible ginger, represent a novel, natural delivery mechanism for improving IBD 
prevention and treatment with an added benefit of overcoming limitations such as potential 
toxicity and limited production scale that are common with synthetic nanoparticles.
Keywords
edible ginger derived nanoparticles; inflammatory bowel disease; colitis-associated cancer; natural 
drug delivery system; therapy
 1. Introduction
Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs), which include ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease, 
are chronic, debilitating inflammatory conditions for which existing treatments are largely 
limited by serious systemic side effects [1–3]. Over the last decade, the treatment options for 
IBD have been anti-inflammatory medications (5-amino salicylic acid, steroids) or 
immunosuppressants [4–6]. Despite the efficacy of these medications, further applications 
are limited by their non-specific actions on immune system that result in short- and long-
term debilitating side effects, such as allergic reactions, nausea, elevated liver tests, 
pancreatitis, and other life-threatening side effects [7]. Furthermore, anti-inflammatory drugs 
that are locally active with minimal systemic absorption (5-aminosalicylates) require 
frequent high-dose administration to exert measurable clinical efficacy. Moreover, while 
sustained drug-release devices, such as pellets, capsules or tablets, designed to deliver drugs 
specifically to the colon for longer periods of time have been developed, these drugs have 
limited therapeutic efficacy and are effective in only a subset of IBD patients [8–13].
More recently, targeted therapeutic approaches, based on the pathophysiology of 
inflammatory responses in IBD, have been developed. These therapeutic strategies can be 
divided into three categories: development of inhibitors of inflammatory cytokines, such as 
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, that induce T-lymphocyte apoptosis; identification of anti-
inflammatory cytokines that down-regulate T-lymphocyte proliferation; and synthesis of 
selective adhesion molecule inhibitors that suppress T-lymphocyte trafficking into the gut 
epithelium. Anti-TNF-α agents are among the most potent drugs in the treatment of IBD. 
However, they must be administered systemically and their use is limited by serious side 
effects [14]. Thus, there is an unmet need for a carrier system capable of delivering drugs 
specifically and exclusively to the inflamed regions for a prolonged period of time. Such a 
system could significantly reduce the side effects of existing, otherwise effective, treatments.
To address this formidable challenge, targeting drug carriers based on nanoparticles have 
been designed and have shown great promises for improving IBD treatment. Various carriers 
have been designed to release the drug at a specific pH value, to be resistant to digestive 
enzymes, and/or require bacterial cleavage for activation, in which several of these carriers 
are currently being investigated. Our laboratory and others have recently demonstrated that 
artificially synthesized nanoparticles can be used to deliver low doses of drugs to specific 
cell types and tissues, and decrease the systemic side effects of medications [15–26]. 
However, the nanoparticles synthesized to date have two major limitations: i) each 
constituent of the synthesized nanoparticles must be examined for potential in vivo toxicity 
Zhang et al.
Page 2
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 before clinical application; and ii) the production scale is limited. In contrast, nanoparticles 
derived from natural sources are considered to be safe and cost effective that may overcome 
aforementioned limitations of synthetic nanoparticles [27]. Recently, exosome-like 
nanoparticles isolated from edible plants using an eco-friendly protocol have been 
characterized [28]. These nature-derived nanoparticles could serve interspecies 
communication roles and exert anti-inflammatory properties in IBD treatment [29–31]. 
These observations suggest that the application of plants as “nanofactories” for the 
fabrication of medical nanoparticles could represent a new approach for IBD treatment.
Ginger, the rhizome of Zingiber officinale, is one of the most widely used natural products. 
It is consumed as a spice and used as a medicine for the treatment of nausea, as well as other 
digestive tract problems like colic, flatulence, diarrhea and dyspepsia [32–35]. Studies have 
also shown that ginger and its active components, including 6-gingerol and 6-shogaol, exert 
anti-oxidative, anti-inflammatory, and anti-cancer activities [36–38]. In the present study, we 
assessed the feasibility of isolating ginger-derived nanoparticles, characterized their 
properties, and examined their potential use as a new treatment for IBD and CAC.
 2. Materials and methods
 2.1. Chemicals
The fluorescent lipophilic dyes, 1,1′-dioctadecyl-3,3,3′,3′-tetramethylindocarbocyanine 
perchlorate (DiL), 3,3′-dioctadecyloxacarbocyanine perchlorate (DiO) and 1,1′-
dioctadecyl-3,3′,3′-tetramethylindotricarbocyanine iodide (DiR), were purchased from 
Promokine (Heidelberg, Germany); DC-Chol/DOPE Blend was from Avanti Polar Lipids 
(Alabaster, AL, USA); phalloidin-FITC, O-dianisidine dihydrochloride, myeloperoxidase 
from human leukocytes, type VIII collagenase, DNase I, (6)-gingerol and (6)-shogaol 
standards were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA). Rabbit anti-mouse E-cadherin 
antibody was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA). Anti-mouse CD326 
(EpCAM) PE-Cy7, anti-mouse CD11b eFluo 450; anti-mouse CD11c APC, and anti-mouse 
F4/80 antigen PE-Cy7 were purchased from eBioscience (San Diego, CA, USA). Duoset 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits were purchased from R&D Systems 
(Minneapolis, MN, USA).
 2.2. Isolation, purification, and characterization of ginger-derived nanoparticles (GDNPs)
For isolation of GDNPs, ginger or Zingiber officinale (Family, Zingiberaceae; Order, 
Zingiberales; Superorder, Lilianae; Subclass, magnoliidae; Class, Equisetopsida) was 
purchased from a local farmers’ market. The utilized ginger was purchased from three 
different farmers’ markets in Atlanta, Georgia; More than 20 batches were purchased over 
the past 12 months. Results similar to those reported in the manuscript were obtained using 
these different ginger batches from different sources. Ginger was washed thoroughly with 
tap water at room temperature (22 °C). After the final washing, the ginger was ground in a 
blender to obtain juice, then the juice was centrifuged first at 3000 × g for 20 min and then at 
10 000 × g for 40 min to remove large ginger fibers. The supernatant was ultracentrifuged at 
150,000 × g for 2 h, and the pellet was suspended in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) 
through ultrasonic dispersion.
Zhang et al.
Page 3
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For purification of GDNPs, the suspension was transferred to a discontinuous sucrose 
gradient (8%, 30%, 45% and 60% [g/v]) and ultracentrifuged at 150,000 × g for an 
additional 2 h. The bands between 8/30%, 30/45%, and 45/60% layers, which corresponds to 
GDNPs 1, GDNPs 2 and GDNPs 3, respectively, were harvested. The concentrations of the 
GDNPs obtained were quantified based on protein concentration using a Bio-Rad protein 
quantification assay kit. The quantified GDNPs were stored at −80°C until use.
GDNPs were characterized with respect to size and zeta potential by dynamic light 
scattering using 90 Plus/BI-MAS (multi-angle particle sizing) or dynamic light scattering 
after applying an electric field using a ZetaPlus instrument (Brookhaven Instruments Corp, 
Holtsville, NY, USA). Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images were acquired using an SPA 
400 AFM instrument (Seiko Instruments Inc., Chiba, Japan). For transmission electron 
microscopy (TEM) imaging, a drop of sample was deposited onto the surface of a formvar-
coated copper grid, after which 1% uranyl acetate was added for 15 s and the sample was 
allowed to dry at room temperature for subsequent imaging.
For in vitro stability tests, 1.34 μl of 18.5% (w/v) HCl (pH 2.0) and 24 μl of pepsin solution 
(80 mg/ml in 0.1 N HCl, pH 2.0) were added to 1 ml (1 mg/ml) of GDNPs in PBS, and the 
mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 0.5 h (stomach-like conditions). Then, 80 μl of a mixture 
containing 24 mg/ml of bile extract and 4 mg/ml of pancreatin in 0.1 N NaHCO3 was added. 
The pH was adjusted to 6.5 with 1 N NaHCO3 and incubated for an additional 0.5 h under 
the same conditions (intestine-like). The stability of GDNPs was evaluated by measuring 
particle size and zeta potential using the method described above.
 2.3. Lipids, proteomics, and microRNA sequencing discovery of GDNPs
For lipidomic analyses, lipid samples extracted from band 1, 2 and 3 were submitted to the 
Lipidomics Research Center, Kansas State University (Manhattan, KS, USA) for analysis. 
Briefly, the lipid composition of GDNPs was determined using a triple quadrupole mass 
spectrometer (Applied Biosystems Q-TRAP; Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA), 
as described in an online protocol (http://www.k-state.edu/lipid/lipidomics/profiling.htm). 
Data for each lipid molecular species were presented as mol % of the total lipids analyzed.
For proteomics analysis of GDNPs 2, samples on dry ice were shipped to Bioproximity 
(Chantilly, VA, USA). GDNPs proteins were identified and quantified by UPLC-MS/MS 
(ultra-performance liquid chromatography tandem mass-spectrometry) using Orbitrap mass 
spectrometry.
For sequencing discovery of GDNPs, total RNA for GDNPs 2 was isolated in duplicates 
using a Urine Exosome RNA Isolation kit (Cat# 47200; Norgen Biotek, Thorold, ON, 
Canada) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The purified RNA sample was 
processed to generate a cDNA library that was then used for deep sequencing.
 2.4. Cell culture
RAW 264.7 cells, Caco-2BBE, and Colon-26 cells were cultured to confluency in 75-cm2 
flasks at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2. RAW 264.7 and Caco-2BBE 
cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM), and Colon-26 cells 
Zhang et al.
Page 4
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA), in which 
both cases were supplemented with penicillin (100 U/ml), streptomycin (100 U/ml), and 
heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (10%) (Atlanta Biological, Lawrenceville, GA, USA).
 2.5. GDNPs labeling
GDNPs were labeled with the fluorescent lipophilic dyes, DiL, DIO or DiR, depending on 
the experiment. Generally, 10 μM dye solution was added to 1 mg GDNPs (1 ml in PBS), 
and the mixture was incubated for 30 min at room temperature. The labeled GDNPs were 
then passed through a 100-kDa ultracentrifuge filter to remove the free dye.
 2.6. In vitro internalization of GDNPs
RAW 264.7 microphage and Colon-26 cells were seeded in 8-chamber glass tissue culture 
slides (BD Falcon, Bedford, MA, USA) at a density of 1 × 105 cells/well and incubated 
overnight in growth medium. GDNPs 2 were labeled with DiL (Ex: 549 nm; Em: 565 nm) at 
a concentration of 10 μM. Subsequently, labeled GDNPs 2 (50 μg/ml) were incubated with 
cells for 4 h. After incubation, cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 10 min, 
and then dehydrated with acetone at −20°C for 5 min. After blocking with 1 % bovine serum 
albumen (BSA) in PBS for 30 min, 100 μl of phalloidin-FITC (1:40 dilution) was added and 
the mixture was incubated for an additional 30 min. Finally, cells were coverslip-mounted 
with mounting medium containing 4-,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, H-1500; Vector 
Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA). Cells were observed and imaged using a Zeiss LSM 
700 confocal microscope with Zen 2014 software version 9.1
 2.7. Cytotoxicity assay
For MTT [3-(4,5-dimethythiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide] cell proliferation 
assay, RAW 264.7 microphages and Colon-26 cells were seeded in 96-well plates at a 
density of 1 × 104 cells/well and incubated overnight. Cells were then incubated with 
different amounts of GDNPs 2 (1, 10, 20, 50, 100 μg) in PBS for 24 h, after which the 
GDNPs 2-containing medium was removed and cells were thoroughly rinsed once with 
PBS. Cells were then incubated with 20 μL of MTT (5 mg/ml) containing phenol red free 
medium at 37°C for 4 h until a purple precipitate was visible. Thereafter, the media were 
discarded and 50 μl dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) was added to each well prior to 
spectrophotometric measurements at 570 nm. Untreated cells were used as a negative 
control.
Barrier function assays were performed using ECIS (electric cell-substrate impedance-
sensing) technology (Applied Biophysics, Troy, NY, USA). Before starting, the Trans-Filter 
Array system was sterilized with 75 % ethanol under a cell culture hood for 30 min, after 
which 1 ml medium was added to each array well. The insert, seeded with 2 × 105 
Caco-2BBE cells in 500 μl medium, was then transferred into the array plate with sterilized 
forceps. After a monolayer of cells had formed, PBS or GDNPs 2 (0.1 mg/ml) was added to 
the well. Cell resistance was continuously measured for 120 h.
The annexin V-FITC/propidium iodide apoptosis assay was used to quantify cell apoptosis 
and death in vitro. Colon-26 and RAW 264.7 macrophage cells were plated in 12-well 
Zhang et al.
Page 5
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 culture plates and cultured in the presence of different concentrations of GDNPs 2 (1, 10, 20, 
50 and 100 μg) for 24 h. At the end of culture period, cells were washed twice with cold 
PBS and then suspended in annexin V binding buffer at a cell concentration of 1×106 
cells/mL. Subsequently, 100 μl of cells suspension were transferred to a 5 ml culture tube in 
which 5 μl annexin V-FITC and 5 μl PI were added and incubated at RT for 15 min in the 
dark. Finally, 400 μl of annexin V binding buffer were added to the tube for the analysis. 
Unstained cells and cells stained with FITC or PI were also prepared in parallel.
 2.8. Wound-healing assay
Healing of wounded intestinal epithelial monolayers by GDNPs 2 (0.1 mg/ml) was 
performed using ECIS technology (ECIS model 1600R; Applied BioPhysics). The ECIS 
device is based on AC impedance measurements using weak and noninvasive AC signals, as 
previously described. The attachment and spread of cells on the electrode surface change the 
impedance in such a way that morphological information about attached cells can be 
inferred. The measurement system consists of an 8-well culture dish (ECIS 8W1E plate) 
with the surface treated for cell culture. The bottom of each well contains a small, active 
electrode and a large counter electrode. A lock-in amplifier with an internal oscillator is used 
to switch among the different wells, and a personal computer controls the measurement and 
stores the data. Once cells reached confluency, PBS, GDNPs 2, or DC-Chol/DOPE liposome 
(with the same lipid concentration as GDNPs 2) was added. For wounding, monolayers 
grown on ECIS 8W1E plates were subjected to a 30s pulse with a frequency of 40 kHz and 
amplitude of 4.5 V. Basal resistance was measured at a frequency of 500 Hz and a voltage of 
1 V.
 2.9. Mice
Female C57BL/6 or FVB/NJ mice (6–8 wk old) were purchased from Jackson Laboratories 
(Bar Harbor, ME, USA). Mice were housed under specific pathogen-free conditions. All the 
experiments involving mice were approved by the institutional animal care and use 
committee (IACUC) of Georgia State University (Atlanta, GA, USA).
 2.10. DSS-induced colitis mouse model
Colitis was induced in FVB/NJ mice by adding 1.5% (w/v) dextran sodium sulfate (DSS; 
36–50 kDa; MP Biomedicals (Santa Ana, CA, USA) in drinking water for 7 d. Mice in the 
GDNPs treatment group were also orally administered GDNPs (0.3 mg/mouse) every day 
for the duration of the study, whereas untreated animals served as controls. The DSS 
solution was freshly prepared every other day. Body weight, feces, and physical activity 
were monitored daily. After 7 d, mice were euthanized with CO2, in which spleen and colon 
were harvested for measurements.
 2.11. DSS-induced colitis wound healing
In this model, mice in both DSS and GDNPs 2 treatment groups were first subjected to 7 d 
of 1.5% DSS water. Then, both groups were changed to regular water for an additional 7-d 
wound-healing period; mice in the GDNPs 2 treatment group were orally administered 
Zhang et al.
Page 6
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 GDNPs 2 (0.3 mg/mouse) every day at the same time. Body weight, feces, and physical 
activity were monitored daily.
 2.12. IL10−/− spontaneous colitis model
Female C57BL/6 and IL10−/− mice (3 wk old) were obtained from Jackson Laboratories. 
Untreated IL10−/− mice (control group) spontaneously develop colitis. For the GDNPs 2 
treatment group, IL10−/− mice were orally administered GDNPs 2 (0.3 mg/mouse) every day 
from 4 wk of age to the end of the experiment. Mice were monitored for 19 weeks for the 
development of colitis.
 2.13. Colitis-associated cancer model
Colitis-associated cancer (CAC) was induced as previously described, with some 
modifications. Briefly, mice were intraperitoneally injected with Azoxymethane (AOM) (10 
mg/kg body weight) and maintained with regular water and diet for 7 d. Mice were then 
subjected to two cycles of DSS treatment, each consisting of 2% DSS for 7 d followed by a 
14-d recovery period with regular water. In the GDNPs 2 treatment group, mice were orally 
administered GDNPs (0.3 mg/mouse) every day throughout the experiment. At the end of 
the experiment, colonic tumors were counted and measured using a dissecting microscope.
In the chronic CAC model, in which the carcinogen AOM was not used, mice were 
subjected to five cycles of DSS treatment, where one cycle corresponds to 7 d of 2% DSS 
followed by 14 d of regular water (recovery period). In the GDNPs 2 treatment group, mice 
were orally administered GDNPs 2 (0.3 mg/mouse) every day throughout the experiment. At 
the end of the experiment, colonic tumors were counted and measured using a dissecting 
microscope.
 2.14. Biodistribution and cellular targeting of oral administrated GDNPs 2
To investigate the in vivo biodistribution of GDNPs 2, fasted and unfasted mice were given a 
single oral dose of DiR-labeled GDNPs 2 (0.3 mg/ml). At different time points after gavage 
(2, 4, 6, 12, and 24 h), mice were killed and colon tissues were harvested for fluorescence 
imaging using an IVIS Spectrum Series in vivo imaging system.
 2.15. Isolation of intestinal epithelial cells, dendritic cells, and microphages from colons 
and analysis by flow cytometry
Intestinal epithelial cells (EpCAM+ cells), dendritic cells (Cd11c+ cells), and microphages 
(Cd11b+F4/80+ cells) were isolated as described previously. Six hours after oral 
administration of DiO-labeled GDNPs 2, colons from mice with or without DSS treatment 
were removed, carefully cleaned of their mesentery, opened longitudinally, and washed of 
feces. Colons were then cut into pieces 0.5 cm in length, which were transferred into 50-ml 
tubes and shaken at 250 rpm for 20 min at 37°C in Hanks balanced salt solution (HBSS) 
supplemented with 5% FBS and 2 mM EDTA. This process was repeated once, and then cell 
suspensions were passed through 100-μm and 40-μm strainers. Finally, the epithelial cells 
(EpCAM+ cells) were collected by centrifugation at 1500 rpm for 5 min at 4°C.
Zhang et al.
Page 7
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For isolation of dendritic cells (Cd11c+ cells) and microphages (Cd11b+F4/80+ cells), the 
remaining tissue was washed, minced, transferred to a 50-ml conical tube, and shaken for 15 
min at 37 °C in HBSS containing 5% FBS, type VIII collagenase (1.5 mg/ml; Sigma), and 
DNase I (40 μg/ml; Sigma). Cell suspensions were collected and passed through 100-μm and 
40-μm strainers, and pelleted by centrifugation at 1500 rpm for 5 min at 4°C.
For flow cytometry, 1 × 106 cells in fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) buffer (Santa 
Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., Dallas, USA) were transferred into a 96-well plate (Fisher 
12565503). After blocking cells with FcrRIIbCD16-2 antibody for 10 min at 4 °C, the cells 
were stained with labeled antibodies at 4 °C for 30 min. Cells were then washed twice with 
FACS buffer for immediate analysis or were fixed with 2% PFA and stored at 4 °C. The 
following antibodies used for analysis were purchased from eBioscience (San Diego, CA, 
USA): anti-mouse CD326 PE-Cy7 (EpCAM), anti-mouse CD11b eFluo 450, anti-mouse 
CD11c APC, and anti-mouse F4/80 antigen PE-Cy7. Flow cytometry analyses were 
performed on a BD LSRFortessa flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) and data were analyzed 
using FlowJo software.
 2.16. Histological analyses of tissue sections by hematoxylin and eosin staining
Mice colons and different organs were fixed in 10% formalin for 24 h or longer at room 
temperature, then embedded in paraffin. Tissues were sectioned at 6 μm thickness and 
stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) using standard protocols established in our own 
lab. Images were acquired using an Olympus microscope equipped with a DP-26 digital 
camera.
 2.17. Immunofluorescence
Paraffin-embedded tissues (6 μm thick) were deparaffinized, epitope retrieved, and blocked 
by incubating with goat serum for 45 min at room temperature. The sections were covered 
with rabbit anti-mouse E-cadherin antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology; sc-7870), diluted 
1:50 in PBS, and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. Sections were washed with PBS, 
and incubated with Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-rabbit secondary antibody (1:200 
dilution; Life Technologies) for 1 h at room temperature, and coverslip-mounted with 
mounting medium containing DAPI (Vector Laboratories; H-1500). Sections were viewed 
under an Olympus fluorescence microscope, and images were acquired with a Hamamatsu 
digital camera (Orca-03G).
 2.18. Immunohistochemistry
For staining with the proliferation marker Ki67, 6-μm-thick paraffin-embedded tissue 
sections were deparaffinized in xylene, incubated in 3% hydrogen peroxide in PBS for 30 
min, then treated with 10 mM sodium citrate buffer (pH 6.0) containing 0.05% Tween 20 
and heated in a pressure cooker for 10 min (antigen retrieval). Sections were blocked with 
goat serum for 45 min at 37°C, followed by incubation with anti-Ki67 antibody (1:50; 
Vector Laboratories) for 1 hour at 37°C. After washing with PBS containing 0.01% Tween 
20, sections were incubated first with the appropriate biotinylated secondary antibody for 30 
min at 37°C, and then with reagents from the Vectastain ABC kit (Vector Laboratories) to 
allow color development. Sections were counterstained with hematoxylin, dehydrated, and 
Zhang et al.
Page 8
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 coverslip-mounted. Images were acquired using an Olympus microscope equipped with a 
DP-26 digital camera.
 2.19. TUNEL assay
Colon sections were deparaffinized, and apoptotic cells were detected by 
immunofluorescence TUNEL (terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated deoxyuridine 
triphosphate nick-end labeling) assay using the In Situ Cell Death Detection Kit (Roche 
Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN, USA). Detailed protocol is provided in Methods and 
Materials in Supporting Information. Images were acquired using an Olympus microscope 
equipped with a Hamamatsu ORCA03G digital camera.
 2.20. Myeloperoxidase assay
Colon tissues were homogenized in pre-chilled potassium phosphate buffer (50 mM 
K2HPO4 and 50 mM KH2PO4, pH 6.0) containing 0.5% hexadecyltrimethylammonium 
bromide (HTAB; Sigma). The homogenates were then sonicated, subjected to three freeze-
thaw cycles (10 min/10 min), and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 15 min. The clarified 
supernatants were collected. O-Dianisidine dihydrochloride (1 mg/ml) and 0.0005% H2O2 
were added to supernatants (50 μl) or myeloperoxidase (MPO) standards, and the change in 
absorbance at 460 nm was measured before saturation. One unit of MPO activity was 
defined as the amount that degraded 1 μmol of peroxidase per minute.
 2.21. Quantification of fecal Lcn-2
Freshly collected or frozen fecal samples which were dried in an oven at 37°C in advance 
were reconstituted in PBS containing 0.1% Tween 20 (100 mg/ml) and vortexed for 20 min 
to yield a homogeneous fecal suspension. Samples were then microcentrifuged for 10 min at 
4°C at full speed, and supernatants were collected for analysis. Levels of Lcn-2 were 
estimated using a Duoset mouse Lcn-2 ELISA kit (R&D Systems).
 2.22. RNA extraction and real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
Total RNA was extracted from colon tissues using an RNeasy mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, 
CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Yield and quality of extracted RNA 
were verified with a Synergy 2 plate reader (BioTek, Winooski, VT, USA). cDNA was 
generated from the total RNA isolated above using a Maxima First-Strand cDNA Synthesis 
kit (Thermo Scientific, Lafayette, CO, USA). Expression of target mRNAs was quantified 
by real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) using Maxima 
SYBR green/ROX (6-carboxyl-X-rhodamine) qPCR Master Mix (Thermo Scientific) and the 
following primer pairs: IL-10, 5′-GGT TGC CAA GCC TTA TCG GA-3′ (forward) and 5′-
CTT CTC ACC CAG GGA ATT CA-3′ (reverse); IL-6, 5′-ACA AGT CGG AGG CTT AAT 
TAC ACA T-3′ (forward) and 5′-TTG CCA TCC GCA CAA CTC TTT TC-3′ (reverse); 
IL-1β, 5′-TCG CTCA GGG TCA CAA GAA A-3′ (forward) and 5′-CAT CAG AGG CAA 
GGA GGA AAA C-3′ (reverse); TNF-α, 5′-AGG CTG CCC CGA CTA CGT-3′ (forward) 
and 5′-GAC TTT CTC CTG GTA TGA GAT AGC AAA-3′ (reverse); cyclin D, 5′-CAG 
ACG TTC AGA ACC AGA TTC-3′ (forward) and 5′-CCC TCC AAT AGC AGC GAA 
Zhang et al.
Page 9
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 AAC-3′ (reverse); and 36B4, 5′-TCC AGG CTT TGG GCA TCA-3′ (forward) and 5′-CTT 
TAT CAG CTG CAC ATC ACT CAG A-3′ (reverse).
 2.23. Colon organ culture and cytokine analysis
Local levels of IL-10, IL-22, IL-6, IL-1β and TNF-α were assessed by first washing colon 
tissues from different treatment groups with PBS containing penicillin/streptomycin and 
then cutting them into 1-cm-long sections. Colon sections were cultured in serum-free RPMI 
1640 medium supplemented with penicillin/streptomycin for 24 h, after which cell-free 
supernatants were harvested and assayed for cytokine secretion using Duoset cytokine 
ELISA kits (R&D Systems).
 2.24. 2D-DIGE gel
Colon tissues from different mouse models (DSS with/without GDNPs 2 treatment; DSS 
wound healing with/without GDNPs 2 treatment; AOM/DSS with/without GDNPs 2 
treatment [tumor tissue and normal tissue]) were analyzed by comparative proteomics using 
2D-DIGE (two dimensional-differences in gel electrophoresis). Colon tissue samples were 
homogenized in ToPI-DIGE buffer, and the lysate was transfered to a new tube after 
centrifugation. Protein concentration was determined using the ToPA Bradford Protein 
Assay. Thereafter, 50 μg of each sample was labeled with 200 pmole Cy3 or Cy5 dye. A 
pooled sample containing 25 μg of each sample was labeled with Cy2 and used as a pooled 
standard (PS) to enable comparisons of samples on different gels. The samples were loaded 
onto 24-cm isoelectric focusing (IEF) strips (pH 3–10, non-linear). The strips were 
rehydrated in sample-containing solutions for 12 h at 30 V. The rehydrated IEF strips were 
focused for a total of 65,000 V-hours, and then were loaded onto a 24 cm × 20 cm, 12.5% 
SDS-PAGE gel, and ran for 4 h. Thereafter, the gel was scanned using a Typhoon Digital 
Imager at three different wavelengths. The images were analyzed using DeCyder Difference 
In-Gel Analysis (DIA) and Biological Variation Analysis (BVA) software (GE Healthcare, 
Atlanta, GA, USA), and candidate spots corresponding to differentially expressed proteins 
were identified and selected based on a volume ratio threshold of 2.0 or greater.
For spot identification, 2D-DIGE gels were stained with Lava Purple Gel stain in order to 
obtain a more accurate spot map for picking the gel spots of interest. Then the spots were 
de-stained and digested overnight with trypsin. The digest was then extracted from the gel 
plugs and dried down. Subsequently, the digests were re-suspended and desalted with a 
Ziptip and then dried again. Finally, the dried samples were re-suspended in 2% 
acentonitrile/0.1% formic acid and injected into a picofrit C18 nanospray column for mass 
spec analysis.
 2.25. High-performance liquid chromatography with mass-spectrometric detection
All samples were analyzed using an HPLC-MS method (Agilent 6410 series) employing a 
positive ionization mode with multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) of 6-gingerol and 6-
shogaol. The ion spray voltage was set at 3000 V, ionization temperature was set at 200°C, 
and drying gas flow rate was 10 μl/min. Data acquisition and quantification were performed 
using Mass Hunter software (Agilent Technologies, Wilmington, DE, USA). Separation was 
achieved using an HP1100 series LC system (Agilent Technologies) equipped with a 
Zhang et al.
Page 10
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 photodiode array detector using an Agilent Zorbax reversed-phase column (SB-C18, 3.0 × 
250 mm, 5.0 μm). A gradient method was employed to separate the individual ginger 
components using mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) and mobile phase B 
(acetonitrile). The gradient elution process was set to 60% B at 0 min, 90% B at 20 min, 
hold for 10 min and return to 60% B at 40 min, with a flow rate of 0.4 ml/min. An injection 
volume of 10 μl was used for analyses.
 2.26. Statistical analyses
One-way and two-way analyses of variance (ANOVA) and t-tests were used to determine 
statistical significance (*p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.0001).
 3. Results
 3.1. Characterization of GDNPs
GDNPs were isolated from ginger juice and purified using a sucrose gradient 
ultracentrifugation method [28]. As shown in Fig. 1A, GDNPs mainly accumulated at the 
8/30% (band 1) and 30/45% (band 2) interfaces of the sucrose gradient; a faint band was 
also detected at the 45/60% interface (band 3). The size distributions and zeta potentials of 
GDNPs were determined using photon correlation spectroscopy (PCS) employing 
Brookhaven equipment (Supplementary Fig. 1). The average size was about 292.5 nm for 
nanoparticles found in band 1, 231.6 nm for those from band 2, and 219.6 nm for those from 
band 3. A zeta potential value of approximately −12 mV at pH 6 (the pH of the duodenum-
jejunum) was obtained for GDNPs from bands 1 (GDNPs 1) and 2 (GDNPs 2). In contrast, a 
zeta potential close to zero (about −2.1 mV) was obtained for band 3 nanoparticles (GDNPs 
3). We also found that GDNPs 1 and GDNPs 2 (but not GDNPs 3) could tolerate freeze/thaw 
cycles and were very stable at room temperature (up to 7 days). Based on this finding, 
GDNPs 3 were excluded from subsequent analyses because of their lower yield and 
instability. We also used transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and atomic force 
microscopy (AFM) to characterize GDNPs 1 (Fig. 1B, C) and GDNPs 2 (Fig. 1D, E). These 
TEM and AFM data confirmed that the integrity and size of GDNPs were consistent with 
those measured using the PCS technique. Importantly, from a starting material of 1000 g 
ginger, we obtained ~50 mg of GDNPs from bands 1, 2 and 3. A consistent yield was 
observed across different ginger batches, and it represented a high-level of GDNPs 
production compared to the synthesis of nanoparticles. We thus successfully isolated and 
characterized two stable populations of nanoscale GDNPs.
 3.2. Biochemical characterization of GDNPs
The total lipid composition of the GDNPs from these three bands showed slight differences 
(Supplementary Fig. 2 and Supplementary Table 1), but a composition analysis revealed 
mainly phosphatidic acid (~25–40% of total lipids), digalactosyldiacylglycerol (~25–40% of 
total lipids) and monogalactosyldiacyglycerol (~20–30% of total lipids). We also examined 
the protein composition of GDNPs 1, GDNPs 2, and GDNPs 3 using proteomic profiling 
assays, in which ultra-high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) was coupled to high-
resolution, high-mass accuracy quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometry (MS; Thermo 
Scientific Q-Exactive). We found that GDNPs had a low protein content, which tended to be 
Zhang et al.
Page 11
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 predominantly cytosolic, such as actin and proteolysis enzymes, with a few membrane 
proteins, such as membrane channel/transporters (e.g., aquaporin and chloride channels) 
(Supplementary Table 2). To assess the presence or absence of microRNAs (miRNAs) in 
GDNPs, we extracted total RNA and generated cDNA libraries. Deep sequencing revealed 
that there were 125 different miRNAs in GDNPs 2, each containing between 15 and 27 
nucleotides (Supplementary Table 3). Targetscan (www.targetscan.org), which is an online 
software provided by the Whitehead Institute for prediction of microRNA targets, showed 
that 124 of these miRNAs could potentially target and regulate the expression of human 
genes by binding to their 3′-untranslated regions (3′-UTRs). Taken together, these findings 
demonstrate that our preparations isolated from ginger are exosome-like nanoparticles.
Ginger was chosen in this study because of its active constituents, including 6-gingerol and 
6-shogaol, which have multiple molecular targets, including inflammatory mediators [36–
38]. Using HPLC/MS we found that GDNPs 2 contain higher concentrations of the ginger 
active constituents, 6-gingerol (5.68 μg/mg) and 6-shogaol (2.95 μg/mg) compared with 
GDNPs 1 (0.56 and 0.22 μg/mg 6-gingerol and 6-shogaol, respectively) (Fig. 2). This latter 
observation demonstrates that GDNPs 1 and GDNPs 2 may have their own specific 
biochemical characteristics.
 3.3. GDNPs are stable in stomach- and intestine-like solutions
Next, we determined whether these GDNPs are stable in stomach- and intestine-like 
solutions. We first mimicked in vivo conditions by suspending GDNPs 2 in phosphate-
buffered saline (PBS) or a stomach- or intestine-like solution, and then analyzed changes in 
their size and zeta potential (Supplementary Fig. 3). The results showed that the size of 
GDNPs 2 was reduced slightly in both stomach- and intestine-like solutions compared with 
that in PBS. Zeta potential changed according to the pH value: in a near-neutral pH solution 
(PBS) and intestine-like solution, the surface of GDNPs 2 was negatively charged (−14.2 
mV and −7.3 mV respectively), whereas in an acid environment (stomach-like solution), 
GDNPs 2 were weakly positively charged (0.26 mV). We also obtained similar results for 
GDNPs 1 (data not shown). Together, these data indicate that GDNPs are highly stable in 
both stomach-like and intestine-like solutions, and changes in their zeta potential coincide 
with the natural properties of GDNPs.
 3.4. Oral administration of colon-targeting GDNPs
Oral administration of GDNPs has several advantages (such as convenience with no need for 
sterilization) over other therapeutic routes. Our primary goal was to deliver GDNPs to the 
colon, the site of intestinal inflammation in ulcerative colitis. Accordingly, mice were fed 
normally or starved for 12 hours (Supplementary Fig. 4), and then orally administered DiR 
dye-labeled GDNPs 2. At 12 hours post-treatment, the stomach, small intestine and colon 
were imaged. Control non-starved mice were orally administered PBS. In non-starved mice, 
images showed low-intensity GDNPs 2 signals in the stomach and small intestine, indicating 
low levels of localization in these tissues, but exhibited high-intensity signals in the colon. In 
starved mice, by contrast, retention of GDNPs 2 in the stomach and small intestine was more 
prominent, whereas colonic retention was less pronounced. Similar results were obtained in 
mice gavaged with GDNPs 1. Overall, these results indicate that retention of orally 
Zhang et al.
Page 12
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 administered GDNPs in the colon is higher in non-starved mice than in starved mice. This 
preferential colon targeting is important for the potential use of GDNPs in IBD treatment.
 3.5. Oral administration of GDNPs 2 reduces the susceptibility of mice to DSS-induced 
colitis
To assess the anti-inflammatory actions of GDNPs in the colon, we investigated the effects 
of GDNPs 1 and GDNPs 2 in the mouse model of dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced 
acute colitis with ulceration, a well-established mice model for the study of human 
ulcerative colitis [39]. To this end, mice in GDNPs treatment groups were provided only 
DSS water (1.5% w/v) for 7 days and were simultaneously orally administered 0.3 mg 
GDNPs 1 or GDNPs 2 daily for the entire treatment period; mice provided plain water or 
DSS water (1.5% w/v) without GDNPs treatment served as controls. To assess the 
progression of intestinal inflammation in different treatment groups (water only, DSS only, 
DSS+GDNPs 1 and DSS+GDNPs 2), we measured the levels of lipocalin-2 (Lcn-2), a 
widely accepted biomarker for intestinal inflammation [55], in samples obtained daily 
during the treatment using ELISAs. As shown in Fig. 3A, basal Lcn-2 levels in the different 
treatment groups were similarly low on Day 1; however, Lcn-2 levels dramatically increased 
from Day 3 to Day 7 (with similar kinetics) in mice treated with DSS and DSS+GDNPs 1. 
In striking contrast, Lcn-2 levels in mice treated with DSS+GDNPs 2 were low and 
comparable to these in the water control group. These results suggest that GDNPs 2, but not 
GDNPs 1, exerted anti-inflammatory effects and were capable of preventing the intestinal 
inflammation induced by DSS. The anti-inflammatory effects of GDNPs 2 were further 
confirmed by the reduction in spleen weight (Fig. 3B); colon length also trended higher (Fig. 
3C), although this difference did not reach statistical significance.
Mice were sacrificed 7 days after the start of treatments, and the histological effects of 
GDNPs on DSS-induced intestinal inflammation were examined by H&E staining. Mice 
treated with DSS water alone exhibited robust signs of inflammation, with epithelial erosion, 
interstitial edema, and a general increase in the number of inflammatory cells in the lamina 
propria (Fig. 3E). Interestingly, treatment with GDNPs 2, but not with GDNPs 1, prevented 
these signs of intestinal inflammation, particularly local lymphocytic infiltration, at the 
histological level. To confirm these initial observations, we measured colonic 
myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity as an indicator of the extent of neutrophil infiltration. As 
shown in Fig. 3D, the DSS-induced increase in MPO activity was indeed decreased 
significantly by GDNPs 2. In contrast, treatment with GDNPs 1 had no effect on DSS-
induced MPO activity. Notably, oral administration of GDNPs 2 to untreated mice had no 
effect on cytokine levels or MPO activity, as noted in Fig. 5A.
E-cadherin plays a crucial role in epithelial cell-cell adhesion and in maintenance of tissue 
architecture. Down-regulation of E-cadherin expression is correlated with strong invasive 
potential; therefore, impaired expression of E-cadherin has been linked to disturbed 
intestinal barrier function and homeostasis [40–42]. An immunofluorescence analysis of 
different treatment regimens revealed that E-cadherin expression on colonic epithelial cells 
was dramatically increased in GDNPs 2 treated mice, but not in mice treated with GDNPs 1, 
Zhang et al.
Page 13
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 compared with mice administered DSS water alone (Fig. 3F). These results corroborate the 
results of H&E staining (Fig. 3E).
 3.6. Oral administration of GDNPs 2 does not affect cell viability or induce local or 
systemic side effects
In order to analyze potential toxicity, we first investigated the effects of GDNPs 1 and 
GDNPs 2 on colon-26 epithelial-like and RAW 264.7 macrophage-like cell lines in vitro 
using the MTT cell proliferation assay. As shown in Fig. 4A, treatment with GDNPs 2 for 24 
hours did not alter the viability of colon-26 and RAW 264.7 cells at any of the tested 
concentration of GDNPs 2 tested (up to 100 μg/mL). Electric cell-substrate impedance 
sensing (ECIS), which assesses the integrity of the intestinal barrier, was then used as a real-
time method for testing toxicity [43]. Caco2-BBE cells were grown on transwell filters, and 
after the resistance had reached a plateau, PBS or GDNPs 2 (100 μg/mL) was added (Fig. 
4B–D). GDNPs 2 did not affect the integrity of the barrier function of Caco2-BBE 
monolayers. Annexin/propidium iodide (PI) assays, which provide an indication of 
apoptosis/necrosis, revealed that GDNPs 2 at concentrations up to 100 μg/mL did not 
increase the percentage of apoptotic colon-26 or RAW 264.7 cells (Fig. 4E). Next, to 
evaluate the possible in vivo cytotoxicity of GDNPs 2, we administered GDNPs 2 (0.3 mg/
mouse) daily to healthy mice by gavage for 7 days and quantitatively assessed colonic MPO 
activity and pro-inflammatory cytokines. There were no significant changes in MPO activity 
compared with controls (Fig. 5A), indicating the absence of neutrophil infiltration in GDNPs 
2-treated colonic tissue. GDNPs 2 treatment also did not induce pro-inflammatory cytokines 
(TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-1β) at the mRNA or protein level (Fig. 5B, C). Moreover, a 
comparative analysis showed no differences in H&E staining, intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) 
proliferation, or IEC apoptosis in colonic tissues between groups (Fig. 5D). A histological 
examination of H&E-stained heart, liver, spleen, kidney, and lung showed no morphological 
or pathological changes in the GDNPs 2-gavaged group compared with controls 
(Supplementary Fig. 5). Taken together, these data suggest that orally administered GDNPs 
2 do not cause toxicity or side effects at the local or systemic level. Notably, similar results 
were obtained with GDNPs 1 (data not shown).
 3.7. Oral administration of GDNPs 2 blocks damaging factors while promoting pro-
healing factors
The expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines is known to be involved in intestinal 
inflammation [44,45]. As expected, real-time RT-PCR experiments showed that DSS 
treatment increased the mRNA levels of the pro-inflammatory cytokines, TNF-α, IL-6, 
IL-1β, and decreased anti-inflammatory cytokine, IL-10 (Fig. 3G). Treatment with GDNPs 
2, but not GDNPs 1, dramatically decreased the levels of tested pro-inflammatory cytokines, 
while increasing the levels of the tested anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10. To assess the 
local protein levels of these pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines, we generated colon 
cultures from mice of different treatment groups, as described in Materials and Methods. As 
shown in Fig. 3H, the protein levels obtained in these experiments were consistent with 
those of mRNA-based experiments, showing that treatment with GDNPs 2, but not with 
GDNPs 1, decreased the DSS-induced colonic secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines and 
increased secretion of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 as well as that of IL-22. Taken 
Zhang et al.
Page 14
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 together, these data demonstrate that the specific GDNPs 2 population of GDNPs confers 
anti-inflammatory effects against DSS-induced colitis by blocking the production of 
damaging pro-inflammatory cytokines, while enhancing the production of pro-healing anti-
inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-10 and IL-22.
 3.8. GDNPs 2 increase the survival and proliferation of IECs in DSS-induced colitis
The balance between apoptosis and cell proliferation determines normal tissue homeostasis. 
A key feature of intestinal homeostasis is the ability to maintain epithelial integrity and 
trigger repair mechanisms following injury [46–48]. Based on our observation that GDNPs 2 
decreased intestinal inflammation in DSS-induced colitis, we speculated that this population 
of GDNPs might decrease IEC apoptosis and increase IEC proliferation in response to DSS-
induced injury. Accordingly, we assessed IEC apoptosis and proliferation in colonic sections 
using TUNEL (terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling) assays and 
by staining for the proliferation marker Ki67, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 6). IEC 
apoptosis was increased and IEC proliferation was decreased in DSS-treated mice compared 
with water controls. In DSS-treated mice, administration of GDNPs 2, not but GDNPs 1, 
reduced IEC apoptosis while increasing IEC proliferation compared with that in mice that 
received DSS. Indeed, the levels of IEC proliferation in GDNPs 2-treated DSS mice and 
control mice that only received water were comparable. These results indicate that GDNPs 2 
modulate the balance of apoptosis and cell proliferation during DSS-induced intestinal 
inflammation, thereby re-establishing tissue homeostasis.
 3.9. Identification of molecular target candidates of GDNPs 2 involved in reducing colitis
Two-dimensional difference in-gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE), with its high sensitivity and 
accuracy, has been a major tool for the identification of proteins [49,50]. To identify 
potential molecular targets of GDNPs 2 involved in reducing colitis, we used 2D-DIGE in 
conjunction with MS to analyze differential protein expression in colonic tissues from DSS-
only mice and GDNPs 2-treated DSS mice. Proteins from the DSS-only group and GDNPs 
2-treated DSS group were labeled with Cy5 (red) and Cy3 (green), respectively, for 2D-
DIGE analysis; representative 2D-DIGE gel images are shown in Supplementary Fig. 7A. 
We identified a total of 24 spots that showed a change in intensity (defined as a DSS/GDNPs 
2 vs DSS volume ratio ≥ 2). We then analyzed the proteins by MS and searched the raw data 
against the most recent FASTA databases for Mouse from Uniprot; the predicted protein 
names are presented. As shown in Supplementary Fig. 7B, 8 proteins were down-regulated 
and 16 proteins were up-regulated. Thus, these proteins are potentially involved in the anti-
inflammatory activities of GDNPs 2 that reduce DSS-induced colitis.
 3.10. Orally administered GDNPs 2 targets the colon and are taken up by epithelial cells 
and macrophages in mice with or without colitis
To confirm which cell population(s) of the colon takes up GDNPs 2 following oral 
administration, we isolated colonic epithelial cells and immune cells from both normal and 
DSS-treated mice 12 hours after oral administration of GDNPs 2, and then performed flow 
cytometry. As shown in Fig. 6A–D, in normal mice 9.93 % (Fig. 6A; Normal colon) of 
tested colonic epithelial cells (EpCAM+) and 10.1 % (Fig. 6D; Normal colon) of tested 
colonic macrophages cells (CD11b+F4/80+) had taken up GDNPs 2. In DSS-treated mice, 
Zhang et al.
Page 15
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 by 9.89 % (Fig. 6A, DSS colon) of tested colonic epithelial cells (EpCAM+) and 11.6 % 
(Fig. 6D, DSS colon) of tested colonic macrophage cells (CD11b+F4/80+) had taken up 
GDNPs 2. A small percentage of examined dendritic cells (CD11c+) also showed uptake of 
GDNPs 2 in both normal (1.07 %; Fig. 6B, Normal) and DSS-treated (1.24 %; Fig. 6B, 
DSS) mice. GDNPs 2 were also efficiently taken up by colon-26 epithelial-like cells (Fig. 
7A, B) and RAW 264.7 macrophage-like cells (Fig. 7C, D) in our in vitro experiments. 
Collectively, these results indicate that orally administered GDNPs 2 target the colon and 
further show that GDNPs are efficiently taken up by epithelial cells and macrophages in 
mice with or without colitis.
 3.11. GDNPs 2 as therapeutics for colitis
Enhancement of intestinal repair mechanisms by modulatory factors may form the basis of 
future approaches for the treatment of diseases characterized by injuries of the epithelial 
surface [51,52]. Having confirmed that GDNPs 2 can ameliorate colitis symptoms in DSS-
induced inflammation, we further speculated that GDNPs 2 might be able to increase 
healing of the inflamed mucosa in induced colitis. To test this, we first investigated the 
effects of GDNPs 2 on wound healing in vitro using ECIS technology. This device takes AC 
impedance measurements using weak and noninvasive AC signals, as previously described 
[53]. We first determined the ideal frequency for measuring the resistance of confluent 
Caco2-BBE monolayers. Monolayers grown on ECIS 8W1E plates were wounded by 
subjecting them to a 30-second pulse with a frequency of 40 kHz and amplitude of 4.5 V. 
ECIS measurements revealed that wounded epithelia cultured in the presence of GDNPs 2 
(500 μl of a 0.1 mg/ml solution) healed significantly faster than PBS (500 μl)-treated 
controls (Fig. 8A). These data suggest that GDNPs 2 enhance the wound-healing process in 
epithelia. In contrast, DC-Chol/DOPE liposomes (Supplementary Fig. 8), considered among 
the most efficient vectors for introduction into cells in vitro and in clinical trials [54], 
reduced wound healing of intestinal epithelial cells at concentrations similar to those of 
GDNPs 2. Thus, our experiments demonstrate the feasibility of generating “natural” 
nanovectors assembled from ginger nanoparticle-derived lipids that mediate efficient in vivo 
drug delivery and exert no cytotoxicity or untoward effects on intestinal barrier function.
To extend our in vitro observations showing that GDNPs 2 may be beneficial for mucosal 
healing, we performed in vivo experiments. Mice were provided drinking water containing 
1.5 % DSS for 7 days (wounding phase), after which they were provided water alone or 
water plus a once-daily dose of GDNPs 2 (300 μl of a 1 mg/ml solution) administered by 
gavage for an additional 7 days (healing phase). Control mice, which had access to water 
alone, showed a slight increase in body weight (Fig. 8B), but no increase in measured levels 
of Lcn-2 (Fig. 8C), a marker used for the non-invasive assessment of colitis development 
[55]. DSS wounded mice maintained their body weights during the 7-day course of DSS 
administration, but their Lcn-2 levels increased during this period. After replacing DSS 
water with water alone (Fig. 8B, C, green dots), mice lost up to 20 % of their body weight 
and showed an increase in Lcn-2 until day 11. By Day 14, mice had not recovered their 
initial (before DSS treatment) body weight and displayed high levels of Lcn-2, indicative of 
active intestinal inflammation. In contrast, mice gavaged once daily with GDNPs 2 lost 
significantly less body weight and had lower levels of Lcn-2 at Day 11 compared with 
Zhang et al.
Page 16
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 control mice. In addition, mice treated with GDNPs 2 almost completely recovered their 
pretreatment body weights and Lcn-2 levels by Day 14. Similarly, a histological analysis 
(Fig. 8E) and an assessment of colonic MPO activity (Fig. 8D) also confirmed decreased 
intestinal mucosal ulceration and the extent of neutrophil infiltration in mice treated with 
GDNPs 2. mRNA for the pro-inflammatory cytokines, TNF-α, IL-1β and IL-6, and the anti-
inflammatory cytokine IL-10 were highly expressed in the recovery group (DSS water) 
compared with that in the GDNPs 2-treated group (Fig. 9A). An analysis of pro- and anti-
inflammatory cytokine protein levels yielded results that were consistent with those of 
mRNA-based experiments, showing that GDNPs 2 decreased the secretion of pro-
inflammatory cytokines TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-1β, and increased the secretion of 
corresponding anti-inflammatory cytokines IL-10 and IL-22, changes that likely account for 
the accelerated healing of intestinal mucosal injuries and recovery of cytokines levels to 
normal in GDNPs 2-treated mice (Fig. 9B). Ki67 staining and TUNEL assays also 
confirmed that GDNPs 2 promoted intestinal mucosal healing (Supplementary Fig. 9).
 3.12. Identification of molecular target candidates of GDNPs 2 involved in promoting 
intestinal mucosal healing
To identify potential molecular targets of GDNPs 2 involved in mucosal healing colitis, we 
used 2D-DIGE and MS to analyze proteins in colonic tissues that were differentially 
expressed between mice in the DSS-only group and GDNPs 2-treated DSS group. Both 
groups were administered DSS for 7 days (wounding phase); during the next 7 days (healing 
phase), mice in the DSS-only group received water and mice in the GDNP2-treatment group 
received water and a once-daily dose of GDNPs 2. Mice were sacrificed at the end of the 
healing phase and colonic proteins were isolated. Proteins from DSS-only group and GDNPs 
2-treated DSS group were labeled with Cy5 (red) and Cy3 (green), respectively, for 2D-
DIGE analysis. Representative 2D-DIGE gel images are shown in Supplementary Fig. 10A. 
We identified a total of 19 spots that showed a change in intensity (defined as a DSS/GDNPs 
2 DSS volume ratio ≥ 5) between the DSS-only group and the GDNPs 2-treated DSS group. 
We then analyzed proteins by MS and searched the raw data against the most recent FASTA 
databases for Mouse from Uniprot; the predicted protein names, molecular weights, PI and 
peptide counts are presented in Supplementary Fig. 10B, which shows that 10 proteins were 
down-regulated and 9 were up-regulated in colonic tissue from GDNPs 2-treated DSS mice 
compared with tissue from mice in the DSS-only group. These proteins are potentially 
involved in the intestinal mucosal healing activities of GDNPs 2.
 3.13. Treatment with GDNPs 2 prevents chronic colitis
To assess the anti-inflammatory effects of GDNPs 2 in a chronic colitis model, we chose 
IL-10 knockout (IL10−/−) mice, which develop colitis with histopathological features that 
closely recapitulate IBD [56,57]. In our facilities, IL10−/− mice spontaneously develop 
colitis in a time-dependent manner, exhibiting fully developed colitis within 18 weeks post 
weaning [58]. One group of IL10−/− mice were fed normally for 18 weeks after weaning, 
and a second group received orally administered GDNPs 2 (300 μl of 1 mg/ml solution) 
once daily for 18 weeks. At the end of the experiment (18 weeks after weaning), both groups 
of mice were sacrificed and the effects of GDNPs 2 were assessed. We observed that 
treatment with GDNPs 2 slightly decreased spleen weight (Fig. 10A) and increased colon 
Zhang et al.
Page 17
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 length compared with IL10−/− mice not treated with GDNPs 2 (Fig. 10B). We also observed 
that GDNPs 2 treatment reduced colonic MPO levels compared with that in untreated 
IL10−/− mice, indicating diminished neutrophil infiltration in the GDNPs 2-treated group 
(Fig. 10C). Anti-inflammatory effects of GDNPs 2 were also confirmed based on 
histological features in H&E-stained samples. Untreated IL10−/− mice displayed obvious 
signs of inflammation, with immune cell infiltration and epithelial erosion at 12 weeks of 
age and more significant signs of inflammation at 22 weeks (Fig. 10D). In contrast, signs of 
mucosal inflammation in GDNPs 2-treated IL10−/− mice at 12 and 22 weeks post weaning 
were significantly reduced (Figure 8D). We further showed that treatment with GDNPs 2 
significantly decreased the expression of colonic pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, 
IL-1β) (Fig. 10E), confirming the anti-inflammatory effects of GDNPs 2 in the development 
of spontaneous colitis. Notably, the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-6 was only slightly 
decreased in GDNPs 2-treated IL10−/− mice compared with untreated IL10−/− mice (Fig. 
10E). Together, these results demonstrate that GDNPs 2 possess anti-inflammatory activity 
in a mouse model of chronic colitis.
 3.14. Treatment with GDNPs 2 prevents CAC
A common complication of ulcerative colitis is colitis-associated cancer. Among the 
chemically induced colorectal cancer (CRC) models, the combination of a single “hit” of 
azoxymethane (AOM; 10 mg/kg body weight) with two, 1-week cycles of 2 % DSS 
exposure in rodents recapitulates the aberrant crypt foci-adenoma-carcinoma sequence that 
occurs in human CRC [59,60]. Using this AOM model, we left one group of mice untreated 
(AOM/DSS) while treating another group of mice (AOM/DSS-GDNPs 2) by orally 
administering GDNPs 2 (0.3 mg) daily throughout the experiment by gavage (Fig. 11A). 
Although treatment with GDNPs 2 did not significantly change body weight compared with 
mice in the untreated AOM/DSS group (Supplementary Fig. 11A), it significantly reduced 
the inflammation level in the AOM/DSS-GDNPs 2 treatment group, as measured by the 
level of Lcn-2 (Supplementary Fig. 11B). AOM/DSS mice developed tumors from the 
middle to the distal portion of the colon (Fig. 11B) [44]. Both tumor numbers per mouse and 
tumor loads were significantly decreased by GDNPs 2 treatment of AOM/DSS mice (Fig. 
11B). Specifically, treatment with GDNPs 2 decreased the number of tumors larger than 3 
mm in size (although not the average tumor size) compared with untreated DSS/AOM mice. 
Importantly, treatment of AOM/DSS mice with GDNPs 2 reduced colonic MPO activity 
compared with untreated AOM/DSS mice (Fig. 11C). Moreover, an assessment of the effect 
of GDNPs 2 treatment on pro-inflammatory cytokine production in AOM/DSS mice 
revealed that the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-6 and IL-1β were significantly decreased in 
the GDNPs 2-treatment group compared with the AOM/DSS group. Treatment with GDNPs 
2 also produced a trend of decreased levels of TNF-α, although this difference failed to 
reach statistical significance owing to substantial inter-individual variability (Fig. 11C). In 
association with these changes, cyclin D1 mRNA levels were also decreased in the GDNPs 
2-treatment group (Fig. 11C), suggesting that orally administered GDNPs 2 decrease cell 
proliferation during CAC development. Apoptosis also plays an important role in CAC, 
since greater apoptosis could induce cell proliferation to maintain homeostasis [61]. TUNEL 
assays showed that orally administered GDNPs 2 decreased apoptosis (Fig. 11D). Taken 
together, these data indicate that GDNPs 2 decrease colorectal tumorigenesis by reducing 
Zhang et al.
Page 18
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pro-inflammatory cytokine levels and inhibiting IEC proliferation and apoptosis. This 
further suggests that the ability of GDNPs 2 to reduce inflammation might be secondary to 
reductions in tumor development.
 3.15. Identification of molecular target candidates of GDNPs 2 involved in reducing CAC
We also identified potential molecular targets of GDNPs 2 involved in reducing CAC using 
2D-DIGE/MS. Proteins from the AOM/DSS group and the GDNPs 2-treated group were 
labeled with Cy5 (red) and Cy3 (green), respectively. Representative 2D-DIGE gel images 
are shown in Supplementary Fig. 12A. We identified a total of 17 spots that showed a 
change in intensity (defined as an AOM/DSS/GDNPs 2 vs AOM/DSS volume ratio ≥ 5). We 
then analyzed the proteins by MS and searched the raw data against the most recent FASTA 
databases for Mouse from Uniprot. The predicted protein names are presented in 
Supplementary Fig. 12B, which showed that 3 proteins were down-regulated and 14 proteins 
were up-regulated. These proteins are potentially involved in reducing colitis associated 
cancer.
 4. Discussion
Targeting drug carriers based on nanoparticles have been designed and have shown great 
promise for improving IBD treatment. Various carriers have been designed to release the 
drug at a specific pH value, to be resistant to digestive enzymes, and/or require bacterial 
cleavage for activation, and several of these carriers are currently being investigated. The 
application of plants as “nanofactories” for the fabrication of medical nanoparticles could 
represent a new approach for IBD treatment. In this study, we isolated and identified three 
populations of nanoparticles—GDNPs 1, GDNPs 2 and GDNPs 3-from edible plant ginger. 
GDNPs 1 and GDNPs 2 exhibited a zeta potential values of approximately −2 to −12 mV at 
pH 6 (~colon pH), indicating mutual repulsion of nanoparticles with no tendency towards 
aggregation. The average size of GDNPs was ~220–290 nm. A monodispersed size 
distribution is considered an essential design criterion for an effective nanoparticle. The size 
distribution and zeta potential of GDNPs was in the range of other isolated edible 
nanoparticles from grape and grapefruit [29,30]. An analysis of GDNPs lipid profiles 
revealed predominantly phosphatidic acid, digalactosyldiacylglycerol and 
monogalactosyldiacyglycerol, which were present in roughly similar amounts in the 
different GDNPs populations. Notably, phosphatidic acid is highly fusogenic in the presence 
of calcium [62], and has been postulated to induce inter-vesicular fusion [63]. Interestingly, 
we found that the lipid profile of each GDNP population (GDNPs 1, GDNPs 2 and GDNPs 
3) was similar to that of other edible nanoparticles from grapefruit and grape that have been 
previously isolated [29,30]. We further found that the protein content of GDNPs was low, 
and was primarily in the form of cytosolic proteins, with few membrane proteins, an 
observation in agreement with the protein profile reported for grape nanoparticles [29]. We 
also showed that GDNPs 2 contains 125 miRNAs (15–27 nucleotides in length) that were 
unique to GDNPs 2 compared with those reported in grape nanoparticles -all but one of 
which have the potential to regulate the expression of human genes by binding to their 3′-
UTRs. Both 6-gingerol and 6-shogaol, two major anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer 
compounds, are components of ginger [64–66]. Interestingly, we found that GDNPs 2 
Zhang et al.
Page 19
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 contained higher concentrations of these active ginger constituents compared with GDNPs 1 
and GDNPs 3. In sum, our characterization revealed these three populations of GDNPs that 
consist of specific natural membrane lipids with a few membrane proteins, and contain 
miRNAs and different levels of 6-gingerol and 6-shogaol. Importantly, we found that 1000 g 
of ginger yielded ~50 mg of GDNPs (GDNPs 1, GDNPs 2 and GDNPs 3)—a high 
production yield of GDNPs compared with synthesized nanoparticles that highlights the 
potential for large-scale production of GDNPs. GDNPs 2, which showed the highest levels 
of active ginger compounds, and GDNPs 1, which, like GDNPs 2, were very stable at room 
temperature and tolerant of freeze/thaw cycles, were selected for further analysis in tests of 
anti-inflammatory activity in experimental colitis.
Unlike most IBD drugs, which must be administered systemically and are thus associated 
with serious side effects [67,68], GDNPs 2 are delivered orally, offering several advantages 
over other therapeutic routes. Importantly, oral administration supports our primary goal of 
delivering GDNPs 2 to the colon, which is the site of intestinal inflammation in ulcerative 
colitis. Our results indicate effective retention of orally administered GDNPs in the colon, 
especially in non-starved mice. These results are in agreement with previous studies showing 
that orally administered grape nanoparticles are stable during transition through the stomach 
and small intestine, and target the colon. They are also important for the potential use of 
GDNPs 2 as a colon-targeting nanoparticle system. Notably, the targeted delivery of GDNPs 
2 to the colon made possible by oral administration did not induce local or systemic side 
effects. Once GNDPs 2 reached the colon, they were taken up equally by IECs and 
macrophages in mice with or without colitis. This dual cellular targeting of orally 
administered GDNPs 2 is unique compared with nanoparticles from grape and grapefruit, 
which primarily target intestinal macrophages and intestinal stem cells (ISCs), respectively 
[29,30].
Comparative functional analyses of the two GDNPs populations that showed favorable 
biophysical properties (GDNPs 1 and GDNPs 2) revealed that orally administered GDNPs 2, 
but not GDNPs 1, reduced acute inflammation induced by DSS, suggesting that the higher 
content of 6-gingerol and 6-shogaol in GDNPs 2 might play a role in their anti-inflammatory 
activities. Interestingly, orally administered GDNPs 2 increased the survival and 
proliferation of IECs, reduced expression of the pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-6 
and IL-1β), and increased expression of the anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-10 and IL-22) 
in induced colitis, suggesting that GDNPs 2 block factors that damage the intestines while 
promoting factors that heal them. An analysis of differentially expressed genes following 
oral administration of GDNPs also identified molecular targets of GDNPs 2 that are 
potentially involved in reducing acute colitis. Most of these molecular targets are proteins 
expressed in cell cytoplasm, membrane, mitochondria or nucleus of the intestinal mucosa. 
For example, GDNPs 2 increased expression of NRROS (negative regulator of reactive 
oxygen species), which is known to limit ROS production by phagocytes during the 
inflammatory response and thus “cools off” inflammation [69]. Accumulating evidence 
places mitochondria at the center of diverse cellular functions and suggest mitochondria as 
integrators of signaling pathways, such as inflammation [70]. In this context, it was not 
surprising that GDNPs 2 affected the expression of numerous mitochondrial proteins, 
including malate dehydrogenase, creatine kinase B-type, ATP synthase subunit beta, and 
Zhang et al.
Page 20
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 succinate dehydrogenase. In acute colitis, intestinal barrier function is compromised by 
dysregulation of the cytoskeleton and junction proteins [71–73]. In our study, we found that 
GDNPs 2 affected the expression of numerous cytoskeleton proteins, including adseverin, 
cofillin-1, KRT19 (keratin, type I cytoskeletal 19), KRT78 (keratin 78 type II), and the 
adherens junction protein, desmoglein. We also found that nuclear proteins, such as 
ZMYND11 (zinc finger, MYND-type containing 11), were targeted by GDNPs 2.
Using in vitro and in vivo wound-healing models, we demonstrated that GDNPs 2 promote 
intestinal mucosa healing. Interestingly, treatment of wounded intestinal mucosal with 
GDNPs 2 reestablished normal levels of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines and MPO 
activity, and restored IEC proliferation-apoptosis balance in the intestinal mucosa. We 
further demonstrated that the molecular targets of GDNPs 2 at the end of the healing phase 
were primarily cytoplasmic/membrane proteins of the intestinal mucosa. For example, 
GDNPs 2 treatment dramatically increased the expression (~14-fold) of CAR1 (carbonic 
anhydrase 1), which is known to be present on the surface of enterocytes of the colon 
[74,75] and is a major cecal antigen that has been implicated in the pathogenesis of IBD 
[76]. Notably, oral tolerization with CAR1 is effective in the treatment of a murine model of 
IBD [77]. Treatment with GDNPs 2 also attenuated expression of the secreted protein 
hemopexin, a result that is in agreement with a previous report showing that hemopexin 
expression is related to the degree of intestinal injury [78]. We further found that GDNPs 2 
affected the expression of mitochondrial proteins, such as HSPA13 (heat shock protein 
family A [Hsp70] member 13), and cytoplasmic proteins such as axin and kinesin, which are 
involved in cell proliferation/division, and proteins such as ADAM8, KRT19 (keratin, type I 
cytoskeletal 19), flotillin-1 and ILK (integrin-linked protein kinase), which are involved in 
cell-cell adhesion during intestinal inflammation. Nuclear proteins such as SNRPD3 (small 
nuclear ribonucleoprotein Sm D3) were also targeted. Taken together, our results 
demonstrate that GDNPs 2 target the expression of multiple proteins that are involved in 
increasing mucosal healing after injury and consequently suggest that GDNPs 2 may be 
useful for colitis treatment.
We further investigated the effectiveness of GDNPs 2 for treating chronic colitis and CAC. 
Using the IL10−/− mouse model of chronic colitis, we discovered that GDNPs 2 treatment 
prevented disease progression. Because GDNPs 2 were administered before the 
manifestation of colitis in this model, these results demonstrate that GDNPs 2 may be useful 
for preventing colitis. The known link between chronic intestinal inflammation and the 
development of CRC, among the most common malignancies [79–81], has given rise to the 
term “colitis-associated cancer” [82]. The development of CAC in patients suffering from 
ulcerative colitis is one of the best clinically characterized examples of an association 
between intestinal inflammation and carcinogenesis [83]. CRC is a major cause of excess 
morbidity and mortality in ulcerative colitis as well as Crohn’s disease patients. In fact, CRC 
is observed in 13.5 % of all patients with ulcerative colitis, a risk rate that is at least 2-fold 
greater than that of the population as a whole. Here, using a mouse CAC model that 
combined AOM-induced carcinogenesis and DSS-induced chronic inflammation, we 
showed that treatment with GDNPs 2 reduced colonic tumor incidence and growth by 
reducing inflammation-induced IEC proliferation, as shown by the decrease in the 
proliferation marker, cyclin D1, and the reduction in the production of pro-inflammatory 
Zhang et al.
Page 21
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cytokines/chemokines, including the critical regulators IL-6, IL-1β and TNF-α. Interestingly, 
we found that GDNPs 2 treatment targeted expression of multiple proteins that have been 
implicated in the development of CAC. For example, recent studies have demonstrated that 
signaling through cGMP is an important regulator of tissue homeostasis in the 
gastrointestinal tract, showing that activation of cGMP-dependent protein kinase inhibits 
TCF (T cell transcription factor) signaling in colon cancer cells by blocking β-catenin 
expression and activating FOXO4 (forkhead box O4) [84,85]. Interestingly, we found that 
treatment with GDNPs 2 increased the expression of PKG, an effect that may be responsible, 
at least in part, for the therapeutic efficacy of GDNPs 2. This interpretation is supported by 
reports showing that therapeutic activation of cGMP/PKG is a promising avenue for the 
prevention and treatment of colon cancer [85]. Other proteins that have been suggested to be 
involved in the development of CAC include the GTP-binding nuclear protein Ran and 
transgelin [86–88], the latter of which has been shown to be significantly down-regulated in 
human colon tumors compared with adjacent non-tumorous tissues [89]. Important in this 
context, we found that treatment with GDNPs 2 increased transgelin expression, which may 
be another contributor to the therapeutic efficacy of GDNPs 2.
 5. Conclusions
This study represents proof of principle that a novel, natural, nontoxic delivery system is 
capable of targeting the inflamed intestinal mucosa, and blocking damaging factors while 
promoting healing factors. This system, exemplified by GDNPs 2, can easily be developed 
for large-scale production and may ultimately represent an effective therapeutic strategy for 
preventing and treating IBD and CAC.
 Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
 Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney (RO1-
DK-071594 to D.M) and Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation of America (ID: 369809 to M.Z. Z).
References
1. Terzic J, Grivennikov S, Karin E, Karin M. Inflammation and Colon Cancer. Gastroenterology. 
2010; 138:2101–2114. [PubMed: 20420949] 
2. Chan AT, Giovannucci EL. Primary Prevention of Colorectal Cancer. Gastroenterology. 2010; 
138:2029–2043. [PubMed: 20420944] 
3. Sussman DA, Santaolalla R, Strobel S, Dheer R, Abreu MT. Cancer in inflammatory bowel disease: 
lessons from animal models. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2012; 28:327–33. [PubMed: 22614440] 
4. Stretch GL, Campbell BJ, Dwarakanath AD, Yaqoob M, Stevenson A, Morris AI, et al. 5-Amino 
salicylic acid absorption and metabolism in ulcerative colitis patients receiving maintenance 
sulphasalazine, olsalazine or mesalazine. Aliment Pharm Ther. 1996; 10:941–7.
5. Pertuit D, Moulari B, Betz T, Nadaradjane A, Neumann D, Ismaili L, et al. 5-amino salicylic acid 
bound nanoparticles for the therapy of inflammatory bowel disease. J Control Release. 2007; 
123:211–8. [PubMed: 17889397] 
6. Hanauer SB. New steroids for IBD: progress report. Gut. 2002; 51:182–3. [PubMed: 12117876] 
Zhang et al.
Page 22
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 7. Navaneethan U, Lashner BA. Effects of Immunosuppression and Liver Transplantation on 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease in Patients With Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis. Clin Gastroenterol 
Hepatol. 2013; 11:524–5. [PubMed: 23376317] 
8. Wang DZ, DuBois RN. The Role of Anti-Inflammatory Drugs in Colorectal Cancer. Annu Rev Med. 
2013; 64:131–44. [PubMed: 23020877] 
9. Ensign LM, Cone R, Hanes J. Oral drug delivery with polymeric nanoparticles: The gastrointestinal 
mucus barriers. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2012; 64:557–70. [PubMed: 22212900] 
10. Zhang SF, Ermann J, Succi MD, Zhou A, Hamilton MJ, Cao BN, et al. An inflammation-targeting 
hydrogel for local drug delivery in inflammatory bowel disease. Sci Transl Med. 2015; 
7:300ra128.
11. Xiao B, Laroui H, Viennois E, Ayyadurai S, Charania MA, Zhang YC, et al. Nanoparticles With 
Surface Antibody Against CD98 and Carrying CD98 Small Interfering RNA Reduce Colitis in 
Mice. Gastroenterology. 2014; 146:1289–1300. [PubMed: 24503126] 
12. Dulai PS, Siegel CA, Colombel JF, Sandborn WJ, Peyrin-Biroulet L. Systematic review: 
monotherapy with antitumour necrosis factor alpha agents versus combination therapy with an 
immunosuppressive for IBD. Gut. 2014; 63:1843–53. [PubMed: 24970900] 
13. Moriasi C, Subramaniam D, Awasthi S, Ramalingam S, Anant S. Prevention of Colitis-associated 
Cancer: Natural Compounds that Target the IL-6 Soluble Receptor. Anti-Cancer Agent Med 
Chem. 2012; 12:1221–38.
14. Fukata M, Shang LM, Santaolalla R, Sotolongo J, Pastorini C, Espana C, et al. Constitutive 
Activation of Epithelial TLR4 Augments Inflammatory Responses to Mucosal Injury and Drives 
Colitis-associated Tumorigenesis. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2011; 17:1464–73. [PubMed: 21674704] 
15. Xing XH, Zhang BB, Wang XH, Liu FJ, Shi DL, Cheng YS. An “imaging-biopsy” strategy for 
colorectal tumor reconfirmation by multipurpose paramagnetic quantum dots. Biomaterials. 2015; 
48:16–25. [PubMed: 25701028] 
16. Araujo F, Shrestha N, Shahbazi MA, Liu DF, Herranz-Blanco B, Makila EM, et al. Microfluidic 
Assembly of a Multifunctional Tailorable Composite System Designed for Site Specific Combined 
Oral Delivery of Peptide Drugs. ACS Nano. 2015; 9:8291–302. [PubMed: 26235314] 
17. Hansen AE, Petersen AL, Henriksen JR, Boerresen B, Rasmussen P, Elema DR, et al. Positron 
Emission Tomography Based Elucidation of the Enhanced Permeability and Retention Effect in 
Dogs with Cancer Using Copper-64 Liposomes. ACS Nano. 2015; 9:6985–95. [PubMed: 
26022907] 
18. Laroui H, Dalmasso G, Nguyen HTT, Yan YT, Sitaraman SV, Merlin D. Drug-Loaded 
Nanoparticles Targeted to the Colon With Polysaccharide Hydrogel Reduce Colitis in a Mouse 
Model. Gastroenterology. 2010; 138:843–853. [PubMed: 19909746] 
19. Han SC, Cheng Q, Wu YD, Zhou JH, Long XW, Wei T, et al. Effects of hydrophobic core 
components in amphiphilic PDMAEMA nanoparticles on siRNA delivery. Biomaterials. 2015; 
48:45–55. [PubMed: 25701031] 
20. Xiao B, Yang Y, Viennois E, Zhang YC, Ayyadurai S, Baker MT, et al. Glycoprotein CD98 as a 
receptor for colitis-targeted delivery of nanoparticles. J Mater Chem B. 2014; 2:1499–508.
21. Xiao B, Laroui H, Ayyadurai S, Viennois E, Charania MA, Zhang YC, et al. Mannosylated 
bioreducible nanoparticle-mediated macrophage-specific TNF-alpha RNA interference for IBD 
therapy. Biomaterials. 2013; 34:7471–82. [PubMed: 23820013] 
22. Ramishetti S, Kedmi R, Goldsmith M, Leonard F, Sprague AG, Godin B, et al. Systemic Gene 
Silencing in Primary T Lymphocytes Using Targeted Lipid Nanoparticles. ACS Nano. 2015; 
9:6706–16. [PubMed: 26042619] 
23. Laroui H, Theiss AL, Yan YT, Dalmasso G, Nguyen HTT, Sitaraman SV, et al. Functional TNF 
alpha gene silencing mediated by polyethyleneimine/TNF alpha siRNA nanocomplexes in 
inflamed colon. Biomaterials. 2011; 32:1218–28. [PubMed: 20970849] 
24. Xiao B, Si XY, Zhang MZ, Merlin D. Oral administration of pH-sensitive curcumin-loaded 
microparticles for ulcerative colitis therapy. Colloid Surf B. 2015; 135:379–85.
25. Tang L, Tong R, Coyle VJ, Yin Q, Pondenis H, Borst LB, et al. Targeting Tumor Vasculature with 
Aptamer-Functionalized Doxorubicin - Polylactide Nanoconjugates for Enhanced Cancer Therapy. 
ACS Nano. 2015; 9:5072–81. [PubMed: 25938427] 
Zhang et al.
Page 23
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 26. Morton SW, Lee MJ, Deng ZJ, Dreaden EC, Siouve E, Shopsowitz KE, et al. A Nanoparticle-
Based Combination Chemotherapy Delivery System for Enhanced Tumor Killing by Dynamic 
Rewiring of Signaling Pathways. Sci Signal. 2014; 7:ra44. [PubMed: 24825919] 
27. Zhuang XY, Deng ZB, Mu JY, Zhang LF, Yan J, Miller D, et al. Ginger-derived nanoparticles 
protect against alcohol-induced liver damage. J Extracell Vesicles. 2015; 4:28713. [PubMed: 
26610593] 
28. Mu JY, Zhuang XY, Wang QL, Jiang H, Deng ZB, Wang BM, et al. Interspecies communication 
between plant and mouse gut host cells through edible plant derived exosome-like nanoparticles. 
Mol Nutr Food Res. 2014; 58:1561–73. [PubMed: 24842810] 
29. Ju SW, Mu JY, Dokland T, Zhuang XY, Wang QL, Jiang H, et al. Grape Exosome-like 
Nanoparticles Induce Intestinal Stem Cells and Protect Mice From DSS-Induced Colitis. Mol Ther. 
2013; 21:1345–57. [PubMed: 23752315] 
30. Wang BM, Zhuang XY, Deng ZB, Jiang H, Mu JY, Wang QL, et al. Targeted Drug Delivery to 
Intestinal Macrophages by Bioactive Nanovesicles Released from Grapefruit. Mol Ther. 2014; 
22:522–34. [PubMed: 23939022] 
31. Zhang M, Viennois E, Xu C, Merlin D. Plant derived edible nanoparticles as a new therapeutic 
approach against diseases. Tissue Barriers. 2016:e1134415.
32. Brahmbhatt M, Gundala SR, Asif G, Shamsi SA, Aneja R. Ginger Phytochemicals Exhibit Synergy 
to Inhibit Prostate Cancer Cell Proliferation. Nutr Cancer. 2013; 65:263–72. [PubMed: 23441614] 
33. Karna P, Chagani S, Gundala SR, Rida PCG, Asif G, Sharma V, et al. Benefits of whole ginger 
extract in prostate cancer. Brit J Nutr. 2012; 107:473–84. [PubMed: 21849094] 
34. Butt MS, Sultan MT. Ginger and its Health Claims: Molecular Aspects. Crit Rev Food Sci. 2011; 
51:383–93.
35. Prasad S, Aggarwal BB. Chronic diseases caused by chronic inflammation require chronic 
treatment: anti-inflammatory role of dietary spices. J Clin Cell Immunol. 2014; 2014
36. Brown AC, Shah C, Liu J, Pham JTH, Zhang JG, Jadus MR. Ginger’s (Zingiber officinale Roscoe) 
Inhibition of Rat Colonic Adenocarcinoma Cells Proliferation and Angiogenesis In Vitro. 
Phytother Res. 2009; 23:640–5. [PubMed: 19117330] 
37. Grzanna R, Lindmark L, Frondoza CG. Ginger - An herbal medicinal product with broad anti-
inflammatory actions. J Med Food. 2005; 8:125–32. [PubMed: 16117603] 
38. Al-Suhaimi EA, Al-Riziza NA, Al-Essa RA. Physiological and Therapeutical Roles of Ginger and 
Turmeric on Endocrine Functions. Am J Chin Med. 2011; 39:215–31. [PubMed: 21476200] 
39. Viennois E, Xiao B, Ayyadurai S, Wang LX, Wang PG, Zhang Q, et al. Micheliolide, a new 
sesquiterpene lactone that inhibits intestinal inflammation and colitis-associated cancer. Lab 
Invest. 2014; 94:950–65. [PubMed: 25068660] 
40. Turner JR. Intestinal mucosal barrier function in health and disease. Nat Rev Immunol. 2009; 
9:799–809. [PubMed: 19855405] 
41. Vetrano S, Rescigno M, Cera MR, Correale C, Rumio C, Doni A, et al. Unique role of junctional 
adhesion molecule-A in maintaining mucosal homeostasis in inflammatory bowel disease. 
Gastroenterology. 2008; 135:173–84. [PubMed: 18514073] 
42. Groschwitz KR, Ahrens R, Osterfeld H, Gurish MF, Han XN, Abrink M, et al. Mast cells regulate 
homeostatic intestinal epithelial migration and barrier function by a chymase/Mcpt4-dependent 
mechanism. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2009; 106:22381–6. [PubMed: 20018751] 
43. Laroui H, Geem D, Xiao B, Viennois E, Rakhya P, Denning T, et al. Targeting Intestinal 
Inflammation With CD98 siRNA/PEI-loaded Nanoparticles. Mol Ther. 2014; 22:69–80. [PubMed: 
24025751] 
44. Hang TTN, Dalmasso G, Torkvist L, Halfvarson J, Yan YT, Laroui H, et al. CD98 expression 
modulates intestinal homeostasis, inflammation, and colitis-associated cancer in mice. J Clin 
Invest. 2011; 121:1733–47. [PubMed: 21490400] 
45. Francescone R, Hou V, Grivennikov SI. Cytokines, IBD, and Colitis-associated Cancer. Inflamm 
Bowel Dis. 2015; 21:409–18. [PubMed: 25563695] 
46. Peterson LW, Artis D. Intestinal epithelial cells: regulators of barrier function and immune 
homeostasis. Nat Rev Immunol. 2014; 14:141–53. [PubMed: 24566914] 
Zhang et al.
Page 24
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 47. Yan F, Cao HW, Cover TL, Whitehead R, Washington MK, Polk DB. Soluble proteins produced by 
probiotic bacteria regulate intestinal epithelial cell survival and growth. Gastroenterology. 2007; 
132:562–75. [PubMed: 17258729] 
48. Maloy KJ, Powrie F. Intestinal homeostasis and its breakdown in inflammatory bowel disease. 
Nature. 2011; 474:298–306. [PubMed: 21677746] 
49. Marouga R, David S, Hawkins E. The development of the DIGE system: 2D fluorescence 
difference gel analysis technology. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2005; 382:669–78. [PubMed: 15900442] 
50. Kakhniashvili DG, Griko NB, Bulla LA, Goodman SR. The proteomics of sickle cell disease: 
Profiling of erythrocyte membrane proteins by 2D-DIGE and tandem mass spectrometry. Exp Biol 
Med. 2005; 230:787–92.
51. Leoni G, Neumann PA, Kamaly N, Quiros M, Nishio H, Jones HR, et al. Annexin A1-containing 
extracellular vesicles and polymeric nanoparticles promote epithelial wound repair. J Clin Invest. 
2015; 125:1215–27. [PubMed: 25664854] 
52. Headland SE, Jones HR, Norling LV, Kim A, Souza PR, Corsiero E, et al. Neutrophil-derived 
microvesicles enter cartilage and protect the joint in inflammatory arthritis. Sci Transl Med. 2015; 
7:315ra190.
53. Saxena NK, Taliaferro-Smith L, Knight BB, Merlin D, Anania FA, O’Regan RM, et al. 
Bidirectional Crosstalk between Leptin and Insulin-like Growth Factor-I Signaling Promotes 
Invasion and Migration of Breast Cancer Cells via Transactivation of Epidermal Growth Factor 
Receptor. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:9712–22. [PubMed: 19047149] 
54. Yang SY, Chen JY, Zhao D, Han DE, Chen XJ. Comparative study on preparative methods of DC-
Chol/DOPE liposomes and formulation optimization by determining encapsulation efficiency. Int J 
Pharm. 2012; 434:155–60. [PubMed: 22643228] 
55. Chassaing B, Srinivasan G, Delgado MA, Young AN, Gewirtz AT, Vijay-Kumar M. Fecal 
Lipocalin 2, a Sensitive and Broadly Dynamic Non-Invasive Biomarker for Intestinal 
Inflammation. Plos One. 2012; 7:e44328. [PubMed: 22957064] 
56. Davidson NJ, Leach MW, Fort MM, Thompson-Snipes L, Kühn R, Müller W, et al. T helper cell 1-
type CD4+ T cells, but not B cells, mediate colitis in interleukin 10-deficient mice. J Exp Med. 
1996; 184:241–51. [PubMed: 8691138] 
57. Kuhn R, Lohler J, Rennick D, Rajewsky K, Muller W. Interleukin-10-Deficient Mice Develop 
Chronic Enterocolitis. Cell. 1993; 75:263–74. [PubMed: 8402911] 
58. Viennois E, Baker MT, Xiao B, Wang LX, Laroui H, Merlin D. Longitudinal study of circulating 
protein biomarkers in inflammatory bowel disease. J Proteomics. 2015; 112:166–79. [PubMed: 
25230104] 
59. Dupaul-Chicoine J, Yeretssian G, Doiron K, Bergstrom KSB, McIntire CR, LeBlanc PM, et al. 
Control of Intestinal Homeostasis, Colitis, and Colitis-Associated Colorectal Cancer by the 
Inflammatory Caspases. Immunity. 2010; 32:367–78. [PubMed: 20226691] 
60. De Robertis M, Massi E, Poeta ML, Carotti S, Morini S, Cecchetelli L, et al. The AOM/DSS 
murine model for the study of colon carcinogenesis: From pathways to diagnosis and therapy 
studies. J Carcinog. 2011; 10:9. [PubMed: 21483655] 
61. Kawasaki H, Altieri DC, Lu CD, Toyoda M, Tenjo T, Tanigawa N. Inhibition of apoptosis by 
survivin predicts shorter survival rates in colorectal cancer. Cancer Res. 1998; 58:5071–4. 
[PubMed: 9823313] 
62. Wiczer BM, Thomas G. Phospholipase D and mTORC1: Nutrients Are What Bring Them 
Together. Sci Signal. 2012; 5
63. Record M. Exosome-like Nanoparticles From Food: Protective Nanoshuttles for Bioactive Cargo. 
Mol Ther. 2013; 21:1294–6. [PubMed: 23812547] 
64. Deol PK, Kaur IP. Improving the therapeutic efficiency of ginger extract for treatment of colon 
cancer using a suitably designed multiparticulate system. J Drug Target. 2013; 21:855–65. 
[PubMed: 23962278] 
65. Hsiang CY, Lo HY, Huang HC, Li CC, Wu SL, Ho TY. Ginger extract and zingerone ameliorated 
trinitrobenzene sulphonic acid-induced colitis in mice via modulation of nuclear factor-kappa B 
activity and interleukin-1 beta signalling pathway. Food Chem. 2013; 136:170–7. [PubMed: 
23017409] 
Zhang et al.
Page 25
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 66. Prasad S, Tyagi AK. Ginger and Its Constituents: Role in Prevention and Treatment of 
Gastrointestinal Cancer. Gastroenterol Res Pract. 2015; 2015:142179.
67. Utrilla MP, Peinado MJ, Ruiz R, Rodriguez-Nogales A, Algieri F, Rodriguez-Cabezas ME, et al. 
Pea (Pisum sativum L) seed albumin extracts show anti-inflammatory effect in the DSS model of 
mouse colitis. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2015; 59:807–19. [PubMed: 25626675] 
68. Fasolino I, Izzo AA, Clavel T, Romano B, Haller D, Borrelli F. Orally administered allyl sulfides 
from garlic ameliorate murine colitis. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2015; 59:434–42. [PubMed: 25488545] 
69. Noubade R, Wong K, Ota N, Rutz S, Eidenschenk C, Valdez PA, et al. NRROS negatively 
regulates reactive oxygen species during host defence and autoimmunity. Nature. 2014; 509:235–
239. [PubMed: 24739962] 
70. Rath E, Haller D. Mitochondria at the interface between danger signaling and metabolism: Role of 
unfolded protein responses in chronic inflammation. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2012; 18:1364–77. 
[PubMed: 22183876] 
71. Khounlotham M, Kim W, Peatman E, Nava P, Medina-Contreras O, Addis C, et al. Compromised 
Intestinal Epithelial Barrier Induces Adaptive Immune Compensation that Protects from Colitis. 
Immunity. 2012; 37:563–73. [PubMed: 22981539] 
72. Barrientos S, Stojadinovic O, Golinko MS, Brem H, Tomic-Canic M. Growth factors and cytokines 
in wound healing. Wound Repair Regen. 2008; 16:585–601. [PubMed: 19128254] 
73. Kamekura R, Nava P, Feng ML, Quiros M, Nishio H, Weber DA, et al. Inflammation-induced 
desmoglein-2 ectodomain shedding compromises the mucosal barrier. Mol Biol Cell. 2015; 
26:3165–77. [PubMed: 26224314] 
74. Parkkila S, Parkkila AK, Juvonen T, Rajaniemi H. Distribution of the Carbonic-Anhydrase 
Isoenzyme-I, Isoenzyme-Ii, and Isoenzyme-Vi in the Human Alimentary-Tract. Gut. 1994; 
35:646–50. [PubMed: 8200558] 
75. Coombes JL, Siddiqui KRR, Arancibia-Carcamo CV, Hall J, Sun CM, Belkaid Y, et al. A 
functionally specialized population of mucosal CD103(+) DCs induces Foxp3(+) regulatory T 
cells via a TGF-beta- and retinoic acid-dependent mechanism. J Exp Med. 2007; 204:1757–64. 
[PubMed: 17620361] 
76. Yamanishi H, Murakami H, Ikeda Y, Abe M, Kumagi T, Hiasa Y, et al. Regulatory Dendritic Cells 
Pulsed with Carbonic Anhydrase I Protect Mice from Colitis Induced by CD4(+)CD25(−) T Cells. 
J Immunol. 2012; 188:2164–72. [PubMed: 22291189] 
77. Mori K, Yamanishi H, Ikeda Y, Kumagi T, Hiasa Y, Matsuura B, et al. Oral administration of 
carbonic anhydrase I ameliorates murine experimental colitis induced by 
Foxp3(−)CD4(+)CD25(−) T cells. J Leukoc Biol. 2013; 93:963–72. [PubMed: 23547144] 
78. Kitano M, Kudo M, Yamao K, Takagi T, Sakamoto H, Komaki T, et al. Characterization of Small 
Solid Tumors in the Pancreas: The Value of Contrast-Enhanced Harmonic Endoscopic 
Ultrasonography. Am J Gastroenterol. 2012; 107:303–10. [PubMed: 22008892] 
79. Terzic J, Grivennikov S, Karin E, Karin M. Inflammation and Colon Cancer. Gastroenterology. 
2010; 138:2101–2114. [PubMed: 20420949] 
80. Rubin DC, Shaker A, Levin MS. Chronic intestinal inflammation: inflammatory bowel disease and 
colitis-associated colon cancer. Front Immunol. 2012; 3:107. [PubMed: 22586430] 
81. Arthur JC, Perez-Chanona E, Muhlbauer M, Tomkovich S, Uronis JM, Fan TJ, et al. Intestinal 
Inflammation Targets Cancer-Inducing Activity of the Microbiota. Science. 2012; 338:120–3. 
[PubMed: 22903521] 
82. Liang J, Nagahashi M, Kim EY, Harikumar KB, Yamada A, Huang WC, et al. Sphingosine-1-
Phosphate Links Persistent STAT3 Activation, Chronic Intestinal Inflammation, and Development 
of Colitis-Associated Cancer. Cancer Cell. 2013; 23:107–20. [PubMed: 23273921] 
83. Rogler G. Chronic ulcerative colitis and colorectal cancer. Cancer Lett. 2014; 345:235–41. 
[PubMed: 23941831] 
84. Kwon IK, Wang R, Thangaraju M, Shuang H, Liu K, Dashwood R, et al. PKG inhibits TCF 
signaling in colon cancer cells by blocking beta-catenin expression and activating FOXO4. 
Oncogene. 2010; 29:3423–34. [PubMed: 20348951] 
85. Browning DD, Kwon IK, Wang R. cGMP-dependent protein kinases as potential targets for colon 
cancer prevention and treatment. Future Med Chem. 2010; 2:65–80. [PubMed: 21426046] 
Zhang et al.
Page 26
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 86. Li SR, Gyselman VG, Dorudi S, Bustin SA. Elevated levels of RanBP7 mRNA in colorectal 
carcinoma are associated with increased proliferation and are similar to the transcription pattern of 
the proto-oncogene c-myc. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000; 271:537–43. [PubMed: 
10799331] 
87. Hrabakova R, Kollareddy M, Tyleckova J, Halada P, Hajduch M, Gadher SJ, et al. Cancer Cell 
Resistance to Aurora Kinase Inhibitors: Identification of Novel Targets for Cancer Therapy. J 
Proteome Res. 2013; 12:455–69. [PubMed: 23151231] 
88. Lin Y, Buckhaults PJ, Lee JR, Xiong HR, Farrell C, Podolsky RH, et al. Association of the Actin-
Binding Protein Transgelin with Lymph Node Metastasis in Human Colorectal Cancer. Neoplasia. 
2009; 11:864–U209. [PubMed: 19724680] 
89. Yeo M, Kim DK, Park HJ, Oh TY, Kim JH, Cho SW, et al. Loss of transgelin in repeated bouts of 
ulcerative colitis-induced colon carcinogenesis. Proteomics. 2006; 6:1158–65. [PubMed: 
16402363] 
Zhang et al.
Page 27
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 1. 
Characterization of GDNPs. (A) Three bands formed after sucrose gradient 
ultracentrifugation. Band 1 from the 8/30% interface (GDNPs 1) was visualized by TEM (B) 
and AFM (C). Band 2 from the 30/45% interface (GDNPs 2) was visualized by TEM (D) 
and AFM (E).
Zhang et al.
Page 28
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 2. 
Evaluation of the contents of 6-gingerol and 6-shogaol in ginger-derived nanoparticles 
(GDNPs) using HPLC/MS. Quantification of 6-gingerol and 6-shogaol in ginger derived 
nanopaticles, GDNPs 1 and GDNPs 2. The presence of GDNPs 1 and GDNPs 2 were 
confirmed by using standards and quantified using calibration curve for each individual 
component. (n=3).
Zhang et al.
Page 29
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 3. 
The effect of orally administered GDNPs 2 on the susceptibility of mice to DSS-induced 
colitis. (A) Lcn-2 level. (B) Spleen/body weight. (C) Colon length. (D) Quantification of 
colonic MPO activity in the distal colon. (E) Representative H&E-stained colons. 
Inflammatory cells in the lamina propria are indicated by arrowheads. (F) 
Immunofluorescence staining for E-cadherin in representative inflamed areas of the colon. 
(G) Colonic levels of cytokine mRNAs were quantified by real-time RT-PCR and 
normalized with respect to the mRNA level of the ribosomal protein, 36B4. (H) Protein 
levels of colon-secreted cytokines were quantified by ELISA. For all panels: *p < 0.05, **p 
< 0.01, ***p < 0.001; ns, not significant; scale bar = 100 μm; n=5.
Zhang et al.
Page 30
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 4. 
Assess the biocompatibility of GDNPs in vitro. (A) MTT cell proliferation assay was used to 
assess the potential toxicity of GDNPs 2 in colon-26 and RAW 264.7 macrophage-like cell 
lines. (B) Barrier function assay was used to determine the influence of GDNPs 2 to the 
barrier function on caco2-BBE monolayer. (C) At the end of barrier function assay, PBS 
treated cells were stained with phalloidin-TRITC. Scale Bar=20 μm. (D) At the end of 
barrier function assay, GDNPs 2 (100 μg/mL) treated cells were stained with phalloidin-
TRITC. Scale Bar=20 μm. (E) Cytotoxicity effect of GDNPs 2 on colon-26 cells and RAW 
264.7 mouse macrophages after 24 h incubation were measured by FACS. Colon-26 and 
RAW 264.7 cells were incubated with indicated concentrations of GDNPs 2 for 24 h and 
then stained with Annexin-V/PI to detect the cell death. Lower left, viable cells (Annexin-
V−/PI−); lower right, early apoptotic cells (Annexin-V+/PI−); upper left, necrotic cells 
(Annexin-V−/PI+); upper right, late apoptotic cells (Annexin-V+/PI+). (n=3).
Zhang et al.
Page 31
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 5. 
Oral administration of GDNPs does not induce side effects at the local or systemic level. 
Mice (N=5) were oral administrated with GDNPs 2 of 0.3 mg/day for 7 days. (A) Colonic 
myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity. (B) Quantify proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-6 and 
IL-1β) at mRNA level. (C) Quantify proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-1β) at 
protein level. (D) H&E stain, IEC proliferation and IEC apoptosis examination in colonic 
tissues. Scale Bar=100 μm. (n=5).
Zhang et al.
Page 32
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 6. 
Quantification of uptake efficiency of GDNPs 2 by epithelial cells and macrophages in vivo 
using flow cytometry. (A) Colonic epithelial cells (EpCAM+), isolated and gated based on 
EpCAM. (B) Dendritic cells (CD11c+), gated based on CD11c. (C) Macrophages 
(CD11b+F4/80+), gated based on CD11b and F4/80. (D) DiO-positive cells among 
Cd11b+F4/80+ macrophages. For control, epithelial cells (EpCAM+), dendritic cells 
(CD11c+) and macrophages (CD11b+F4/80+) cells were isolated from normal mice without 
GDNPs 2 oral administration using the same method. (n=3).
Zhang et al.
Page 33
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 7. 
The uptake of GDNPs 2 by epithelial-like (colon-26) and macrophage-like (macrophage 
264.7) cells in vitro. (A) Colon-26 cells labeled with DAPI (blue channel) and phalloidin-
FITC (green channel). (B) Colon-26 cells incubated with DiL-GDNPs 2 and then labeled 
with DAPI and phalloidin-FITC. (C) Macrophage cells labeled with DAPI and phalloidin-
FITC. (D) Macrophage cells incubated with DiL-GDNPs 2 and then labeled with DAPI and 
phalloidin-FITC.
Zhang et al.
Page 34
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 8. 
Effect of GDNPs 2 in in vitro and in vivo wound-healing models. (A) GDNPs 2 accelerate 
healing in wounded intestinal epithelial monolayers using ECIS technology. (B) Body 
weight changes. (C) Lcn-2 changes. (D) MPO activity changes. (E) H&E-staining. 
Inflammatory cells in the lamina propria are indicated by arrowheads. Scale bar = 100 μm. 
(n=5).
Zhang et al.
Page 35
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 9. 
Measurement of mRNA and protein levels of various cytokines in the DSS-induced mouse 
model of wound healing. (A) Cytokine mRNAs were quantified by real-time PCR. (B) 
Cytokines proteins were quantified by ELISA kits. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001. 
(n=5).
Zhang et al.
Page 36
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 10. 
Effect of GDNPs 2 on chronic colitis in IL10−/− mice. (A) Spleen/body weight. (B) Colon 
length. (C) MPO activity. (D) Representative H&E-stained colon sections. Inflammatory 
cells in the lamina propria are indicated by arrowheads. (E) Pro-inflammatory cytokines 
mRNAs were quantified by real-time RT-PCR. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001; ns, not 
significant. Scale bar = 100 μm. (n=7)
Zhang et al.
Page 37
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 11. 
Effect of GDNPs 2 on colitis-associated cancer (CAC). (A) Protocol for CAC induction. 
Mice were administered GDNPs 2 (0.3 mg/dose) daily in treatment group. (B) Colon tumor/
mouse, tumor load, tumor size and tumor distribution were obtained at the end of the CAC 
protocol. (C) MPO activities mRNA levels of cytokines and cyclin D1 were quantified. (D) 
Apoptosis of cells was quantified by TUNEL assay (FITC, green color) and nuclei were 
stained with DAPI (blue). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001; ns, not significant. Scale bar 
= 100 μm. (n=5).
Zhang et al.
Page 38
Biomaterials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
