 C A N C E R D I A GN O S T I C S
Copyright © 2017
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim
to original U.S.
Government Works.
Nondestructive tissue analysis for ex vivo
and in vivo cancer diagnosis using a handheld
mass spectrometry system
Jialing Zhang,1 John Rector,1,2 John Q. Lin,1 Jonathan H. Young,1 Marta Sans,1 Nitesh Katta,2
Noah Giese,1 Wendong Yu,3 Chandandeep Nagi,3 James Suliburk,4 Jinsong Liu,5
Alena Bensussan,1 Rachel J. DeHoog,1 Kyana Y. Garza,1 Benjamin Ludolph,1 Anna G. Sorace,6
Anum Syed,2 Aydin Zahedivash,2 Thomas E. Milner,2 Livia S. Eberlin1*
Conventional methods for histopathologic tissue diagnosis are labor- and time-intensive and can delay decision-
making during diagnostic and therapeutic procedures. We report the development of an automated and bio-
compatible handheld mass spectrometry device for rapid and nondestructive diagnosis of human cancer tissues.
The device, named MasSpec Pen, enables controlled and automated delivery of a discrete water droplet to a tissue
surface for efficient extraction of biomolecules. We used the MasSpec Pen for ex vivo molecular analysis of 20 human
cancer thin tissue sections and 253 human patient tissue samples including normal and cancerous tissues from breast,
lung, thyroid, and ovary. The mass spectra obtained presented rich molecular profiles characterized by a variety of
potential cancer biomarkers identified as metabolites, lipids, and proteins. Statistical classifiers built from the histolog-
ically validated molecular database allowed cancer prediction with high sensitivity (96.4%), specificity (96.2%), and
overall accuracy (96.3%), as well as prediction of benign and malignant thyroid tumors and different histologic sub-
types of lung cancer. Notably, our classifier allowed accurate diagnosis of cancer in marginal tumor regions presenting
mixed histologic composition. Last, we demonstrate that the MasSpec Pen is suited for in vivo cancer diagnosis during
surgery performed in tumor-bearing mouse models, without causing any observable tissue harm or stress to the
animal. Our results provide evidence that the MasSpec Pen could potentially be used as a clinical and intraoperative
technology for ex vivo and in vivo cancer diagnosis.
INTRODUCTION
Tissue assessment and diagnosis are critical in the clinical management
of cancer patients. Tissue diagnosis is particularly important during
surgical excision of solid cancers for surgical margin evaluation. Many
women diagnosed with breast cancer, for example, undergo breast-
conserving surgery, which involves removing the lesion of interest with
a rim of normal tissue and preserving the rest of the breast. One of the
greatest challenges a breast cancer surgeon faces is determining the del-
icate boundary between cancerous and normal tissues to achieve nega-
tive margins for invasive and carcinoma in situ while optimizing aesthetic
outcomes (1). Similarly, optimal surgical treatment of lung carcinomas
includes complete local resection of the primary tumor (2) because ad-
verse patient outcome is strongly associated with residual tumor at the
bronchial resection margin (3). For high-grade serous ovarian cancer
(HGSC) patients, postoperative residual disease after surgical debulking
is also negatively associated with progression-free survival and response
to adjuvant chemotherapy (4). Thus, accurate negative margin assessment
and complete tumor excision are highly desirable across cancer surgeries
because they offer the greatest potential for prolonged disease-free and
overall survival (1, 5–7).
Intraoperative assessment of the extent of tumor involvement can be
challenging through conventional histopathologic analysis of frozen
sections. Frozen section preparation is time- and labor-intensive and
requires skilled technicians and pathologists to produce and interpret
the results. Moreover, freezing artifacts can negatively interfere with
tissue structure and cell morphology, thus complicating pathological in-
terpretation. Logistically, intraoperative frozen section analysis prolongs
operative time, subjecting the patient to increased risks related to ex-
tended anesthesia. Therefore, margin specimens are frequently processed
postoperatively as permanent specimens. However, when positive
margins are found during the final pathologic evaluation, the patient
is subjected to additional surgical procedures for re-excision of the in-
volved margin, which increases health care costs and places the patient
at risk for additional surgical complications, discomfort, and anxiety (1, 8).
Molecular analysis of cancer tissues offers the exciting opportunity
to incorporate cancer-specific biomarkers into clinical decision-making
forimproved cancerdetectionanddiagnosis. Severalmolecularimaging
technologies have been developed and advanced to preclinical and clin-
ical phases for ex vivo and in vivo tissue diagnosis. Immunohisto-
chemistry protocols targeting protein biomarkers are routinely used in
diagnostic pathology for postoperative evaluation of ex vivo tissue sec-
tions and typing of neoplasms (9). Gene sequencing technologies are
powerful for postoperative identification of specific genetic mutations
and chromosomal translocations in ex vivo tissue samples (10). Intra-
operative real-time techniques including fluorescent probes that target
tumor cells are currently being implemented for in vivo tumor and sur-
gical margin visualization (11). Emerging optical technologies including
Raman spectroscopy and stimulated Raman scattering microscopy
have been recently applied for intraoperative diagnosis of brain cancers
(12, 13). Mass spectrometry (MS) imaging approaches have been suc-
cessfully applied for molecular imaging of cancer tissues (14–17).
Within the last decade, several ambient ionization MS techniques
have been developed for rapid molecular diagnosis of cancer tissues
1Department of Chemistry, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA. 2De-
partment of Biomedical Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712,
USA. 3Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
TX 77030, USA. 4Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030,
USA. 5Department of Pathology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. 6Department of Internal Medicine, Dell Medical School, Uni-
versity of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: liviase@utexas.edu
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Zhang et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan3968 (2017)
6 September 2017
1 of 11
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 and have shown exceptional potential for clinical use (18). Desorption
electrospray ionization MS imaging (DESI-MSI), for example, has been
used for ex vivo cancer diagnosis and surgicalmargin evaluation of tissue
sections and tissue smears (19, 20). Yet, technical incompatibilities in-
cluding the use of a spray of organic solvents, high-pressure nebulizing
gas, and high voltage have prevented the use of DESI-MSI for fresh tissue
and in vivo analyses. A few approaches for direct MS analysis of cancer
tissue specimens have been developed (18). Rapid evaporative ionization
MS, or the iKnife, combines an electrocauterization device with MS for
direct tissue analysis and classification and has been successfully used
intraoperatively for in vivo cancer diagnosis (21, 22). Ultraviolet and in-
frared lasers have also been coupled with MS for characterization of
cancer tissues (23, 24). Although these approaches offer the advantage
of incorporatingcommon surgicalmethodsintoanMS-baseddiagnostic
workflow,thesetechnologiesrelyontissue damageto produce molecular
ions or are operationally constrained to a specific surgical modality.
Here, we describe the development and application of an automated,
biocompatible, disposable handheld device, the MasSpec Pen, for direct,
real-time nondestructive sampling and molecular diagnosis of tissues.
We tested the MasSpec Pen for ex vivo molecular evaluation of human
normal and cancerous tissue samples from 253 patients. The mass
spectra obtained presented rich molecular information including diag-
nostic metabolites, lipids, and proteins. Statistical analysis using the least
absolute shrinkage and selector operator (Lasso) technique allowed pre-
diction of cancer with high sensitivity and specificity (25). In a tumor-
bearing mouse model, we demonstrate that this technology is suited for
in vivo use and diagnosis of breast cancer during surgery.
RESULTS
Optimization of the MasSpec Pen design and operation
We designed the MasSpec Pen (Fig. 1A) as an automated and bio-
compatible handheld sampling probe that allows gentle and time- and
volume-controlled extraction of molecules from a tissue sample using
a discrete water droplet (movie S1). Several prototypes of the system
were engineered with the goal of minimizing tissue damage, maximizing
tissue-analyte extraction, and maximizing solvent transfer to the mass
spectrometer.The optimizedsystemcontainsthreeprimarycomponents:
(i) a syringe pump that is programmed to deliver a defined water vol-
ume (4 to 10 ml) to the sampling probe; (ii) small diameter [inner diam-
eter (ID), 800 mm] polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) tubing conduits,
which are integrated to a fast (8 ms) two-way pinch valves for controlled
solvent transport from the pump to the tissue and from the tissue to the
mass spectrometer; and (iii) a handheld pen-sized probe for direct
sampling of biological tissues.
The main component of the handheld pen-sized probe is a three-
dimensional (3D) printed polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) tip (Fig. 1B).
The probe tip is designed withthree ports: an incoming port that delivers
a single water droplet to the probe tip (conduit 1), a central port for gas
(N2, CO2, or air) delivery (conduit 2), and an outgoing port to transport
molecular constituents in the water droplet from the tissue to the mass
spectrometer (conduit 3). At the probe tip, all ports combine into a small
reservoir where a single water droplet is retained and exposed to the
tissue sample for a controlled amount of time (3 s), allowing efficient
analyte extraction. After the 3-s extraction period, the MasSpec Pen is
removed from the tissue. Concomitantly, conduit 3 is opened, allowing
vacuum extraction of the droplet to the mass spectrometer, whereas
positive pressure from a low-pressure gas delivery (<10 psi) is provided
through conduit 2 (Fig. 1C). The gas provided by the second tube does
not participate in the extraction process but is used instead to prevent
the collapse of the system due to the vacuum used and to assist solvent
transport from the tissue to the mass spectrometer. A subsequent flush
step cleans the system; this is not used for extraction of biomolecules
from tissues because there is no contact with the tissue during this pe-
riod. Conduit 3 is directly connected to the transfer tube of a high–mass
resolution Orbitrap mass spectrometer so that the negative pressure
of the mass spectrometer vacuum system drives the movement of the
droplet from the reservoir to the mass spectrometer for ionization and
mass analysis. This setup simplifies the operational steps and precludes
the use of ionization sources, although various connection and ioniza-
tion methods could be coupled to our system.
The diameter of the reservoir at the probe tip determines the volume
of solvent exposed to the tissue and the spatial resolution of the device.
Using current tooling, we have designed MasSpec Pen tips with sam-
pling sizes ranging from 1.5 to 5.0 mm, which is determined by the
reservoir diameter. At a 2.77-mm reservoir diameter, a solvent vol-
ume of 10 ml is retained in the reservoir and contacts the tissue sample
for a defined time period, whereas 4.4 ml is retained in a reservoir with a
1.5-mm diameter. Contact times of 1, 3, and 5 s between the droplet and
the tissue sample were evaluated (fig. S1). The 3-s contact time was
selected for all the experiments because it allowed ease of operation
by the user and yielded mass spectra with sufficient total ion intensity.
A tube length of 1.5 m was used for all the conduits to allow free
handheld use of the device by an operator without geometrical or spatial
constraints.
The tip design using three conduit tubes and high-speed actuated
pinch valves allowed precise control of droplet motion and showed ex-
cellent performance and robustness. The entire process from sampling
to mass spectral acquisition is completed in 10 s or less and is automated
using an Arduino microcontroller so that each acquisition and analysis
is individually triggered through a one-step click using a foot pedal. Sys-
tem automation ensures that each solvent droplet is delivered separately
to the inlet, yielding several mass spectra that are averaged for a final
molecular profile of the sample. Controlled droplet delivery allowed
the mass spectrometer to operate without any evident performance deg-
radation. After each use, the MasSpec Pen was cleaned through a rapid
and automated cleaning flush or by replacing the disposable tip. Con-
tamination of the mass spectrometer was evaluated by installing com-
mercially heated ESI source and acquiring mass spectra after the
MasSpec Pen analysis. No lipid contamination was observed other than
background peaks commonly observed in the mass spectra.
Molecular analysis of thin tissue sections using the
MasSpec Pen
We tested the effectiveness of the MasSpec Pen by analyzing thin mouse
and human tissue sections and pieces of tissue samples. First, 16-mm-
thick tissue sections were analyzed on standard histologic glass slides
following the operational steps described above for the MasSpec Pen,
using pure water as the solvent. Several probe tips with different reser-
voir diameters of the MasSpec Pen were tested, yielding mass spectra
presenting lipid species characteristic of mouse brain tissue gray matter,
white matter, or mixed composition for larger sampling sizes (fig. S2)
(26). Figure S3 shows a representative mass spectrum obtained in the
negative ion mode using a 2.7-mm pen tip from the gray matter region
of a mouse brain tissue section and a representative background mass
spectrum obtained from a region of glass slide (no sample).
The negative ion mode mass spectrum obtained from the glass slide
region presented background ions from a mass/charge ratio (m/z) of
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Zhang et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan3968 (2017)
6 September 2017
2 of 11
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 120 to 400, corresponding to common solvent clusters and chemical
contaminants present on the glass slide or within the mass spectrom-
eter. The negative ion mode mass spectrum obtained from the gray
matter region of the mouse brain tissue section presented rich mo-
lecular information, including a variety of ions corresponding to de-
protonated or chloride adducts of lipid species commonly detected
from biological tissues using solvent-based ambient ionization MS
techniques (16). Peaks at high relative abundances were identified
as fatty acids (FA) from m/z 120 to 350, sphingolipids such as sulfa-
tides from m/z 700 to 1100 and chloride adducts of ceramides (Cer)
from m/z 500 to 700, and glycerophospholipids (GL) such as glycer-
ophosphoinositols (PI), glycerophosphoethanolamines (PE), glycer-
ophosphoserines (PS), and doubly charged cardiolipins (CL) from
m/z 700 to 1100. In the higher mass range from m/z 1100 to 1800,
GL dimers and singly charged CL were observed. A variety of peaks
tentatively identified as small metabolites including glutamine at
m/z 145.061, glutamate at m/z 146.045, N-acetylaspartic acid at
m/z 174.041, and chloride adduct of hexose at m/z 215.033 were
detected in the lower mass range from m/z 120 to 250, based on high–
mass accuracy measurements and tandem MS data (table S1). The
negative ion mode mass spectra obtained from the gray matter from
different tissue sections of the same mouse brain were reproducible
[relative standard deviation (RSD) = 9.3%; n = 9], comparable to what
has been reported using the same method for DESI-MSI (RSD = 8.0%;
n = 5) (26).
In the positive ion mode, the mass spectrum obtained presented
high relative abundances of commonly observed molecular species
identified as diacylglycerols, PE, and glycerophosphocholines (fig. S4).
Tentative assignments were performed using high–mass accuracy mea-
surements, as well as tandem MS analysis when adequate intensity of
fragment ions was achieved for structural interpretation (see Identi-
fication of molecular ions in the Supplementary Materials). Mass errors
and the m/z of fragment ions obtained by tandem MS experiments
are described for all the species identified throughout the study (tables
S1 to S5). Because isomerism of the double bonds in the FA chains of
complex lipids complicates precise structural assignment, FA chains
were tentatively assigned for lipid species.
To evaluate the extraction efficiency and molecular profiles ob-
tained, we compared the molecular species detected in the negative
ion mode using the MasSpec Pen with those observed in DESI-MSI
acquired from a serial tissue section of the same mouse brain using
water as the solvent and under analogous experimental conditions. The
mass spectra obtained using the MasSpec Pen and DESI-MSI were
similar with a calculated cosine similarity of 0.9 (see Data analysis in
the Supplementary Materials), sharing a large number of molecular
species at comparable relative abundances and signal-to-noise ratios
(fig. S5). Other solvent systems including mixtures of water with eth-
anol at various ratios were also explored as solvent systems for the
MasSpec Pen. The mass spectraobtained presented similarlipidspecies
to those observed in those obtained using pure water, with variations in
their relative abundances (fig. S6). To ensure full biocompatibility of our
device, we selected water as the solvent for all subsequent MasSpec Pen
experiments performed.
We then tested the capability of the MasSpec Pen to analyze 20 thin
tissue sections of human breast tissues (n = 5 normal breast and 5 breast
ductal carcinoma tissues) and thyroid tissues [n = 5 normal thyroid, 4
papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), and 1 follicular thyroid adenoma
(FTA) tissues]. The mass spectra obtained in the negative ion mode
for each tissue type presented arichvariety of molecular ionscommonly
observed from human tissues by DESI-MSI (18), with high relative
abundances of metabolites, FA, and complex lipids. For example, the
mass spectra obtained for PTC tissue sections presented lipid species
Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the MasSpec Pen system and operational steps. (A) The pen-sized handheld device is directly integrated into a laboratory-built MS
interface through PTFE tubing. The integrated MS interface houses the pinch valves, microcontroller, and tubing to connect the system to the mass spectrometer inlet.The system
is triggered by the user through a foot pedal. (B) The MasSpec Pen (handheld device) is designed with a PDMS tip and three PTFE conduits, which provide incoming water (1) and
gas (2) to the tip and an outgoing conduit for the water droplet (3). (C) The tip contacts the tissue for analysis. Inset shows the three conduits (1 to 3) and solvent reservoir (4) within
the tip. When the system is triggered (t = 0 s) by using the foot pedal, the syringe pump delivers a controlled volume of water to the reservoir. The discrete water droplet interacts
with the tissue to extract the molecules (t = 2 s). After 3 s of extraction, the vacuum and the gas conduits are concomitantly opened (arrows) to transport the droplet from the
MasSpec Pen to the mass spectrometer through the tubing system for molecular analysis.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Zhang et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan3968 (2017)
6 September 2017
3 of 11
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 previously identified as diagnostic markers by DESI-MSI (27), includ-
ing a variety of doubly charged CL and other GL such as PI(38:4)
(m/z 885.550), PI(36:4) (m/z 857.518), PE(38:4) (m/z 766.539), and PE
(36:2) (m/z 742.539) (table S2). A distinct mass spectral profile was ob-
tained for the normal thyroid tissue sections, presenting high relative
abundances of iodine (m/z 126.904), glutamine (m/z 145.050), ascorbic
acid (m/z 175.024), C36H78O9N3I (tentatively assigned; m/z 822.472),
and PI(38:4) (m/z 885.551) (Fig. 2). A series of multiply charged molec-
ular ions at different charge states (z) including m/z 991.091 (z = −5),
m/z 1239.113 (z = −4), and m/z 1652.484 (z = −3) were detected in the
mass spectra obtained from all tissue sections analyzed. These ions were
tentatively identified as different charge states of the protein thymosin
b-4 based on high–mass accuracy measurements (fig. S7 and table S1).
Principal components analysis (PCA) performed on the data obtained
from the human tissue sections showed separation between tumor and
normal tissues (fig. S8).
Nondestructive molecular analysis of tissue samples
The MasSpec Pen was designed to operate directly on tissue specimens
independently of tissue stiffness and morphology. We tested the
performance of the MasSpec Pen to analyze soft tissue samples (0.1
to 5 g) from different organs including mouse brain and human breast,
thyroid, lung, and ovary tissues. Tissue analyses were performed under
ambient conditions through a simple one-step experiment, following
the same operational steps described previously. The MasSpec Pen tip
was gently brought into contact with the surface of the tissue sample for
a period of 3 s during which extraction took place. The mass spectra
obtained for a region of gray matter probed from a piece of fresh mouse
brain tissue were reproducible (RSD = 4.6%; n = 10) and highly similar
to the mouse brain tissue section mass spectra (cosine similarity of 0.93),
indicating that the extraction process at the tissue surface occurs inde-
pendently of the tissue shape and rigidity (fig. S9). MasSpec Pen analyses
of human tissue samples provided similar rich molecular information,
especiallyof tissuescomposedof epithelialandcancerouscells.Noncan-
cerous tissue specimens that were mostly composed of soft connective
tissue such as stroma provided less abundant mass spectra. Many of the
normal breast tissue samples analyzed presented abundant fat content,
which is immiscible with water and thus yielded lower total ion counts
in the mass spectra when compared to breast cancer tissues or normal
breast cancer glands.
Visual and microscopic inspection of the tissue samples after the
MasSpec Pen analysis revealed no detectable damage to the tissue mor-
phology in the region probed. Figure 3A shows optical images obtained
from a lung tissue sample before, during, and after the MasSpec Pen
analysis. No observable damage to the tissue was seen at the region ana-
lyzed, and rich mass spectra were obtained (Fig. 3B). The automated and
time-controlled operational steps of the MasSpec Pen prevent tissue
damage because the tissue is only exposed to the small water droplet
and not to the vacuum used to transport the droplet from the reser-
voir to the mass spectrometer. These results provide evidence that
the MasSpec Pen can obtain rich molecular information from tissue
samples nondestructively.
Fig. 2. MasSpec Pen analysis of PTC and normal thyroid tissue sections. (A) A representative negative ion mode MasSpec Pen mass spectra obtained from a normal human
thyroid tissue section (average of n = 5 mass spectra) and (B) a PTC tissue section (average of n = 4 mass spectra) are shown. Identification of the most abundant molecular ions is
provided. Insets shows an optical image of the H&E-stained tissue sections evaluated by histopathology.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Zhang et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan3968 (2017)
6 September 2017
4 of 11
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Molecular diagnosis and statistical prediction of cancer in
human tissues
We next evaluated whether the molecular information obtained from
human tissue samples using the MasSpec Pen was diagnostic and pre-
dictive of disease state. We analyzed a total of 253 human tissue speci-
mens using the MasSpec Pen, including 95 lung samples (47 normal
and 48 cancer samples including 17 adenocarcinoma, 17 squamous cell
carcinoma, and 14 cancer samples of other histologic subtypes), 57
ovary samples (29 normal and 28 HGSC samples), 56 thyroid samples
(27 normal, 11 FTA, and 18 PTC samples), and 45 breast samples (29
normal and 16 ductal carcinoma samples). Patient demographic in-
formation is provided in table S6. After the MasSpec Pen analysis, the
region analyzed was demarcated and registered through a series of
optical images. Parallel pieces of the samples were frozen, sectioned at
the demarcated region, hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)–stained, and
evaluated by histopathology to derive a diagnosis. Only samples with
a predominant cell composition and clear diagnosis were used to build
molecular databases. The histologically validated mass spectra obtained
for the cancerous samples presented molecular species identified as
several lipids and metabolites previously described as potential disease
markers using ambient ionization MS techniques. For the lung cancer
tissue,characteristicmolecularmarkerssuchasPI(36:1)(asm/z863.565),
PG(36:2) (m/z 773.542), PG(34:1) (m/z 747.514), and FA(18:1)
(m/z 281.249) were observed (Fig. 3B and table S4). For the normal
lung, m/z 885.550, identified as PI(38:4), and m/z 744.552, identified
as PE(36:1), were observed. The mass spectra obtained for breast cancer
tissue presented diagnostic lipid markers previously described by DESI-
MSI (28, 29), including m/z 885.550, identified as PI(38:4), m/z 863.565,
identified as PI(36:1), m/z 773.542, identified as PG(36:2), and several
FA such as m/z 303.233, identified as FA(20:4), and m/z 281.249, iden-
tified as FA(18:1) (table S5). PCA performed on the data obtained from
the 253 human tissue samples analyzed showed separation between
cancer and normal tissues for each organ (Fig. 4).
To evaluate whether the MasSpec Pen molecular signatures are pre-
dictive of cancer and normal tissues, we applied the Lasso method to
build classification models using the histologically validated mass spec-
tral database. The performance of the model was evaluated through a
leave-one-patient-out cross-validation approach and was measured by
sensitivity and specificity for cancer, as well as accuracy and the area
under the curve (AUC) (Table 1). For breast cancer (n = 45), 87.5%
sensitivity, 100% specificity (AUC = 1.0), and an overall accuracy of
95.6% were achieved, which is comparable to the results reported using
DESI-MSI (98.2% accuracy; n = 126) (29), the iKnife (95.5% accuracy;
n = 10) (22), and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization imaging
of lipids and proteins (94.1% accuracy; n = 68) (30). For HGSC (n = 57),
100% sensitivity, 89.7% specificity, and 94.7% accuracy were achieved
(AUC = 0.98), which is also similar to classification results obtained by
DESI-MSI (97.1% accuracy; n = 31) (31). For lung cancer (n = 96),
97.9% sensitivity, 95.7% specificity, and 96.8% accuracy were achieved
(AUC = 0.97). When predicting on the basis of lung cancer histologic
subtypes, 93.8 and 92.2% accuracy was achieved for squamous cell car-
cinoma and adenocarcinoma, respectively. Thyroid tumor samples in-
vestigated included benign FTA and malignant PTC samples. A classifier
for each was built, yielding 94.7% accuracy for FTA and 97.8% accuracy
for PTC. Overall, 96.4% sensitivity, 96.2% specificity, and 96.3% accuracy
were achieved for all four types of cancer investigated. These results
demonstrate that the molecular information obtained from human
tissue samples by the MasSpec Pen can be used to identify cancer and
indicate that the statistical classifiers built are robust and may be
used in an automated approach for rapid clinical diagnosis of tissue
samples.
Intrasample analysis of histologically distinct and cancer
margin tissue regions
We evaluated the ability of the MasSpec Pen to identify histologically
distinct regions in a single human tissue sample that contained regions
of HGSC adjacent to normal ovarian stroma tissue. Five regions of the
tissue sample were analyzed consecutively using a MasSpec Pen with a
1.5-mm probe tip diameter, as demarcated in the optical image shown
in Fig. 5A. A tissue section of the sample including the regions analyzed
by the MasSpec Pen was subjected to H&E staining and evaluated by
histopathology. Regions 1 and 2 were diagnosed by histopathology as
normal stroma, whereas regions 4 and 5 were diagnosed as HGSC.
Region 3 was in the margin between the cancer and normal stroma
tissue regions, presenting ~50% tumor tissue and ~50% normal stroma
tissue (Fig. 5A, inset). Figure 5B shows the mass spectra obtained for
regions 1, 3, and 5. The spectra obtained for region 5, HGSC, presented
characteristic lipid markers detected in the HGSC tissues analyzed
ex vivo to build our statistical classifier (table S3). The mass spectra
Fig. 3. Nondestructive molecular analysis of human tissue samples using the
MasSpec Pen. (A) Optical images show a lung adenocarcinoma tissue sample before,
during, and after the MasSpec Pen analysis. A magnification of the tissue specimen
(inset) shows no macroscopic damage to the tissue region analyzed by the MasSpec
Pen. (B) Negative ion mode mass spectrum obtained for the tissue region analyzed
including the identification of the most abundant molecular ions.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Zhang et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan3968 (2017)
6 September 2017
5 of 11
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 obtained for region 1, diagnosed as normal ovarian stroma tissue, pres-
ented less abundant molecular ions as also observed for the other stroma
tissues analyzed ex vivo. Region 3 presented molecular profiles
characteristic of HGSC with lower total abundance due to the contribu-
tion of normal stroma tissue present within the region analyzed. The
mass spectra obtained for the five regions were then evaluated by our
ovarian cancer molecular classifier as an independent validation set.
Our classifier correctly identified regions 1 and 2 as normal and regions
3 to 5 as cancer (Fig. 5C). Similar results were obtained for a different
tissue sample with histologically distinct regions (fig. S10). These results
show that the molecular information obtained by the MasSpec Pen can
be used to detect cancer in marginal regions with mixed composition of
normal and cancer cells.
In vivo analysis of a murine model of human breast cancer
during surgery
The MasSpec Pen was designed with biocompatible materials to ensure
full compatibility as an in vivo molecular diagnostic tool. We tested the
MasSpec Pen for in vivo tissue analysis using a murine model of human
breast cancer. BT474 human epidermal growth factor receptor 2–
positive (HER2+) breast cancer cells were implanted subcutaneously in
nude athymic mice (n = 3). The tumors were grown to an average of
250 mm3 over a period of 4 weeks. Under anesthesia, the skin overlying
the tumors was dissected away, and several tissue regions were analyzed
following the same automated experimental steps described previously,
including multiple positions of the top of the tumor, the core of the tu-
mor after partial tumor resection, and adjacent normal soft connective
tissue. Figure 6A shows an optical image of the animal under anesthesia
before initiation of surgery, before analysis (after surgical removal of the
skin), during the MasSpec Pen analysis, and after the analysis. The mass
spectra obtained for the tumor regions presented many molecular species
observedinhumanbreasttissue,withadistinctiveprofile from what was
obtained for adjacent nor-
mal soft connective tissue
regions (Fig. 6B). Using
optical microscopy, no ob-
servable macroscopic or
microscopic damage to the
tissueregionsanalyzedwere
detected due to MasSpec
Pen analyses, as evident
from theopticalimagesob-
tained of the H&E-stained
tissue sections (fig. S11).
Further, no apparent ef-
fects to the health of the
animals were observed due
to the MasSpec Pen analy-
sis during surgery. After
in vivo analysis, freshly ex-
cised tumor specimens
were also analyzed ex vivo,
yielding mass spectra with
common lipid species to
those observed during in
vivo analysis despite varia-
tionsinrelativeabundances,
which are likely due to the
reanalysis process of the
same tissue region (fig. S12). These results suggest that the MasSpec
Pen is suitable for in vivo molecular evaluation and cancer diagnosis.
DISCUSSION
We developed the MasSpec Pen as an automated and biocompatible
handheld sampling probe that allows gentle and time- and volume-
controlled extraction of molecules from a tissue sample using a discrete
water droplet. Our results provide evidence that the MasSpec Pen is
suited for rapid ex vivo and in vivo cancer diagnosis of tissue samples.
The mass spectra obtained from the analysis of 20 thin tissue sections
and 253 human tissue samples presented rich molecular information
that is diagnostic of disease state. The chemical extraction process used
is gentle so that the tissue is undamaged after molecular analysis. Statis-
tical classifiers built from the mass spectra obtained provided high sen-
sitivity and specificity for cancer detection (>96%), including prediction
of histologic subtypes of lung cancer and benign and malignant thyroid
tumors. Experimentsperformedin animalmodelsdemonstrate thatthis
technology is suitable for in vivo molecular evaluation of cancer and
normal tissues without causing observable tissue harm or evident stress
to the animal.
The MasSpec Pen provides rich mass spectra from biological sam-
ples characterized by a variety of singly and doubly charged ions of
lipids and metabolites and multiply charged protein ions, similar to
those obtained by DESI-MSI and ESI methods. A liquid-solid chemical
extraction process is used to sample molecules from the tissue using a
water droplet, without assistance from a gas or a strong electric field.
Our results show that by depositing a discrete water droplet onto a
tissue sample for a determined amount of time, efficient extraction
of biomolecules is achieved while tissue integrity is preserved (Figs. 3
and 6). The extraction process is similar to that reported for liquid ex-
traction surface analysis (32), liquid microjunction surface sampling
Fig. 4. PCA of the data obtained from human tissue samples using the MasSpec Pen. A total of 253 patient tissue samples were
analyzed including breast (n = 45), thyroid (n = 56), ovary (n = 57), and lung (n = 96) cancer and normal tissue samples. 3D PCA (PC1,
PC2, and PC3) score plots are shown for each tissue type. The first three PCs explain the 77, 69, 51, and 87% of the total variance of breast,
thyroid, lung, and ovarian data sets, respectively.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Zhang et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan3968 (2017)
6 September 2017
6 of 11
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 probe (33), and nanoDESI (34), although the latter two techniques use a
continuous flow of solvent onto a sample surface, whereas the MasSpec
Pen uses a single water droplet for extraction. In our current system,
the water droplet containing analytes is transported as a liquid sample
to the mass spectrometer and directly introduced to an extended trans-
fer tube, which is connected to the heated inlet. Vaporization and
ionization occur in the inlet region of the mass spectrometer, similar
to what has been observed in solvent-assisted inlet ionization (35).
Additional means of ionization such as electric field or laser assist-
ance were not applied, although various connection methods and
ionization sources (ESI, atmospheric pressure chemical ionization,
atmospheric pressure photoionization, and others) could be adapted
for our system.
Biocompatibility has been recognized as a key functional require-
ment of next-generation medical devices (36). The MasSpec Pen was
designed as a simple, disposable device made with biocompatible
materials and chemicals for contact with living tissues. The probe tip
material, the conduit tubes, and the chemical used were PDMS, PTFE,
and water, respectively. PDMS and PTFE are widely recognized as bio-
compatible materials and have a long history of utilization in medical
devices including catheters and long-term implants (37). Our experi-
ments demonstrate that the low volume (10 ml or less) of high-purity
water used caused no effect to the tissues analyzed in vivo and ex vivo.
The MasSpec Pen has shown good compatibility for contact with living
tissues, which should enable in vivo use.
We designed the MasSpec Pen as an automatic and user-friendly
device that could be used during routine medical diagnosis (movie S1).
A drawback of many ambient ionization MS methods is the need for
geometrical optimization and alignment between the source, the sam-
ple, and the mass spectrometer inlet to achieve good ion transmission.
On the other hand, the MasSpec Pen operates in a geometry-free man-
ner independently of sample stiffness and morphology and does not
require optimization because all of the components required for solvent
delivery, tissue sampling, and solvent retrieval are incorporated within
the tip. The 1.5-m tube transport systems enable free motion and ease
of use to the operator. The high-speed electronically and time-controlled
pinch valves allowed precise control of droplet motion and showed
excellent performance, robustness, and reproducibility in the results
obtained.
Our results suggest that the MasSpec Pen may provide the per-
formance required for near real-time nondestructive molecular di-
agnosis of tissues in vivo and ex vivo. Intraoperative diagnosis and
surgical margin evaluation continue to be research focuses of clinical
ambient ionization MS, with efforts used to develop devices for in vivo
diagnosis (18). For example, a sampling probe using a DESI-MSI
source to produce a continuous high-pressure spray of microdroplets
has been proposed for tissue analysis (38), but it has not been dem-
onstrated for cancer diagnosis or in vivo use. Ultraviolet and infrared
laser approaches have been reported for tissue analysis through ab-
lation processes (23, 24). A resonant infrared laser ablation system
was used to analyze a cancer tissue sample ex vivo and human finger
skin in vivo (24). To date, the iKnife has been the most successful MS-
based technique demonstrated for in vivo, intraoperative diagnosis
(21, 22). Yet, the electrocauterization process used by the iKnife is nec-
essary for ion generation for MS analysis, resulting in thermal and
mechanical damage of the analyzed tissue. Further, surgicalmodalities
other than electrocauterization are used in oncologic surgeries, such
as ultrasonic surgical aspiration, cold knife and mechanical stapled
excisions, and laser surgery. Different from laser and electrocauteriza-
tion approaches, an advantage of the proposed water-based MasSpec
Pen technology is its nondestructive nature, which allows diagnosis of
cancerous tissues without damage to normal tissues. Because the
MasSpec Pen performs molecular diagnosis independently of any dis-
section tools, it has the potential to be used in many surgical modalities.
Table 1. Human tissue sample details and results obtained using the MasSpec Pen. Pathological diagnosis, number of patient samples, and the Lasso
prediction sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, and AUC obtained using a leave-one-out cross-validation approach are shown.
Organ
Pathologic evaluation
Number of patients
Lasso prediction
Diagnosis
Histologic type
Sensitivity
Specificity
Accuracy
AUC
Breast
Normal
29
87.5%
100.0%
95.6%
1.00
Cancer
Ductal carcinoma
16
Lung*
Normal
47
97.9%
95.7%
96.8%
0.97
Cancer
Adenocarcinoma
17
88.2%
93.6%
92.2%
0.98
Squamous cell
17
88.2%
95.7%
93.8%
0.93
Others
14
—
—
—
—
Ovary
Normal
29
100.0%
89.7%
94.7%
0.98
Cancer
High-grade serous
28
Thyroid†
Normal
27
—
—
—
—
Tumor
Papillary carcinoma
18
94.4%
100.0%
97.8%
0.99
Follicular adenoma
11
90.9%
96.3%
94.7%
0.93
*Lasso prediction results for lung are shown for normal versus all cancer tissues (first row), followed by normal versus lung adenocarcinoma (middle row) and
normal versus squamous cell carcinoma (last row).
†Lasso prediction results for thyroid are shown for normal versus malignant papillary carcinoma and
normal versus benign follicular adenoma.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Zhang et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan3968 (2017)
6 September 2017
7 of 11
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Intraoperatively, we envision the MasSpec Pen to be used in conjunc-
tion with a surgical resection tool, depending on the oncologic surgery
and the preference of the medical professional. Because surgeons
routinely exchange handheld surgical instruments during surgery,
with assistance from surgical technologists, we expect the MasSpec
Pen to be adapted into routine surgical workflows. Clinically, the
MasSpec Pen could be suitable for pre- and postsurgical procedures that
require diagnosis of ex vivo samples (fresh tissues, tissue sections, or
biopsies) commonly examined by pathologists.
Our results show that the molecular information obtained using the
MasSpec Pen is diagnostic of disease and can be used for rapid tissue
classification, cancer diagnosis, and subtyping. We tested the MasSpec
Pen using 253patienttissue samplesincluding the normaland tumorous
breast, ovary, lung, and thyroid tissues. The mass spectra presented rich
molecular profiles characterized by a variety of potential cancer bio-
markers. The statistical classifiers built using machine learning algo-
rithms and the histologically validated molecular information provided
an overall sensitivity of 96.4%, specificity of 96.2%, and accuracy of
96.3% for cancer. Our classifiers allowed the identification of differ-
ent histologic types of lung cancers and benign and malignant thy-
roid tumors when compared to normal tissue samples and correctly
predicted ovarian cancer diagnosis in an independent test sample with
mixed histologic features. Yet, as with
any technology that relies on machine
learning and statistical modeling of large
data sets to provide predictive diagnosis,
larger sample sets are needed to increase
the training set size, improve the predic-
tive accuracy of our classifiers including
information on tumor cell concentra-
tion, and expand the histologic and mo-
lecular subtypes of neoplasms and
normal tissues. Rigorous validation
studies of the statistical results using
large independent held-out test sets are
necessary to determine possible overfit-
ting of our statistical models and to
more conclusively determine the overall
performance of the method.
Here, we demonstrated that the
MasSpec Pen is effective for in vivo diag-
nosis of cancer regions during murine
oncological surgery. The entire procedure
from triggering the system to data anal-
ysis is performed under 10 s, and further
improvements are envisioned. Compared
with the time necessary for intraoperative
pathologic frozen section analysis of ex-
cised species (~30 min) or postoperative
final pathologic evaluation (several days),
the time required for the MasSpec Pen
analysis could expedite surgical proce-
dures, diagnosis, and treatment. Our
results demonstrate that the molecular
information obtained using a 1.5-mm
sampling size allows accurate identifi-
cation of cancer in marginal tumor re-
gions of mixed histologic composition
(Fig. 5), although further validation of
these results with larger independent sample sets is needed. We are
currently exploring other machining methods to increase sampling res-
olution; however, the 1.5-mm sampling size relates well with the degree
of precision achieved during surgical resection.
We envision that the MasSpec Pen will become a valuable clinical
technology for near real-time in vivo and ex vivo cancer diagnosis.
Emerging technologies including fluorescence-guided surgery (11),
Raman spectroscopy (12), optical coherence tomography (39), reflec-
tance spectroscopy (40), and stimulated Raman scattering microscopy
(13) have been proposed for cancer diagnosis and surgical guidance.
Although powerful, many of these methods rely on injection of ex-
ogenous labels that target specific cell types for tumor visualization,
require tissue excision and processing for analysis, suffer from moderate
tissue specificity, or provide limited biochemical information. The ap-
proach we propose here leverages on the unparalleled sensitivity and
specificity provided by MS for untargeted molecular evaluation and
on its biocompatibility for disease diagnosis and clinical use. Yet, many
challenges exist in translating and integrating new technologies into
the workflow of a complex surgical and clinical environment (41). In-
tegrationoftheMasSpecPenintolaparoscopicandroboticsurgicalsystems
for minimally invasive procedures and improved communication
and visualization tools will facilitate its inclusion in clinical workflows.
Fig. 5. MasSpec Pen analysis of an HGSC tissue sample with mixed histologic composition. (A) Optical image shows
the tissue sample that was analyzed at the demarcated regions (1 to 5) using a 1.5-mm-diameter MasSpec Pen. After the
MasSpec Pen analysis, the tissue sample was frozen, sectioned, and H&E-stained. An optical image of the H&E-stained tissue
section obtained at region 3 is shown (inset), presenting a mixed histologic composition including cancer and adjacent
normal stroma tissue. (B) The MasSpec Pen negative ion mode mass spectra are shown for regions 1 (normal stroma; average
of n = 3 mass spectra), 3 (mixture of normal stroma and cancer; average of n = 3 mass spectra), and 5 (cancer; average of n = 3
mass spectra). (C) Table listing the pathologic diagnosis of the five regions analyzed and the Lasso prediction results.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Zhang et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan3968 (2017)
6 September 2017
8 of 11
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Similarly, size- and cost-effective mass spectrometers with sufficient an-
alytical performance for molecular evaluation are needed for dedicated
surgical use. Advances in building and validating databases for tissue
identification, as well as automated computational methods for real-
time output of predictive results, are also necessary for broad use. Fur-
ther work will require careful evaluation of the long-term benefits to
patients to determine the value of new technologies in clinical practice.
We expect that the excellent performance and simple design and
operation of the MasSpec Pen, combined with its clinically desirable fea-
tures, may enable its translation to the clinic for routine medical use,
improving patient care and treatment.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
The objective of this study was to evaluate the potential of an MS-
based probe to nondestructively analyze and diagnose cancer in hu-
man tissue samples. Here, we investi-
gated the molecular profiles of human
tissue samples obtained from 281 pa-
tients including normal and cancer
breast, lung, thyroid, and ovary tissues.
All patient samples were obtained from
the CHTN (Cooperative Human Tissue
Network), Asterand Bioscience, and the
Baylor College of Medicine Tissue Bank
under approved Institutional Review
Board protocol. The mass spectra ob-
tained using the MasSpec Pen in tissue
samples were normalized, background-
subtracted, and analyzed using a statis-
tical technique to build classification
models. Expert, board-certified pathol-
ogists (J.L., W.Y., and C.N.) evaluated
the H&E-stained tissue sections obtained
from the tissue samples analyzed. The
pathologists were blind to any informa-
tion about the acquisition from MS
analysis. Samples were excluded from
statistical analysis if they were deter-
mined by the pathologist to have sub-
stantial heterogeneity in cell composition,
which included 28 samples, resulting
in a final sample set of 253 samples.
The in vivo animal model experiments
were conducted under approved Insti-
tutional Animal Care and Use Commit-
tee protocol.
Design and engineering of the
MasSpec Pen
A 3D printer (Model uPrint SE Plus)
was used to print the key component,
a PDMS (Dow Corning) probe tip. The
pen tips were fabricated by casting an
elastomer from a negative mold designed
using SolidWorks computer-aided de-
sign software and then dissolving the
mold away. PTFE tubing (ID, 1/32 inch;
outer diameter, 1/16 inch; Cole-Parmer) was directly inserted into the
probe tip for experiments. For more information, see the Supple-
mentary Materials.
MS data acquisition
All experiments were performed on a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-
Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full scan was
carried out at the range of m/z 120 to 1800, using a resolving power
of 140,000, a capillary temperature of 350°C, and an S-lens radio
frequency level of 100. Wild-type mouse brains were purchased from
BioreclamationIVT. Human tissue samples were obtained frozen
and stored in a −80°C freezer until analysis, when they were thawed
at room temperature. The tissues were placed on a glass slide and
analyzed by the MasSpec Pen using the experimental steps described.
After experiments, the tissue regions analyzed were annotated and
frozen, and 16-mm tissue sections were prepared using a CryoStar
NX50 cryostat. Additional tissue sections at different regions of the
Fig. 6. Intraoperative analysis of tumor and normal tissues in a murine model. (A) Experiments were performed in
vivo in mice under anesthesia. Optical images show the animal under anesthesia and before, during, and after the MasSpec
Pen analysis. (B) Representative negative ion mode mass spectra show distinct molecular profiles from normal (average of
n = 3 mass spectra) and tumor (average of n = 3 mass spectra) tissues.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Zhang et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan3968 (2017)
6 September 2017
9 of 11
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 tissue piece were obtained for the MasSpec Pen analysis. Tissue
sections were H&E-stained and evaluated by histopathology after
analysis.
In vivo mouse experiments
BT474 HER2+ cells were grown in improved minimum essential medi-
um (IMEM) (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum,
1% L-glutamine, and 1% insulin to a confluency of 80 to 90% in 5% O2
and 37°C. Cells were counted via a hemocytometer and trypan blue dye
exclusion. Nude athymic female mice (n = 3) were subcutaneously im-
planted with a 17b-estradiol pellet (0.72 mg, 60-day release; Innovative
Research of America) in the nape of the neck. About 24 hours later,
BT474 breast cancer cells (107) in serum-free IMEM with 20% growth
factor–reduced Matrigel were injected subcutaneously into the right
flank of the mouse (total injection of 100 ml). Tumors were monitored
weekly for growth until they reached 0.7 to 1.0 cm in diameter (average
of 250 mm3). In vivo experiments were performed during surgical re-
section of tumors using murine animal models while the mice were
under anesthesia (2% isoflurane and 98% O2). A surgical blade was used
to open a flap of skin, leaving an estimated space of 1 to 2 cm around the
tumors, and then, the skin flap was dissected from the surface of the
tumor. The skin was flapped to expose the tumor and adjacent normal
tissues, which were analyzed in several regions using the MasSpec Pen.
Pieces of the tumor were then resected using a scalpel and analyzed
ex vivo. Tumor tissue pieces analyzed by the MasSpec Pen were an-
notated, flash-frozen, sectioned, and subjected to H&E staining for
diagnosis.
Statistical analysis
Averages of three mass spectra obtained during each 10-s MasSpec Pen
analysis were used to build molecular databases. The Xcalibur raw data
were converted to Microsoft Excel spreadsheet format. The full mass
range of the spectra was partitioned into bins by rounding m/z values
to the nearest hundredth. All mass spectra were first normalized
according to total ion count or to the absolute intensity of m/z 885.55
to account for slight fluctuations in signal intensities that may occur
between experiments. Then, background peaks and peaks not ap-
pearing in at least 10% of the samples analyzed were excluded to reduce
random noise. For each tissue section (breast or thyroid), four repre-
sentative mass spectra for each tissue section analyzed were imported
to MetaboAnalyst (www.metaboanalyst.ca/) for PCA using the web-
site built-in function. Score and loading plots were generated through
the website for each tissue type. For each soft tissue sample type (breast,
thyroid, lung, and ovary), the data were imported to R programming
language. PCA was performed by centering the preprocessed data
to mean zero and computing principal components using the prcomp
function in R. The first three principal components were visualized
with the rgl and pca3d packages for R. For tissue classification, the
Lasso method was applied using the glmnet package in the CRAN R
language library. Models generated using the Lasso are simpler to
interpret than other regularization methods because it yields “sparse”
models (models that involve only a subset of the features). A math-
ematical weight for each statistically informative feature is calculated
by the Lasso depending on the importance that the mass spectral feature
has in characterizing a certain class (cancer versus normal or a cancer
subtype versus normal). Classification was performed using a leave-
one-out cross-validation approach to assess the predictive accuracy
within the training set. Performance of trained classifiers was measured
by sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, and AUC.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/9/406/eaan3968/DC1
Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. Effect of MasSpec Pen contact time on the mass spectra obtained.
Fig. S2. Effect of MasSpec Pen tip diameter on the mass spectra obtained.
Fig. S3. MasSpec Pen analysis of a mouse brain tissue section.
Fig. S4. Positive ion mode analysis using the MasSpec Pen.
Fig. S5. Comparison between MasSpec Pen and DESI-MSI mass spectra.
Fig. S6. Effect of MasSpec Pen solvent systems on the mass spectra obtained.
Fig. S7. MasSpec Pen detection of protein ions.
Fig. S8. PCA of the data obtained for the human tissue sections including normal and tumor
thyroid and breast tissue sections.
Fig. S9. Comparison between the MasSpec Pen mass spectra obtained from the tissue section
and fresh tissue piece.
Fig. S10. MasSpec Pen analysis of an HGSC tissue sample with mixed histologic composition.
Fig. S11. Intraoperative analysis of tumor and normal tissues in a murine model.
Fig. S12. MasSpec Pen analysis of the same tissue sample in vivo and ex vivo.
Table S1. Data obtained for the identification of selected negative ion mode molecular ions
from mouse brain tissue.
Table S2. Data obtained for the identification of selected negative ion mode molecular ions
from human thyroid tissue.
Table S3. Data obtained for the identification of selected negative ion mode molecular ions
from human ovarian tissue.
Table S4. Data obtained for the identification of selected negative ion mode molecular ions
from human lung tissue.
Table S5. Data obtained for the identification of selected negative ion mode molecular ions
from human breast tissue.
Table S6. Patient demographics of the 253 human tissue samples used in this study.
Movie S1. Simulation demonstrating the use of the MasSpec Pen for routine intraoperative
diagnosis.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. T. A. Buchholz, M. R. Somerfield, J. J. Griggs, S. El-Eid, M. E. H. Hammond, G. H. Lyman,
G. Mason, L. A. Newman, Margins for breast-conserving surgery with whole-breast
irradiation in stage I and II invasive breast cancer: American society of clinical
oncology endorsement of the society of surgical oncology/american society for radiation
oncology consensus guideline. J. Clin. Oncol. 32, 1502−1506 (2014).
2. S. J. Maygarden, F. C. Detterbeck, W. K. Funkhouser, Bronchial margins in lung cancer
resection specimens: Utility of frozen section and gross evaluation. Mod. Pathol. 17,
1080–1086 (2004).
3. G. Massard, C. Doddoli, B. Gasser, X. Ducrocq, R. Kessler, C. Schumacher, G. M. Jung,
J. M. Wihlm, Prognostic implications of a positive bronchial resection margin.
Eur. J. Cardiothorac. Surg. 17, 557–565 (2000).
4. A. M. Nick, R. L. Coleman, P. T. Ramirez, A. K. Sood, A framework for a personalized
surgical approach to ovarian cancer. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 12, 239–245 (2015).
5. S.-S. Han, J.-Y. Jang, S.-W. Kim, W.-H. Kim, K. U. Lee, Y.-H. Park, Analysis of long-term
survivors after surgical resection for pancreatic cancer. Pancreas 32, 271–275 (2006).
6. M. Zhang, Z. G. Li, Y. Ma, G. Y. Zhu, H. F. Zhang, Y. W. Xue, Prognostic predictors of
patients with carcinoma of the gastric cardia. Hepatogastroenterology 59, 930–933 (2012).
7. N. Sanai, M. S. Berger, Glioma extent of resection and its impact on patient outcome.
Neurosurgery 62, 753–764 (2008).
8. A. Macario, What does one minute of operating room time cost? J. Clin. Anesth. 22,
233–236 (2010).
9. M. Mino-Kenudson, L. R. Chirieac, K. Law, J. L. Hornick, N. Lindeman, E. J. Mark,
D. W. Cohen, B. E. Johnson, P. A. Janne, A. J. Iafrate, S. J. Rodig, A novel highly sensitive
antibody allows for the routine detection of ALK-rearranged lung adenocarcinomas by
standard immunohistochemistry. Clin. Cancer Res. 16, 1561–1571 (2010).
10. S. Jones, V. Anagnostou, K. Lytle, S. Parpart-Li, M. Nesselbush, D. R. Riley, M. Shukla,
B. Chesnick, M. Kadan, E. Papp, K. G. Galens, D. Murphy, T. Zhang, L. Kann, M. Sausen,
S. V. Angiuoli, L. A. Diaz Jr., V. E. Velculescu, Personalized genomic analyses for cancer
mutation discovery and interpretation. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 283ra53 (2015).
11. W. Stummer, U. Pichlmeier, T. Meinel, O. D. Wiestler, F. Zanella, H.-J. Reulen; ALA-Glioma
Study Group, Fluorescence-guided surgery with 5-aminolevulinic acid for resection of
malignant glioma: A randomised controlled multicentre phase III trial. Lancet Oncol. 7,
392–401 (2006).
12. M. Jermyn, K. Mok, J. Mercier, J. Desroches, J. Pichette, K. Saint-Arnaud, L. Bernstein,
M.-C. Guiot, K. Petrecca, F. Leblond, Intraoperative brain cancer detection with Raman
spectroscopy in humans. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 274ra19 (2015).
13. D. A. Orringer, B. Pandian, Y. S. Niknafs, T. C. Hollon, J. Boyle, S. Lewis, M. Garrard,
S. L. Hervey-Jumper, H. J. L. Garton, C. O. Maher, J. A. Heth, O. Sagher, D. A. Wilkinson,
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Zhang et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan3968 (2017)
6 September 2017
10 of 11
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 M. Snuderl, S. Venneti, S. H. Ramkissoon, K. A. McFadden, A. Fisher-Hubbard,
A. P. Lieberman, T. D. Johnson, X. S. Xie, J. K. Trautman, C. W. Freudiger, S. Camelo-Piragua,
Rapid intraoperative histology of unprocessed surgical specimens via fibre-laser-based
stimulated Raman scattering microscopy. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 1, 0027 (2017).
14. K. Chughtai, R. M. A. Heeren, Mass spectrometric imaging for biomedical tissue analysis.
Chem. Rev. 110, 3237–3277 (2010).
15. C. C. Hsu, P. C. Dorrestein, Visualizing life with ambient mass spectrometry. Curr. Opin.
Biotechnol. 31, 24–34 (2015).
16. C. P. Wu, A. L. Dill, L. S. Eberlin, R. G. Cooks, D. R. Ifa, Mass spectrometry imaging under
ambient conditions. Mass Spectrom. Rev. 32, 218–243 (2013).
17. J. L. Norris, R. M. Caprioli, Analysis of tissue specimens by matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization imaging mass spectrometry in biological and clinical research.
Chem. Rev. 113, 2309–2342 (2013).
18. D. R. Ifa, L. S. Eberlin, Ambient ionization mass spectrometry for cancer diagnosis and
surgical margin evaluation. Clin. Chem. 62, 111–123 (2016).
19. L. S. Eberlin, I. Norton, D. Orringer, I. F. Dunn, X. H. Liu, J. L. Ide, A. K. Jarmusch, K. L. Ligon,
F. A. Jolesz, A. J. Golby, S. Santagata, N. Y. R. Agar, R. G. Cooks, Ambient mass
spectrometry for the intraoperative molecular diagnosis of human brain tumors.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 1611–1616 (2013).
20. A. K. Jarmusch, V. Pirro, Z. Baird, E. M. Hattab, A. A. Cohen-Gadol, R. G. Cooks, Lipid and
metabolite profiles of human brain tumors by desorption electrospray ionization-MS.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113, 1486–1491 (2016).
21. K.-C. Schäfer, J. Dénes, K. Albrecht, T. Szaniszló, J. Balog, R. Skoumal, M. Katona, M. Tóth,
L. Balogh, Z. Takáts, In vivo, in situ tissue analysis using rapid evaporative ionization mass
spectrometry. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 48, 8240–8242 (2009).
22. J. Balog, L. Sasi-Szabó, J. Kinross, M. R. Lewis, L. J. Muirhead, K. Veselkov, R. Mirnezami, B. Dezs,
L. Damjanovich, A. Darzi, J. K. Nicholson, Z. Takáts, Intraoperative tissue identification using
rapid evaporative ionization mass spectrometry. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 194ra93 (2013).
23. K.-C.Schäfer, T. Szaniszló, S. Günther, J. Balog, J. Dénes, M.Keserű, B. Dezső, M.Tóth, B. Spengler,
Z. Takáts, In situ, real-time identification of biological tissues by ultraviolet and infrared
laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry. Anal. Chem. 83, 1632–1640 (2011).
24. B. Fatou, P. Saudemont, E. Leblanc, D. Vinatier, V. Mesdag, M. Wisztorski, C. Focsa,
M. Salzet, M. Ziskind, I. Fournier, In vivo real-time mass spectrometry for guided surgery
application. Sci. Rep. 6, 25919 (2016).
25. R. Tibshirani, Regression shrinkage and selection via the Lasso. J. R. Stat. Soc. Series B Stat.
Methodol. 58, 267–288 (1996).
26. A. L. Dill, L. S. Eberlin, A. B. Costa, D. R. Ifa, R. G. Cooks, Data quality in tissue analysis using
desorption electrospray ionization. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 401, 1949–1961 (2011).
27. J. Zhang, W. Yu, S. W. Ryu, J. Lin, G. Buentello, R. Tibshirani, J. W. Suliburk, L. S. Eberlin,
Cardiolipins are molecular markers of mitochondria-rich thyroid oncocytic tumors.
Cancer Res. 76, 6588–6597 (2016).
28. D. Calligaris, D. Caragacianu, X. Liu, I. Norton, C. J. Thompson, A. L. Richardson, M. Golshan,
M. L. Easterling, S. Santagata, D. A. Dillon, F. A. Jolesz, N. Y. R. Agar, Application of desorption
electrospray ionization mass spectrometry imaging in breast cancer margin analysis.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 15184–15189 (2014).
29. S. Guenther, L. J. Muirhead, A. V. M. Speller, O. Golf, N. Strittmatter, R. Ramakrishnan,
R. D. Goldin, E. Jones, K. Veselkov, J. Nicholson, A. Darzi, Z. Takats, Spatially
resolved metabolic phenotyping of breast cancer by desorption electrospray ionization
mass spectrometry. Cancer Res. 75, 1828–1837 (2015).
30. H. S. Kang, S. C. Lee, Y. S. Park, Y. E. Jeon, J. H. Lee, S.-Y. Jung, I. H. Park, S. H. Jang, H. M. Park,
C. W. Yoo, S. H. Park,S. Y. Han, K. P. Kim, Y.H. Kim, J. Ro, H. K. Kim, Protein andlipidMALDIprofiles
classify breast cancers according to the intrinsic subtype. BMC Cancer 11, 465 (2011).
31. M. Sans, K. Gharpure, R. Tibshirani, J. Zhang, L. Liang, J. Liu, J. H. Young, R. L. Dood,
A. K. Sood, L. S. Eberlin, Metabolic markers and statistical prediction of serous ovarian
cancer aggressiveness by ambient ionization mass spectrometry imaging. Cancer Res. 77,
2903–2913 (2017).
32. V. Kertesz, G. J. Van Berkel, Fully automated liquid extraction-based surface sampling
and ionization using a chip-based robotic nanoelectrospray platform. J. Mass Spectrom.
45, 252–260 (2010).
33. V. Kertesz, M. J. Ford, G. J. Van Berkel, Automation of a surface sampling probe/
electrospray mass spectrometry system. Anal. Chem. 77, 7183–7189 (2005).
34. J. Laskin, B. S. Heath, P. J. Roach, L. Cazares, O. J. Semmes, Tissue imaging using
nanospray desorption electrospray ionization mass spectrometry. Anal. Chem. 84,
141–148 (2012).
35. V. S. Pagnotti, N. D. Chubatyi, C. N. McEwen, Solvent assisted inlet ionization: An ultrasensitive
new liquid introduction ionization method for mass spectrometry. Anal. Chem. 83,
3981–3985 (2011).
36. M. N. Helmus, D. F. Gibbons, D. Cebon, Biocompatibility: Meeting a key functional
requirement of next-generation medical devices. Toxicol. Pathol. 36, 70–80 (2008).
37. J. Mokkaphan, W. Banlunara, T. Palaga, P. Sombuntham, S. Wanichwecharungruang,
Silicone surface with drug nanodepots for medical devices. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 6,
20188–20196 (2014).
38. C.-H. Chen, Z. Lin, S. Garimella, L. Zheng, R. Shi, R. G. Cooks, Z. Ouyang, Development of a
mass spectrometry sampling probe for chemical analysis in surgical and endoscopic
procedures. Anal. Chem. 85, 11843–11850 (2013).
39. C. Kut, K. L. Chaichana, J. Xi, S. M. Raza, X. Ye, E. R. McVeigh, F. J. Rodriguez,
A. Quiñones-Hinojosa, X. Li, Detection of human brain cancer infiltration ex vivo and in
vivo using quantitative optical coherence tomography. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 292ra100
(2015).
40. N. Rajaram, T. J. Aramil, K. Lee, J. S. Reichenberg, T. H. Nguyen, J. W. Tunnell, Design and
validation of a clinical instrument for spectral diagnosis of cutaneous malignancy. Appl. Optics
49, 142–152 (2010).
41. J. Zhang, W. Yu, J. Suliburk, L. S. Eberlin, Will ambient ionization mass spectrometry
become an integral technology in the operating room of the future? Clin. Chem. 62,
1172–1174 (2016).
Acknowledgments: We thank the Eberlin and Milner laboratory members for valuable
discussions. L.S.E. thanks J. Brodbelt and R. Crooks (University of Texas at Austin) for reviewing
the manuscript and their mentoring. We are grateful to R. Tibshirani (Stanford University)
for the assistance with the statistical analysis. We also thank T. Hooper for his help with the
hardware design and E. Que for the use of microscope. Tissue samples were provided by the
Cooperative Human Tissue Network, a National Cancer Institute supported resource, and the
Baylor College of Medicine Tissue Bank. Funding: This work was supported by the National
Cancer Institute of the NIH under award R00CA190783 to L.S.E., the startup funds provided to
L.S.E. by the University of Texas at Austin, and the Cancer Prevention Research Institute of
Texas to A.G.S. (CPRIT RR160005) and to T.E.M. (CPRIT DP 150102). Author contributions:
L.S.E., T.E.M., J.Z., J.Q.L., and J.R. designed the experiments. L.S.E, T.E.M., J.Z., J.R., J.Q.L., N.K., and
A.Z. designed the MasSpec Pen. J.Z., J.R., J.Q.L., M.S., N.G., A.B., R.J.D., K.Y.G., B.L., L.S.E., A.G.S.,
and A.S. acquired the data. L.S.E., J.Z., T.E.M., M.S., and J.S. performed the data analysis and
interpretation. W.Y., C.N., and J.L. performed the pathologic evaluation. J.H.Y., J.Z., J.Q.L.,
and L.S.E. performed the statistical analysis and interpretation. L.S.E., J.Z., and T.E.M. wrote and
revised the manuscript. L.S.E. conceived and supervised the study. Competing interests:
L.S.E., T.E.M., J.Z., J.L., J.R., N.K., and A.Z. are inventors on a provisional patent application
62/462,524 owned by the Board of Regents of the University of Texas System that relates to
a handheld probe and MS system, such as described in this study. All other authors declare
that they have no competing interests. Data and materials availability: The data for this
study have been deposited in Dataverse, which can be found at https://dataverse.harvard.edu/
dataset.xhtml?persistentId=doi:10.7910/DVN/XBVHGM.
Submitted 7 April 2017
Accepted 17 August 2017
Published 6 September 2017
10.1126/scitranslmed.aan3968
Citation: J. Zhang, J. Rector, J. Q. Lin, J. H. Young, M. Sans, N. Katta, N. Giese, W. Yu, C. Nagi,
J. Suliburk, J. Liu, A. Bensussan, R. J. DeHoog, K. Y. Garza, B. Ludolph, A. G. Sorace, A. Syed,
A. Zahedivash, T. E. Milner, L. S. Eberlin, Nondestructive tissue analysis for ex vivo and in vivo
cancer diagnosis using a handheld mass spectrometry system. Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan3968 (2017).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Zhang et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan3968 (2017)
6 September 2017
11 of 11
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 mass spectrometry system
Nondestructive tissue analysis for ex vivo and in vivo cancer diagnosis using a handheld
Ludolph, Anna G. Sorace, Anum Syed, Aydin Zahedivash, Thomas E. Milner and Livia S. Eberlin
Chandandeep Nagi, James Suliburk, Jinsong Liu, Alena Bensussan, Rachel J. DeHoog, Kyana Y. Garza, Benjamin 
Jialing Zhang, John Rector, John Q. Lin, Jonathan H. Young, Marta Sans, Nitesh Katta, Noah Giese, Wendong Yu,
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aan3968
, eaan3968.
9
Sci Transl Med 
destruction.
healthy tissue during surgery in mice, without requiring specific labeling or imaging and without evidence of tissue 
characterizes diagnostic proteins, lipids, and metabolites. The pen could be used to rapidly distinguish tumor from
physical contact with a tissue surface, the water droplet is transported to a mass spectrometer, which 
gentle
molecular profile of tissues using a small volume water droplet and mass spectrometry analysis. After 3 s of 
 developed a handheld pen-like device that rapidly identifies the
et al.
facilitate intraoperative diagnosis, Zhang 
margins (absence of cancer cells at the outer edge of the excised tumor specimen) can be challenging. To 
Although a surgeon's goal is to remove cancer in its entirety during excision surgery, achieving negative
Is the pen mightier than the scalpel?
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/406/eaan3968
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/09/01/9.406.eaan3968.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/5/201/201ra119.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/4/142/142ra94.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/7/274/274ra19.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/5/194/194ra93.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/406/eaan3968#BIBL
This article cites 41 articles, 14 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
