 Platelet-Derived Mitochondria Display Embryonic
Stem Cell Markers and Improve Pancreatic Islet b-cell
Function in Humans
YONG ZHAO
,a ZHAOSHUN JIANG,b ELIAS DELGADO,c HENG LI,d HUIMIN ZHOU,e WEI HU,a
MARCOS PEREZ-BASTERRECHEA
,f ANNA JANOSTAKOVA,a QIDONG TAN,b JING WANG,b MAO MAO,a
ZHAOHUI YIN,b YE ZHANG,g YING LI,g QUANHAI LI,h JING ZHOU,h YUNXIANG LI,g
EVA MARTINEZ REVUELTA,i JOSE MARIA GARC´
ıA-GALA,i HONGLAN WANG,a SILVIA PEREZ-LOPEZ,f
MARIA ALVAREZ-VIEJO,f EDELMIRO MENENDEZ,c THOMAS MOSS,j EDWARD GUINDI,j JESUS OTERO
f
Key Words. Diabetes • Type 1 diabetes • Stem cell • Platelet • Mitochondria • Stem cell educator •
Islet b cell • Immune
ABSTRACT
Diabetes is a major global health issue and the number of individuals with type 1 diabetes (T1D)
and type 2 diabetes (T2D) increases annually across multiple populations. Research to develop a
cure must overcome multiple immune dysfunctions and the shortage of pancreatic islet b cells, but
these challenges have proven intractable despite intensive research effort more than the past dec-
ades. Stem Cell Educator (SCE) therapy—which uses only autologous blood immune cells that are
externally exposed to cord blood stem cells adhering to the SCE device, has previously been proven
safe and effective in Chinese and Spanish subjects for the improvement of T1D, T2D, and other
autoimmune diseases. Here, 4-year follow-up studies demonstrated the long-term safety and clini-
cal efficacy of SCE therapy for the treatment of T1D and T2D. Mechanistic studies found that the
nature of platelets was modulated in diabetic subjects after receiving SCE therapy. Platelets and
their released mitochondria display immune tolerance-associated markers that can modulate the
proliferation and function of immune cells. Notably, platelets also expressed embryonic stem cell-
and pancreatic islet b-cell-associated markers that are encoded by mitochondrial DNA. Using
freshly-isolated human pancreatic islets, ex vivo studies established that platelet-releasing mito-
chondria can migrate to pancreatic islets and be taken up by islet b cells, leading to the prolifera-
tion and enhancement of islet b-cell functions. These findings reveal new mechanisms underlying
SCE therapy and open up new avenues to improve the treatment of diabetes in clinics. STEM CELLS
TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2017;6:1684–1697
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT
Abnormalities in multiple immune cells and the deficit of insulin-producing cells are two crucial
common issues in T1D and T2D. Insulin therapy is not a cure. Stem Cell Educator (SCE) therapy
is a closed-loop system that circulates the patient’s immune cells, briefly cocultures with adher-
ent cord blood (CB) stem cells in vitro, and returns only the “educated” autologous immune
cells to the patient’s circulation. We found that the feature of platelets was changed in diabetic
subjects after receiving SCE therapy. Notably, mitochondria released by platelets displayed
immune tolerance-, embryonic stem cell-, and islet b-cell-associated markers, leading to the
improvement of islet b-cell functions. Long-term follow-up studies demonstrated the safety and
clinical efficacy of SCE therapy for the treatment of T1D and T2D.
INTRODUCTION
The epidemic of diabetes is a major public health
issue worldwide, with prevalence rates exceeding
12.1% of the population in India, 11.6% in China
[1, 2], and 9.3% in the United States. Animal and
clinical evidence shows that abnormalities in mul-
tiple types of immune cells (e.g., T cells, B cells,
regulatory Tcells [Tregs], monocytes/macrophages
[Mo/M/s], and dendritic cells [DC]) contribute to
the autoimmunity in type 1 diabetes (T1D) [3] and
the chronic inflammation that induces insulin
resistance in type 2 diabetes (T2D) [4–11]. Thus,
overcoming these multiple immune dysfunctions
is necessary for both the prevention and treat-
ment of T1D and T2D. Specifically for T1D, a true
cure has proven elusive despite intensive research
effort using conventional approaches over the
Authored by a member of
aDepartment of Research,
Hackensack University Medical
Center, Hackensack, New Jersey,
USA; bSection of Endocrinology,
General Hospital of Jinan Military
Command, Jinan, Shandong,
People’s Republic of China;
cEndocrinology Section,
Department of Medicine,
University of Oviedo, Oviedo,
Spain; dSection of Neurology,
Jinan Central Hospital, Jinan,
Shandong, People’s Republic of
China; eSection of Endocrinology,
The First Affiliated Hospital of
Hebei Medical University,
Shijiazhuang, Hebei, People’s
Republic of China; fUnit of
Transplants, Cell Therapy and
Regenerative Medicine, Hospital
Universitario Central de Asturias,
Oviedo, Spain; gTianhe Stem Cell
Biotechnologies Inc., Jinan,
Shandong, People’s Republic of
China; hCell Therapy Center, The
First Affiliated Hospital of Hebei
Medical University, Shijiazhuang,
Hebei, People’s Republic of China;
iHematology and Hemotherapy
Service, Hospital Universitario
Central de Asturias, Oviedo,
Spain; jCORD:USE Cord Blood
Bank, Orlando, Florida, USA
Correspondence: Yong Zhao
M.D., Ph.D., Associate Scientist,
Department of Research,
Hackensack University Medical
Center, 40 Prospect Avenue,
Hackensack, New Jersey 07601,
USA. e-mail: Yong.Zhao@
HackensackMeridian.org
Received March 31, 2017;
accepted for publication May 24,
2017; first published July 7, 2017.
O
c AlphaMed Press
1066-5099/2017/$30.00/0
http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/sctm.17-0078
This is an open access article
under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivs
License, which permits use and
distribution in any medium,
provided the original work is
properly cited, the use is non-
commercial and no modifications
or adaptations are made.
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2017;6:1684–1697 www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
CORD BLOOD
 past 30 years [3, 12, 13]. Several recent clinical trials [13–16] high-
light the challenges in conquering T1D, but their failures provide
some valuable lessons about limitations of conventional immune
therapy and the future direction of the quest. Specifically, they
point to the need for an approach that produces comprehensive
immune modulation at both the local pancreatic and systemic lev-
els rather than targeting the pancreatic effects of one or a few
components of the immune system.
Deficit of insulin-producing cells is another crucial common
issue for T1D and T2D [17, 18]. Although daily insulin injections
offer limited control over blood sugar levels, they are not a cure.
To overcome the shortage of insulin-producing cells in diabetic
patients, pancreas and islet transplantations have offered poten-
tial treatments for independence from insulin injections. However,
the scarcity of donors and immune rejections severely hinder their
wide application. To date, functional insulin-producing cells have
been generated from embryonic stem (ES) cells and induced pluri-
potent stem cells (iPSCs) through ex vivo inductions [19–22].
Recent advances in stem cell biology have realized that ES cells,
iPSCs, and their derived cells can also cause immune rejections
post transplantation [23–25], in addition to ethical and safety
issues. Thus, this compelling need brings a sense of urgency to
find a cure for diabetes that can not only overcome the shortage
of insulin-producing b-cells, but also halt the progression of auto-
immunity in T1D and correct multiple immune dysfunctions in
T2D in the clinical setting.
CB-derived multipotent stem cells (CB-SCs) are a unique type
of stem cell identified from human CB [26, 27] and different from
other known stem cell types such as mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs), hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) [28], and previously char-
acterized monocyte-derived pluripotent stem cells [29]. Based on
their unique properties in immune modulation [27, 30], we devel-
oped a new technology, called Stem Cell Educator (SCE) therapy,
by using CB-SCs in a closed-loop system that circulates a patient’s
blood through a blood cell separator, briefly co-cultures the
patient’s lymphocytes with adherent CB-SCs in vitro, and returns
the “educated” lymphocytes (but not the CB-SCs) to the patient’s
circulation [28, 31]. A single treatment with SCE therapy provides
lasting reversal of autoimmunity, leading to the regeneration of
islet b cells and improvement of metabolic control in individuals
with longstanding T1D [31, 32] and T2D [33]. Specifically, a recent
phase I/II study demonstrated the safety and feasibility of SCE
therapy in the treatment of alopecia areata (AA) [34], one of the
most common T cell-mediated autoimmune diseases. This trial
provided visible evidence that SCE therapy can control autoim-
munity and lead to hair regrowth [34]. Thus, SCE therapy may rev-
olutionize
the
clinical
treatment
of
diabetes
and
other
autoimmune-related diseases without the safety and ethical con-
cerns associated with conventional stem cell-based approaches.
Although SCE therapy appears to be effective, its physiological
mechanisms are not fully understood in humans.
We found that platelets were elevated in patients following SCE
therapy, prompting further investigation of the possibility platelets
may be responsible for long-lasting clinical effects observed follow-
ing SCE therapy. We found that platelets display immune tolerance
markers, embryonic stem (ES) cell-associated markers, and human
islet b cell-specific transcription factors that may contribute to the
improvement in T1D and T2D pathology and symptoms. These fac-
tors are encoded in the platelets’ mitochondrial DNA (mitoDNA),
which is released from the platelets upon activation. Here we show
that mitochondria can migrate into pancreatic islet b cells, resulting
in the marked improvement of human islet b-cell functions. These
findings hold the potential for enormous clinical impact on T1D and
T2D by paving the way toward the development of novel
approaches to treat and prevent diabetes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patients
Diabetic subjects recruited from three hospitals were enrolled in
phase I, phase II, open-label multi-center clinical trials. At the Sec-
tion of Endocrinology at the General Hospital of Jinan Military
Command (Jinan, Shandong, China) and the first affiliated hospital
of Hebei Medical University, T1D subjects (N5 17) and T2D sub-
jects (N5 26) were enrolled in trials conducted from October
2010 through January 2011 and from August 2011 through Octo-
ber 2013, respectively. At the Endocrinology and Nutrition Service,
Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias (Oviedo, Spain), T1D
patients (n 5 8) were enrolled in a trial conducted from Novem-
ber 27, 2012 through October 1, 2014.With oversight from a plan-
ning committee, the principal investigators designed the trial and
received ethical approval for the clinical treatment protocol and
consent form for each hospital. Patients were qualified for enroll-
ment if they met the diagnosis standards of the American Diabe-
tes Association and if a blood test confirmed the presence of at
least one autoantibody to pancreatic islet b cells for T1D subjects.
Exclusion criteria included clinically significant liver, kidney, or
heart disease; pregnancy; immunosuppressive medication; viral
diseases; or diseases associated with immunodeficiency. The pri-
mary study endpoints on feasibility and safety of the SCE therapy
have been published elsewhere [31–33]. Endpoints relevant to
the current study were preliminary evidence of effects of SCE ther-
apy on platelets in T1D and T2D subjects. Baseline blood samples
were collected prior to SCE therapy. Four-year follow-up studies in
Chinese T1D subjects (N5 9) and T2D subjects (N 5 21) were per-
formed at the General Hospital of Jinan Military Command. Trial
registration: ClinicalTrials.gov numbers, NCT01350219 for T1D
trial and NCT01415726 for T2D trial.
Treatment of Human PBMCs with Platelet-Derived
Mitochondria
Human buffy coat blood units were purchased from the New York
Blood Center (New York, NY, http://nybloodcenter.org/). Human
peripheral blood-derived mononuclear cells (PBMC) were harvested
as previously described [31, 33]. As described elsewhere [34],
PBMC were stimulated for 2–4 days with Dynabeads coupled with
anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies (Life Technologies, Grand Island,
NY, https://www.thermofisher.com/us) in the presence of 30 U/ml
recombinant human IL-2 (rIL-2) (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN,
www.rndsystems.com/), with or without mitochondria (70 lg/ml),
and incubated at 378C, in 8% CO2. The mitochondria were isolated
from PB-platelets using the Qproteome Mitochondria Isolation kit
(Qiagen, Hidden, Germany, https://www.qiagen.com/) according to
the manufacturer’s recommended protocol. The concentration of
mitochondria was determined by the measurement of protein con-
centration using a NanoDrop 2000 Spectrophotometer (Thermo
Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, https://www.thermofisher.com/).
Cells were collected on day 2 and 4, respectively for cell prolifera-
tion assay and flow cytometry.
Zhao, Jiang, Delgado et al.
1685
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 Treatment of Human Pancreatic Islets with
Platelet-Derived Mitochondria
Freshly isolated human pancreatic islets were purchased from
Lonza (San Francisco, CA, www.lonza.com/). In one set of experi-
ments, pancreatic islets were dissociated into single cells with
0.25% trypsin/EDTA for 5 minutes at room temperature. The pan-
creatic islet cells (1 3 105 cells/ml) seeded at the top inserts were
co-cultured with MitoTracker Deep Red-labeled platelets (bottom)
in Transwell culture system with 0.4 lm pore size (EMD Millipore,
Billerica, MA, www.emdmillipore.com/). Islet cells were collected
at different time points for kinetic flow cytometry at 1, 2, 4, 6, 20,
and 24 hours. After seven days, the treated and untreated islet
cells were collected to examine cell viability and viable cell num-
ber with a TC20 automated cell counter (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA,
www.bio-rad.com/).
In another set of experiments, whole pancreatic islets seeded in
the top inserts at 125 IEQ per well were treated with platelet-
derived mitochondria (250 lg/ml, bottom well) in 12-well tissue
culture-treated plates with Transwell inserts (0.4 lm pore size) at
378C in 8% CO2. Pancreatic islets cultured in pancreatic islet medium
(Lonza, San Fransisco, CA, www.lonza.com/) served as controls. The
mitochondria were isolated from platelets using the Qproteome
Mitochondria Isolation kit (Qiagen, Hidden, Germany, https://www.
qiagen.com/) according to the manufacturer’s recommended proto-
col. After 7 days, mitochondrion-treated and untreated pancreatic
islets were collected for multiple functional studies such as flow
cytometry, cell viability, and insulin/C-peptide release.
To determine which molecules contribute to the interaction
between mitochondria and islet b cells, the dissociated pancreatic
islet cells were initially pre-treated with 20 lg/ml anti-CD29 and/
or 20 lg/ml anti-TLR4 Abs at 378C for 30 minutes followed by add-
ing the MitoTracker Green-labeled mitochondria (125 mg/ml) iso-
lated from platelets. The islet cells co-cultured with mitochondria
in the absence of blocking Abs served as control. After 5 hours,
the mitochondrion-treated and untreated islets cells were washed
and fixed and permeabilized by using PerFix-nc (no centrifuge
assay) kit (Beckman Coulter, Jersey City, NJ, https://www.beck-
mancoulter.com/) and followed by an intra-cellular staining with
islet b-cell marker insulin for flow cytometry.
Islet b Cell Function and C-Peptide Release
Freshly isolated human pancreatic islets (Lonza, San Francisco, CA,
www.lonza.com/) at 125 IEQ per well (top insert) were treated
with platelet-derived mitochondria (250 lg/ml, bottom well) in
12-well tissue culture-treated plates with Transwell inserts at 378C
in 8% CO2. Untreated pancreatic islets cultured in pancreatic islet
Figure 1.
Long-term follow-up studies of SCE therapy in Chinese T1D and T2D subjects. All Chinese subjects received one treatment with
the SCE therapy. (A): Kinetic examination of fasting C-peptide levels during the 4-year follow-up period. Before receiving a SCE therapy, sub-
ject #1 diagnosed with T1D for 8 months with glycated hemoglobin (HbA1C) at 11.3%, islet autoantibodies IA-2A1 and GAD1; subject 2 diag-
nosed with T1D for 5 months with HbA1C at 9.4%, islet autoantibodies IA-2A1 and GAD1 and IAA1. (B): Comparison of C-peptide levels at a
75-g oral glucose challenge after 4-year follow-up in T1D subjects 1 and 2. (C): Recovered fasting and high glucose-stimulated C-peptide levels
were retained in subject 3 through the follow-up at 4 years post-treatment with a SCE therapy. (D): Comparison of fasting and high glucose-
stimulated C-peptide levels after 4-year follow-up in long-standing severe T2D subjects (N 5 4). Data are presented as mean 6 SD. Abbrevia-
tion: OGTT, oral glucose tolerance test.
1686
Platelet Mitochondria Expand Islet b-Cell Function
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 medium (Lonza, San Francisco, CA, www.lonza.com/) served as
controls. After 7 days, the mitochondrion-treated and untreated
pancreatic islets were collected into 2 ml conical tubes, washed
twice with Kreb’s buffer (137 mM NaCl, 4.7 mM KCl, 1.2 mM
KH2PO4, 2.5 mM CaCl2, 1.2 mM MgCl2, 25 mM NaHCO3, 0.1%
BSA), and then incubated with 1 ml Kreb’s buffer for 30 minutes in
the absence of glucose at 378C. After removing the Kreb’s buffer,
pancreatic islets were incubated with different concentrations of
glucose (5.5 and 16.7 mM) and/or 10 lM tolbudamide (Sigma, St.
Louis, MO, https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/) in 300 ll Kreb’s
buffer/well for one hour at 378C. Supernatants were collected
from each group after incubation. C-peptide levels were examined
using the Quantikine ELISA kit (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN,
www.rndsystems.com/) following the manufacturer’s protocol.
Statistical Analysis
An intention-to treat approach was used, with 36 diabetic patients
undergoing SCE therapy. The primary efficacy endpoints were
change in platelet numbers between baseline and follow-up. Sta-
tistical analyses of data were performed by the two-tailed paired
Student’s t test to determine statistical significance between base-
line and follow-up. Values were given as mean 6 SD (standard
deviation).
RESULTS
Long-Term Safety and Clinical Efficacy of SCE Therapy in
T1D and T2D Diabetic Subjects
Previous work demonstrated the short-term safety and clinical
efficacy of SCE therapy for the treatment of Chinese T1D [28, 31]
and T2D subjects [33] during a year.To define the long-term safety
of SCE therapy, SCE-treated subjects (total N 5 30, including 9 T1D
and 21 T2D patients) received the 4-year follow-up studies with
safety profiles. Serological tests demonstrated that no subjects
showed a marked increase in tumor markers including alpha-
fetoprotein (AFP), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), cancer antigen
(CA) 19–9, CA72–4, CA125, CA15–3, and neuron-specific enolase
(NSE). Chest x-ray failed to show lung cancer and other abnormal-
ities in these subjects. Ultrasonography did not find tumor forma-
tion in livers, gallbladders, pancreata, spleens, and kidneys of
these participants. Additionally, no subject experienced any signifi-
cant adverse events during the 4-year follow-up period. Thus,
these clinical data confirmed the long-term safety of SCE therapy.
To determine the long-term clinical efficacy, we performed 4-
year follow-up studies in some of these subjects after receiving
one treatment with the SCE therapy. Two T1D participants (one
female having T1D for 8 months and another male having T1D for
5 months) achieved normal fasting C-peptide levels and remained
Figure 2.
Modulation of platelets by SCE therapy in diabetic patients. (A–C): Clinical data were summarized from the clinical trials in Chinese
diabetic subjects. Both T1D (N 5 10) and T2D (N 5 16) received one treatment with SCE therapy. A complete blood count (CBC) test was per-
formed at baseline (before the treatment) and 1 month after the treatment with SCE therapy. Age- and gender matched T1D (N 5 7) and
T2D (N 5 10) subjects receiving conventional therapy served as controls. (A): Increase in the platelet count. (B): Increase in the platelet distri-
bution width (PDW). (C): Decrease in the mean platelet volume (MPV). (D): Increase in the platelet count of Caucasian T1D subjects after
receiving one treatment with SCE therapy, N 5 8. Data are presented as mean 6 SD.
Zhao, Jiang, Delgado et al.
1687
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 Figure 3.
1688
Platelet Mitochondria Expand Islet b-Cell Function
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 completely recovered with no relapse after 4 years (Fig. 1A). The
C-peptide response following a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test
(OGTT) further confirmed the normalization of their islet b cell
function (Fig. 1B).To our knowledge, this is the first long-term clin-
ical study demonstrating that islet b cell function has been com-
pletely and safely rescued in recent-onset T1D subjects after
controlling the autoimmunity by the SCE therapy.
Additionally, subject 3, who had T1D 4 years at the time of
treatment, still achieved long-lasting improvements, including an
increase in fasting C-peptide from 0.3 ng/ml at basal to 0.56 ng/ml
at 12 weeks and retained 0.53 ng/ml at 4 years. Glucose-
stimulated C-peptide levels were increased from 0.85 ng/ml at
basal to 1.21 ng/ml at 4 years (Fig. 1C). Other six long-standing
T1D participants showed the decline of fasting C-peptide at differ-
ent levels at 4-year follow-ups. The data suggest that one treat-
ment with SCE therapy was not enough to control the islet
autoimmunity in these patients and additional treatment post 3
months is needed to promote the regeneration of islet b cells.
To explore the long-term clinical efficacy of SCE therapy in
T2D subjects, long-standing (15–24 years) severe T2D subjects
(n 5 6) received 4-year follow-up studies. The data demonstrated
that 4/6 T2D subjects showed a significant increase in fasting C-
peptide from 0.39 6 0.17 ng/ml at basal to 1.12 6 0.33 ng/ml at
1 year, and retained normal level 0.82 6 0.2 ng/ml at 4 years
(p 5 .017). Their C-peptide levels following OGTT were also mark-
edly increased from 1.476 0.22 ng/ml at basal to 2.95 6 0.36
ng/ml at 4 years (p 5 .004) (Fig. 1D). Thus, these data revealed
the long-lasting therapeutic efficacy of SCE therapy in T1D and
T2D subjects after receiving one treatment with SCE therapy.
Clinical Efficacy Outcomes in Modulating Platelets by
SCE Therapy
To explore clinical mechanisms underlying the above long-lasting
therapeutic effects of SCE therapy, we analyzed the complete
blood count (CBC) test results and found that platelets were ele-
vated in diabetic patients following SCE therapy for 1 month,
prompting further investigation of the possibility platelets may be
responsible for some of the effects observed following SCE ther-
apy. Modulations of platelets were examined in 10 T1D and 16
T2D patients receiving SCE therapy. Age- and gender-matched
T1D (n 5 7) and T2D (n 5 10) subjects who received conventional
therapies served as controls, respectively. Clinical results demon-
strated that platelet counts were markedly increased in T1D
(p 5 .017) and T2D subjects (p5 .027) after receiving the SCE
therapy (Fig. 2A). Platelet distribution width (PDW) was signifi-
cantly increased (Fig. 2B), and mean platelet volume (MPV) was
decreased (Fig. 2C) in both T1D and T2D subjects after SCE ther-
apy. No changes were observed in plateletcrit (PCT) following
treatment. Clinical data from Caucasian T1D subjects (n 5 8) also
showed an increase in the platelet count after SCE therapy
(p 5 .04, Fig. 2D). These data suggest that modulations in platelet
populations may contribute to the clinical efficacy of SCE therapy
for diabetic patients [31–33].
Expression of Immune Tolerance-Related Markers in
Platelets and Mitochondria
To determine the expression of immune tolerance-related markers
in platelets, flow cytometry demonstrated that CB-derived plate-
lets (Fig. 3A) displayed several co-inhibitory surface molecules
including the programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1, CD274), CD270
(a herpes virus entry mediator, HVEM), ICOS (inducible costimula-
tor), and Galectin 9. In contrast, high percentages of platelets
expressed PD-L1 (80.31% 6 10.48%) and CD270 (91.55% 6
5.18%), and almost no platelets expressed ICOS (0.43% 6 0.73%)
on the adult peripheral blood (PB)-platelets (Fig. 3B). Galectin 9
was expressed on PB-platelets in four individuals (4/8 donors,
54.07% 6 27.59%), but highly positive on CB-platelets (n 5 9
donors, 94.09% 6 7.44%) (Fig. 3A). Intra-cellular staining showed
that they also express the cytokine transforming growth factor b
1 (TGF-b1) (Fig. 3C, 3D). We also found that 81.31% 6 11.6% of
CD411 CB-platelets and 89.92% 6 4.12% of CD411 PB-platelets
display the immune modulation-associated transcription factor
FoxP3 (Fig. 3E). Notably, Western blotting and flow cytometry
revealed the expression of autoimmune regulator (AIRE) in CB-
(Fig. 3F, 3G) and PB-platelets (Fig. 3H, 3I). Additional flow cytome-
try showed that platelets displayed high levels of chemokine
receptors CXCR4 and CCR3; an intermediate level of CCL2; low lev-
els of CXCL10, CCR4, CCR5, CCR7, CXCR1, CXCR2, CXCR3, and
CD62L; and no expression of CXCL1 (Supporting Information Fig.
S1).
Platelets are anucleate cells without human genomic DNA.
To identify the origin of these immune marker-related genes,
mitochondria were purified from CB- and PB-platelets to be
explored for the gene transcriptions of mitochondria DNA
(MitoDNA). Real time PCR Array revealed expressions of
human T cell anergy and immune tolerance-related genes
(Supporting
Information
Fig.
S2).
Flow
cytometry
further
proved that platelet-releasing mitochondria displayed immune
tolerance-related markers CD270 and CD274 (PD-L1) (Fig. 3J).
To determine the immune modulation of mitochondria on T
cells,
peripheral
blood-derived
mononuclear
cells
(PBMCs)
were treated with allogeneic PB-platelet-derived mitochondria
in the presence of Dynabeads coupled with anti-CD31 anti-
CD28 antibodies 1 recombinant human IL-2 (rIL-2). After ex-
vivo expansion of T cells with this mAb combination for 4
days, there were large numbers of cell clusters with different
Figure 3.
Expression of immune modulation-related markers in platelets and mitochondria. (A): Flow cytometry showed expression of co-
inhibitory surface markers PD-L1, CD270, ICOS, and Galectin 9 on CB-platelets (n 5 9). (B): Flow cytometry showed the expression of co-
inhibitory surface markers PD-L1, CD270, ICOS, and Galectin 9 on PB-platelets (n 5 8). (C): Intra-cellular staining showed the expression of
TGF-b1 in CB-platelets (n 5 8). (D): Intra-cellular staining showed the expression of TGF-b1 in PB-platelets (n 5 4). (E): Intra-cellular staining
showed the expression of FoxP3 in CB- and PB-platelets (n 5 9 and 4, respectively). (F): Western blotting showed the expression of AIRE in
seven cord blood preparations. (G): Double staining showed the expression of AIRE in CD411 CB-platelets (n 5 5). (H): Western blotting
showed the expression of AIRE in nine adult blood preparations. (I): Double staining showed the expression of AIRE in CD411 PB-platelets
(n 5 3). (J): Flow cytometry showed the expression of CD270 and CD274 (PD-L1) on CB platelet-releasing mitochondria labeled with Mito-
Tracker Red. N 5 7. (K): Phase contrast microscopy. Human PBMCs were activated with Dynabeads coupled with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 anti-
bodies, 30 U/ml rIL-2 for 4 days, in absence (middle panels) and presence (right panels) of 70 lg/ml mitochondria. Untreated PBMCs (left
right panel) served as control. Original magnification, 340. (L): Quantification of cell proliferation after the treatment for 2 days. (M): Flow
cytometry showed the increase in the percentage of CD41PD11 T cells. (N): Flow cytometry showed the increase in the percentage of
CD81PD11 T cells. Data are presented as mean 6 SEM from four experiments. Isotype IgGs serve as negative control for flow cytometry.
Abbreviations: PBMC, peripheral blood-derived mononuclear cells; ICOS, inducible costimulatory.
Zhao, Jiang, Delgado et al.
1689
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 sizes floating in the supernatant (Fig. 3K, bottom middle
panel), it suggestive of significant T cell proliferation. However,
this phenomenon was not evident in the presence of mito-
chondria (Fig. 3K, right panels). The cell number was markedly
declined after the combination treatment with mitochondria
(Fig. 3L). Next, we examined the expression of an immune
checkpoint receptor PD-1 (programmed death receptor-1) on T
cells, which is the ligand of PD-L1 (CD274). Notably, the per-
centage of CD41PD11 T cells was increased to 15% 6 0.64%
following treatment with mitochondria (Fig. 3M) (p 5 .001).
Further flow cytometry indicated that the percentage of
CD81PD11 T cells was also improved from 2.43% 6 1.18% to
6.46% 6 0.28% in the presence of mitochondria (Fig. 3N) (p 5
.034). Thus, these findings demonstrated that platelets and
mitochondria have the requisite cellular molecules to act as
novel immune modulators and induce immune tolerance.
Platelets Display Human Pancreatic Islet b Cell-Related
Markers
To explore whether platelets contribute to regeneration of islet b
cells, we examined human islet b cell-specific markers [19, 22]
including insulin and C-peptide production, transcription factors
(MAFA, PDX1, NKX6.1, NEUROD1, and NGN3), KATP channel pro-
teins (Sur1 and Kir6.2), and glucokinase (GCK). Real time PCR
data revealed the clear expressions of insulin, MAFA, and Sur1
mRNAs in CB-platelets (n 5 6); the Kir 6.2 mRNA was displayed in
most samples (5/6); a few samples (1/6) were positive for GCK
(Fig. 4A, 4B); however, we found no expression or very weak
expression of PDX1, NKX6.1, NEUROD1, and NGN3 (Fig. 4B). Inter-
estingly, CB-platelets displayed the pancreatic islet d cell-released
hormone somatostatin and E cell marker Ghrelin mRNAs, with
very weak or no expression of glucagon and PPY mRNAs (Fig. 4A).
Western blotting further demonstrated the expression of MAFA
Figure 4.
Expression of pancreatic islet b cell-related markers in platelets. (A): Real time PCR analysis of pancreatic islet-related hormone
products and b-cell-related functional markers in CB-platelets (n 5 6). Freshly isolated human islets served as positive controls. (B): Real time
PCR analysis of pancreatic islet b-cell-related transcription factors in CB-platelets (n 5 6). (C): Western blotting shows the protein expression
of an islet b cell-specific transcription factor MAFA in CB-platelets. (D): Flow cytometry for human pancreatic islet-related hormone products
in freshly-isolated human pancreatic islet cells. (E): Flow cytometry for the pancreatic islet-related hormone products by double staining with
platelet markers CD41 or CD42 in CB-platelets. (F): Flow cytometry for pancreatic islet b-cell-related transcription factors by double staining
with platelet markers CD41 or CD42 in CB-platelets (n 5 7). (G): Real time PCR analysis of pancreatic islet-related hormone products and b-
cell-related functional markers in PB-platelets (n 5 6). (H): Real time PCR analysis of pancreatic islet b-cell-related transcription factors in PB-
platelets (n 5 6). (I): Flow cytometry for pancreatic islet-related hormone products by double staining with platelet markers CD41 or CD42 in
PB-platelets (n 5 15). (J): Flow cytometry of pancreatic islet b-cell-related transcription factors in PB-platelets (n 5 8). (K): Confocal micros-
copy of human CB- and PB-platelets after triple immunostainings with insulin (blue), dense granule marker ADP (red), and a granule marker
vWF (green). Isotype-matched IgGs served as controls (inserted yellow dashed rectangle). Scale bars, 5 lm. Representative data were from
six experiments.
1690
Platelet Mitochondria Expand Islet b-Cell Function
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 protein in CB-platelets (Fig. 4C). Using freshly isolated human
pancreatic islet cells as positive control (Fig. 4D), flow cytometry
confirmed diverse expression of relevant markers including
39.47% 6 20.6% of CD421Insulin1, 40.74% 6 6.32% of CD421C-
peptide1, 28.52% 6 18.56% of CD411MAFA1, 0.24% 6 0.23% of
CD421PDX11, 0.6% 6 0.42% of CD421NKX6.11, and 3.42% 6
0.9% of CD421Glucagon11, and 3.87% 6 1.4% of CD411SST1 in
CB-platelets (Fig. 4E, 4F).
Additionally, flow cytometry revealed low expressions of
normal b-cell development-related transcription factors (e.g.,
23.27% 6 15.14%
of
CD421PTFA11,
1.46% 6 1.05%
of
CD421FOXA21, 0.48% 6 0.08% of CD421SOX171) (Fig. 4F). Addi-
tional studies in adult human PB-platelets demonstrated the
marker expression and patterns similar to the CB-platelets (Fig.
4G–4J). In distinction to that, GCK mRNA was displayed in most
samples (5/6), but only one sample (1/6) was positive for SST, and
none expressed Sur1 in PB-platelets (Fig. 4G). Confocal microscopy
confirmed no typical insulin granules formations in the cytoplasm
(Fig. 4K). Thus, these data confirmed that expression of islet b-
cell-associated markers in human platelets, supporting their
potential to promote the differentiation and regeneration of islet
b cells.
Human Platelets: The Smallest Cell in Blood Holds the
Stemness for Tissue Regenerations
To determine whether platelets contain embryonic stem (ES)-
related self-renewal markers [35], flow cytometry using human
platelets’ markers CD41 and CD42 demonstrated that the highly-
purified CB-platelets (>98% purity) highly display the ES-
associated pluripotent gene markers such as transcription factors
octamer-binding protein 4 (OCT4) and SRY-box containing gene 2
(SOX2), with little or no expression of NANOG (Fig. 5A, 5B). Using
human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) as positive control
(Fig. 5C), similar data were obtained from adult human PB-
platelets (Fig. 5D). The mRNA expression of OCT4, SOX2, Kruppel-
like factor 4 (KLF4), and c-myelocytomatosis oncogene (C-MYC)
was quantified by real time PCR analysis in CB- (Fig. 5E) and PB-
Platelets (Fig. 5G). Western blotting further confirmed the expres-
sion of OCT4, SOX2, CRIPTO, GATA-4, and C-MYC at protein levels
in CB-platelets (Fig. 5F). Similar data were obtained from PB-
platelets (Fig. 5H). Both NANOG mRNA and protein levels were
very low or negative in CB-platelets (Fig. 5E, 5F) and PB-platelets
(Fig. 5G, 5H). The data imply that platelets hold the stemness’
markers that aid in modulating and reprogramming the prolifera-
tion and differentiation of adult human cells.To identify the origin
of these stemness-related genes, mitochondria were purified
from CB- and PB-platelets to be explored for the gene transcrip-
tions of mitochondria DNA (MitoDNA). The RT2 Profiler PCR Array
revealed the expressions of human stem cell-related transcription
factors (Supporting Information Fig. S3) and human stem cell-
associated markers (Supporting Information Fig. S4) in the
mitochondria of both human CB- and PB-platelets. The data con-
firm that the stemness’ markers are localized in platelets’
mitochondria.
Figure 4.
Continued
Zhao, Jiang, Delgado et al.
1691
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 Figure 5.
Platelets express human ES cell markers. (A): Analysis of purified CB-platelets by flow cytometry. The gated platelets in dot plot
(top left panel, blue) were analyzed by using platelet markers CD41 and CD42, together with ES marker OCT4. Representative data of those
obtained from eight experiments. (B): Flow cytometry after double staining with CD41 and ES markers in CB-platelets (n 5 8). (C): Induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) as positive control express the ES cell markers, with isotype-matched IgGs as negative controls (grey). (D): Flow
cytometry after double staining with CD41 and ES markers in PB-platelets (n 5 4). (E): Gene expressions of ES markers in CB-platelets are
demonstrated by electrophoresis of real time PCR products. Their expressions in iPSCs served as positive controls. (F): Western blot showed
the protein expression of ES markers in CB-platelets. (G): Real time PCR showed gene expressions of ES markers in PB-platelets. (H): Western
blot showed the protein expression of ES markers in PB-platelets.
1692
Platelet Mitochondria Expand Islet b-Cell Function
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 Mitochondria Released by Platelets Improve Function
and Replication of Human Pancreatic Islet b Cells
To elucidate the interaction between platelets and pancreatic
islets, firstly flow cytometry demonstrated that CB-platelets could
release mitochondria (Fig. 6A), and stimulation with different pla-
telet aggregators altered the levels of mitochondria released
(adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and arachidonic acid (ARA)
increased release, but thrombin reduced release) (Fig. 6B). Using
the Transwell co-culture system to separate human islet cells (top
chamber) from CB-platelets (bottom chamber) (Fig. 6C), notably,
kinetic studies by flow cytometry demonstrated that the
MitoTracker-labeled mitochondria released from CB-platelets
Figure 6.
Improve pancreatic islet b-cell function by the platelet-derived mitochondria. (A): Flow cytometry showed the basal release of
mitochondria from platelets in dot plot (left) and histogram (right). (B): Effects of platelet aggregators on the releasing of mitochondria. Rep-
resentative data of those obtained from four experiments. (C): Co-culture of freshly-isolated human pancreatic single islet cells (top chamber)
with platelets labeled with MitoTracker Deep Red (bottom chamber) in Transwells. (D): Kinetic measurements by flow cytometry demon-
strated that human pancreatic islet cells take up MitoTracker Deep Red-labeled mitochondria released from platelets (bottom) in Transwell
co-culture. (E): Expression of chemokine and chemokine receptors on CB-platelet-derived mitochondria (n 5 11). (F): Expression of adhesion
molecules and chemokine receptors on human islet b cells. Representative data of those obtained from three experiments. (G): Migration
and the taking up of mitochondria by human islet b cells were markedly declined in the presence of blocking Abs with anti-CD29 and/or anti-
TLR4. (H): Cell viability was increased after single islet b cells co-cultured with platelets in Transwells. (I): The number of islet b cells was
increased after co-culture with platelets in Transwells. (J): Co-culture of freshly-isolated whole human pancreatic islets (top chamber) with
platelets labeled with mitochondria (bottom chamber) in Transwells. The pore size of transmembrane is 0.4 lm. (K): Islet cell viability was
increased after co-cultured with mitochondria. (L): The average islet size was increased after co-cultured with mitochondria. (M): Flow cytom-
etry indicates that the percentage of Insulin1Ki671 islet b cells was increased after co-cultured with mitochondria in Transwells. Mitochon-
dria were purified from CB-platelets (n 5 4). (N): Functional analysis demonstrated that the C-peptide release from islet b cells was enhanced
in the presence of different insulin secretagogues. Data are presented as mean6 SEM (n 5 3 experiments). (O): Immunohistochemistry of
human pancreatic tissues from diabetic patients (N 5 6) showed the migration of platelets into islets, with a formation of platelet clusters
(green color, a platelet marker CD42a) at different sizes and close to islet b cells (red color, a b-cell marker insulin). Scale bar, 10 lm. Abbrevi-
ations: ADP, adenosine diphosphate; ARA, arachidonic acid; Pct, percentage.
Zhao, Jiang, Delgado et al.
1693
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 (bottom) can pass through the membrane (with a 0.4 lm pore
size) of Transwells and are taken up by pancreatic islet cells (top
chamber) (Fig. 6D).
Next, we clarified molecular mechanisms by which mitochon-
dria migrate to islet b cells. Flow cytometry revealed that CB-
platelet-derived mitochondria strongly express adhesion molecule
and chemokine receptors such as fibronectin, CXC chemokine
receptor 2 (CXCR2), CXCR4, and chemokine C-C motif receptor 7
(CCR7) but are negative for CD62L (Fig. 6E). Human pancreatic
islet b cells display the fibronectin ligand CD29 (integrin b1), Toll-
like receptor 4 (TLR4), and TLR6, but they were negative for or
only modestly expressed type II transmembrane glycoprotein
CD38, thrombospondin receptor CD36, C-C motif chemokine
ligand 2 (CCL2), C-C motif chemokine receptor 4 (CCR4), and CCR6
(Fig. 6F). To determine which molecules are involved in the inter-
action between mitochondria and islet b cells, CB-platelet-derived
Figure 6.
Continued
1694
Platelet Mitochondria Expand Islet b-Cell Function
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 mitochondria were co-cultured with pancreatic islets in the pres-
ence of anti-CD29 and/or anti-TLR4 antibodies. The uptake of
MitoTracker-labeled mitochondria by islet b cells was markedly
reduced (Fig. 6G), indicating that CD29 and TLR4 contribute to the
adhesion and uptake of mitochondria by human islet b cells.
To determine the biological effects of platelet-derived mito-
chondria on islet b cells, we co-cultured trypsin/EDTA-dissociated
single pancreatic islet b cells with platelets in Transwells (Fig. 6C).
Both cell viability and viable cell numbers were substantially
increased after co-culture for 7 days (Fig. 6H, 6I). We then co-
cultured whole pancreatic islets with CB-platelet-derived mito-
chondria in Transwells for 7 days (Fig. 6J), which also increased
islet cell viability (Fig. 6K) and average islet size (p 5 .026, Fig. 6L).
Using the insulin byproduct C-peptide as indicator for b cells, flow
cytometry demonstrated that the percentage of C-peptide1Ki671
islet b cells was strikingly enriched following co-culture with mito-
chondria (Fig. 6M), and functional analysis demonstrated that the
islet b cells exhibited improved C-peptide release in response to
insulin secretagogues (e.g., 16.7 mM high glucose and tolbuta-
mide) (Fig. 6N). These ex vivo studies confirmed that pancreatic
islet b-cell function is improved after treatment with platelet-
derived mitochondria.
To explore the relationship between platelets and islet b
cells, the distribution of platelets was examined in pancreatic
islets of diabetic subjects. Immunohistochemistry studies dem-
onstrated the migration of platelets into pancreatic islets in the
form of single or clusters (Fig. 6O). We also tested the platelet
distribution in pancreata of healthy donors (n 5 2) and found
there were no or only a few platelets scattered in or around
pancreatic islets (Supporting Information Fig. S5). It was rare to
find the cluster of platelets inside of healthy pancreatic islets.
Therefore, platelets may migrate into pancreatic islets and
release mitochondria that could be directly taken up by islet b
cells, leading to the regeneration of b cells and long-lasting clini-
cal improvements of islet b-cell function in diabetic patients
after receiving the SCE therapy.
DISCUSSION
Diabetes is a major public health issue worldwide. Abnormalities
in multiple types of immune cells contribute to the autoimmunity
in T1D and the insulin resistance in T2D. A comprehensive
approach is needed to fundamentally address these multiple
immune dysfunctions in the clinical setting and find a cure for dia-
betes.The current study substantiated the long-lasting clinical effi-
cacy of SCE therapy for the treatment of T1D and T2D subjects,
with a complete recovery of islet b-cell functions after one treat-
ment with SCE therapy for 4 years. Additionally, we found expres-
sions of immune tolerance- and ES cell-associate characteristics in
platelets and mitochondria. Pancreatic islet b cells can be reprog-
rammed to proliferate while maintaining good cell viability and
restoring normal b-cell function by taking up platelet-releasing
mitochondria. This novel mechanism may contribute to the long-
lasting clinical efficacy of SCE therapy in diabetic subjects after
receiving one treatment with SCE therapy. Thus, these innovative
approaches using platelets to protect and enrich islet b cells may
mitigate safety and ethical concerns associated with other
approaches that involve the transplantation of insulin-producing
cell surrogates or the viral/drug-induced transduction of pancre-
atic cells.
By the time T1D is diagnosed, 70%–80% of total islet b-cell
mass has been lost. Similarly, individuals who have been diag-
nosed with T2D for more than 10 years also have a shortage of
islet b cells due to persistent glucotoxicity, lipotoxicity, chronic
metabolic inflammation, oxidative stress, and endoplasmic reticu-
lum stress [36]. The shortage of pancreatic islet b cells is a key
issue that must be overcome in any cure for T1D and T2D; there-
fore, promoting b-cell neogenesis is essential. Current ex vivo
studies established that platelet-derived mitochondria not only
display the critical molecules for inducing immune tolerance, but
also carry the islet-specific transcription factor MAFA, the pancre-
atic progenitor-associated marker SOX9, and ES-related self-
renewal markers (e.g., OCT4, SOX2, KLF4, and C-MYC) [35]. Thus,
mitochondria function not only as powerhouses, producing 90%
of a cell’s energy to support human activities of daily living, but
also as modulators to induce the immune tolerance, as well as
controllers for the tissue regeneration.
Additionally, immunohistochemistry data demonstrated the
migration of platelets into pancreatic islets of diabetic subjects. As
demonstrated by current ex vivo studies, these islet-infiltrated pla-
telets could be activated to release mitochondria and enter into
islet b cells via fibronectin/CD29, CXCR4/SDF-1 or other potential
chemokines, resulting in the proliferation and recovery of normal
b-cell function. In this regard, current and previous clinical data
[31] from the Chinese trials have provided powerful evidence that
reversal of autoimmunity by SCE therapy leads to regeneration of
islet b cells and improvement of metabolic control in Chinese dia-
betics. Therefore, these findings advanced our understanding of
molecular and cellular mechanisms [28] underlying the long-
lasting (4 years) improvement of islet b-cell function and meta-
bolic control in diabetic patients after receiving a SCE therapy.This
novel mechanism may be applied to the treatment of other
degenerative diseases, such as Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s
disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
CONCLUSION
Overcoming multiple immune dysfunctions is fundamental for the
treatment of T1D. The SCE therapy offers comprehensive immune
modulation at both the local and systemic levels in T1D, by using
a patient’s own immune cells that are “educated” by CB stem
cells, thus mitigating the safety and ethical concerns associated
with other conventional immunological approaches [28]. Current
clinical data demonstrated the modulation of platelets in diabetic
patients after receiving SCE therapy. Mechanistic studies in plate-
lets and mitochondria revealed high expressions of immune
tolerance-related markers on platelets and released mitochondria.
Specifically, there is an expression of autoimmune regulator (AIRE)
in both CB- and PB-platelets, which is usually expressed in thymic
medullary epithelial cells and play a key role in the deletion of
auto-reactive T cells during T cell differentiation and development
[37, 38]. Ex vivo data demonstrated the suppression of T-cell pro-
liferation and the up-regulation of PD1 expression on CD41 and
CD81 T cells after the treatment with mitochondria. Thus, the
therapeutic potential of SCE therapy can be magnified through in
vivo actions of platelets and released mitochondria after the treat-
ment with SCE therapy. SCE therapy delivers not only the long-
lasting recovery of homeostasis in pancreata, but also the compre-
hensive immune balance for the whole body. Targeting mitochon-
dria and platelets may revolutionize conventional immune
Zhao, Jiang, Delgado et al.
1695
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 therapies and regenerative medicine with current stem cell
approaches, by leading the way toward the development of novel
therapy to treat human diseases.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Clinical trials in Chinese T1D and T2D subjects were supported
by the China Jinan 5150 Program. Spanish clinical trial was sup-
ported by the grants from the European Union FEDER funds,
Principado de Asturias and FICYT (GRUPIN 14–069). Ex vivo
studies were supported by the Hackensack University Medical
Center Foundation.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Y.Z.: Conception and design, financial support, data analysis and
interpretation, manuscript writing, final approval of manuscript;
Z.J., E.D.: Conception and design, provision of study material or
patients, collection and/or assembly of data, data analysis and
interpretation; H.L.: Provision of study material or patients, other
(GMP production of stem cell educators for clinical treatments);
H.Z.: Provision of study material or patients, collection and/or
assembly of data, data analysis and interpretation; W.H., A.J.,
M.M., H.W.: Other (performed ex vivo studies and flow cytome-
try); M.P.-B., Y.Z., Y.L., S.P.-L., M.A.-V.: Other (GMP production of
stem cell educators for clinical treatments); Q.T., Z.Y.: Collection
and/or assembly of data; J.W.: Provision of study material or
patients; Q.L.: Administrative support, other (clinical technical
support for apheresis); J.Z., Y.L., E.M.R., J.M.G.-G.: Other (clinical
technical support for apheresis); E.M.: Provision of study material
or patients; T.M.: Provision of study material (cord blood units);
E.G.: Provision of study material (cord blood units), administrative
support; J.O.: Conception and design, financial support, final
approval of manuscript.
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Dr. Zhao, an inventor of Stem Cell Educator technology, led the
clinical study, and has an investment and a fiduciary role in
Tianhe Stem Cell Biotechnology Inc. (licensed this technology
from University of Illinois at Chicago). Dr. Zhao is an inventor for
this technology on platelets and mitochondria that has been
submitted for provisional patent application. Dr. Zhao received
the governmental funding for clinical trials and also received the
funding from Hackensack University Medical Center Foundation
for mechanistic studies. Dr. Zhao is the founder and has an
investment and an ownership in Tianhe Stem Cell Biotechnology
Inc. All other authors indicated no potential conflicts of interest.
REFERENCES
1
Nanditha A, Ma RC, Ramachandran A
et al. Diabetes in Asia and the Pacific: Implica-
tions for the global epidemic. Diabetes Care
2016;39:472–485.
2
Xu Y, Wang L, He J et al. Prevalence and
control of diabetes in Chinese adults. JAMA
2013;310:948–959.
3
Bluestone JA, Herold K, Eisenbarth G.
Genetics, pathogenesis and clinical interven-
tions in type 1 diabetes. Nature 2010;464:
1293–1300.
4
Defuria J, Belkina AC, Jagannathan-Bogdan
M et al. B cells promote inflammation in obesity
and type 2 diabetes through regulation of T-cell
function and an inflammatory cytokine profile.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2013;110:5133–5138.
5
Winer DA, Winer S, Shen L et al. B cells
promote insulin resistance through modula-
tion of T cells and production of pathogenic
IgG antibodies. Nat Med 2011;17:610–617.
6
Winer S, Chan Y
, Paltser G et al. Normaliza-
tion of obesity-associated insulin resistance through
immunotherapy. Nat Med 2009;15:921–929.
7
Winer
S,
Winer
DA.
The
adaptive
immune system as a fundamental regulator of
adipose tissue inflammation and insulin resist-
ance. Immunol Cell Biol 2012;90:755762.
8
Liu J, Divoux A, Sun J et al. Genetic
deficiency and pharmacological stabilization
of mast cells reduce diet-induced obesity
and diabetes in mice. Nat Med 2009;15:
940–945.
9
Olefsky JM, Glass CK. Macrophages,
inflammation, and insulin resistance. Annu
Rev Physiol 2010;72:219–246.
10
Talukdar S, Oh DY, Bandyopadhyay G
et al. Neutrophils mediate insulin resistance in
mice fed a high-fat diet through secreted elas-
tase. Nat Med 2012;18:1407–1412.
11
Wu D, Molofsky AB, Liang HE et al.
Eosinophils
sustain
adipose
alternatively
activated macrophages associated with glu-
cose homeostasis. Science 2011;332:243–247.
12
Couzin-Frankel J. Trying to reset the
clock on type 1 diabetes. Science 2011;333:
819–821.
13
Herold KC, Vignali DA, Cooke A et al.
Type
1
diabetes:
Translating
mechanistic
observations into effective clinical outcomes.
Nat Rev Immunol 2013;13:243–256.
14
Bach JF. Anti-CD3 antibodies for type 1
diabetes: Beyond expectations. Lancet 2011;
378:459–460.
15
Wherrett DK, Bundy B, Becker DJ
et al. Antigen-based therapy with glutamic
acid decarboxylase (GAD) vaccine in patients
with recent-onset type 1 diabetes: A rando-
mised double-blind trial. Lancet 2011;378:
319–327.
16
Herold KC, Majzoub JA, Melmed S et al.
Endocrinology research-reflecting on the past
decade and looking to the next. Nat Rev Endo-
crinol 2015;11:672–680.
17
Stewart AF, Hussain MA, Garcia-Ocana
A et al. Human beta-cell proliferation and
intracellular signaling: Part 3. Diabetes 2015;
64:1872–1885.
18
Bernal-Mizrachi E, Kulkarni RN, Scott
DK et al. Human beta-cell proliferation and
intracellular signaling part 2: Still driving in
the dark without a road map. Diabetes 2014;
63:819–831.
19
Pagliuca FW, Millman JR, Gurtler M
et al. Generation of functional human pancre-
atic beta cells in vitro. Cell 2014;159:428–439.
20
Agulnick AD, Ambruzs DM, Moorman
MA et al. Insulin-producing endocrine cells dif-
ferentiated in vitro from human embryonic
stem cells function in macroencapsulation
devices in vivo. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
2015;4:1214–1222.
21
Schulz TC, Young HY, Agulnick AD et al.
A scalable system for production of functional
pancreatic progenitors from human embry-
onic stem cells. PLoS One 2012;7:e37004.
22
Rezania A, Bruin JE, Arora P et al. Rever-
sal of diabetes with insulin-producing cells
derived in vitro from human pluripotent stem
cells. Nat Biotechnol 2014;32:1121–1133.
23
Boyd AS, Rodrigues NP, Lui KO et al.
Concise
review:
Immune
recognition
of
induced pluripotent stem cells. STEM CELLS
2012;30:797–803.
24
Zhao T, Zhang ZN, Rong Z et al. Immu-
nogenicity of induced pluripotent stem cells.
Nature 2011;474:212–215.
25
Zhao T, Zhang ZN, Westenskow PD et al.
Humanized mice reveal differential immuno-
genicity of cells derived from autologous
induced pluripotent stem cells. Cell Stem Cell
2015;17:353–359.
26
Zhao Y, Wang H, Mazzone T. Identifica-
tion of stem cells from human umbilical cord
blood with embryonic and hematopoietic
characteristics. Exp Cell Res 2006;312:2454–
2464.
27
Zhao Y, Mazzone T. Human cord blood
stem cells and the journey to a cure for type 1
diabetes. Autoimmun Rev 2010;10:103–107.
28
Zhao Y. Stem cell educator therapy and
induction of immune balance. Curr Diab Rep
2012;12:517–523.
29
Zhao Y, Glesne D, Huberman E. A
human peripheral blood monocyte-derived
subset acts as pluripotent stem cells. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2003;100:2426–2431.
30
Zhao Y, Lin B, Darflinger R et al. Human
cord blood stem cell-modulated regulatory T
lymphocytes reverse the autoimmune-caused
type 1 diabetes in nonobese diabetic (NOD)
mice. PloS One 2009;4:e4226.
31
Zhao Y, Jiang Z, Zhao T et al. Reversal of
type 1 diabetes via islet beta cell regeneration
following immune modulation by cord blood-
1696
Platelet Mitochondria Expand Islet b-Cell Function
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 derived multipotent stem cells. BMC Med
2012;10:3.
32
Delgado E, Perez-Basterrechea M, Suarez-
Alvarez B et al. Modulation of autoimmune T-cell
memory by stem cell educator therapy: Phase 1/
2 clinical trial. Ebiomedicine 2015;2:2024–2036.
33
Zhao Y, Jiang Z, Zhao T et al. Targeting
insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes via
immune modulation of cord blood-derived
multipotent stem cells (CB-SCs) in stem cell
educator therapy: Phase I/II clinical trial. BMC
Med 2013;11:160.
34
Li Y, Yan B, Wang H et al. Hair regrowth
in alopecia areata patients following Stem Cell
Educator therapy. BMC Med 2015;13:87.
35
Takahashi K, Tanabe K, Ohnuki M et al.
Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult
human fibroblasts by defined factors. Cell
2007;131:861–872.
36
Nolan CJ, Damm P, Prentki M. Type 2
diabetes across generations: From pathophysi-
ology to prevention and management. Lancet
2011;378:169–181.
37
Mathis D, Benoist C. Aire. Annu Rev
Immunol 2009;27:287–312.
38
Metzger TC, Anderson MS. Control of
central and peripheral tolerance by Aire.
Immunol Rev 2011;241:89–103.
See www.StemCellsTM.com for supporting information available online.
Zhao, Jiang, Delgado et al.
1697
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
