 Zheng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau8317     6 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
1 of 11
NEUROSCIENCE
The gut microbiome from patients with schizophrenia 
modulates the glutamate-glutamine-GABA cycle and 
schizophrenia-relevant behaviors in mice
Peng Zheng1,2,3*, Benhua Zeng4*, Meiling Liu5, Jianjun Chen6, Junxi Pan2,3,7, Yu Han1,2,3, 
Yiyun Liu1,2,3, Ke Cheng1,2,3, Chanjuan Zhou2,3, Haiyang Wang1,2,3, Xinyu Zhou1,2,3, Siwen Gui1,2,3, 
Seth W. Perry8, Ma-Li Wong8, Julio Licinio8†‡, Hong Wei9†‡, Peng Xie1,2,3†‡
Schizophrenia (SCZ) is a devastating mental disorder with poorly defined underlying molecular mechanisms. The 
gut microbiome can modulate brain function and behaviors through the microbiota-gut-brain axis. Here, we 
found that unmedicated and medicated patients with SCZ had a decreased microbiome -diversity index and 
marked disturbances of gut microbial composition versus healthy controls (HCs). Several unique bacterial 
taxa (e.g., Veillonellaceae and Lachnospiraceae) were associated with SCZ severity. A specific microbial panel 
(Aerococcaceae, Bifidobacteriaceae, Brucellaceae, Pasteurellaceae, and Rikenellaceae) enabled discriminating 
patients with SCZ from HCs with 0.769 area under the curve. Compared to HCs, germ-free mice receiving SCZ 
microbiome fecal transplants had lower glutamate and higher glutamine and GABA in the hippocampus and 
displayed SCZ- 
relevant behaviors similar to other mouse models of SCZ involving glutamatergic hypofunction. 
Together, our findings suggest that the SCZ microbiome itself can alter neurochemistry and neurologic function 
in ways that may be relevant to SCZ pathology.
INTRODUCTION
Schizophrenia (SCZ) is a devastating illness affecting approximately 
0.5 to 1% of the general population worldwide (1). Previously, re-
searchers have focused on analysis of the human genome to determine 
the pathogenesis of SCZ (2). Genome-wide association (GWAS) 
analysis of 36,000 patients identified 108 susceptibility loci for SCZ 
(3). However, the identified associations likely account for only about 
4% of the variance in SCZ. Thus, we should also seek to identify the 
role of non-human genetic factors in the onset of SCZ.
The gastrointestinal (GI) tract is a complex ecosystem contain-
ing a large number of resident microorganisms (4). Recent evidence 
suggests that the gut microbiota could modulate brain function and 
behaviors via the “microbiota-gut-brain” (MGB) axis (5, 6). For ex-
ample, gut microbiota have been reported to be associated with al-
terations in anxiety (7), memory (8), cognition (9), and locomotor 
activity (10). Our groups recently showed that modulation of gut 
microbiota using the germ-free (GF) method or antibiotics could 
result in depressive-like behaviors (11, 12). These findings highlight 
the novel possibility that disturbances of gut microbiota or the MGB 
axis may contribute to the onset of psychiatric disorders.
The relationships between the MGB axis and the SCZ are not yet 
fully understood. Emerging clinical and preclinical studies indicate 
potential associations between a disturbed gut microbiome and SCZ 
(13). Epidemiological studies have shown that prenatal microbial in-
fection resulted in a 10- to 20-fold increased risk of developing SCZ 
(14). In addition, SCZ is frequently comorbid with GI disorders that 
are characterized by alterations of gut microbial communities (15). 
In animal studies, gut microbiota are crucial in postnatal develop-
ment and maturation of neural, immune, and endocrine systems 
(16), and these behavioral and physiological processes are frequently 
impaired in patients with SCZ (17). These aforementioned studies 
suggest that disturbance of the MGB axis may be associated with 
development of SCZ.
To address this issue, a culture-independent, 16S ribosomal RNA 
(16S rRNA) gene sequence–based approach was used to compare 
the gut microbial communities of patients with SCZ and healthy 
controls (HCs) to evaluate whether microbiotal dysbiosis was linked 
with schizophrenic episodes or the severity of schizophrenic symp-
toms. Then, we transferred gut microbiota from patients with SCZ 
into GF mice to test whether SCZ-relevant behavioral phenotypes 
were transmissible via their gut microbiome. Last, to capture func-
tional readout of microbial activity, we performed comparative 
metagenomic and metabolomic analyses of samples from the mice 
harboring “SCZ microbiota” versus “HC microbiota” to determine 
the potential mechanistic pathways by which the disturbed gut micro-
biota may modulate host physiology and behavior.
RESULTS
Human studies
Clinical characteristics of recruited participants
A total of 63 patients with SCZ and 69 HCs were recruited for this study. 
There were no significant differences in age, gender, or body mass 
index between the two groups. All patients with SCZ were undergoing 
some symptoms of this illness. The Positive and Negative Syndrome 
1Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical Uni-
versity, Chongqing, China. 2Institute of Neuroscience and the Collaborative Inno-
vation Center for Brain Science, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China. 
3Chongqing Key Laboratory of Neurobiology, Chongqing, China. 4Department of 
Laboratory Animal Science, College of Basic Medical Sciences, Third Military Medi-
cal University, Chongqing, China. 5Department of Gastroenterology, The First Affil-
iated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China. 6College of Life 
Sciences, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China. 7The M.O.E. Key Labo-
ratory of Laboratory Medical Diagnostics, the College of Laboratory Medicine, 
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 400016, China. 8Department of Psychi-
atry, College of Medicine, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, USA. 
9Precision Medicine Institute, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, 
Guangzhou, Guangdong 510080, China.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†These authors are co-senior authors.
‡Corresponding author. Email: xiepeng@cqmu.edu.cn (P.X.); weihong63528@163.
com (H.W.); licinioj@upstate.edu (J.L.)
Copyright © 2019 
The Authors, some 
rights reserved; 
exclusive licensee 
American Association 
for the Advancement 
of Science. No claim to 
original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed 
under a Creative 
Commons Attribution 
License 4.0 (CC BY).
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Zheng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau8317     6 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
2 of 11
Scale Score (PANSS) measured the severity of schizophrenic symp-
toms and ranged from 45 to 120. Detailed characteristics of the re-
cruited participants are shown in table S1 and “study design” under 
Materials and Methods.
Lower within-sample microbial diversity in patients with SCZ
In total, we obtained 2,905,956 high-quality reads across all samples 
with an average length of 439.18. These reads were clustered into 
864 OTUs (operational taxonomic units) at 97% sequence similarity. 
A Venn diagram showed that 744 of 864 OTUs were detected in the 
two groups, while 56 and 64 OTUs were unique to patients with 
SCZ and HCs subjects, respectively (fig. S1A). Most rarefaction 
curves tended to approach the saturation plateau, suggesting that 
the sequencing depth was enough to cover the whole bacterial di-
versity (fig. S1B). Within-sample -phylogenetic diversity analysis 
showed that both microbial richness indices (Chao) and diversity 
indices (Shannon) were lower in patients with SCZ when compared 
to those of HCs (Fig. 1A). These findings suggest that the micro-
bial compositions of patients with SCZ were characterized by lower 
within-sample diversity.
Patients with SCZ exhibit altered gut microbiota
To determine whether the microbial composition of patients with 
SCZ was substantially different from that of HC subjects, we carried 
out -diversity analysis and found obvious differences in gut micro-
bial composition between the two groups from order to OTU levels 
(fig. S1, C to F and Fig. 1B). At the phylum or class level, SCZ and 
HC subjects showed a separation trend (fig. S1, G and H). We also 
performed analyses to determine whether the global microbial phe-
notypes were substantially affected by potential confounding vari-
ables (i.e., sex or antipsychotic drugs). The patients with SCZ or HCs 
were not clustered on the basis of these variables, suggesting that 
global microbial phenotypes were not greatly influenced by sex or 
medication status (fig. S2, A to C).
To further identify the gut microbiota responsible for discrim-
inating patients with SCZ from HC subjects, we carried out Linear 
discriminant analysis Effect Size (LEfSe). This analysis identified 
77 differential OTUs responsible for the discrimination between 
the two groups (Fig. 1C and table S2A). Twenty-three of 77 OTUs 
were increased in patients with SCZ compared to HC subjects, 
and those OTUs mainly belonged to the bacterial taxonomic fam-
ilies Veillonellaceae (five OTUs), Prevotellaceae (four OTUs), 
Bacteroidaceae (three OTUs), and Coriobacteriaceae (two OTUs). 
The remaining 54 OTUs were decreased in patients with SCZ rela-
tive to HC subjects, and they belonged to the bacterial families 
Lachnospiraceae (16 OTUs), Ruminococcaceae (12 OTUs), Norank 
(5 OTUs), and Enterobacteriaceae (4 OTUs).
Dysbiosis of gut microbiota in SCZ is specific relative to that of 
major depressive disorder
To determine whether these altered OTUs were relatively specific to 
SCZ versus other neuropsychiatric disorders, we compared key differ-
ential bacterial taxa observed in SCZ and major depression. Previ-
ously, we identified 54 OTUs able to discriminate between depressed 
and HC subjects (12). Compared to the HC group, only 15.3% 
OTUs (8 of 52) belonging to Ruminococcaceae were up-regulated, 
and 30.3% OTUs (24 of 79) belonging to Acidaminococcaceae, Bac-
teroidaceae, Ruminococcaceae, and Veillonellaceae were synchro-
nously down-regulated, in both SCZ and depression groups (fig. S3). 
These findings indicate that the altered gut microbial composition 
observed in SCZ is specific relative to the gut microbiome changes 
we observed in depression.
Microbial markers for symptomatic severity and diagnosis 
 
in SCZ
To identify the OTUs related to severity of schizophrenic symp-
toms, we performed correlation analysis. Veillonellaceae OTU191 
was negatively correlated with PANSS, whereas Bacteroidaceae 
OTU172, Streptococcaceae OTU834, and two Lachnospiraceae OTUs 
(477 and 629) were positively correlated with PANSS. Ruminococ-
caceae also had two OTUs correlated with PANSS, one negatively 
correlated (OTU725) and the other positively correlated (OTU181) 
(Fig. 1D).
To identify key discriminative microbial markers, we performed 
a stepwise regression analysis based on relative abundance of differ-
ent gut microbes. This analysis showed that the most significant 
deviations between SCZ and HC subjects occurred for the bacterial 
families Aerococcaceae, Bifidobacteriaceae, Brucellaceae, Pasteurel-
laceae, and Rikenellaceae. An ROC (receiver operating characteristic) 
analysis showed that this microbial panel enabled discrimination of pa-
tients with SCZ from HC subjects with an area under the curve (AUC) 
of 0.769 (Fig. 1E), suggesting potential diagnostic value for SCZ.
Animal studies
Gut microbiome transplantation from patients with SCZ induces 
SCZ-relevant behaviors in GF recipient mice
To determine whether SCZ-relevant behavioral phenotypes might 
be linked with disturbed gut microbiota, we performed fecal micro-
biota transplantation (FMT) experiments. The global gut microbial 
phenotypes of the randomly selected subset samples used for these 
FMT experiments were representative of their full population dis-
tributions (fig. S4A). In the open-field test, the SCZ microbiota re-
cipient mice showed hyperactivity (greater total distance traveled; 
Fig. 2A) and reduced anxiety (more travel in the exposed center 
region away from the walls; Fig. 2B). Similarly, the duration of im-
mobility in the forced swimming test was significantly decreased in 
the SCZ microbiota recipient mice compared to the HC microbiota 
recipient mice (Fig. 2C), suggesting decreased depressive-like (and 
more active) behavior. Cognitive behaviors were also measured using 
Y-maze, sociability, and social novelty preference tests, as well as 
the prepulse inhibition (PPI) test. In the Y-maze test, there was no 
difference between the two groups (Fig. 2D). In the sociability test, 
the time investigating the chamber containing a mouse versus the 
alternative empty chamber did not differ between groups (Fig. 2E). 
Furthermore, the time investigating a novel versus a familiar mouse 
was also statistically indistinguishable (P = 0.100) between the groups 
in the social novelty preference test (Fig. 2F). Compared to the HC 
microbiota recipient mice, the SCZ microbiota recipient mice dis-
played an exaggerated startle response to high-decibel tones (120 db) 
(Fig. 2G), but PPI did not differ between the two groups (Fig. 2H). 
Collectively, these behavioral tests showed that mice transplanted with 
SCZ microbiota displayed locomotor hyperactivity, decreased anxiety- 
and depressive-like behaviors, and increased startle responses, sug-
gesting that the disturbed microbial composition of SCZ microbiota 
recipient mice was associated with several endophenotypes charac-
teristic of mouse models of SCZ (see Discussion).
The key discriminative microbial markers found in patients 
with SCZ were successfully colonized in the SCZ microbiota 
recipient mice
To determine whether the discriminative microbial markers char-
acteristic of SCZ were successfully colonized in the SCZ microbiota 
recipient mice, we characterized gut microbial compositions. Overall, 
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Zheng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau8317     6 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
3 of 11
the microbial phenotypes of the SCZ microbiota recipient mice were 
greatly different from those of the HC microbiota recipient mice 
(fig. S4B). Stepwise regression analysis showed that the most sig-
nificant discrimination between these two groups was attributable 
to the bacterial families Aerococcaceae and Rikenellaceae, and their 
combined microbial markers could completely discriminate the 
SCZ microbiota recipient mice from their HC counterparts with an 
AUC of 1, which represents 100% discrimination accuracy (fig. S4C). 
Fig. 1. Gut microbial characteristics of SCZ. (A) -Phylogenetic diversity analysis showed that patients with SCZ were characterized by lower microbial richness (Chao, 
*P < 0.05) and diversity (Shannon, **P < 0.01) indices relative to HCs. (B) At the OTU level, partial least-squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) showed that gut microbiota composition 
of patients with SCZ was greatly different from that of HCs. (C) Heat map of the 77 discriminative OTU abundances between patients with SCZ and HCs; 23 up-regulated OTUs in 
SCZ are arranged on the left part of the image, and 54 decreased OTUs are arranged on the right part. The taxonomic assignment of each OTU is provided on the right column. (D) OTUs 
related to SCZ symptom severity (quantitation with PANSS). The red line designates negative correlation between PANSS and microbes, while the green line shows positive 
correlation. Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae are shown twice because they both had two different OTUs correlated with PANSS (see Results). (E) ROC analysis showed 
that the combination of Aerococcaceae, Bifidobacteriaceae, Brucellaceae, Pasteurellaceae, and Rikenellaceae can distinguish patients with SCZ from HCs with an AUC of 0.769.
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Zheng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau8317     6 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
4 of 11
Furthermore, identical changes in Aerococcaceae and Rikenellaceae 
composition were seen in both patients with SCZ and the SCZ micro-
biota recipient mice (fig. S4, D and E).
Perturbed gut-brain amino acid and lipid metabolism in SCZ 
microbiota recipient mice
To characterize the functions encoded by the gut microbiotal DNA, 
we performed whole-genome shotgun sequencing of cecum stool 
samples obtained from the SCZ microbiota and the HC microbiota 
recipient mice at week 2 after FMT. Pathway- 
enrichment analysis 
revealed that eight pathways were increased, whereas 25 pathways 
were decreased in the SCZ microbiota recipient mice compared to 
the HC microbiota recipient mice (Fig. 3 and table S2B), and SCZ 
microbiota recipient mice were characterized by enrichment of genes 
for lipid and amino acid metabolism.
Fig. 2. Behavioral comparisons between the SCZ microbiota recipient mice and the HC microbiota recipient mice. (A and B) Open-field test. Compared to the HC 
microbiota recipient mice, the total distance (A) and proportion (B) of central distance traveled in 30 min were significantly increased in the SCZ microbiota recipient mice 
(HC, n = 24; SCZ, n = 25). (C) Forced swimming test. Compared to the HC microbiota recipient mice, the duration of immobility was significantly decreased in the SCZ 
microbiota recipient mice (n = 20 per group). (D) Y-maze test. There was no difference in the alteration rate between the two groups (n = 20 per group). (E and F) Socia-
bility and social novelty preference test. In the sociability test (E) and social novelty preference tests (F), the time investigating the chamber containing a novel mouse 
versus the time investigating both chambers was indistinguishable between the two groups (HC, n = 24; SCZ, n = 23). (G and H) Prepulse inhibition (PPI) test. (G) The SCZ 
microbiota recipient mice displayed an exaggerated startle response to high-decibel tones (120 db) relative to the HC microbiota recipient mice. (H) Increasing prepulse 
intensity led to increased PPI magnitude in both microbiota recipient groups; however, the PPI magnitude did not differ between the two groups. All data were presented 
as means ± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 using nonparametric tests).
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Zheng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau8317     6 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
5 of 11
We further performed nontargeted metabolomics to determine 
whether or which metabolisms modulated by the gut microbiome 
were paralleled by an altered MGB axis. We found that the metabo-
lomic profiles of fecal, serum, and hippocampal samples obtained 
from the SCZ microbiota recipient mice were substantially different 
from those of the HC microbiota recipient mice (fig. S5, A to G). 
We identified the differentially expressed metabolites between 
the two groups (table S3, A to C). Of particular relevance to SCZ, 
we measured differences in central nervous system and peripheral 
glutamate- 
glutamine–GABA (-aminobutyric acid) metabolism, 
and in the SCZ microbiota compared to the HC microbiota recipi-
ent mouse samples, we found elevated glutamine in the serum and 
hippocampus, decreased glutamate (glutamic acid) in the stool and 
hippocampus, and increased GABA in the hippocampus (Fig. 4, A to C 
and fig. S6). Serum glutamate and GABA, as well as fecal GABA, 
were not different between the two groups (fig. S7, A and B). Signifi-
cant differences between HC and SCZ subjects were seen in these 
three metabolites in cortex, but not in cerebellum or striatum (fig. S7, 
C to E), thus confirming that the observed metabolic disturbances are 
localized to the glutamate-rich brain regions (i.e., hippocampus and 
cortex) that are most consistently implicated in glutamate-glutamine- 
GABA disruptions in SCZ (18–20) and that are relevant to the be-
havioral endophenotypes observed (21–24). Functional clustering 
analysis showed that these differentially expressed fecal, serum, and 
hippocampal metabolites were consistently involved in amino acid 
metabolism, for example, in the glutamate-glutamine-GABA cycle 
(Fig. 4D and fig. S6), transport of several amino acids (fig. S6), and 
lipid metabolism (e.g., glycerophospholipids; Fig. 4D). Overall, the 
results for the SCZ microbiota mice suggested alterations in the 
glutamate- 
glutamine-GABA cycle and amino acid metabolism and 
transport. The altered lipids were mainly glycerophospholipids in-
cluding phosphatidylethanolamines (PEs), phosphoserines (PSs), 
phosphatidylcholines (PCs), or phosphatidylinositol (PIs) and were 
generally decreased in the serum and hippocampus of SCZ recipient 
mice (Fig. 4D). Together, these metagenomic and metabolomic find-
ings suggest that alterations in gut microbiota may be associated with 
SCZ pathophysiology through MGB amino acid and lipid metabolic 
pathways.
DISCUSSION
Gut microbiota can influence brain function and behaviors through 
the MGB axis and thus may predispose the onset of various neuro-
psychiatric disorders (25). Here, we found profound gut microbiota 
alterations in patients with SCZ relative to HC subjects. We identi-
fied unique bacterial taxa that were strongly associated with SCZ 
severity. Moreover, a specific microbial panel enabled discrimination 
of SCZ from HC subjects with an AUC of 0.769. Our animal exper-
iments of GF mice colonization with human SCZ microbiota result-
ed in SCZ-relevant behavioral changes similar to those observed in 
glutamatergic mouse models of SCZ (see Fig. 5 for study flow). 
These behavioral phenotypes were not seen in the control mice col-
onized with human HC microbiota. Consistent with these behav-
ioral changes, the mice receiving gut microbiome transfers from 
patients with SCZ displayed disturbances of microbial genes and host 
metabolites involved in amino acid and lipid metabolism, including 
glutamate, which has been strongly implicated in SCZ pathology. 
Our findings support the possibility that alterations of gut microbiota 
may potentially participate in the onset and/or pathology of SCZ 
through modulating MGB metabolic pathways.
We also found that the microbial composition of patients with 
SCZ was less diverse, i.e., was associated with lower -diversity scores, 
than that of HC individuals. Generally speaking, a high -diversity 
is thought to represent a marker of “good” health status. Here, the 
lower -diversity suggests an overall abnormal microbial status with-
in patients with SCZ. Previously, we found that there was no differ-
ence in gut microbiome -diversity between depressed individuals and 
HC subjects (12). Moreover, the gut microbiome changes observed in 
Fig. 3. Metagenomic analysis identified differential KEGG pathways between SCZ microbiota and HC microbiota recipient mice. The altered differential KEGG 
Orthologs (KOs) were mainly involved in 33 disturbed metabolic pathways. Eight of 33 pathways were up-regulated, and the remaining pathways were down-regulated 
in the SCZ microbiota recipient mice compared to HC microbiota recipient mice (n = 8 per group). tRNA, transfer RNA.
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Zheng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau8317     6 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
6 of 11
patients with SCZ herein are greatly different from those seen in de-
pressed individuals. These findings suggest that dysbiosis of gut micro-
biota in SCZ is distinct from the microbiota characteristic of depression. 
Here, patients with SCZ were characterized mainly by decreased rela-
tive abundance of Lachnospiraceae (16 OTUs) and Ruminococcaceae 
(12 OTUs). The Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae are two 
of the most abundant families from the order Clostridiales ob-
served in the gut microbiome and have been linked with the mainte-
nance of gut health. The decrease in these two gut microbiota species 
suggests abnormal microbial status in SCZ, and follow-up studies 
using microbial metagenomics and culturomics may further define 
how these and other specific gut microbiota species may affect SCZ 
etiopathogenesis. In the context of these findings, several events shown 
to influence composition of the gut microbiome, especially during 
the microbiome’s establishment/dynamic period in infancy—e.g., 
cesarean versus vaginal birth, breast versus formula feeding, or early 
life antibiotic treatment—have all been associated, to some degree, 
with risk or onset of SCZ (26). While these links are not definitive, 
they provide compelling avenues for further investigation. In these 
contexts, it is unlikely a coincidence that the antibiotic minocycline 
has shown significant potential as an adjunctive therapy for SCZ (27). 
Together, our findings have potential clinical diagnostic value, with 
treatment implications, and lay the groundwork for further identi-
fication of “signature patterns” of defined gut microbes in SCZ.
We also demonstrated that transfer of human SCZ microbiomes 
to mice induced changes in gut microbial composition and SCZ- 
relevant behavioral phenotypes, compared to mice receiving HC 
microbiomes. Behavioral phenotypes seen in mouse models rele-
vant to SCZ can be somewhat nonspecific and have relevance to mul-
tiple human psychiatric disorders, can vary substantially by manner 
Fig. 4. Altered metabolites in stool, serum, and hippocampus. (A to C) Key metabolites glutamine (A), glutamate (B), and GABA (C) related to glutamatergic neuro-
transmission metabolism were significantly changed in the SCZ microbiota mice (n = 10 per group). All data were presented as means ± SEM. *P < 0.05 using Student’s 
t test. (D) A heat map shows the altered metabolites in stool, serum, and hippocampus. Functional clustering analysis showed that these differentially expressed fecal, 
serum, and hippocampal metabolites were consistently involved in amino acid and lipid metabolism (n = 10 per group).
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Zheng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau8317     6 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
7 of 11
of induction, and can have variable refractoriness to antipsychotics 
typically used to treat SCZ (21). These represent just some of the 
difficulties in establishing uniform and consistent mouse models 
with high predictive validity for SCZ and other psychiatric disease. 
However, one of the key findings here is that mice receiving SCZ 
microbiome were hyperactive relative to mice receiving HC micro-
biome (Fig. 2, A to C), and hyperactivity in these and similar behavioral 
tests is one of the most consistent findings across multiple rodent 
models of SCZ (21) and hypoglutamatergic rodent models of SCZ 
in particular (23, 24). We also observed a significant increase in 
startle response (Fig. 2G), which is characteristic of the SCZ dysbindin 
knockout model that involves hypoactive glutamatergic function (22), 
as does our SCZ microbiome model herein. In addition, some be-
havioral tests including social interactions and PPI of acoustic startle 
were not significantly different between SCZ and HC microbiome mice, 
suggesting that alterations of gut microbiome are associated with some 
(but not all) endophenotypes characteristic of mouse models of SCZ 
(21). Together, these results suggest that our SCZ microbiome–induced 
model shares many features with other well- 
characterized SCZ ro-
dent models that involve decreased glutamate signaling. These be-
havioral results, together with our metabolomic and metagenomic 
data, strongly suggest that the SCZ microbiome transplantation af-
fects the same SCZ-relevant behavioral pathways that are affected in 
other SCZ rodent models, particularly glutamate circuits.
Consistent with these behavioral data characteristic of other hypo-
glutamatergic rodent models of SCZ, we identified decreased brain 
glutamate and disruptions in the glutamate-glutamine-GABA cycle 
and altered amino acid and lipid metabolism as possible mechanistic 
Fig. 5. The workflow diagram for this study. SCZ is associated with dysbiosis of gut microbial composition, which is distinct from that seen in major depressive disorder 
(MDD). This alteration can result in host gut-brain axis metabolic and neurobehavioral changes relevant to SCZ.
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Zheng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau8317     6 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
8 of 11
targets that may underlie the altered behavior in the SCZ microbiota 
recipient mice. Glutamatergic neurotransmission (18) and, in par-
ticular, decreased hippocampal glutamate (19, 20) have been widely 
implicated in the pathophysiology of SCZ. In the SCZ microbiota re-
cipient mice, the observed decreased hippocampal glutamate levels, 
together with higher glutamine and GABA, may reflect reduced 
glutamatergic neurotransmission, increased production of GABA 
from glutamate or decreased breakdown of GABA into glutamate, 
increased conversion of glutamate to glutamine (via glutamine syn-
thetase) or decreased conversion of glutamine to glutamate (via 
glutaminase), and/or altered transport or reuptake of any of the 
above. Future experiments will seek to clarify these observed alter-
ations in glutamate-glutamine-GABA metabolism. Within the brain, 
the localization and confinement of our observed metabolic distur-
bances to hippocampus and cortex (Fig. 4, A to C, and fig. S7, C to E) 
align with evidence that these are the brain regions most consistently 
implicated in glutamate-glutamine-GABA disruptions in SCZ (18–20) 
and affected in the endophenotypes observed herein (21–24) and 
suggest a targeted pathogenic functional specificity resulting from 
the SCZ microbiota transplantation. However, future studies char-
acterizing metabolic disturbances in other glutamate-glutamine- 
GABA–rich brain regions with significant relevance to SCZ, such as 
the amygdala, are also needed.
We also found significant changes in MGB axis lipid species, es-
pecially involving glycerophospholipid metabolism, in the SCZ micro-
biota versus HC microbiota mice. Consistent with these findings, 
significant disturbances in serum and brain lipids have been ob-
served in patients with SCZ (28). The glycerophospholipids includ-
ing PEs, PSs, PCs, and PIs are major components of myelin and 
neuronal membranes and are key regulators of synaptic function. 
Our results showed that these glycerophospholipids and their related 
metabolites were typically decreased in the hippocampus and serum, 
yet increased in fecal samples, of SCZ versus HC microbiota mice, 
respectively. Whether this observed increase in waste (i.e., fecal) 
glycerophospholipid metabolites was causal or consequent to, or 
independent of, the corresponding decreases in serum and hippo-
campal metabolites requires further investigation. Regardless, these 
findings suggest that the SCZ gut microbiome resulted in lower 
glycerophospholipid content in the periphery and brains of SCZ micro-
biota recipient mice, pathologies that are consistent with the synaptic 
deficits and disconnectivity that are thought to underlie SCZ (29).
There were some possible confounds common to many clinical 
and translational SCZ studies that warrant mention. First, most of 
the patients with SCZ were taking antipsychotic medication. Recruit-
ment of unmedicated patients with SCZ is very difficult, because 
once initial SCZ-like symptoms of hallucination, delusion, or im-
pulsive behavior appear, pharmacotherapy is initiated before diag-
nosis and continues after formal SCZ diagnosis. However, to mitigate 
this concern relevant to our experiments, we found that the distri-
butions of global microbial phenotypes did not vary between medi-
cated and unmedicated patients with SCZ (fig. S2, B and C), or with 
respect to medication type (fig. S2C), indicating that antipsychotic 
treatment was not a prominent confounding variable that was likely to 
affect the interpretation of our results. Second, all recruited subjects 
were symptomatic for SCZ, and this could be why the distribution 
of global microbial phenotypes did not vary between medicated and 
unmedicated patients with SCZ. Studies with larger numbers of un-
medicated patients are required to validate and extend the current 
findings. Nonetheless, as yet, we cannot entirely rule out the possi-
bility that the endophenotypic effects observed in the SCZ microbi-
ota mice were a function of the medicated microbiome rather than 
the SCZ disease state per se.
Together, we provide seminal evidence that SCZ is associated with 
changes in gut microbiota composition that are both specific to SCZ 
and correlated with symptom severity. Moreover, we found that 
changes in the gut microbiota resulting from human SCZ fecal micro-
biome transfer to mice lead to hypoglutamatergia and onset of SCZ- 
relevant behaviors characteristic of SCZ rodent models, accompanied 
by gut-brain axis metabolic changes. Our findings provide a novel 
framework for understanding the mechanisms of SCZ through the 
MGB axis and may lead to new diagnostic and treatment strategies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
The study protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee of 
Chongqing Medical University. All participants signed a written in-
formed consent before any procedure was carried out. In total, 63 SCZ 
and 69 HC subjects were recruited from the First Affiliated Hospital of 
Chongqing Medical University. Here, most of the patients with SCZ 
were treated with a single antipsychotic drug including clozapine 
(n = 15), risperidone (n = 14), olanzapine (n = 9), chlorpromazine (n = 5), 
aripiprazole (n = 3), and quetiapine (n = 3), while the remaining patients 
were treated with two of the above drugs in combination (n = 9) or were 
unmedicated (n = 5). In clinical practice, the diversity of SCZ drugs is 
determined by the diversity of clinical symptoms and the heteroge-
neity of pathological mechanisms. SCZ was diagnosed by Structured 
Psychiatric Interview using Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders, 4th Edition (DSM-IV) criteria by two senior psychiatrists 
(30). All participants did not have any physical or other mental dis-
orders or illicit drug use, and they also had not taken any antibiotics, 
probiotics, or prebiotics within 1 month before sampling. Fresh stool 
samples were collected from each participant and immediately frozen 
at −80°C until analysis. Sample sizes were determined empirically on 
the basis of previous studies, are similar or larger than those in related 
published literature, and are as stated here or in each of the figure leg-
ends. To accurately reflect the clinical reality, we did not exclude out-
liers. Statistical analyses were performed as described below.
DNA extraction, polymerase chain reaction amplification, 
and Illumina MiSeq sequencing
The Illumina MiSeq sequencing protocol was based on our previous 
published literature (12). Briefly, microbial DNA was extracted from 
human and animal stool samples using the QIAamp DNA Stool 
Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany). The V3 and V4 regions of 
the bacteria 16S rRNA gene were amplified by polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) using primers 338F and 806R (31). PCR reactions 
were performed in triplicate 20-l mixtures. Primers included an 
eight-base sequence unique to each sample. Amplicons were ex-
tracted from 2% agarose gels and purified using the AxyPrep DNA 
Gel Extraction Kit (Axygen Biosciences, Union City, CA). Purified 
amplicons were quantified using QuantiFluor-ST (Promega, USA) 
and paired-end–sequenced (2 × 250) on an Illumina MiSeq plat-
form according to the standard protocols.
16S rRNA gene sequence analysis
Raw FASTQ files were demultiplexed and quality-filtered using QIIME 
(version 1.17; http://qiime.org/). The 250–base pair (bp) reads were 
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Zheng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau8317     6 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
9 of 11
truncated at any site of more than three sequential bases receiving 
an average quality score of <20. Reads shorter than 50 bp, contain-
ing ambiguous base calls or barcode/primer errors, were discarded. 
Chimeric sequences were checked by UCHIME (www.drive5.com/
usearch/manual/uchime_algo.html) and removed from subsequent 
analyses. The remaining high-quality sequences were clustered into 
OTUs at 97% similarity using USEARCH (version 7.0; www.drive5.
com/usearch/manual/). To assess adequacy of sequencing depth, 
rarefaction analysis was performed using the RDP Rarefaction tool 
based on the number of sequences and OTUs for each sample. 
-Diversity was assessed using the species richness indices (Ace and 
Chao) and species diversity indices (Shannon) (12). Partial least-
squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) was performed to visually 
evaluate the difference and similarity of bacterial communities be-
tween groups (-diversity) (32). The differentially expressed bacterial 
taxa between SCZ and HC samples were identified using LEfSe (33). 
Taxonomy was assigned to OTU representatives using the RDP 
classifier against the SILVA database. A Venn diagram was generated 
to describe the common and unique OTUs between groups.
Animal experiments
Animal protocols were approved by the Ethical Committee of 
Chongqing Medical University (Chongqing, China) and the Third 
Military Medical University (Chongqing, China). Male GF Kunming 
mice were bred in the Experimental Animal Research Center at the 
Third Military Medical University. They were kept in flexible film 
gnotobiotic isolators until the start of experiments. Mice were fed 
autoclaved chow and water ad libitum under a 12-hour light/12-hour 
dark cycle (lights on at 7:30 a.m.) and constant temperature (21° to 
22°C) and humidity (55 ± 5%).
FMT experiments
GF mice were obtained from the Department of Laboratory Animal 
Science of the Third Military Medical University (Chongqing, China). 
During the study, the mice were fed autoclaved chow and water ad 
libitum under a 12-hour light/12-hour dark cycle (lights on at 7:30 a.m.) 
and constant temperature of 21° to 22°C and humidity of 55 ± 5%. 
All animal experiments followed the National Institutes of Health 
Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and were approved 
by the Ethics Committee of Chongqing Medical University.
As described previously (12, 34, 35), fecal samples (i.e., the gut 
microbiome) from randomly selected subsets of five patients with 
SCZ (male, aged 26 to 65 years; PANSS scores, 67 to 81) and five 
HCs (male, aged 31 to 57 years), which were representative of their 
respective full population distributions (fig. S4A), were used to col-
onize GF mice (Kunming mice, 5 to 6 weeks old). Briefly, fecal sam-
ples were suspended with reduced sterile phosphate-buffered saline 
(15 ml/g of feces), equal volumes combined for each group, and then 
these inoculum samples were vortexed for 5 min, followed by 5-min 
standing to precipitate particles. Each GF mouse was gavaged with 
200 l of fecal suspensions derived from either patients with SCZ or 
HCs. After colonization, the mice remained in a gnotobiotic environ-
ment under the same feeding conditions as before. Last, mice under-
went behavioral testing 2 weeks after microbiota transplantation.
Behavioral tests
Open-field test
Mice were placed individually in the corner of an open-field box 
(L × W × H, 45 cm by 45 cm by 45 cm) and allowed to explore freely 
for 6 min. Their spontaneous activities over the last 5 min were re-
corded. The total move distance was designated as an index of loco-
motor activity, while increased proportion of time or distance spent 
in the center (inner 25% of the surface area, away from the walls) 
indexes decreased anxiety.
Sociability and social novelty preference test
Mice were placed in a rectangular, three-chambered box. Each chamber 
was 40 cm by 20 cm by 22 cm (L × W × H) in size. Dividing walls 
were made from clear plexiglass, with rectangular openings (L × H, 
35 mm by 35 mm) allowing access into each chamber. The test was 
composed of three sequential 10-min trials: trial 1, habituation (the 
mouse was allowed to explore the three chambers); trial 2, sociability 
(an unfamiliar mouse was placed into a mesh wire cage in either the 
left or right chamber, and exploration of the three chambers by the 
test mouse was recorded for a further 10 min); and trial 3, social 
novelty preference (a novel mouse was placed into a mesh wire cage in 
the chamber opposite the familiar mouse from the previous stage; ex-
ploration of the three chambers by the test mouse was again recorded 
for 10 min). The amount of time spent in each chamber was recorded. 
An entry was defined as all four paws in one chamber. Test cham-
bers were cleaned with disinfectant and 70% ethanol after each trial.
PPI test
The test was measured using the SR-LAB System (San Diego Instru-
ments, San Diego, CA) as described previously. Before testing, each 
mouse was acclimatized to the plexiglass cylinder with background 
noise (70 dB) for 5 min. The mouse was then exposed to six blocks 
of seven trial types that were presented in a pseudorandom order 
with an average intertrial interval of 15 s. The seven trial types com-
prised the following: trial 1 (startle-only trial), 40 ms, 120-dB sound 
burst; trials 2 to 6 (prepulse trials), 120-dB startle stimulus preceded 
100 ms earlier by 20-ms prepulse sounds of 74, 78, 82, 86, or 90 dB; 
and trial 7, 70-dB background noise. The startle response was re-
corded for 65 ms, measuring every 1 ms from the onset of the startle 
stimulus. The maximum startle amplitude recorded during the 65-ms 
sampling window was used as the dependent variable. The percent-
age of PPI induced by each prepulse intensity was calculated as [1 − 
(startle amplitude on prepulse trial)/(startle amplitude on pulse 
alone)] × 100%.
Y-maze
The Y-maze apparatus consisted of three dark gray arms (L × W × H, 
45 cm by 10 cm by 29 cm). Each mouse was placed at the end of one 
arm and allowed to freely explore the maze for 8 min. The sequence and 
total number of arms entered were recorded. Entry into an arm was 
considered valid only when all four paws of the mouse were inside 
that arm. The percentage of alternation was used to assess memory 
performance and calculated by dividing the number of triads con-
taining entries into all three arms by alternation opportunities × 100.
Forced swimming test
The mice were placed individually in plexiglass cylinders (30 cm in 
height and 15 cm in diameter) filled with 15 cm of water (25° ± 1°C). 
Test sessions lasted for 6 min, with the last 5 min scored for immo-
bility. A mouse was judged to be immobile when it remained float-
ing in an upright position, making only the movements necessary to 
keep its head above the water.
Comparisons of metabolite profiles from the FMT model
On week 2 after FMT, the HC microbiota and SCZ microbiota recip-
ient mice were euthanized, and the biological samples including stool, 
serum, and hippocampus were obtained. Here, three complementary 
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Zheng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau8317     6 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
10 of 11
metabolomic methods were chosen to analyze the three types of 
samples. These detailed metabolomic methods were similar to our 
previously published literature (12). The gas chromatography–mass 
spectrometry three-dimensional matrices composed of peak indices 
paired retention time and mass to charge ratio (RT−m/z), sample 
names (observations), and normalized peak area percentages were 
imported into SIMCA-P+14.0 (Umetrics, Umeå, Sweden). The liquid 
chromatography–mass spectrometry data were collected in both 
positive and negative electrospray ionization modes. PLS-DA was 
used to visualize discrimination between the HC microbiota and the 
SCZ microbiota recipient mice (36). By analysis of PLS-DA load-
ings, the differential metabolites responsible for discriminating be-
tween the two groups were identified with variable importance plot 
values of greater than 1.0 and P values of less than 0.05.
Nuclear magnetic resonance data were collected on a 600-MHz 
spectrometer operating at 599.925-MHz 1H frequency. One-dimensional 
spin-echo spectra were recorded using Carr-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill 
relaxation dispersion [recycle delay − 90 − ( − 180 − ) n]. PLS-DA 
was used to visualize discrimination between the two groups. The 
coefficient loading plots of the model were used to identify the spec-
tral variables responsible for sample differentiation on the scores plot. 
A correlation coefficient (│r│) of greater than 0.602 was used as the 
cutoff value for statistical significance (36).
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software (QIAGEN, Redwood 
City, CA, USA) was used to uncover the predicted molecular path-
ways and biological functions of differentially expressed metabolites.
Metagenomic analysis of fecal samples
DNA was extracted from 16 samples using the E.Z.N.A. Stool DNA 
Kit (Omega Bio-tek, Norcross, GA, USA). The DNA extracted from 
stool samples was used to construct Illumina paired-end libraries fol-
lowing Illumina’s genomic DNA library preparation procedure. Then, 
the amplicon library was paired-end–sequenced (2 by 150) on an 
Illumina HiSeq X platform. Raw FASTQ files were quality-filtered 
using Trimmomatic (version 0.36) with the following criteria: (i) 
removal of bases at the start and end of a read below a threshold 
quality (score < 3) and (ii) the reads were truncated at any site re-
ceiving an average quality score of <15 over a 4-bp sliding window, 
discarding the truncated reads that were shorter than 100 bp.
BMTagger (version 3.102) was used to remove host contamina-
tion following the standard operating protocol for removing human 
sequence, as outlined in the Human Microbiome Project. Read level 
functional profiling with KO (KEGG Ortholog) was performed using 
the UProC toolbox (version 2.0.0-rc1) (37). The KEGG BRITE 
databases were used for annotation at the higher functional level. 
Briefly, the reads from the same KO were binned to REACTION 
ontology using the KO and REACTION hierarchy relationship, and 
unique reads were summarized to construct the REACTION ontol-
ogy count table.
Metaphlan2 (version 2.5.0) and Kaiju (version 1.4.5) with default 
databases were used to perform the taxonomy composition analysis 
(38). The raw reads count table for several different taxonomy levels 
from Kaiju classifier was constructed for differential abundance 
analysis using DESeq2. R package DESeq2 (version 1.10.1) was used 
to detect the differential abundance ontologies or taxonomy catalog 
(39). The de bruijn graph–based assembler MEGAHIT (version 
1.0.6) was used to assemble short reads. The contigs with length 
greater than 500 bp were used to make the reference index for bowtie 
alignment, the unaligned reads were collected to co-assemble with 
the same assembly parameter, and the minimal contig length was 
set to 200. MetaProdigal (version 2.6.3) was used for gene predic-
tion of metagenomic contigs (40). The abundance of each nonre-
dundant gene [measured as transcripts-per-million (TPM)] was 
quantified with kallisto (version 0.42.5). The function space of the 
nonredundant gene was annotated with KEGG.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were carried out using SPSS version 18 (SPSS, 
Chicago, IL, USA). All continuous variables such as bacterial 
- 
diversity, behavioral data, age, and body mass index were pres-
ented as means ± SEM, unless otherwise indicated and compared 
between groups using Student’s t test. Categorical data (sex) were 
analyzed by 2 test. Statistical significance level was set at P < 0.05.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/5/2/eaau8317/DC1
Fig. S1. Gut microbial composition differences between patients with SCZ and HC subjects.
Fig. S2. Impact of confounding variables on global gut microbial phenotypes.
Fig. S3. Comparison of microbial markers between patients with SCZ and major depressive 
disorder.
Fig. S4. Comparison of gut microbial characteristics between SCZ microbiota and HC 
microbiota recipient mice.
Fig. S5. Metabolomic analysis of fecal, serum, and hippocampal samples obtained from SCZ 
microbiota and HC microbiota recipient mice.
Fig. S6. IPA shows that differentially expressed fecal, serum, and hippocampus metabolites 
were consistently involved in amino acid metabolism, especially glutamate metabolism.
Fig. S7. Levels of glutamine, glutamic acid, and GABA in SCZ microbiota and HC microbiota 
recipient mice.
Table S1. Detailed clinical characteristics of participants.
Table S2A. Discriminatory OTUs between patients with SCZ and HC subjects.
Table S2B. Discriminatory KEGG pathways between SCZ microbiota and HC microbiota 
recipient mice.
Table S3A. Differential fecal metabolites between SCZ microbiota and HC microbiota 
recipient mice.
Table S3B. Differential serum metabolites between SCZ microbiota and HC microbiota 
recipient mice.
Table S3C. Differential hippocampus metabolites between SCZ microbiota and HC microbiota 
recipient mice.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1. J. Long, G. Huang, W. Liang, B. Liang, Q. Chen, J. Xie, J. Jiang, L. Su, The prevalence of 
schizophrenia in mainland China: Evidence from epidemiological surveys. Acta Psychiatr. 
Scand. 130, 244–256 (2014).
 2. The Schizophrenia Psychiatric Genome-Wide Association Study (GWAS) Consortium, 
Genome-wide association study identifies five new schizophrenia loci. Nat. Genet. 43, 
969–976 (2011).
 3. Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, Biological 
insights from 108 schizophrenia-associated genetic loci. Nature 511, 421–427 (2014).
 4. The Human Microbiome Project Consortium, Structure, function and diversity of the 
healthy human microbiome. Nature 486, 207–214 (2012).
 5. J. F. Cryan, T. G. Dinan, Mind-altering microorganisms: The impact of the gut microbiota 
on brain and behaviour. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 13, 701–712 (2012).
 6. E. Y. Hsiao, S. W. McBride, S. Hsien, G. Sharon, E. R. Hyde, T. McCue, J. A. Codelli, J. Chow, 
S. E. Reisman, J. F. Petrosino, P. H. Patterson, S. K. Mazmanian, Microbiota modulate 
behavioral and physiological abnormalities associated with neurodevelopmental 
disorders. Cell 155, 1451–1463 (2013).
 7. R. Diaz Heijtz, S. Wang, F. Anuar, Y. Qian, B. Björkholm, A. Samuelsson, M. L. Hibberd, 
H. Forssberg, S. Pettersson, Normal gut microbiota modulates brain development and 
behavior. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108, 3047–3052 (2011).
 8. M. G. Gareau, E. Wine, D. M. Rodrigues, J. H. Cho, M. T. Whary, D. J. Philpott, G. MacQueen, 
P. M. Sherman, Bacterial infection causes stress-induced memory dysfunction in mice. 
Gut 60, 307–317 (2011).
 9. L. Desbonnet, G. Clarke, F. Shanahan, T. G. Dinan, J. F. Cryan, Microbiota is essential for 
social development in the mouse. Mol. Psychiatry 19, 146–148 (2014).
 10. T. R. Sampson, J. W. Debelius, T. Thron, S. Janssen, G. G. Shastri, Z. E. Ilhan, C. Challis, 
C. E. Schretter, S. Rocha, V. Gradinaru, M.-F. Chesselet, A. Keshavarzian, K. M. Shannon, 
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Zheng et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau8317     6 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
11 of 11
R. Krajmalnik-Brown, P. Wittung-Stafshede, R. Knight, S. K. Mazmanian, Gut microbiota 
regulate motor deficits and neuroinflammation in a model of Parkinson’s disease. Cell 
167, 1469–1480.e12 (2016).
 11. L. Zeng, B. Zeng, H. Wang, B. Li, R. Huo, P. Zheng, X. Zhang, X. Du, M. Liu, Z. Fang, X. Xu, 
C. Zhou, J. Chen, W. Li, J. Guo, H. Wei, P. Xie, Microbiota modulates behavior and protein 
kinase C mediated cAMP response element-binding protein signaling. Sci. Rep. 6, 29998 
(2016).
 12. P. Zheng, B. Zeng, C. Zhou, M. Liu, Z. Fang, X. Xu, L. Zeng, J. Chen, S. Fan, X. Du, X. Zhang, 
D. Yang, Y. Yang, H. Meng, W. Li, N. D. Melgiri, J. Licinio, H. Wei, P. Xie, Gut microbiome 
remodeling induces depressive-like behaviors through a pathway mediated by the host’s 
metabolism. Mol. Psychiatry 21, 786–796 (2016).
 13. F. Lv, S. Chen, L. Wang, R. Jiang, H. Tian, J. Li, Y. Yao, C. Zhuo, The role of microbiota in 
the pathogenesis of schizophrenia and major depressive disorder and the possibility  
of targeting microbiota as a treatment option. Oncotarget 8, 100899–100907  
(2017).
 14. V. Babulas, P. Factor-Litvak, R. Goetz, C. A. Schaefer, A. S. Brown, Prenatal exposure to 
maternal genital and reproductive infections and adult schizophrenia. Am. J. Psychiatry 
163, 927–929 (2006).
 15. M. Fadgyas-Stanculete, A.-M. Buga, A. Popa-Wagner, D. L. Dumitrascu, The relationship 
between irritable bowel syndrome and psychiatric disorders: From molecular changes to 
clinical manifestations. J. Mol. Psychiatry 2, 4 (2014).
 16. G. Clarke, S. Grenham, P. Scully, P. Fitzgerald, R. D. Moloney, F. Shanahan, T. G. Dinan, 
J. F. Cryan, The microbiome-gut-brain axis during early life regulates the hippocampal 
serotonergic system in a sex-dependent manner. Mol. Psychiatry 18, 666–673 (2013).
 17. B. J. Miller, P. Buckley, W. Seabolt, A. Mellor, B. Kirkpatrick, Meta-analysis of cytokine 
alterations in schizophrenia: Clinical status and antipsychotic effects. Biol. Psychiatry 70, 
663–671 (2011).
 18. D. C. Goff, J. T. Coyle, The emerging role of glutamate in the pathophysiology and 
treatment of schizophrenia. Am. J. Psychiatry 158, 1367–1377 (2001).
 19. E. S. Lutkenhoff, T. G. van Erp, M. A. Thomas, S. Therman, M. Manninen, M. O. Huttunen, 
J. Kaprio, J. Lönnqvist, J. O’Neill, T. D. Cannon, Proton MRS in twin pairs discordant for 
schizophrenia. Mol. Psychiatry 15, 308–318 (2010).
 20. A. D. Stan, S. Ghose, C. Zhao, K. Hulsey, P. Mihalakos, M. Yanagi, S. U. Morris, J. J. Bartko, 
C. Choi, C. A. Tamminga, Magnetic resonance spectroscopy and tissue protein 
concentrations together suggest lower glutamate signaling in dentate gyrus in 
schizophrenia. Mol. Psychiatry 20, 433–439 (2015).
 21. C. A. Jones, D. J. G. Watson, K. C. F. Fone, Animal models of schizophrenia.  
Br. J. Pharmacol. 164, 1162–1194 (2011).
 22. K. H. Karlsgodt, K. Robleto, H. Trantham-Davidson, C. Jairl, T. D. Cannon, A. Lavin, 
J. D. Jentsch, Reduced dysbindin expression mediates N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor 
hypofunction and impaired working memory performance. Biol. Psychiatry 69, 28–34 
(2011).
 23. M. Nilsson, S. Waters, N. Waters, A. Carlsson, M. L. Carlsson, A behavioural pattern analysis 
of hypoglutamatergic mice—Effects of four different antipsychotic agents. J. Neural 
Transm. 108, 1181–1196 (2001).
 24. C. Procaccini, T. Aitta-aho, K. Jaako-Movits, A. Zharkovsky, A. Panhelainen, R. Sprengel, 
A.-M. Linden, E. R. Korpi, Excessive novelty-induced c-Fos expression and altered 
neurogenesis in the hippocampus of GluA1 knockout mice. Eur. J. Neurosci. 33, 161–174 
(2011).
 25. G. Sharon, T. R. Sampson, D. H. Geschwind, S. K. Mazmanian, The central nervous system 
and the gut microbiome. Cell 167, 915–932 (2016).
 26. T. G. Dinan, J. F. Cryan, Gut instincts: Microbiota as a key regulator of brain development, 
ageing and neurodegeneration. J. Physiol. 595, 489–503 (2017).
 27. L. Zhang, J. Zhao, Profile of minocycline and its potential in the treatment of 
schizophrenia. Neuropsychiatr. Dis. Treat. 10, 1103–1111 (2014).
 28. C. Tessier, K. Sweers, A. Frajerman, H. Bergaoui, F. Ferreri, C. Delva, N. Lapidus, 
A. Lamaziere, J. P. Roiser, M. De Hert, P. Nuss, Membrane lipidomics in schizophrenia 
patients: A correlational study with clinical and cognitive manifestations.  
Transl. Psychiatry 6, e906 (2016).
 29. I. A. C. Romme, M. A. de Reus, R. A. Ophoff, R. S. Kahn, M. P. van den Heuvel, Connectome 
disconnectivity and cortical gene expression in patients with schizophrenia.  
Biol. Psychiatry 81, 495–502 (2017).
 30. J. Yang, T. Chen, L. Sun, Z. Zhao, X. Qi, K. Zhou, Y. Cao, X. Wang, Y. Qiu, M. Su, A. Zhao, 
P. Wang, P. Yang, J. Wu, G. Feng, L. He, W. Jia, C. Wan, Potential metabolite markers of 
schizophrenia. Mol. Psychiatry 18, 67–78 (2013).
 31. A. J. Bruce-Keller, J. M. Salbaum, M. Luo, E. Blanchard IV, C. M. Taylor, D. A. Welsh, 
H.-R. Berthoud, Obese-type gut microbiota induce neurobehavioral changes in the 
absence of obesity. Biol. Psychiatry 77, 607–615 (2015).
 32. C. Newell, M. R. Bomhof, R. A. Reimer, D. S. Hittel, J. M. Rho, J. Shearer, Ketogenic diet 
modifies the gut microbiota in a murine model of autism spectrum disorder. Mol. Autism 
7, 37 (2016).
 33. N. Segata, J. Izard, L. Waldron, D. Gevers, L. Miropolsky, W. S. Garrett, C. Huttenhower, 
Metagenomic biomarker discovery and explanation. Genome Biol. 12, R60 (2011).
 34. S. H. Wong, L. Zhao, X. Zhang, G. Nakatsu, J. Han, W. Xu, X. Xiao, T. N. Y. Kwong, H. Tsoi, 
W. K. K. Wu, B. Zeng, F. K. L. Chan, J. J. Y. Sung, H. Wei, J. Yu, Gavage of fecal samples from 
patients with colorectal cancer promotes intestinal carcinogenesis in germ-free and 
conventional mice. Gastroenterology 153, 1621–1633.e6 (2017).
 35. O. Koren, J. K. Goodrich, T. C. Cullender, A. Spor, K. Laitinen, H. K. Bäckhed, A. Gonzalez, 
J. J. Werner, L. T. Angenent, R. Knight, F. Bäckhed, E. Isolauri, S. Salminen, R. E. Ley, Host 
remodeling of the gut microbiome and metabolic changes during pregnancy. Cell 150, 
470–480 (2012).
 36. P. Zheng, H. C. Gao, Q. Li, W. H. Shao, M. L. Zhang, K. Cheng, D. Y. Yang, S. H. Fan, L. Chen, 
L. Fang, P. Xie, Plasma metabonomics as a novel diagnostic approach for major 
depressive disorder. J. Proteome Res. 11, 1741–1748 (2012).
 37. M. Kanehisa, M. Furumichi, M. Tanabe, Y. Sato, K. Morishima, KEGG: New perspectives on 
genomes, pathways, diseases and drugs. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, D353–D361 (2017).
 38. P. Menzel, K. L. Ng, A. Krogh, Fast and sensitive taxonomic classification for 
metagenomics with Kaiju. Nat. Commun. 7, 11257 (2016).
 39. M. I. Love, W. Huber, S. Anders, Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for 
RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15, 550 (2014).
 40. D. Hyatt, P. F. LoCascio, L. J. Hauser, E. C. Uberbacher, Gene and translation initiation site 
prediction in metagenomic sequences. Bioinformatics 28, 2223–2230 (2012).
Acknowledgments 
Funding: This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China 
(2017YFA0505700, 2016YFC1307200, 2017YFD0500503, and 2017YFD0501000), the Natural 
Science Foundation Project of China (81771490, 81371310, 31271189, 81200899, and 
31300917), institutional funds from the State University of New York (SUNY) Upstate Medical 
University, and Chongqing Science and Technology Commission (cstc2014kjrc-qnrc10004). 
Author contributions: P.X., J.L., and H.W. designed the experiments. P.Z., M.L., J.C., and Y.H. 
performed the metagenomic analysis. P.Z., B.Z., and J.P. performed the metabolomic analysis. 
B.Z., M.L., C.Z., and HL.W. performed the fecal microbiotic transplantation. P.Z., J.C., J.P., S.G., 
and Y.L. analyzed metagenomic and metabolomic data. P.Z., M.L., K.C., and X.Z. collected 
clinical samples. P.X. and P.Z. drafted the manuscript. P.X., J.L., S.W.P., and M.-L.W. revised the 
manuscript for intellectual content. Competing interests: The authors declare that they have 
no competing interests. Data and materials availability: All data needed to evaluate the 
conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. 
Additional data related to this paper may be requested from the authors.
Submitted 20 July 2018
Accepted 20 December 2018
Published 6 February 2019
10.1126/sciadv.aau8317
Citation: P. Zheng, B. Zeng, M. Liu, J. Chen, J. Pan, Y. Han, Y. Liu, K. Cheng, C. Zhou, H. Wang, 
X. Zhou, S. Gui, S. W. Perry, M.-L. Wong, J. Licinio, H. Wei, P. Xie, The gut microbiome from 
patients with schizophrenia modulates the glutamate-glutamine-GABA cycle and schizophrenia- 
relevant behaviors in mice. Sci. Adv. 5, eaau8317 (2019).
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 glutamate-glutamine-GABA cycle and schizophrenia-relevant behaviors in mice
The gut microbiome from patients with schizophrenia modulates the
Wang, Xinyu Zhou, Siwen Gui, Seth W. Perry, Ma-Li Wong, Julio Licinio, Hong Wei and Peng Xie
Peng Zheng, Benhua Zeng, Meiling Liu, Jianjun Chen, Junxi Pan, Yu Han, Yiyun Liu, Ke Cheng, Chanjuan Zhou, Haiyang
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aau8317
 (2), eaau8317.
5
Sci Adv 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/5/2/eaau8317
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2019/02/04/5.2.eaau8317.DC1
REFERENCES
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/5/2/eaau8317#BIBL
This article cites 40 articles, 2 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
registered trademark of AAAS.
is a
Science Advances 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
(ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New
Science Advances 
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
