 JCB: Article
JCB
103
The Rockefeller University Press  
$30.00
J. Cell Biol. Vol. 214 No. 1 103–119
www.jcb.org/cgi/doi/10.1083/jcb.201605101
Introduction
Mitochondria are cellular power plants that supply ATP essen-
tial for neuron growth, survival, and regeneration (Nicholls and 
Budd, 2000). Because of their extremely varied morphological 
features, neurons face special challenges to maintain energy ho-
meostasis in distal regions of the axons. Mitochondrial distri-
bution to far distal axons depends on microtubule (MT)-based 
motors via mechanisms that require ATP hydrolysis (Ruthel and 
Hollenbeck, 2003; MacAskill and Kittler, 2010; Saxton and 
Hollenbeck, 2012; Sheng and Cai, 2012). Mitochondria move 
bidirectionally along axons and frequently change direction. 
Motile mitochondria can become stationary, and stationary ones 
can be redistributed in response to changes in metabolic status 
and growth conditions (Sheng, 2014). In mature axons of the 
central nervous system (CNS), the majority of mitochondria re-
main stationary, whereas ∼20–30% are motile (Sun et al., 2013). 
In addition, distal mitochondria need to be removed when their 
integrity is impaired under certain stress conditions (Miller and 
Sheetz, 2004; Chang and Reynolds, 2006; Cai et al., 2012).
Although young neurons possess the capacity for robust 
axon growth during early development, mature CNS axons typ-
ically fail to regrow after injury, leading to permanent neuro-
logical impairments. Numerous studies in the past have focused 
on genetic programs, signaling mechanisms, and extracellular 
inhibitory factors for axon regeneration (see reviews by Schwab 
and Bartholdi [1996], Case and Tessier-Lavigne [2005], Fil-
bin [2006], Harel and Strittmatter [2006], Yiu and He [2006], 
Fitch and Silver [2008], Liu et al. [2011], and Cho and Cavalli 
[2014]). These studies suggest that mature CNS neurons have 
lost their growth capacity as the result of an intrinsic decline 
of permissive conditions for regeneration. Thus, it is critical to 
reveal these intrinsic pathways that account for mature neuron- 
associated decline of axonal regrowth capacity.
To survive an injury, neurons need to quickly reform an 
active growth cone where damaged membranes are resealed, 
cytoskeletal structures are rearranged, and regrowth programs 
are activated, including synthesis of raw materials, transport, 
and assembly of axonal components (Bradke et al., 2012). All 
of these events require high levels of energy consumption. 
Thus, proper mitochondrial transport into injured axons ensures 
that metabolically active areas are adequately supplied with 
ATP. However, two fundamental questions remain to be ad-
dressed. (1) Do mature neurons maintain an effective capacity 
to recruit mitochondria to injured axons? And (2) if this func-
tion declines in mature neurons, does enhancing mitochondrial 
transport enable mature neurons to regain regenerative capacity 
Although neuronal regeneration is a highly energy-demanding process, axonal mitochondrial transport progressively 
declines with maturation. Mature neurons typically fail to regenerate after injury, thus raising a fundamental question as 
to whether mitochondrial transport is necessary to meet enhanced metabolic requirements during regeneration. Here, 
we reveal that reduced mitochondrial motility and energy deficits in injured axons are intrinsic mechanisms controlling 
regrowth in mature neurons. Axotomy induces acute mitochondrial depolarization and ATP depletion in injured axons. 
Thus, mature neuron-associated increases in mitochondria-anchoring protein syntaphilin (SNPH) and decreases in mi-
tochondrial transport cause local energy deficits. Strikingly, enhancing mitochondrial transport via genetic manipulation 
facilitates regenerative capacity by replenishing healthy mitochondria in injured axons, thereby rescuing energy deficits. 
An in vivo sciatic nerve crush study further shows that enhanced mitochondrial transport in snph knockout mice acceler-
ates axon regeneration. Understanding deficits in mitochondrial trafficking and energy supply in injured axons of ma-
ture neurons benefits development of new strategies to stimulate axon regeneration.
Facilitation of axon regeneration by enhancing 
mitochondrial transport and rescuing energy deficits
Bing Zhou,1 Panpan Yu,2 Mei-Yao Lin,1 Tao Sun,1 Yanmin Chen,1 and Zu-Hang Sheng1
1Synaptic Functions Section, The Porter Neuroscience Research Center, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,  
MD 20892
2Guangdong–Hong Kong–Macau Institute of CNS Regeneration, Ministry of Education Joint International Research Laboratory of CNS Regeneration, Jinan University, 
Guangzhou 510632, China
This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike–No 
Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date (see http 
://www 
.rupress 
.org 
/terms). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–
Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 Unported license, as described at http 
://creativecommons 
.org 
/licenses 
/by 
-nc 
-sa 
/3 
.0 
/).
Correspondence to Zu-Hang Sheng: shengz@ninds.nih.gov
Abbreviations used in this paper: CNS, central nervous system; DRG, dorsal 
root ganglion; KO, knockout; MT, microtubule; PNS, peripheral nervous system; 
SNPH, syntaphilin; TMRE, tetramethylrhodamine ethylester; WT, wild type.
T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y
on June 3, 2019
jcb.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201605101
Published Online: 7 June, 2016 | Supp Info: 
 JCB • Volume 214 • NumBer 1 • 2016
104
by facilitating the removal of damaged mitochondria from and 
replenishing healthy ones to injured axons?
Our previous study demonstrated that syntaphilin (SNPH) 
acts as a “static anchor” specific for axonal mitochondria (Kang 
et al., 2008; Chen and Sheng, 2013). Deleting murine snph re-
sults in a substantially increased percentage (∼70%) of motile 
axonal mitochondria. Conversely, overexpressing SNPH abol-
ishes axonal mitochondrial transport. Most interestingly, SNPH 
is strictly developmentally regulated in the brain: its expression 
is hardly detectable in embryonic stages, very low before post-
natal day 7 (P7), and peaks at adult stages (Das et al., 2003). 
The unique pattern of SNPH expression in the brain and its spe-
cific role in anchoring axonal mitochondria allow us to propose 
an attractive hypothesis: mature neuron-associated decline of 
mitochondrial transport is an intrinsic mechanism controlling 
axon regrowth capacity. Thus, snph knockout (KO) mice pro-
vide an ideal model to investigate how mitochondrial trafficking 
and anchoring influences axonal regenerative capacity.
In the current study, we reveal that enhancing axonal mi-
tochondrial transport in snph KO mice facilitates axon regen-
erative capacity. We further show that axon injury is an acute 
stress signal that depolarizes mitochondria in the vicinity of 
the injured site. Enhancing transport helps remove those dys-
functional mitochondria from and replenish healthy ones to 
the injured axons, thus rescuing energy deficits and facilitating 
axonal regrowth. Therefore, our study suggests a new cellular 
target for stimulating axon regeneration and perhaps functional 
recovery after nerve injury and disease.
Results
Enhanced axon regrowth in snph KO 
cortical neurons
Our previous study identified SNPH as an axonal mitochondrial 
anchoring protein; deleting snph results in a majority (∼70%) 
of motile axonal mitochondria in cultured hippocampal and 
cortical neurons (Kang et al., 2008; Chen and Sheng, 2013). 
To examine the in vivo effect of SNPH on axonal mitochon-
drial transport, we crossed snph KO mice with Thy1-Mito-CFP 
transgenic mice, where mitochondria are labeled with CFP 
in a subset of neurons (Misgeld et al., 2007). Relative mito-
chondrial motility was assessed from acute nerve explants after 
rapid dissection in adult wild-type (WT) and snph KO litter-
mates (2 mo old). The crossed snph−/−/Mito-CFP mice display 
robustly enhanced mitochondrial motility along axonal bundles 
of the sciatic nerve (71.58 ± 2.72%, mean ± standard error, P < 
0.0001, Mann–Whitney U test) relative to that in control Mito- 
CFP mice (30.95 ± 2.17%, n = 23 images for each genotype 
from five paired littermates; Videos 1 and 2). This ex vivo imag-
ing further verifies that SNPH acts as an anchoring protein that 
controls axonal mitochondrial transport. Thus, snph KO mice 
serve as an ideal genetic model for our investigations as to how 
enhanced transport of axonal mitochondria in mature neurons 
influences axonal regrowth and regenerative capacity.
We first asked whether enhanced mitochondrial transport 
in snph KO cortical neurons facilitates axon regrowth after axo-
tomy. To address this issue, we applied microfluidic culture de-
vices as we previously described (Zhou et al., 2012), in which 
neuronal cell bodies and dendrites are restricted to the soma 
chamber while axons grow into the axon terminal chamber 
through long (450 µm in length) microgrooves. Neurons at 4 d in 
vitro (DIV4) were stained with βIII-tubulin, which labels axons 
(Fig. 1 A). Deleting snph in cortical neurons did not change ax-
onal growth during the early stages of development (DIV5; P = 
0.38, n = 62) when compared with WT neurons (n = 60; Fig. S1, 
A and B). However, when axons in the terminal chamber were 
removed by vacuum aspiration (axotomy; Fig. 1 B), we found 
that snph KO neurons display enhanced regrowth capacity 3 d 
after axotomy (Fig. 1, C–E). Axon regrowth begins as early as 
7 h after injury and enters a rapid growth phase by 28 h (Fig. 1, 
F and G). Regrown axonal areas are significantly increased at 
28 h in snph KO neurons relative to WT control (P < 0.001). 
We costained terminal axons with phalloidin to label active 
growth cones 14 h after axotomy. Deleting snph significantly 
facilitates formation of new growth cones (69.11 ± 2.90%, P = 
0.0002) compared with WT neurons (44.46 ± 1.92%; Fig. 1, H 
and I). Live imaging shows that regenerating axons are mainly 
grown from the injured tips (Fig. S1 C). Thus, enhancing mito-
chondrial transport by deleting the snph gene facilitates axon 
regrowth after injury.
Mature neuron-associated decline of 
mitochondrial transport contributes to 
failed regrowth
We asked whether SNPH expression contributes to a reduced 
regrowth capacity in mature CNS neurons. WT cortical neurons 
in microfluidic devices were axotomized at DIV4 or DIV12 and 
stained with βIII-tubulin 3 or 6 d after axotomy. Although neu-
rons at DIV7 maintain some regrowth capacity, mature neurons 
at DIV18 display little axon regrowth (Fig. 2, A–C). A possible 
mechanism underlying such a striking difference in regrowth 
capacity between young and mature neurons may be caused by 
development-dependent cellular pathways. To address this issue, 
we examined the relative expression of SNPH and other mito-
chondrial proteins in various developmental stages of cultured 
neurons between DIV3 and DIV22, mouse brains at embryonic 
day (E) 18 and adult. To our surprise, mature neuron-associated 
decline of regrowth capacity correlates with progressively in-
creased SNPH expression: its expression is hardly detectable 
in E18 brains and in cultured neurons before DIV3, readily de-
tected after DIV9, and peaks at DIV22 in culture (Fig. 2, D and 
E), an expression pattern consistent with our previous findings 
from rat brains (Das et al., 2003). There were no other proteins 
detected showing such changes, including kinesin-1 (KIF5), ki-
nesin adaptors Trak2 and Miro1/2, dynein intermediate chain 
(DIC), and outer mitochondrial membrane proteins TOM20 and 
VDAC. Furthermore, there is no significant change (P = 0.25) 
in Miro1/2 expression in WT and snph KO cortical neurons at 
DIV14 (Fig. S1 D). In addition, we expressed HA-SNPH or HA 
control in cortical neurons and detected no observable change 
in Miro1/2 expression at DIV14 (P = 0.16; Fig. S1 E).
The unique expression pattern suggests that SNPH con-
trols mitochondrial transport in mature neurons. Consistent with 
this hypothesis, axonal mitochondria display progressively re-
duced motility from DIV7 to DIV18 (Fig. 2, F and G). The rel-
ative axonal mitochondrial motility at DIV7 is 47.60 ± 4.60%, 
two times higher than that at DIV18 (22.88 ± 3.09%, P < 0.001). 
To exclude a general transport decline caused by the long-term 
neuronal culture, we examined the axonal transport of late en-
dosomes as an internal control and found no decline during the 
same maturation stages (Fig. 2, F and H). These results suggest 
that elevated SNPH expression in mature neurons is one of the 
intrinsic mechanisms diminishing axonal regenerative capacity.
 mitochondrial transport facilitates regeneration • Zhou et al.
105
Mature neurons regain regrowth capacity 
by enhancing mitochondrial transport
Mature neurons at DIV18 lose their regrowth capacity after 
axotomy (Fig. 2, A–C) and display a substantial decline in axo-
nal mitochondrial transport (Fig. 2, F–H), raising a question as 
to whether mature neurons can regain their regrowth capacity 
by enhancing mitochondrial transport. To address this issue, we 
manipulated axonal mitochondrial motility in cortical neurons 
by coexpressing DsRed-Mito with SNPH, SNPH-dMTB, an 
SNPH loss-of-function mutant deleting its anchoring domain 
(Kang et al., 2008), or Miro1 via lentivirus infection. Cultured 
neurons display strikingly different motility patterns of mito-
chondria along the microgrooves after transgene expression 
(Fig. 3 A). Expressing SNPH abolishes axonal mitochondrial 
motility, whereas expressing Miro1 enhances their bidirectional 
transport along the microgrooves relative to control neurons 
(Fig. 3 B and Videos 3–5). To assess axon regrowth after axo-
tomy, these cortical neurons were coinfected with Lenti-GFP 
to visualize axons in the terminal chambers and grown for 12 d 
before axotomy. Axonal regrowth was evaluated 6 d after injury 
(DIV18). Although neurons coexpressing SNPH show very lim-
ited axon regrowth, enhancing mitochondrial transport by ex-
pressing Miro1 robustly increases axon regrowth capacity when 
compared with neurons expressing SNPH-dMTB (Fig. 3, C and 
Figure 1. snph KO cortical neurons display enhanced 
axon regrowth capacity. (A and B) A microfluidic cham-
ber allows physical and fluidic separation of axons from 
cell bodies and dendrites. Cortical neurons were seeded 
in the soma chamber where cell bodies and dendrites 
are restricted to the soma chamber, whereas axons grow 
into the axon terminal chamber through the microgroove 
channels (MC; 450 µm in length). The device (a) allows 
quick and definitive detection of axons, (b) determines 
axon directionality, (c) reduces background signals from 
glial and neuronal cell bodies and dendrites, (d) permits 
axotomy along the edge of microgrooves by vacuum 
aspiration, and (e) measures axon regrowth. Neurons 
were stained with βIII-tubulin (A) or infected with lenti-YFP 
(B); axon removal in the terminal chamber by vacuum as-
piration was confirmed by imaging live neurons express-
ing YFP before and after axotomy (B). (C–E) Images (C 
and D) and quantitative analysis (E) showing enhanced 
axon regrowth after axotomy in snph KO neurons. WT 
(C) and snph KO (D) cortical neurons were axotomized 
at DIV4 and allowed to regrow for 3 d. Axons were 
immunostained with βIII-tubulin at DIV7. Note that the 
normalized area of regenerating axons was significantly 
increased in snph KO neurons relative to controls (P < 
0.001). (F and G) Images (F) and quantitative analysis 
(G) of WT and snph KO cortical neurons showing early 
phases of axon regrowth at 7 and 28 h after axotomy. 
(H and I) Representative images (H) and quantitative 
analysis (I) showing the formation of new growth cones 
after axotomy. Axonal terminals were costained with 
βIII-tubulin and Alexa Fluor 543 phalloidin 14 h after 
axotomy. Note that deleting snph facilitates the forma-
tion of growth cones (69.11 ± 2.90%, P = 0.0002) 
compared with WT (44.46 ± 1.92%) from injured axon 
tips. Imaging data were pooled from a total number of 
microgroove channels indicated within bars (E and G) 
taken from three pairs of littermates or a total number of 
axonal terminal chambers indicated within bars (I) and 
expressed as mean ± SE (Student’s t test).
 JCB • Volume 214 • NumBer 1 • 2016
106
D). SNPH-mediated suppression of axon regrowth is partially 
recovered by supplying 200 µM ATP through electroporation 
(Fig. 3 E). To determine whether mitochondrial ATP produc-
tion is critical for axon regrowth, we briefly treated the axonal 
chamber with 2 µM oligomycin, a mitochondrial complex V in-
hibitor, after axotomy. Such treatment abolishes recovery of the 
regrowth capacity in snph KO neurons (Fig. 3 F). Altogether, 
these results suggest that supplying ATP to injured axons by en-
hancing mitochondrial transport contributes to axon regrowth.
To determine whether increased regrowth in snph KO 
neurons is secondary to improved neuronal survival, we ex-
amined MAP2-positive survival neurons and TUN 
EL-positive 
death cells in the somatic chamber (Fig. S2 A) and character-
ized the correlation between cell density and axonal regrowth 
after injury. Our study shows no significant change in the nor-
malized density of MAP2-positive neurons (Fig. S2 B) and 
percentage of TUN 
EL-positive death cells (Fig. S2 C) between 
WT and snph KO neurons at 1 h and 3 d after axotomy (P > 
0.05). Although WT neuron density correlates with axonal re-
growth after injury (R2 = 0.3501, P < 0.0001), enhanced axonal 
regrowth in snph KO neurons is not correlated with relative cell 
density in the soma chamber (R2 = 0.0556, P = 0.1187; Fig. 
S2 D). Our results are consistent with previous studies showing 
that promoting neuronal survival failed to increase axon regen-
eration (Park et al., 2008; Hu et al., 2012).
To further test our hypothesis, we examined the regrowth 
capacity of mature dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons isolated 
from adult WT or snph KO mice at postnatal day (P) 60. These 
adult DRG neurons are well matured and undergo an axoto-
my-like injury during cell dissociation and culture preparation; 
axon regrowth occurs from the cell body 1 h after plating on 
coverslips, thus partially recapitulating an axonal regrowth 
program in mature neurons after injury. Because almost all 
processes in DRG neurons are tau-positive axons (Perlson et 
al., 2009), adult DRG neurons were immunostained with the 
neuron-specific marker βIII-tubulin. The snph KO adult DRG 
neurons display increased regrowth capacity, as indicated by the 
total number of axonal intersections when compared with WT 
Figure 2. SNPH-mediated mitochondrial anchoring contributes to 
reduced regrowth capacity in mature neurons. (A–C) Representa-
tive microfluidic images (A and B) and quantitative analysis (C) 
showing reduced capacity of axonal regrowth in mature cortical 
neurons after axotomy. Neurons were axotomized at DIV4 (A) 
or DIV12 (B) and imaged by staining of βIII-tubulin 3 (A) or 6 d 
(B) after injury. Although young neurons at DIV7 maintain some 
level of regrowth capacity, mature neurons at DIV18 show failed 
regeneration (P < 0.001, Mann–Whitney test). (D and E) Repre-
sentative immunoblots (D) and quantitative analysis (E) showing 
progressive increase in SNPH expression with neuron maturation. 
Cortical neurons isolated from E18 mouse brains were cultured for 
3, 7, 9, 12, 15, 18, and 22 d. Equal amounts (20 µg) of cell 
lysates were loaded and sequentially immunoblotted with various 
antibodies after stripping between applications of each antibody. 
Brain lysates from E18 WT, adult WT, and adult snph KO mice 
were used as controls. The intensity of SNPH bands were quanti-
fied from three repeats, calibrated with TOM20 levels, and then 
normalized to SNPH expression at DIV7. (F–H) Kymographs (F) 
and quantitative analysis (G and H) showing progressive decline 
of axonal mitochondrial motility with neuron maturation. Cortical 
neurons were transfected with DsRed-Mito or Rab7-YFP. Time-lapse 
images, obtained at DIV7, 9, 12, or 18, were recorded for 100 
frames with 5-s intervals. In kymographs, vertical lines represent 
stationary organelles; oblique lines or curves to the right indicate 
anterograde transport toward distal terminals. Note that axonal 
mitochondria have progressively reduced motility, whereas late en-
dosomes show no significant change in their motility in the same 
axons during maturation. Bars, 10 µm. Data were analyzed from 
the total number of chambers indicated within bars (C) or the total 
number of neurons indicated within bars (G and H) and expressed 
as mean ± SE and by one-way ANO 
VA test.
 mitochondrial transport facilitates regeneration • Zhou et al.
107
DRG neurons (P < 0.05; Fig. 3, G and H), thereby confirming 
that axonal regrowth in matured neurons is facilitated by en-
hancing mitochondrial transport.
Expressing SNPH alters mitochondrial 
distribution and ATP/ADP ratio in 
distal axons
A critical step for inducing axon regrowth is the transformation 
of the injured axonal end into a growth cone–like structure that 
can integrate extracellular and intracellular signals for regrowth 
(see reviews by Tessier-Lavigne and Goodman [1996], Yu and 
Bargmann [2001], and Liu et al. [2011]). We next addressed 
whether altered mitochondrial motility regulates their distribu-
tion in distal axons, thus controlling the size of growth cones 
in both the peripheral nervous system (PNS) and CNS. We first 
used adult DRG sensory neurons isolated from adult P60 mice. 
Neurons were cotransfected with DsRed-Mito with GFP and 
SNPH, SNPH-dMTB, or Miro1, followed by immunostaining 
Figure 3. Mature neurons regain regrowth capacity by enhancing mitochondrial transport. (A and B) Kymographs (A) and quantitative analysis (B) show-
ing mitochondrial motility along microgrooves in microfluidic chambers. Time-lapse imaging was recorded in cortical neurons at DIV12 for a total of 100 
frames with 5-s intervals. In kymographs, vertical lines represent stationary organelles; oblique lines or curves to the right indicate anterograde transport 
toward distal terminals. Note that the relative motility in control neurons expressing HA is significantly higher than the motility in neurons overexpressing 
HA-SNPH, but lower than the motility in neurons expressing HA-Miro1. (C and D) Representative microfluidic images (C) and quantitative analysis (D) 
showing regrowth capacity in mature cortical neurons. Neurons infected with lentivirus encoding SNPH, SNPH-dMTB, or Miro1 were grown on microflu-
idic chambers for 12 d before axotomy. Axon regeneration was evaluated 6 d after axotomy (DIV18). Note that abolishing mitochondrial transport by 
expressing SNPH shows failed axon regrowth, whereas enhancing mitochondrial transport by expressing Miro1 robustly increases axon regrowth capacity. 
(E) Partial recovery of regrowth capacity in the SNPH-expressing neurons by ATP application. The electroporated neurons were immediately plated on a 
microfluidic chamber with medium containing 200 µM ATP. (F) Recovery of regrowth capacity 14 h after axotomy in snph KO neurons is largely abolished 
by blocking mitochondrial ATP generation with 2 µM oligomycin (Oligo). The axonal chambers were briefly treated with 2 µM oligomycin for 4 h after 
axotomy. (G and H) Representative images (G) and quantitative analysis (H) showing enhanced axonal regrowth in snph KO adult DRG neurons. DRG 
neurons isolated from adult (P60) WT or snph KO mice were immunostained with βIII-tubulin at DIV1. Axon regrowth was quantified by Sholl analysis. The 
snph-deficient adult DRG neurons display increased axon branching as indicated by the total number of axonal intersections. Mitochondrial motility data 
were analyzed from the total number of microgrooves (B); axonal regrowth data were analyzed in terminal chambers where new axons grow from a total 
number of microgrooves (E and F), total number of terminal chambers (D), or total number of DRG neurons (H) indicated within bars or in parentheses and 
expressed as mean ± SE and by one-way ANO 
VA test (B and D), Student’s t test (F and H), or Mann–Whitney U test (E). Bars: (A) 20 µm; (C and G) 100 µm.
 JCB • Volume 214 • NumBer 1 • 2016
108
with the axonal marker Tau. Expressing SNPH, but not its loss-
of-function mutant dMTB, blocks delivery of mitochondria 
into axonal terminals (Fig. 4, A and B). Conversely, expressing 
Miro1 increases mitochondrial density in growth cones. Inter-
estingly, these mitochondrial distribution patterns correlate with 
the mean size of reformed growth cones in adult DRG neurons 
after dissociation axotomy.
We further confirmed this correlation in cortical neu-
rons by coexpressing DsRed-Mito with GFP or together with 
SNPH, SNPH-dMTB, or Miro1, followed by immunostaining 
with Tau. Both mitochondrial density in axonal terminals and 
the mean size of growth cones were decreased in neurons over-
expressing SNPH (P < 0.01 and P < 0.001, respectively), but 
increased in neurons overexpressing Miro1 (P < 0.05) relative 
to control neurons (Fig. 4, C and D). Because SNPH is hardly 
detectable before DIV7, it is predictable that expressing loss-
of-function mutant SNPH-dMTB in young cortical neurons 
(DIV5) displays no dominant-negative effect on mitochondrial 
density nor the mean size of growth cones when compared with 
control neurons (Fig. 4 D). Thus, our results provide a clue as 
to why an injured axonal tip in mature neurons often fails to 
transform into an active growth cone (Li and Raisman, 1995; 
Hill et al., 2001), as mitochondrial recruitment is suppressed by 
elevated SNPH expression.
Reduced mitochondrial density within axonal terminals 
in the SNPH-expressing neurons prompted us to examine how 
mitochondrial motility impacts ATP homeostasis throughout an 
axon. The cellular ATP/ADP ratio in live axons was measured 
by applying an engineered fluorescent ATP sensor, PercevalHR, 
in live neurons (Sun et al., 2013; Tantama et al., 2013). The 
 
fluorescence intensity ratio (F488nm/F405nm) reflects the relative 
ATP/ADP ratio, thus allowing spatial detection of intracellular 
ATP homeostasis in various axonal segments. Relative mito-
chondrial density and ATP/ADP ratios along an axon were ana-
lyzed based on five equally divided segments of each individual 
axon from the most proximal to the most distal region (Fig. S3, 
A and B). Overexpressing SNPH in cortical neurons redistrib-
utes axonal mitochondria to the proximal region (P < 0.001) and 
also reduces mitochondrial density and the ATP/ADP ratio in the 
most distal axon segment (P < 0.001 and P < 0.05, respectively). 
Because intracellular pH values impact the Perceval fluorescent 
intensity (Berg et al., 2009), we monitored pH in axons using 
the pH dye SNA 
RF-5F (Fig. S3, C and D). SNA 
RF-5F signal 
was calibrated using various buffered solutions containing high 
K+/nigericin with varying pH values (Fig. S3, E and F). The pH 
values in an entire axon of both WT and SNPH overexpression 
neurons undergo very minor changes (7.10–7.15). Thus, reduc-
tion in the ATP/ADP ratios in distal axons is physiologically 
relevant to the reduced axonal mitochondrial density. These 
results suggest that proper mitochondrial positioning in distal 
axons is required to maintain local ATP homeostasis. Therefore, 
in mature neurons, where SNPH expression is elevated and ax-
onal mitochondrial motility is suppressed (Fig. 2), local ATP 
deficits occur if injury stress triggers mitochondria dysfunction. 
This notion is supported by previous in vivo studies showing 
that axonal injury induces mitochondrial depolarization and ox-
idative stress (O’Donnell et al., 2013; Cavallucci et al., 2014).
Axotomy triggers an acute stress signal 
that depolarizes local mitochondria
We assessed the impact of axotomy on mitochondrial integrity 
by performing the following four experiments. First, we chose 
adult DRG neurons for laser-based axotomy using a multi-
timer programed two-photon laser microsurgery as previously 
Figure 4. Mitochondrial transport impacts ter-
minal mitochondrial recruitment and growth cone 
size. (A and B) Representative images (A) and 
quantitative analysis (B) showing correlation of 
mitochondrial density in the axonal terminals and 
growth cone size of adult DRG neurons after disso-
ciation axotomy. Adult DRG neurons isolated from 
P60 mice were cotransfected with DsRed-Mito, GFP, 
and control vector, SNPH, SNPH-dMTB, or Mrio1, 
followed by immunostaining with Tau at DIV2. Note 
that expressing SNPH, but not its loss-of-function 
mutant SNPH-dMTB, blocks the delivery of mito-
chondria into growth tips and reduces average size 
of growth cones, whereas expressing Miro1 ro-
bustly increases terminal mitochondrial density and 
size of growth cones. (C and D) Images (C) and 
quantitative analysis (D) of distal mitochondrial dis-
tribution and growth cone size in cortical neurons 
coexpressing DsRed-Mito with GFP or together with 
SNPH, SNPH-dMTB, or Miro1. Neurons at DIV5 
were immunostained with Tau. Note that both mito-
chondrial density in terminals and the average size 
of growth cones are decreased in neurons express-
ing SNPH (P < 0.01 and P < 0.001, respectively), 
but increased in neurons expressing Miro1 (P < 
0.05) relative to control neurons. Arrows indicate 
the most distal mitochondrion in the SNPH-express-
ing axons (C). Data were analyzed from the total 
number of axons indicated within bars from more 
than three experiments and expressed as mean ± 
SE and by one-way ANO 
VA test. Bars, 10 µm.
 mitochondrial transport facilitates regeneration • Zhou et al.
109
described (Cho et al., 2013) with some modifications. A train 
of near-infrared femtosecond laser pulses lead to nearly 100% 
physical separation of axonal processes. Time-lapse images 
demonstrate that although mitochondria at the axotomized site 
were ablated during axotomy, mitochondria in the vicinity sud-
denly shrank and lost their staining by tetramethylrhodamine 
ethylester (TMRE), a fluorescent dye that stains mitochondria 
depending on membrane potential (Δψm; Fig. 5, A–C).
Second, we confirmed the axotomy-induced depolariza-
tion of local mitochondria in mature cortical neurons on mi-
crofluidic chambers. Neurons were infected with lentiviruses 
expressing pLenti-GFP or pLenti-GFP-Mito. Axon bundles in 
the terminal chambers were loaded with 25 nM TMRE dye at 
DIV12, followed by laser-based axotomy and time-lapse im-
aging. The axons were quickly broken up during axotomy, and 
mitochondria in the vicinity suddenly lost their TMRE staining 
(Fig. 5 D and Video 6). Similarly, in the axons expressing GFP-
Mito, axotomy triggered a loss of TMRE staining near the axot-
omy site, while those depolarized mitochondria still maintained 
GFP-Mito signals (Fig. 5 E and Video 7). Alternatively, we ap-
plied a physical axotomy in the axonal chamber by using pulled 
glass capillaries with a tip diameter of ∼1 µm. Neurons were 
loaded with both TMRE (Δψm-dependent dye) and MitoTracker 
Green FM (Δψm-independent dye) before axotomy. After phys-
ical axotomy, TMRE staining was lost near the axotomized 
ends, whereas MitoTracker Green FM staining remained (Fig. 
S4 A). In addition, we costained mitochondria in the axonal 
chambers with MitoTracker Green FM and MitoTracker Red 
FM (Δψm-insensitive dye with similar wavelength as TMRE). 
Laser-induced axotomy does not reduce the signal intensity of 
MitoTracker Red FM (Fig. S4 B), thus excluding an artificial 
laser effect on TMRE signals.
Third, we examined somatic mitochondrial integrity 
by staining with MitoTracker Orange CMT 
MRos, a fixable 
Δψm-dependent dye. Axotomy in the axonal terminal chamber 
does not induce any observable reduction in the mean intensity 
of Orange CMT 
MRos in the soma chamber at 1 and 5 h after 
injury (Fig. S4 C). In addition, we asked whether the observed 
local mitochondrial damage is accompanied by ATP depletion 
in the injured axons. To monitor intracellular ATP levels, we 
applied the red-shifted genetically encoded ATP probe GO-
ATeam2, in which GFP and OFP were used as a FRET (Förster 
resonance energy transfer) pair (Nakano et al., 2011). This ATP 
probe is relatively stable against acidification and less photo-
toxic to cells and thus is suitable for long-time live imaging. 
 
Laser-based axotomy triggers a quick ATP depletion at millimo-
lar levels in the vicinity of the injured site of adult DRG neurons 
(Fig. 5, F and G), indicating axotomy-induced energy deficits. 
These studies consistently support the notion that axotomy is 
an acute stress signal that depolarizes local mitochondria, thus 
triggering energy deficits in the vicinity of injury sites.
Enhanced transport recovers mitochondrial 
integrity and rescues energy deficits
Depolarized mitochondria not only supply less ATP, but also 
release toxic reactive oxygen species that trigger axon degener-
ation (Sheng and Cai, 2012). Therefore, quickly replacing those 
damaged mitochondria not only protects axons from degener-
ation, but also supports high-energy demanded regeneration. 
We hypothesize that the intrinsic reduction of mitochondrial 
transport in mature neurons impairs efficient delivery of healthy 
mitochondria to and removal of damaged mitochondria from in-
jured axons. Mature cortical neurons can regain axon regrowth 
capacity by enhancing mitochondrial transport (Fig. 1, C–E; 
and Fig. 3 C), supporting that proper axonal transport is essen-
tial to maintain mitochondrial integrity and energy supply in 
response to injury-induced mitochondrial damage.
To test our hypothesis, we performed the following three 
types of experiments. First, we characterized axonal mitochon-
drial flux along the microgrooves before and after axotomy in 
WT and snph KO mature cortical neurons infected with pLenti-
GFP-Mito. Mitochondrial flux was measured by the total num-
ber of bidirectional transport events through the microgrooves. 
Deleting snph significantly increases axonal mitochondrial flux 
before (P < 0.001) and 10 min (P < 0.05) and 1 h after axotomy 
(P < 0.001) when compared with WT neurons (Fig. 6, A and B; 
and Videos 8 and 9). Our findings also suggest that the imme-
diate pause of axonal mitochondria upon axotomy (Videos 6 
and 7) is likely a temporary response to high calcium influx into 
injured axons; paused mitochondria are then recruited to motile 
pools 10 min after axotomy, and their total flux rate is affected 
by the relative SNPH expression in mature neurons.
Next, we investigated the impact of enhanced transport 
on the recovery of mitochondrial integrity by examining mito-
chondrial Δψm after injury. Cortical neurons were infected with 
pLenti-GFP-Mito and axons were loaded with 25 nM TMRE 
dye before or 1 or 5 h after axotomy. Axotomy impairs mito-
chondrial integrity by depolarizing Δψm in the proximal ends 
of the injured axons in WT neurons (Fig. 6 C). However, there 
was a significant increase (P < 0.001) in TMRE recovery in 
snph KO neurons (Fig. 6 D), suggesting that the mitochondrial 
stress phenotype can be reversed in snph KO axons by enhanced 
mitochondrial transport. These results support our hypothesis 
that enhancing mitochondrial transport helps remove dam-
aged mitochondria and/or replenish healthy ones to the proxi-
mal ends of injured axons.
We next asked whether local ATP deficits occur after axo-
tomy-induced mitochondrial dysfunction in mature neurons, 
where SNPH expression is elevated and axonal mitochondrial 
motility is suppressed (Fig. 2). We measured ATP maintenance 
in the distal growing tips 6 h after axotomy in WT and snph 
KO neurons infected with pLenti-PercevalHR. Enhanced mi-
tochondrial transport in snph KO axons significantly increases 
the ATP/ADP ratio in the growing tips relative to that in WT 
neurons (Fig. 6, E and F). We detected no change in pH val-
ues at growing tips 6 h after axotomy between WT and snph 
KO neurons (Fig. S5 A). To further confirm these observations, 
we alternatively applied the ATP probe GO-ATeam2 to monitor 
intracellular ATP levels by measuring the F560nm/F510nm ratio-
metric integrated intensity before or 1, 3, or 5 h after axotomy. 
ATP-insensitive GO-ATeam3 mutant (R122K/R126K; Nakano 
et al., 2011) was also applied as a control of imaging and axo-
tomy procedures. WT neurons expressing the ATP probe GO-
ATeam2 display reduced F560nm/F510nm integrated intensity in the 
distal microgrooves after axotomy, suggesting an axotomy-in-
duced ATP depletion. Enhancing axonal mitochondrial trans-
port in snph KO neurons recovers energy deficits at 3 and 5 h 
after axotomy (Fig. 6, G and H; and Fig. S5 B). As a control, 
WT neurons expressing ATP-insensitive GO-ATeam3 mutant 
do not show any significant change after axotomy (Figs. S5, C 
and D). Thus, both ATP sensors Perceval and GO-ATeam2 con-
sistently reveal a higher ATP/ADP ratio in the regrowing axon 
of snph KO neurons than in those of WT neurons after axotomy. 
We further confirmed that enhancing mitochondrial transport 
 JCB • Volume 214 • NumBer 1 • 2016
110
Figure 5. Axotomy depolarizes mitochondria in the vicinity of injured sites. (A) Representative images showing axonal mitochondria in adult DRG neurons 
before and after laser-based axotomy. Adult DRG neurons isolated from P60 mice were cotransfected with DsRed-Mito and GFP. Note that mitochondria at the 
axotomized site were immediately lost during axotomy (white arrows). (B and C) Kymographs showing axonal mitochondria labeled by DsRed-Mito (B) or cola-
beled by GFP-Mito and TMRE (C) before and after axotomy. The white arrows indicate laser-scanning sites (injured site), and the black arrows in the y axis show 
the laser execution time. Time-lapse images were captured to show that mitochondria in the vicinity suddenly shrunk (B) and lost the Δψm (TMRE staining; C). The 
images were first recorded at 5-s intervals for a total of 50 frames; the consecutive post-axotomy recording was collected at 5-s intervals for a total of 50 frames. 
(D and E) Representative images showing axotomy-induced depolarization of axonal mitochondria. Neurons were infected with pLenti-GFP (D) or GFP-Mito 
(E), and axons in the terminal chambers were loaded with 25 nM TMRE dye at DIV12, followed by laser-based axotomy and time-lapse imaging. Note that 
in neurons expressing GFP (D), axons were quickly broken up upon axotomy (white dashed lines), and a majority of mitochondria in the vicinity suddenly lost 
their TMRE staining (bottom right). In neurons expressing GFP-Mito (E), axotomy triggered a sudden loss of mitochondria staining by TMRE near the axotomy 
site (white dashed lines), whereas those depolarized mitochondria maintained GFP-Mito signals. MC, microgroove channels. (F and G) Representative images 
(F) and ratiometric kymograph (G) showing axotomy-induced ATP depletion. Cultured adult DRG neurons from 2-mo-old mice were transfected with red-shifted 
ATP probe GO-ATeam2, in which GFP and OFP were used as a FRET pair to monitor intracellular ATP levels with an affinity Kd of 2.3 mM at 37°C. Laser-based 
axotomy was applied (white bars in F, white arrow in G) along a distal axon. The green color is the cp173-mEGFP channel, and the red color is the OFP 
channel (mKOk). The ratiometric kymograph was generated by time-lapse imaging of a total of 100 frames with 5-s intervals. Axotomy was applied at the 51th 
frame (G). Note that axotomy triggers acute ATP depletion at millimolar levels in the vicinity of the injured site. Bars: (A–C) 10 µm; (D–G) 20 µm.
 mitochondrial transport facilitates regeneration • Zhou et al.
111
Figure 6. Enhanced mitochondrial transport recovers mitochondrial integrity and rescues energy deficits in injured axons. (A and B) Kymographs (A) and 
quantitative analysis (B) showing axonal mitochondrial flux of WT and snph KO cortical neurons along microgrooves. Neurons were infected with pLenti-
GFP-Mito. Time-lapse imaging was recorded for 30 frames with a 5-s interval for a total of 2.5 min. In kymographs, vertical lines represent stationary or-
ganelles; oblique lines or curves to the right indicate anterograde transport toward terminals. The mitochondrial flux in axonal bundles was measured by the 
total events of bidirectional transport through microgrooves. The images were acquired by 40× lens. Note that deleting snph significantly increases axonal 
mitochondrial flux before and after axotomy when compared with WT neurons. Data were analyzed from the total number of microgrooves indicated within 
bars from more than three independent experiments and expressed as mean ± SE and by Student’s t test. (C and D) Images (C) and quantitative analysis 
(D) showing the recovery of TMRE staining on axonal mitochondria in the microgrooves adjacent to the axotomized site. Cortical neurons were infected 
 JCB • Volume 214 • NumBer 1 • 2016
112
in WT neurons by overexpressing Miro1 also recovers axoto-
my-induced energy deficits (Fig. 6 I). Our study thus highlights 
the crucial role of mitochondrial transport in maintaining ATP 
supply in response to axotomy-induced mitochondrial damage.
To examine whether adult snph KO neurons display any 
altered capacity of calcium buffering, we applied the green flu-
orescent Ca2+ sensor G-GECO1.2 with a Kd = 1.15 µM (Zhao 
et al., 2011), a Ca2+ sensor well characterized in our previous 
study (Di Giovanni and Sheng, 2015). The sensor G-GECO1.2 
was electroporated into neurons and imaged 2 d later. The 
multi-timer macro was applied for consecutive laser axotomy 
and image acquiring of calcium buffering capacity (Fig. S5 E). 
The maximal length of Ca2+ sensor response was unchanged 
after deleting snph (P = 0.423; Fig. S5 F). The mean decay time 
constant within 40 µm of the proximal end of injured axons, 
calculated based on the florescence intensity (F/F0) curve with a 
nonlinear fit, showed no significant change (WT: 15.28 ± 0.08; 
KO: 15.57 ± 0.08, P = 0.827; Fig. S5 G). Thus, Ca2+ sensing is 
unlikely the key pathway in snph KO neurons to facilitate axo-
nal regrowth after injury.
snph KO sciatic nerves display enhanced 
regenerative capacity in vivo after injury
Our ex vivo imaging in adult snph KO mice (2 mo old) dis-
plays enhanced mitochondrial motility along axonal bundles 
of sciatic nerve (71.58 ± 2.72%, P < 0.0001) relative to those 
from control littermates (30.948 ± 2.17%; Videos 1 and 2). To 
test whether enhanced mitochondrial transport facilitates axo-
nal regeneration in vivo, we crushed sciatic nerve in adult snph 
KO mice and control littermates (2 mo old) and assessed the 
level of regeneration past the crush site 3 d after injury. We 
first verified SNPH depletion in snph KO sciatic nerve by co- 
immunostaining SNPH and βIII-tubulin. Although SNPH-tar-
geted mitochondria are abundant along the axons of sciatic 
nerves of WT mice, SNPH staining was absent in the same re-
gion of snph KO mice (Fig. 7 A).
To visualize regrowth of damaged axons in vivo, longi-
tudinal sciatic nerve sections were stained for the growth-as-
sociated protein, GAP-43. The reported concentrations of 
GAP-43 in growth cones (Goslin et al., 1988) and regenerating 
axons (Fu and Gordon, 1997) make it an ideal marker to track 
axon regeneration in vivo (Ackermann et al., 2002; Abe et al., 
2010). GAP-43 expression was undetectable or at a very low 
level in the axons of uninjured WT and snph KO sciatic nerve 
(Fig. 7 B). Adult WT and snph KO mice were subjected to a 
sciatic nerve crush injury and axonal regenerative capacity 3 d 
after the crush injury was assessed in sciatic nerve longitudinal 
sections by examining GAP-43–positive axonal processes. The 
length of GAP-43–expressing axons past the crush site was sig-
nificantly increased in snph KO sciatic nerves compared with 
that of control littermates (Fig. 7 C). We quantified this increase 
by normalizing the number of GAP-43–expressing axons at 
various distances from the crush site. snph KO sciatic nerves 
display significantly more regenerating axons at 1.5 (P < 0.001), 
2.0 (P < 0.01), 2.5 (P < 0.01), and 3.0 mm (P < 0.001) distal 
from the crush site than WT controls (Fig. 7 D). In addition, 
we calculated a regeneration index by measuring the distance 
away from the crush site in which the average number of GAP-
43–positive axons is half of that observed at the crush site. The 
regeneration index is significantly higher in snph KO sciatic 
nerve compared with that of WT (P = 0.01, Student’s t test; 
Fig. 7 E). Thus, our in vivo crush study suggests that enhanced 
axonal mitochondrial transport in snph KO sciatic nerves accel-
erates axon regeneration.
Next, we examined whether rescued energy deficits in 
mature snph KO neurons impact GAP-43 expression in both 
injured ipsilateral and uninjured contralateral DRG neurons 3 
d after injury. Although WT contralateral DRG neurons display 
undetectable or low levels of GAP-43, sciatic nerve injury in-
duces its expression in ipsilateral DRG neurons (Fig. 8, A and 
B), consistent with injury-induced GAP-43 expression. To our 
surprise, GAP-43 expression in snph KO DRGs is increased to a 
larger extent after injury. Although a significant number of unin-
jured contralateral DRG neurons express GAP-43, which mim-
ics the peripheral conditioning lesion effect, sciatic nerve injury 
further enhances its expression. Elevated GAP-43 expression is 
induced in association with nerve regeneration, potentially re-
capitulating an early developmental program. Enhanced axonal 
mitochondrial transport and rescued energy deficits in mature 
snph KO neurons likely activate the early intrinsic program to 
support neuron regrowth.
Discussion
In the current study, we reveal a previously unknown cellular 
pathway that controls axonal regenerative capacity in mature 
neurons. Although mitochondrial transport in axons progres-
sively declines with neuron maturation, axonal injury triggers an 
acute stress signal that depolarizes local mitochondria, leading 
to energy deficits near the injured site. Thus, maintaining a local 
ATP supply via recruiting healthy mitochondria into injured 
axons is critical to meet the enhanced metabolic requirements 
during axonal regeneration. Enhancing mitochondrial transport 
with pLenti-GFP-Mito, and axon bundles were loaded with 20 nM TMRE dye before or 1 or 5 h after axotomy. Live images were acquired at 12 bit below 
the saturate setting for quantitative analysis of Δψm of individual GFP-Mito–labeled mitochondria in axon bundles. Note that axotomy impairs mitochondrial 
integrity by depolarizing Δψm (reduced TMRE staining, arrowheads) in the distal axons of WT neurons; the phenotype can be effectively reversed by 
enhanced mitochondrial transport in snph KO axons. Data were analyzed from the total number of mitochondria (n > 1,000) for each condition indicated 
within bars. (E and F) Pseudo-color images (E) and quantitative analysis (F) showing ATP maintenance in the growing tips 6 h after axotomy in WT and 
snph KO neurons infected with pLenti-PercevalHR. The F488nm/F405nm ratiometric mean intensity of PercevalHR reflects the relative ATP/ADP ratio. Note that 
enhanced mitochondrial transport in snph KO axons increases the ATP/ADP ratio in the growing tips (white arrows). (G and H) Pseudo-color ratiometric 
images (G) and the F560nm/F510nm ratiometric integrated intensity (H) of ATP probe GO-ATeam2. Both WT and snph KO cortical neurons were transfected 
with ATP-sensitive GO-ATeam2 probe, followed by imaging distal 150-µm microgrooves before or 1, 3, or 5 h after axotomy. Note that WT neurons display 
reduced F560nm/F510nm integrated intensity after axotomy, suggesting ATP depletion. Enhancing mitochondrial transport in snph KO neurons reverses energy 
deficits. (I) Overexpressing Miro1 rescues axotomy-induced energy deficits. Quantitative analysis shows the F560nm/F510nm ratiometric integrated intensity 
(left) and normalized F560nm/F510nm integrated intensity (right) of ATP probe GO-ATeam2. WT neurons were coinfected with lenti–GO-ATeam2 and lenti-con-
trol vector or lenti-Miro1 at DIV0, followed by axotomy at DIV8 and imaging of distal 150-µm microgrooves before or 1, 3, or 5 h after axotomy. Note that 
enhancing mitochondrial transport in WT neurons expressing Miro1 recovers energy deficits. Data were analyzed from the total number of microgrooves 
indicated within bars or in parentheses and expressed as mean ± SE and Mann–Whitney U test (F) or Student’s t test (D, H, and I). Bars, 20 µm.
 mitochondrial transport facilitates regeneration • Zhou et al.
113
not only helps remove those injury-damaged mitochondria, but 
also replenishes healthy ones in the injured axons, thus recover-
ing mitochondrial integrity and reversing energy deficits. This 
cellular process is critical for mature neurons to facilitate their 
regeneration after injury (Fig. 9). Therefore, our study provides 
new mechanistic insights as to how mature neuron-associated 
elevation of SNPH expression contributes to regeneration fail-
ure. Thus, rescuing local energy deficits by enhancing mito-
chondrial transport is one of the potential cellular targets for 
new therapeutic strategies to stimulate axon regeneration.
Energy deficits in injured axons contribute 
to regeneration failures
CNS injury in adult mammals usually leads to a failure to ini-
tiate regeneration because of an inability to assemble a new 
active growth cone, a cellular process that includes sealing rup-
tured membranes, retrograde growth signaling, cytoskeleton 
restructuring, local translation, transport of building materials, 
and insertion of new membrane and cell surface molecules 
(Bradke et al., 2012). All of these steps demand high energy 
consumption. ATP consumption is central to axon growth and 
regeneration. Mitochondrial ATP production provides most 
of the axonal energy. Because the diffusion capacity of intra-
cellular ATP through long axons is rather limited (Sun et al., 
2013), local mitochondria provide the ATP necessary to sup-
port axonal regeneration. Axonal injury induces mitochondrial 
depolarization and oxidative stress associated with axonal de-
generation (O’Donnell et al., 2013; Cavallucci et al., 2014). 
Therefore, proper mitochondrial transport into regenerating 
axons ensures that metabolically active areas are adequately 
supplied with ATP. Thus, ATP consumption and supply are cen-
tral to axon regeneration.
Our study demonstrates that both physical and la-
ser-based axotomy triggers an acute stress signal that effi-
ciently depolarizes local mitochondria (Fig. 5 and Fig. S4), 
thus reducing ATP supply to the growing tips after injury 
(Fig. 6 and Fig. S5). Mitochondrial dysfunction and impaired 
transport are associated with the pathology of neurodegener-
ative disorders (see reviews by Chen and Chan [2009], Court 
and Coleman [2012], and Sheng and Cai [2012]). Dysfunc-
Figure 7. SNPH KO sciatic nerves display 
enhanced regenerative capacity after crush in-
jury. Adult WT and snph KO mice (2 mo old) 
were subjected to a sciatic nerve crush injury 
and sacrificed at 3 d after injury. Regenerating 
axons through and beyond the lesion site were 
visualized by their expression of GAP-43 on 
sciatic nerve longitudinal sections. DAPI was 
used to label the cell nuclei. Sciatic nerves 
from the contralateral side were used as un-
injured controls. (A) Although SNPH-labeled 
mitochondria are abundant along the axons 
(labeled by βIII-tubulin) of the uninjured WT 
sciatic nerve, SNPH staining was absent in the 
same region of snph KO mice. (B) Expression 
of GAP-43 was undetectable in the uninjured 
sciatic nerve axons of WT and snph KO mice. 
(C) Representative images of sciatic nerve 
longitudinal sections show GAP-43–positive 
regenerating axons. Note that at 3 d after the 
crush injury, snph KO mice display a marked 
increase in the number and growth distance of 
GAP-43–positive axons past the injury site as 
compared with the WT littermates. The crush 
site is indicated by asterisks. (D) Quantification 
of GAP-43–positive axons in the distal sciatic 
nerves reveals that regenerating axons grew 
significantly longer distances at 3 d after injury 
in snph KO mice than WT controls. The number 
of GAP-43–positive axons at various distances 
from the crush site was counted and normal-
ized to the crush site. Note that snph KO mice 
display significantly more regenerating axons 
at 1.5 (***, P < 0.001), 2.0 (**, P < 0.01), 
2.5 (**, P < 0.01), and 3.0 mm (***, P < 
0.001) distal to the crush site (two-way ANO 
VA, followed by Bonferroni’s post-hoc test). (E) 
The regeneration index was measured as the 
distance away from the crush site in which the 
mean number of regenerating axons is half of 
that observed at the crush site. snph KO sci-
atic nerves show a higher regeneration index 
compared with WT (P = 0.01, Student’s t test). 
Data are mean ± SE (n = 6 mice per genotype 
and 3 longitudinal sections per animal).
 JCB • Volume 214 • NumBer 1 • 2016
114
tional mitochondria not only supply less ATP, but also release 
toxic reactive oxygen species and apoptotic factors, which 
further trigger axonal pathology and degeneration (Lucius 
and Sievers, 1996; Koeberle and Ball, 1999; Alvarez et al., 
2008). We show that SNPH-mediated mitochondrial anchor-
ing in mature axons impairs delivery of healthy mitochondria 
to and removal of those damaged mitochondria from injured 
axons, thus leading to energy deficits and loss of regrowth ca-
pacity. However, the mitochondrial stress and energy deficits 
at the injured axons can be effectively rescued by enhanced 
mitochondrial transport in axons (Fig. 6). Efficiently replac-
ing those damaged mitochondria serves as a neuroprotective 
mechanism essential for regeneration.
Mature neuron-associated elevation 
of SNPH expression inhibits 
regenerative capacity
The majority of axonal mitochondria are stationary in mature 
neurons, which is achieved through an SNPH-mediated anchor-
ing mechanism. SNPH targets axonal mitochondria through its 
carboxyl-terminal mitochondria-targeting domain and immo-
bilizes mitochondria by anchoring to MTs (Kang et al., 2008; 
Chen and Sheng, 2013). Deleting snph results in a robust increase 
of axonal mitochondrial transport. Conversely, overexpressing 
SNPH abolishes mitochondrial transport in axons. Strikingly, 
SNPH is strictly developmentally regulated in brains: its expres-
sion is hardly detectable in embryonic stages and before P7 and 
peaks 2 wk after birth (Das et al., 2003). Here, we further re-
veal mature neuron-associated SNPH expression (Fig. 2, D and 
E). As a result, axonal mitochondria display progressively re-
duced motility during maturation from DIV7 to DIV18 (Fig. 2, 
F and G). This unique SNPH expression highlights a new in-
trinsic pathway controlling axonal regrowth capacity: increased 
SNPH expression in mature neurons and reduced mitochondrial 
transport account for the mature neuron-associated decline of 
regenerative capacity. Therefore, the snph KO mouse is an ideal 
genetic model to examine the impact of enhanced mitochondrial 
transport on in vitro regrowth of mature neurons and in vivo re-
generation in adult mice.
We found that when mitochondrial transport is abol-
ished by genetic manipulation, axon regrowth fails after axot-
omy. Conversely, enhancing mitochondrial transport in mature 
neurons significantly increases axon regrowth in vitro and re-
generation in vivo after injury (Figs. 3 and 7). Such regrowth re-
covery depends on mitochondrial ATP production: (a) blocking 
mitochondrial ATP generation abolishes the regrowth recovery 
in snph KO neurons, and (b) applying ATP to neurons overex-
pressing SNPH partially recovers regrowth capacity. Altogether, 
these in vitro and in vivo studies suggest that maintaining the 
ATP supply to injured axons by enhancing mitochondrial trans-
port facilitates axonal regeneration.
Mitochondrial flux into distal axons supports axonal 
growth and branching during early brain development (Morris 
and Hollenbeck, 1993; Spillane et al., 2013; Tao et al., 2014). A 
recent study highlights a critical role for SNPH-mediated mi-
tochondrial anchoring in the maintenance of axonal branching 
through the AMPK signaling pathway (Courchet et al., 2013). 
Activation of AMPK increases anterograde flux of mitochondria 
into axons and induces axonal branching in an ATP-dependent 
manner. As a cellular energy sensor, AMPK activation may reg-
ulate signaling pathways that replenish ATP supplies. Although 
these studies focused on axonal growth in developing neurons, 
a fundamental question remains unaddressed: does mitochon-
drial transport play a critical role in the facilitation of axonal 
regeneration in mature neurons? The snph KO neurons show 
no detectable changes in initial axon growth during early de-
Figure 8. Relative expression of GAP-43 
after sciatic nerve injury. (A and B) Represen-
tative images (A) and quantitative analysis (B) 
show increased GAP-43 expression in snph 
KO DRG neurons. snph KO and WT littermates 
(9 wk old) were subjected to a left-sided sciatic 
nerve injury. Both injured ipsilateral and unin-
jured contralateral L5 DRGs of WT and snph 
KO mice were co-immunostained with anti-
bodies against GAP-43, βIII-tubulin, and DAPI 
3 d after crush injury. Note that in snph KO 
mice, a higher GAP-43 expression is detected 
in uninjured DRGs (contralateral) as compared 
with the WT mice (P = 0.0013). GAP-43 ex-
pression is further increased in response to 
the sciatic nerve injury in snph KO mice (P < 
0.0001). Data were analyzed from the total 
number of neurons indicated within bars from 
four mice for each genotype and expressed as 
mean ± SE and by two-way ANO 
VA followed 
by Tukey’s post-hoc test. Bars, 50 µm.
 mitochondrial transport facilitates regeneration • Zhou et al.
115
velopmental stages when compared with WT neurons (Fig. S1, 
A and B; Kang et al., 2008); this is attributed to the fact that 
SNPH is hardly detectable during early development (Fig. 2, D 
and E). Thus, the SNPH-mediated mechanism controls axonal 
regrowth/regeneration in mature neurons, rather than initial 
growth in developing neurons.
Selection of in vivo system for injury-
induced regeneration
The failure of CNS regeneration is caused by a lack of induction 
of a cell-intrinsic growth capacity after injury (Afshari et al., 
2009; Giger et al., 2010) and the presence of extrinsic inhibitory 
effects (Filbin, 2006; Yiu and He, 2006; Hoffman, 2010; Sun 
et al., 2011). In view of these, we considered that enhancing 
mitochondrial transport and rescuing energy deficits may not be 
sufficient to activate intrinsic signaling pathways and overcome 
extrinsic inhibitory effects in the CNS. In contrast, injured axons 
in the adult PNS maintain some capacity to regenerate (Abe and 
Cavalli, 2008; Chandran et al., 2016). We reasoned that regenera-
tive capacity in PNS could be further facilitated in snph KO mice 
if enhanced mitochondrial transport rescues local energy deficits 
after injury. Thus, by focusing on the sciatic nerve crush study, 
we provide in vivo evidence showing that snph KO sciatic nerves 
display enhanced regenerative capacity (Fig. 7). This enhanced 
regeneration is consistent with robustly enhanced mitochon-
drial motility along snph KO sciatic nerves (71.58 ± 2.72%, P < 
0.0001) relative to those from WT adult mice (30.948 ± 2.17%; 
Videos 1 and 2). We also found that GAP-43 expression in snph 
KO DRGs is increased to a larger extent after injury (Fig. 8, A 
and B). It is well documented that elevated GAP-43 expression 
is associated with nerve regeneration, potentially recapitulating 
an early developmental program (Fu and Gordon, 1997; Ack-
ermann et al., 2002; Abe et al., 2010). Alternatively, enhanced 
mitochondrial transport in mature snph KO neurons activates the 
early intrinsic program to support neuron regrowth. Exploring 
how an enhanced energy supply in injured axons impacts the 
GAP-43 signaling pathway is of great interest in future research.
Our study provides mechanistic insights into how mitochon-
drial anchoring and energy deficits influence axonal regenerative 
capacity. Our model is supported by several studies manipulating 
mitochondrial transport in axons. In the Caenorhabditis elegans 
mutant ric-7, in which mitochondria fail to transport to distal 
axons, injured axons degenerate rapidly; such degeneration can 
be suppressed by forcing mitochondria into the axons (Rawson 
et al., 2014). In an adult fly model, Fang et al. (2012) revealed 
that axonal mitochondria are rapidly depleted upon axotomy. 
The injury-induced mitochondrial loss is suppressed by up-reg-
ulation of Nmnat, which is known to suppress axon degeneration 
(Gilley and Coleman, 2010). Interestingly, when mitochondria 
are genetically eliminated from axons by depleting the kinesin 
adaptor Milton, up-regulation of Nmnat is no longer effective 
to suppress axon degeneration (Fang et al., 2012). Similarly, 
WldS (slow Wallerian degeneration) is an effective protein that 
suppresses Wallerian degeneration after axon injury (Conforti et 
al., 2000; Coleman and Freeman, 2010). Using both Drosophila 
melanogaster and mouse models, Avery et al. (2012) identified 
axonal mitochondria as a key site of action for WldS neuropro-
tective function. Altogether, these studies consistently suggest 
that regulating mitochondrial transport is a common target for the 
signaling pathways protecting injured axons from degeneration.
In summary, our study addresses three fundamental issues 
as to whether (a) axonal mitochondrial transport is essential for 
mature neurons to regenerate, (b) enhancing mitochondrial trans-
port facilitates axonal regenerative capacity both in vitro and in 
vivo, and (c) enhanced mitochondrial transport rescues local en-
ergy deficits in injured axons. Our study highlights that reduced 
mitochondrial transport in mature neurons and injury-induced 
energy deficits reflect common factors limiting regenerative ca-
Figure 9. Model illustration of enhanced mito-
chondrial transport critical for mature neurons to 
regain axonal regenerative capacity. (A) Although 
mitochondrial transport in WT axons progressively 
declines with maturation, axonal injury depolar-
izes local mitochondria, thus leading to energy 
deficits. Energy deficits may reflect the intrinsic re-
striction of mature axons to regenerate after injury. 
(B) Enhanced local ATP supply via healthy mito-
chondrial flux into injured axons is critical to meet 
metabolic requirements for axonal regeneration. 
Enhancing mitochondrial transport in snph KO 
axons not only helps remove those dysfunctional 
mitochondria, but also replenishes healthy ones to 
the injured axons, thus recovering mitochondrial 
integrity and rescuing energy deficits.
 JCB • Volume 214 • NumBer 1 • 2016
116
pacity. Our in vivo and in vitro experiments suggest that activating 
an intrinsic “growth program” requires the coordinated modula-
tion of mitochondrial transport and recovery of energy deficits. 
Such combined approaches may represent a valid therapeutic 
strategy to facilitate regeneration in the injured CNS and PNS.
Materials and methods
Mouse lines and animal care
The snph−/− mouse line was generated by targeted gene replacement 
in embryonic stem cells as previously described (Kang et al., 2008). 
Thy1/Mito-CFP transgenic mice were purchased from the Jackson 
Laboratory. The mice and the Sprague-Dawley rats were maintained in 
the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NIN 
DS) 
 
animal facility and housed in a 12-h light/dark cycle. All animal pro-
cedures were performed according to National Institutes of Health 
(NIH) guidelines and were approved by the NIN 
DS/National Institute 
on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders (NID 
CD) Animal 
Care and Use Committee.
Antibodies
The purified polyclonal antibody against SNPH residues 225–428 was 
described previously (Kang et al., 2008). Sources of other antibodies 
or reagents are as follows: anti–βIII-tubulin, anti-MAP2, anti–Tau-1, 
anti-dynein IC74, and anti–GAP-43 were from EMD Millipore; anti–
cytochrome c was from BD; anti-TOM20 was from Santa Cruz Bio-
technology, Inc.; anti-Miro1/2 (HPA010687) and anti-Trak2 were from 
Sigma-Aldrich; ECL-HRP–linked secondary antibodies were from GE 
Healthcare; and Alexa Fluor 546– or Alexa Fluor 488–conjugated sec-
ondary antibodies were from Invitrogen.
Lentivirus infection
The cDNA gene encoding SNPH, SNPH-dMTB, or Miro1 was cloned 
into the lenti-vector pHUGW with the CMV promoter and HA tag; 
the YFP, GFP-Mito, or PercevalHR (Addgene) and GO-ATeam2 and 
GO-ATeam3 (gifts from H. Imamura, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan) 
were cloned into pFUGW vector. All lenti-vectors were prepared and 
transduced at the same concentration. For infection, 2 × 105 freshly 
dissociated neurons were incubated with up to 5 µl concentrated virus 
preparation in 25 µl culture medium for 1 h; 200 µl culture media was 
then added to each side of the wells.
Microfluidic neuron culture and axotomy
For axotomy and staining, both commercialized (#RD450; Xona) and 
house-made microfluidic devices were used. For the latter, a silicon 
wafer with a pattern made out of SU-8 by photolithography was used to 
cast the PDMS microfluidic devices. In brief, SYL 
GARD 184 silicone 
elastomer base was mixed with the curing agent at a ratio of 10:1. The 
PDMS was then mixed well using a THI 
NKY mixer ARF-310 in two 
steps: mixing at 2,000 rpm for 4 min and de-foaming at 2,200 rpm for 
4 min. The well-mixed PDMS was poured onto the silicon wafer and 
then placed in a Bel-Art vacuum desiccator for 3 h to help remove 
air bubbles from the PDMS. The wafer with PDMS was placed in an 
80°C oven for 1–2 h to cure. Once the PDMS was cured, the PDMS 
was pulled out, and reservoirs were punched out. The PDMS devices 
were extensively washed and autoclaved before use. The coverslips and 
house-made devices were exposed to the plasma treatment for 2 min in 
a PDC-32G plasma cleaner and bonded together for neuronal culture.
Brain tissues were dissected out from E18–19 mouse embryos 
and kept in ice-cold Hibernate buffer supplemented with 2% B27 and 
antibiotics. After the embryos were genotyped by direct tail PCR, cor-
tical neuron cultures were prepared with papain as described previ-
ously (Kang et al., 2008). After preparing a single-cell suspension, 2 
× 105/20 µl dissociated neurons were added into the cell body chamber 
of the microfluidic devices. After cells were attached, 100 µl of prebal-
anced culture medium was added into each well of the device. Axons 
pass through microgrooves into the axonal terminal chamber at DIV4 
as they grow. For axon regrowth assays, axons in terminal chambers 
were axotomized by vacuum aspiration at DIV5–7 or DIV12. The two 
wells on the axon sides were subjected twice to aspiration to ensure 
complete axotomy. After the first aspiration, Hibernate medium was 
added to the axon chambers, followed by the second aspiration. The 
devices were then refilled with fresh culture medium for further incu-
bation for various times, as indicated.
For quantitative analysis of axon growth before and after axot-
omy, axons in the terminal chamber labeled by lenti-YFP or by βIII- 
tubulin staining, were imaged under the same setting using an 880 con-
focal microscope (ZEI 
SS) with a 20× objective. The area of YFP or 
βIII-tubulin signals above the same threshold within a 1024 × 1024 
image that covers all axon segments extending from microgrooves was 
measured using ImageJ (NIH). Images were collected from multiple 
chambers in at least three experiments for quantitative analysis.
Adult DRG neuron cultures and Sholl analysis
Adult WT and SNPH KO littermates at P60 were dissected in HBSS. 
After clipping off bones from the spinal cords, DRGs were pulled out 
and the excess roots were trimmed off in the HBSS buffer. DRGs were 
digested in 2.5 U/ml dispase II (Roche) and 200 U/ml collagenase 
(Worthington Biochemical) for 30 min at 37°C and then an additional 
35 min at 30°C. DRG neurons were collected and triturated in Neuro-
basal-A medium supplemented with B27 and 0.5 mM GlutaMAX (In-
vitrogen). After purification with 1% BSA cushions, the isolated DRG 
neuronal cell bodies were plated onto coverslips coated with 30 µg/
ml poly-l-ornithine and 5 µg/ml laminin (Roche) at a final density of 
2,000 cells per 12-mm coverslip. After 1-d culture in vitro, DRG neu-
rons were stained for imaging, and a Sholl analysis of total numbers of 
axon intersections was performed with an ImageJ plugin.
Time-lapse imaging and kymograph analysis
To image mitochondrial transport in axons, neurons grown on the 
PDMS device were replaced with prewarmed Hibernate A low fluo-
rescence medium (BrainBits) supplemented with 2% B27, 0.5 mM 
GlutaMAX, and 1% Pen/Strep at day of image. The temperature was 
maintained at 37°C during time-lapse imaging. The microgrooves of 
the device that contain the fasciculated axon bundles were visualized. 
Time-lapse imaging of the microgrooves was recorded using a confocal 
microscope (LSM 510 META; ZEI 
SS) with a C-Apochromat 40×/1.3 
oil NA objective (ZEI 
SS). The image sequences were collected at a 512 
× 512–pixel resolution (12 bit) with 5-s intervals at a scanning zoom 
of 1.0 in the x and y directions; 100–200 frames were captured for 
each condition. For mitochondrial transport before and after axotomy, 
only 30 frames were recorded to coherently match the time window. 
To quantify motility, a kymograph was generated by ImageJ as pre-
viously described (Kang et al., 2008). For each experimental group, 
all visible vesicles on the kymograph were pooled together. The mi-
tochondria were considered stationary if they remained immobile 
during the entire recording period; a mobile one was counted if the net 
displacement was >5 µm.
Microscope image acquisition
For imaging acquisition, a prescan of all samples was conducted to 
ensure confocal settings below saturation at 1024 × 1024 pixels (12 
bit). From a given experiment, all images were acquired on the same 
 mitochondrial transport facilitates regeneration • Zhou et al.
117
day with new pinhole adjustment and under the same confocal settings. 
Morphometric measurements were performed using ImageJ. For ATP/
ADP ratio analysis, the neurons transfected with PercevalHR were ex-
cited using 488/458 filters, and the emissions were collected at 505–
550 nm. For axonal ATP analysis, two emission images were collected 
at 505–550 nm and long pass above 545 nm along the GO-ATeam2 
or GO-ATeam3 expression axon. Radiometric images were generated 
by an ImageJ macro using binary Mask image to remove nonspecific 
background in the microgrooves. To analyze axon regrowth, a fixed 
threshold was manually set to ensure that most signals were detected 
but not oversaturated with a minimum detectable background. Both the 
pixel area and fluorescence integrated intensity were measured. For ac-
tive growth cone quantification, the axon tips that were labeled with 
543 phalloidin and βIII-tubulin were imaged and a fixed threshold and 
particle size were applied for ImageJ analysis. Other parameters are 
described in the figure legends.
Measurement of mitochondria membrane potential (Δψm)
Lenti-GFP-Mito was introduced into cultured neurons to label total mi-
tochondria. Before and right after axotomy, nonplasma-treated devices 
were removed and the exposed axon bundles along microgrooves were 
loaded with 25 nM TMRE (Invitrogen) for 30 min and then washed three 
times with B27/Hibernate A low fluorescence medium before imaging. 
Δψm was assessed by relative TMRE fluorescent intensity of each indi-
vidual mitochondrion labeled by GFP-Mito along the most distal 200 
µm of axon bundles on microgrooves using ImageJ particle analysis.
ATP rescue experiments
Neurons were electroporated by Nucleofector (Amaxa) using pro-
gram O-004 with an electroporation buffer (86 mM KH2PO4, 17.5 mM 
NaHCO3, 2.72 mM d-glucose, and 11.6 mM MgCl2-6H2O) contain-
ing 7.1 mM ATP disodium, followed by spin down and removal of the 
supernatant containing ATP. For ATP rescue study, the electroporated 
neurons were immediately plated onto a microfluidic chamber with 
medium containing the final ATP concentration adjusted to 200 µM. 
Acquisition of axotomy time-lapse imaging
The multi-timer macro was applied for a combination of laser-based 
axotomy and time-lapse imaging, as previously described (Yanik et al., 
2004; Cho et al., 2013) with some modifications. For axotomy, an LSM 
510 META two-photon confocal microscope (ZEI 
SS) with an inverted 
P-Apochromat 40×/1.3 oil objective was applied. After alignment of 
scan head and collimator adjustment, Mira 900F laser power was set 
on to initiate mode-lock without CW break. The stable mode-lock 
was achieved by tuning the slits on the Coherent Mira 900F. Once 
the arbitrary units in the power indicator were above 260, the beam 
wavelength was set to 730 nm for bleaching. For consecutive real-time 
imaging capture of TMRE and GFP-Mito before and after axotomy, 
both acquisition and bleach parameters were preset and reloaded in 
multi-timer macro blocks. In brief, the images in the first block were 
first recorded at 5-s intervals for a total of 50 frames by 400/543-nm 
laser in line switch model; then, the second block reloaded the 730-nm 
laser that powered-up with 70% output and pixel dwell time >10 µs 
in cropped imaging region for bleaching. The post-axotomy record-
ing was collected at 5-s intervals for a total of 50 or 100 frames by 
488/543-nm laser in the final block.
To measure the Ca2+ buffering capacity in the adult DRG axons, 
the neurons were electroporated with green fluorescent Ca2+ sensor 
G-GECO1.2. The same multi-timer macro was applied for consecutive 
laser axotomy and image acquiring. In brief, after 2 frames of base line 
acquisition and two-photo laser, 730 nm was applied at the third frame, 
and then another 26 frames were collected at 512 × 512–pixel resolu-
tion (12 bit) with 3-s intervals. The average decay time constant was 
calculated based on florescence intensity (F/F0) curve with nonlinear fit.
For physical axotomy and time-lapse imaging, the pure axon 
bundle was first stained by TMRE and MitoTracker Green, and images 
were acquired before and after physical axotomy by using pulled glass 
capillaries (World Precision Instruments) with a tip diameter of ∼1 µm 
that were prepared from Sutter Instrument (p-97).
In vivo axonal regeneration after injury
For in vivo sciatic nerve injury and axonal regeneration, adult snph 
KO and WT littermates (2 mo old) were subjected to unilateral sciatic 
nerve crush as described previously (Abe et al., 2010). In brief, under 
deep anesthesia, the left sciatic nerve was exposed at the mid-thigh 
level; the nerve was then crushed using fine hemostatic forceps three 
times, 15 s each time. The wound was sutured in layers, and the mice 
were allowed to recover on a heating pad. 3 d after injury, mice were 
perfused transcardially with PBS (pH 7.4) followed by ice-cold 4% 
PFA in PBS. Sciatic nerves and L4/L5 DRGs from the injured side as 
well as the contralateral uninjured side were dissected, post-fixed in 
4% PFA in PBS for 2 h, and then cryoprotected overnight in 30% su-
crose. Specimens were embedded in tissue-freezing medium and then 
cut longitudinally into serial sections at a thickness of 12 µm. Immu-
nohistochemistry was performed to evaluate axonal regeneration with 
a GAP-43 antibody to label regenerating axons. Sciatic nerve sections 
were first blocked with 10% normal goat serum in PBS containing 
0.3% Triton X-100 and then incubated with primary antibodies for 
1 h at room temperature. The following primary antibodies were used: 
rabbit anti–GAP-43 antibody (1:800; Abcam), mouse anti–βIII-tubu-
lin antibody (1:1,000; Sigma-Aldrich), or rabbit anti-SNPH antibody 
(1:400). Sections were washed with PBS, followed by incubation with 
Alexa Flour 546–conjugated goat anti–rabbit IgG or Alexa Flour 488–
conjugated goat anti–mouse IgG (1:500; Invitrogen) secondary anti-
bodies together with DAPI (1:1,000) to visualize nuclei. Slices were 
mounted and images were acquired using an LSM 880 confocal mi-
croscope (ZEI 
SS) with a 20× objective. Three sections spaced 60 µm 
apart for each sciatic nerve were used to assess axonal regeneration. 
The nerve was divided into 0.5-mm segments; the number of axons in 
the segment 0.5 mm proximal to the injury site (0 mm) and in the distal 
0.5-, 1.0-, 1.5-, 2.0-, 2.5-, 3.0-, and 3.5-mm segments were quantified 
and normalized to the number in the injury site.
To examine GAP-43 expression in DRG neuronal cell bodies in 
response to sciatic nerve injury, 9-wk-old snph KO and their WT lit-
termates were subjected to unilateral sciatic nerve crush injury. DRG 
sections (three sections each) from ipsilateral and contralateral sides of 
both WT and snph KO mice were co-immunostained with antibodies 
against GAP-43, βIII-tubulin, and DAPI 3 d after sciatic nerve crush 
injury. Images were obtained using an LSM 880 confocal microscope 
with a 40× objective. The mean intensity of GAP-43 in individual DRG 
neuronal cell bodies was measured using ImageJ and normalized to the 
mean intensity of that from the contralateral uninjured side of WT mice.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using Prism (GraphPad Software). 
Two groups were compared using F-test, Mann–Whitney (sample size 
n < 30), or Student’s t test (sample size n ≥ 30). For multiple comar-
isons, one-way ANO 
VA analysis (n ≥ 30) or Kruskal–Wallis test (n 
< 30) is used. Data are expressed as mean ± SEM. Differences were 
considered significant with P < 0.05.
Online supplemental material
Fig. S1 shows that deleting snph did not change early axonal growth 
and Miro1/2 expression is not regulated by SNPH. Fig. S2 shows 
 JCB • Volume 214 • NumBer 1 • 2016
118
that enhanced axonal regrowth in snph KO neurons is not directly 
correlated with cell density in the somatic chambers. Fig. S3 shows 
that overexpressing SNPH alters mitochondrial distribution and ATP/
ADP ratios in distal axons. Fig. S4 shows that axotomy stress induces 
mitochondrial depolarization. Fig. S5 shows energy deficit recovery 
and calcium buffering in snph KO neurons after axotomy. Videos 1 
and 2 show ex vivo imaging of axonal mitochondrial transport along 
sciatic nerves in Thy1-Mito-CFP and in the crossed snph KO/Thy1-
Mito-CFP mice, respectively. Videos 3–5 show axonal mitochondrial 
motility along microgrooves from cortical neurons overexpressing 
SNPH, SNPH-dMTB, or Miro1, respectively. Videos 6 and 7 show 
axotomy stress depolarizing mitochondria in the vicinity of injured 
sites. Video 8 shows axonal mitochondrial motility along microgrooves 
from WT cortical neurons 1 h after axotomy. Video 9 shows enhanced 
mitochondrial motility along microgrooves from snph KO cortical 
neurons 1 h after axotomy. Online supplemental material is available at 
http 
://www 
.jcb 
.org 
/cgi 
/content 
/full 
/jcb 
.201605101 
/DC1.
Acknowledgments
We thank members of the Sheng laboratory for technical assis-
tance and constructive discussion; X.-T. Cheng for model illustra-
tion; D. Schoenberg and S. Cuddy for editing; Nicole Morgan 
from National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, 
National Institutes of Health for design and fabrication of microflu-
idic device templates; and the NIN 
DS Light Imaging Facility. We 
also thank Hiromi Imamura from Kyoto University for providing 
ATP probe GO-ATeam2.
Animal care and use were carried out in accordance with NIH guide-
lines and approved by the NIH, NIN 
DS/NID 
CD Animal Care 
and Use Committee.
The work was supported by the Intramural Research Program of 
 
NIN 
DS and NIH ZIA NS003029 and ZIA NS002946 (to Z.-H. Sheng).
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author contributions: B. Zhou designed and conducted in vitro and in 
vivo experiments and data analysis; P. Yu designed in vivo experi-
ments and data analysis; M.-Y. Lin performed biochemical analysis; 
Y. Chen characterized ex vivo mitochondrial transport; T. Sun per-
formed ATP/ADP assays with pH calibration; Z.-H. Sheng is the senior 
author who conceived and designed the project; B. Zhou and 
Z.-H. Sheng wrote the manuscript.
Submitted: 26 May 2016
Accepted: 31 May 2016
References
Abe, N., and V. Cavalli. 2008. Nerve injury signaling. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 
18:276–283. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.conb 
.2008 
.06 
.005
Abe, N., S.H. Borson, M.J. Gambello, F. Wang, and V. Cavalli. 2010. Mammalian 
target of rapamycin (mTOR) activation increases axonal growth capacity 
of injured peripheral nerves. J. Biol. Chem. 285:28034–28043. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1074 
/jbc 
.M110 
.125336
Ackermann, P.W., M. Ahmed, and A. Kreicbergs. 2002. Early nerve regeneration 
after achilles tendon rupture—a prerequisite for healing? A study in 
the rat. J. Orthop. Res. 20:849–856. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S0736 
-0266(01)00159 
-0
Afshari, F.T., S. Kappagantula, and J.W. Fawcett. 2009. Extrinsic and intrinsic 
factors controlling axonal regeneration after spinal cord injury. Expert 
Rev. Mol. Med. 11:e37. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1017 
/S1462399409001288
Alvarez, S., M. Moldovan, and C. Krarup. 2008. Acute energy restriction triggers 
Wallerian degeneration in mouse. Exp. Neurol. 212:166–178. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.expneurol 
.2008 
.03 
.022
Avery, M.A., T.M. Rooney, J.D. Pandya, T.M. Wishart, T.H. Gillingwater, 
J.W. Geddes, P.G. Sullivan, and M.R. Freeman. 2012. WldS prevents 
axon degeneration through increased mitochondrial flux and enhanced 
mitochondrial Ca2+ buffering. Curr. Biol. 22:596–600. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cub 
.2012 
.02 
.043
Berg, J., Y.P. Hung, and G. Yellen. 2009. A genetically encoded fluorescent 
reporter of ATP 
:ADP ratio. Nat. Methods. 6:161–166. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nmeth 
.1288
Bradke, F., J.W. Fawcett, and M.E. Spira. 2012. Assembly of a new growth cone 
after axotomy: the precursor to axon regeneration. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 
13:183–193. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nrn3176
Cai, Q., H.M. Zakaria, A. Simone, and Z.H. Sheng. 2012. Spatial parkin 
translocation and degradation of damaged mitochondria via mitophagy in 
live cortical neurons. Curr. Biol. 22:545–552. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cub 
.2012 
.02 
.005
Case, L.C., and M. Tessier-Lavigne. 2005. Regeneration of the adult central 
nervous system. Curr. Biol. 15:R749–R753. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cub 
.2005 
.09 
.008
Cavallucci, V., E. Bisicchia, M.T. Cencioni, A. Ferri, L. Latini, A. Nobili, 
F. Biamonte, F. Nazio, F. Fanelli, S. Moreno, et al. 2014. Acute focal brain 
damage alters mitochondrial dynamics and autophagy in axotomized 
neurons. Cell Death Dis. 5:e1545. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/cddis 
.2014 
.511
Chandran, V., G. Coppola, H. Nawabi, T. Omura, R. Versano, E.A. Huebner, 
A. Zhang, M. Costigan, A. Yekkirala, L. Barrett, et al. 2016. A systems-
level analysis of the peripheral nerve intrinsic axonal growth program. 
Neuron. 89:956–970. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.neuron 
.2016 
.01 
.034
Chang, D.T., and I.J. Reynolds. 2006. Mitochondrial trafficking and morphology 
in healthy and injured neurons. Prog. Neurobiol. 80:241–268. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.pneurobio 
.2006 
.09 
.003
Chen, H., and D.C. Chan. 2009. Mitochondrial dynamics—fusion, fission, 
movement, and mitophagy—in neurodegenerative diseases. Hum. Mol. 
Genet. 18:R169–R176. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/hmg 
/ddp326
Chen, Y., and Z.H. Sheng. 2013. Kinesin-1—syntaphilin coupling mediates 
activity-dependent regulation of axonal mitochondrial transport. J. Cell 
Biol. 202:351–364. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1083 
/jcb 
.201302040
Cho, Y., and V. Cavalli. 2014. HDAC signaling in neuronal development and 
axon regeneration. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 27:118–126. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.conb 
.2014 
.03 
.008
Cho, Y., R. Sloutsky, K.M. Naegle, and V. Cavalli. 2013. Injury-induced HDAC5 
nuclear export is essential for axon regeneration. Cell. 155:894–908. 
(published erratum appears in Cell. 2015. 161:691) http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2013 
.10 
.004
Coleman, M.P., and M.R. Freeman. 2010. Wallerian degeneration, wld(s), and 
nmnat. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 33:245–267. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1146 
/
annurev 
-neuro 
-060909 
-153248
Conforti, L., A. Tarlton, T.G. Mack, W. Mi, E.A. Buckmaster, D. Wagner, 
V.H. Perry, and M.P. Coleman. 2000. A Ufd2/D4Cole1e chimeric protein 
and overexpression of Rbp7 in the slow Wallerian degeneration (WldS) 
mouse. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 97:11377–11382. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.97 
.21 
.11377
Courchet, J., T.L. Lewis Jr., S. Lee, V. Courchet, D.Y. Liou, S. Aizawa, and 
F. Polleux. 2013. Terminal axon branching is regulated by the LKB1-
NUAK1 kinase pathway via presynaptic mitochondrial capture. Cell. 
153:1510–1525. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2013 
.05 
.021
Court, F.A., and M.P. Coleman. 2012. Mitochondria as a central sensor for 
axonal degenerative stimuli. Trends Neurosci. 35:364–372. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.tins 
.2012 
.04 
.001
Das, S., J. Boczan, C. Gerwin, P.B. Zald, and Z.H. Sheng. 2003. Regional 
and developmental regulation of syntaphilin expression in the brain: 
a candidate molecular element of synaptic functional differentiation. 
Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res. 116:38–49. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S0169 
-328X(03)00212 
-2
Di Giovanni, J., and Z.H. Sheng. 2015. Regulation of synaptic activity by snapin-
mediated endolysosomal transport and sorting. EMBO J. 34:2059–2077. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.15252 
/embj 
.201591125
Fang, Y., L. Soares, X. Teng, M. Geary, and N.M. Bonini. 2012. A novel 
Drosophila model of nerve injury reveals an essential role of Nmnat in 
maintaining axonal integrity. Curr. Biol. 22:590–595. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cub 
.2012 
.01 
.065
Filbin, M.T. 2006. Recapitulate development to promote axonal regeneration: 
good or bad approach? Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 361:1565–
1574. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1098 
/rstb 
.2006 
.1885
 mitochondrial transport facilitates regeneration • Zhou et al.
119
Fitch, M.T., and J. Silver. 2008. CNS injury, glial scars, and inflammation: 
Inhibitory extracellular matrices and regeneration failure. Exp. Neurol. 
209:294–301. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.expneurol 
.2007 
.05 
.014
Fu, S.Y., and T. Gordon. 1997. The cellular and molecular basis of peripheral 
nerve regeneration. Mol. Neurobiol. 14:67–116. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/BF02740621
Giger, R.J., E.R. Hollis II, and M.H. Tuszynski. 2010. Guidance molecules in 
axon regeneration. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 2:a001867. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1101 
/cshperspect 
.a001867
Gilley, J., and M.P. Coleman. 2010. Endogenous Nmnat2 is an essential survival 
factor for maintenance of healthy axons. PLoS Biol. 8:e1000300. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.pbio 
.1000300
Goslin, K., D.J. Schreyer, J.H. Skene, and G. Banker. 1988. Development of 
neuronal polarity: GAP-43 distinguishes axonal from dendritic growth 
cones. Nature. 336:672–674. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/336672a0
Harel, N.Y., and S.M. Strittmatter. 2006. Can regenerating axons recapitulate 
developmental guidance during recovery from spinal cord injury? Nat. 
Rev. Neurosci. 7:603–616. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nrn1957
Hill, C.E., M.S. Beattie, and J.C. Bresnahan. 2001. Degeneration and sprouting 
of identified descending supraspinal axons after contusive spinal cord 
injury in the rat. Exp. Neurol. 171:153–169. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1006 
/
exnr 
.2001 
.7734
Hoffman, P.N. 2010. A conditioning lesion induces changes in gene expression 
and axonal transport that enhance regeneration by increasing the intrinsic 
growth state of axons. Exp. Neurol. 223:11–18. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.expneurol 
.2009 
.09 
.006
Hu, Y., K.K. Park, L. Yang, X. Wei, Q. Yang, K.S. Cho, P. Thielen, A.H. Lee, 
R. Cartoni, L.H. Glimcher, et al. 2012. Differential effects of unfolded 
protein response pathways on axon injury-induced death of retinal 
ganglion cells. Neuron. 73:445–452. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.neuron 
.2011 
.11 
.026
Kang, J.S., J.H. Tian, P.Y. Pan, P. Zald, C. Li, C. Deng, and Z.H. Sheng. 2008. 
Docking of axonal mitochondria by syntaphilin controls their mobility 
and affects short-term facilitation. Cell. 132:137–148. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2007 
.11 
.024
Koeberle, P.D., and A.K. Ball. 1999. Nitric oxide synthase inhibition delays 
axonal degeneration and promotes the survival of axotomized retinal 
ganglion cells. Exp. Neurol. 158:366–381. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1006 
/exnr 
.1999 
.7113
Li, Y., and G. Raisman. 1995. Sprouts from cut corticospinal axons persist in 
the presence of astrocytic scarring in long-term lesions of the adult rat 
spinal cord. Exp. Neurol. 134:102–111. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1006 
/exnr 
.1995 
.1041
Liu, K., A. Tedeschi, K.K. Park, and Z. He. 2011. Neuronal intrinsic mechanisms 
of axon regeneration. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 34:131–152. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1146 
/annurev 
-neuro 
-061010 
-113723
Lucius, R., and J. Sievers. 1996. Postnatal retinal ganglion cells in vitro: 
protection against reactive oxygen species (ROS)-induced axonal 
degeneration by cocultured astrocytes. Brain Res. 743:56–62. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S0006 
-8993(96)01029 
-3
MacAskill, A.F., and J.T. Kittler. 2010. Control of mitochondrial transport and 
localization in neurons. Trends Cell Biol. 20:102–112. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.tcb 
.2009 
.11 
.002
Miller, K.E., and M.P. Sheetz. 2004. Axonal mitochondrial transport and 
potential are correlated. J. Cell Sci. 117:2791–2804. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1242 
/jcs 
.01130
Misgeld, T., M. Kerschensteiner, F.M. Bareyre, R.W. Burgess, and J.W. Lichtman. 
2007. Imaging axonal transport of mitochondria in vivo. Nat. Methods. 
4:559–561. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nmeth1055
Morris, R.L., and P.J. Hollenbeck. 1993. The regulation of bidirectional mito-
chondrial transport is coordinated with axonal outgrowth. J. Cell Sci. 
104:917–927.
Nakano, M., H. Imamura, T. Nagai, and H. Noji. 2011. Ca2+ regulation of 
mitochondrial ATP synthesis visualized at the single cell level. ACS 
Chem. Biol. 6:709–715. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1021 
/cb100313n
Nicholls, D.G., and S.L. Budd. 2000. Mitochondria and neuronal survival. 
Physiol. Rev. 80:315–360.
O’Donnell, K.C., M.E. Vargas, and A. Sagasti. 2013. WldS and PGC-1α 
regulate mitochondrial transport and oxidation state after axonal injury. 
J. Neurosci. 33:14778–14790. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1523 
/JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.1331 
-13 
.2013
Park, K.K., K. Liu, Y. Hu, P.D. Smith, C. Wang, B. Cai, B. Xu, L. Connolly, 
I. Kramvis, M. Sahin, and Z. He. 2008. Promoting axon regeneration 
in the adult CNS by modulation of the PTEN/mTOR pathway. Science. 
322:963–966. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1161566
Perlson, E., G.B. Jeong, J.L. Ross, R. Dixit, K.E. Wallace, R.G. Kalb, and 
E.L. Holzbaur. 2009. A switch in retrograde signaling from survival to 
stress in rapid-onset neurodegeneration. J. Neurosci. 29:9903–9917. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1523 
/JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.0813 
-09 
.2009
Rawson, R.L., L. Yam, R.M. Weimer, E.G. Bend, E. Hartwieg, H.R. Horvitz, 
S.G. Clark, and E.M. Jorgensen. 2014. Axons degenerate in the absence 
of mitochondria in C. elegans. Curr. Biol. 24:760–765. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cub 
.2014 
.02 
.025
Ruthel, G., and P.J. Hollenbeck. 2003. Response of mitochondrial traffic to axon 
determination and differential branch growth. J. Neurosci. 23:8618–8624.
Saxton, W.M., and P.J. Hollenbeck. 2012. The axonal transport of mitochondria. 
J. Cell Sci. 125:2095–2104. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1242 
/jcs 
.053850
Schwab, M.E., and D. Bartholdi. 1996. Degeneration and regeneration of axons 
in the lesioned spinal cord. Physiol. Rev. 76:319–370.
Sheng, Z.H. 2014. Mitochondrial trafficking and anchoring in neurons: New 
insight and implications. J. Cell Biol. 204:1087–1098. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1083 
/jcb 
.201312123
Sheng, Z.H., and Q. Cai. 2012. Mitochondrial transport in neurons: impact on 
synaptic homeostasis and neurodegeneration. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 13:77–
93. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nrn3156
Spillane, M., A. Ketschek, T.T. Merianda, J.L. Twiss, and G. Gallo. 2013. 
Mitochondria coordinate sites of axon branching through localized intra-
axonal protein synthesis. Cell Reports. 5:1564–1575. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.celrep 
.2013 
.11 
.022
Sun, F., K.K. Park, S. Belin, D. Wang, T. Lu, G. Chen, K. Zhang, C. Yeung, 
G. Feng, B.A. Yankner, and Z. He. 2011. Sustained axon regeneration 
induced by co-deletion of PTEN and SOCS3. Nature. 480:372–375. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature10594
Sun, T., H. Qiao, P.Y. Pan, Y. Chen, and Z.H. Sheng. 2013. Motile axonal 
mitochondria contribute to the variability of presynaptic strength. Cell 
Reports. 4:413–419. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.celrep 
.2013 
.06 
.040
Tantama, M., J.R. Martínez-François, R. Mongeon, and G. Yellen. 2013. 
Imaging energy status in live cells with a fluorescent biosensor of the 
intracellular ATP-to-ADP ratio. Nat. Commun. 4:2550. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/ncomms3550
Tao, K., N. Matsuki, and R. Koyama. 2014. AMP-activated protein kinase 
mediates activity-dependent axon branching by recruiting mitochondria 
to axon. Dev. Neurobiol. 74:557–573. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/dneu 
.22149
Tessier-Lavigne, M., and C.S. Goodman. 1996. The molecular biology of axon 
guidance. Science. 274:1123–1133. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.274 
.5290 
.1123
Yanik, M.F., H. Cinar, H.N. Cinar, A.D. Chisholm, Y. Jin, and A. Ben-Yakar. 
2004. Neurosurgery: functional regeneration after laser axotomy. Nature. 
432:822. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/432822a
Yiu, G., and Z. He. 2006. Glial inhibition of CNS axon regeneration. Nat. Rev. 
Neurosci. 7:617–627. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nrn1956
Yu, T.W., and C.I. Bargmann. 2001. Dynamic regulation of axon guidance. Nat. 
Neurosci. 4:1169–1176. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nn748
Zhao, Y., S. Araki, J. Wu, T. Teramoto, Y.F. Chang, M. Nakano, A.S. Abdelfattah, 
M. Fujiwara, T. Ishihara, T. Nagai, and R.E. Campbell. 2011. An expanded 
palette of genetically encoded Ca2+ indicators. Science. 333:1888–1891. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1208592
Zhou, B., Q. Cai, Y. Xie, and Z.H. Sheng. 2012. Snapin recruits dynein to BDNF-
TrkB signaling endosomes for retrograde axonal transport and is essential 
for dendrite growth of cortical neurons. Cell Reports. 2:42–51. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.celrep 
.2012 
.06 
.010
