 Research Paper
In Vitro Regeneration of Patient-specific Ear-shaped Cartilage and Its First
Clinical Application for Auricular Reconstruction
Guangdong Zhou a,b,d,1, Haiyue Jiang c,1, Zongqi Yin a,b,1, Yu Liu a,b,1, Qingguo Zhang c, Chen Zhang e, Bo Pan c,
Jiayu Zhou c, Xu Zhou c, Hengyun Sun c, Dan Li a,b, Aijuan He a,b, Zhiyong Zhang a,b, Wenjie Zhang a,b,
Wei Liu a,b, Yilin Cao a,b,c,⁎
a Shanghai Tissue Engineering Research Key Laboratory, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, PR China
b National Tissue Engineering Center of China, Shanghai, PR China
c Auricular Center, Plastic Surgery Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Science, Beijing, PR China
d Research Institute of Plastic Surgery, Plastic Surgery Hospital, Wei Fang Medical College, Weifang, Shandong Province, PR China
e Department of Plastic Surgery, Xin Hua Hospital, Dalian University, Dalian, Liaoning Province, PR China
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 25 December 2017
Received in revised form 11 January 2018
Accepted 11 January 2018
Available online 13 January 2018
Microtia is a congenital external ear malformation that can seriously influence the psychological and physiolog-
ical well-being of affected children. The successful regeneration of human ear-shaped cartilage using a tissue en-
gineering approach in a nude mouse represents a promising approach for auricular reconstruction. However,
owing to technical issues in cell source, shape control, mechanical strength, biosafety, and long-term stability
of the regenerated cartilage, human tissue engineered ear-shaped cartilage is yet to be applied clinically. Using
expanded microtia chondrocytes, compound biodegradable scaffold, and in vitro culture technique, we
engineered patient-specific ear-shaped cartilage in vitro. Moreover, the cartilage was used for auricle reconstruc-
tion of five microtia patients and achieved satisfactory aesthetical outcome with mature cartilage formation dur-
ing 2.5 years follow-up in the first conducted case. Different surgical procedures were also employed to find the
optimal approach for handling tissue engineered grafts. In conclusion, the results represent a significant break-
through in clinical translation of tissue engineered human ear-shaped cartilage given the established in vitro
engineering technique and suitable surgical procedure.
This study was registered in Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (ChiCTR-ICN-14005469).
© 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Keywords:
Microtia chondrocytes
Human ear-shaped cartilage
In vitro engineering
3D printing
Polycaprolactone (PCL)
Clinical trial
1. Introduction
Microtia is a congenital malformation of the external ear, with a var-
ied regional prevalence rate of 0.83 to 17.4 per 10,000 births worldwide,
and higher prevalence rates in Hispanics and Asians (Bly et al., 2016;
Luquetti et al., 2011; Paput et al., 2012). The auricle is an important
identifying feature of human face, and hence its deformity has a pro-
found effect on self-confidence and psychological development in the
afflicted children. Current cosmetic procedures of treating microtia
mainly include the wear of auricular prosthesis, implantation of non-
absorbable auricular frame materials or an autologous rib cartilage
framework (Bly et al., 2016; Jessop et al., 2016; Wiggenhauser et al.,
2017). Non-absorbable frames, such as silastic or high-density polyeth-
ylene (Medpor®), generate an excellent ear shape without donor
site morbidity, but they lack bioactivity and can lead to extrusion and in-
fections. Autologous rib cartilage transplantation is the current gold-
stand treatment for microtia, but harvesting rib cartilage inevitably
leads to donor site injury, and replicating the complex 3D ear
structure is hard to achieve using surgeons’ hand skill, which is highly
EBioMedicine 28 (2018) 287–302
Abbreviations: MC, microtia chondrocyte; PCL, polycaprolactone; ChiCTR, Chinese
clinical trial registry; ICTRP, International Clinical Trial Registry Platform; SOP, standard
operating procedures; PGA, polyglycolic acid; PLA, polylactic acid; GMP, good
manufacturing procedure; PBS, phosphate buffered saline; DMEM, Dulbecco's modified
Eagle's medium; bFGF, basic fibroblast growth factor; FBS, fetal bovine serum; CAD,
computer aided design; CAM, computer aided manufacturing; SEM, scanning electron
microscopy; ECM, extracellular matrices; TGF-β1, transforming growth factor-beta1;
IGF-I, insulin-like growth factor-I; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; HE, hematoxylin
and eosin; SO/FG, Safranin-O/Fast Green; EvG, Verhoeff van Gieson; HRP, horseradish per-
oxidase; DAB, diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride; Mn, number-average molecular
weight; Mw, weight-average molecular weight; SEC, size exclusion chromatography;
GAG, glycosaminoglycan.
⁎ Corresponding author at: Shanghai Tissue Engineering Research Key Laboratory,
Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine; 639
Zhi Zao Ju Road, Shanghai 200011, PR China.
E-mail address: yilincao@yahoo.com (Y. Cao).
1 These authors are equal to this work.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.01.011
2352-3964/© 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
EBioMedicine
journal homepage: www.ebiomedicine.com
 depended on the training background and clinical experiences
(Breugem et al., 2011; Han et al., 2015; Magritz and Siegert, 2014;
Murabit et al., 2010).
Emerging tissue engineering technologies and their successful clini-
cal translation in bone, cartilage, skin, blood vessels, and bladder, pro-
vide a novel direction for the treatment of patients with microtia
(Atala et al., 2006; Fulco et al., 2014; Makris et al., 2015; Muhart et al.,
1997; Olausson et al., 2012). In 1997, the generation of engineered car-
tilage with human auricular shape in a nude mouse model was report-
ed, which vividly revealed the great potential of tissue engineering for
clinical translation (Cao et al., 1997). Since this achievement, many
follow-up studies have been published, and cartilage with human ear-
shape has been engineered in vitro, in nude mice, and in immunocom-
petent animals using various cells and scaffolds (Bichara et al., 2014;
Liu et al., 2010; Reiffel et al., 2013; Shieh et al., 2004; Sterodimas and
de Faria, 2013; Zhang et al., 2014; Zheng et al., 2014). However, the clin-
ical application of these technologies remains unreported due to a num-
ber of technical issues that need to be addressed, including the lack of
proper cell source, the difficulty to generate ear-shaped cartilage with
pre-designed 3D structure, the insufficient mechanical properties for
shape maintenance, and the unfavorable host response to the
engineered graft after its transplantation in vivo, etc. (Haisch, 2010;
Jessop et al., 2016; Nayyer et al., 2012). To date, the only successful clin-
ical reports of auricular reconstruction with regenerated cartilage have
utilized a two-step scaffold-free approach, in which MCs were injected
subcutaneously into the lower abdomen, and the regenerated cartilage
was further hand-carved into an ear-shaped framework and re-
implanted into the final position (Yanaga et al., 2009, 2013). Therefore,
the feasibility remains unknown for direct generation of human ear-
shaped cartilage in vitro and its clinical translation to treat microtia,
which would neither depend on surgeons’ hand skill nor require the
process of heterotopic growth and transplantation.
Recent developments in material science, biofabrication, 3D-
printing, and in vitro tissue engineering techniques make it possible to
design and fabricate a human ear-shaped cartilage in vitro for its clinical
application. In this study, CT scanning and 3D-printing were employed
to direct the fabrication of a biodegradable scaffold which replicated
the exact auricular 3D structure symmetrical to the patient’s healthy
ear and possessed good mechanical properties. After the autologous
chondrocytes derived from microtia cartilage (MCs) were seeded
onto the scaffold and in vitro cultured for 3 months, cartilage frame-
works with patient-specific ear-shape were generated and then
implanted to reconstruct auricles in five patients with the longest
follow-up time of 2.5 years. This paper reports a pilot clinical trial of
in vitro engineered human ear-shaped cartilage for human auricular
reconstruction.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Patient Information and Study Design
This study was approved by the Ethical Committee of Plastic Sur-
gery Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, and was regis-
tered in Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (ChiCTR), one of primary
registers of the WHO International Clinical Trial Registry Platform
(ICTRP, http://www.who.int/ictrp/network/chictr2/en/). The regis-
tration number for this study is ChiCTR-ICN-14005469). Seed cell ex-
pansion and manufacturing of the scaffold were conducted
according to the defined standard operating procedures (SOP) and
established quality management system approved by National
Institutes for Food and Drug Control (identification number:
SH201300928 for microtia chondrocytes, and QH201300641 for the
scaffold). The manufacturing facilities were approved by Shanghai
Food and Drug Packaging Material Control Center (identification
number: 20130281).
Five patients (male or female, between 6 and 10 years old) with
unilateral microtia were recruited. Table 1 lists the full inclusion
and exclusion criteria. Three surgical methods for implanting
engineered ear cartilages were respectively adopted according to
each patient's physical condition. Table 2 lists the indications and de-
tailed procedures of these three surgical methods. The patients will
be followed up intermittently up to 5 years. The primary outcome
parameters are the shape, size, and cranio-auricular angle of the re-
constructed auricle, which are expected to match those of the con-
tralateral ear. The secondary outcome parameters are the quality of
cartilage formation and mechanical property of the reconstructed
auricle. The purpose and detailed procedures of this study were ex-
plained to the patients and their parents, to whom written informed
consent was provided. The current study provides detailed descrip-
tion of a reprehensive case (case 1), a 6-year-old female child, who
was the first to receive the tissue engineered ear graft treatment
and was followed up for 2.5 years. Preliminary data on the other
four on-going cases were also included, and full reporting will be ex-
pected after follow up data are completely collected.
A flow chart of the manufacturing and surgical procedure of the
first conducted case is shown in Fig. 1. Briefly, CT scanning and 3D re-
construction were applied to obtain a digital image of the patient's
healthy contralateral ear (Fig. 1A). A digital mirror-image was creat-
ed to guide patient's ear reconstruction (Fig. 1B), and a correspond-
ing resin model was generated through 3D-printing (Fig. 1C). This
resin ear model was used to cast a pair of negative molds (Fig. 1D),
in which biodegradable materials made from polyglycolic acid
(PGA, Mw = ~30,000, provided by National Tissue Engineering Cen-
ter of China, Shanghai, China), polylactic acid (PLA, Mn = ~10,000,
Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Mississippi, USA), and polycaprolactone
(PCL, Mn = ~60,000, Purac Biochem, the Netherlands) were proc-
essed into the ear scaffold with the same shape as the resin positive
model (Fig. 1E). At the first stage of surgery, microtia cartilage was
harvested for chondrocyte isolation (Fig. 1F1) and a tissue expander
was implanted for skin expansion (Fig. 1F2). Patients with low skin
tension in the retro-auricular region (such as case 4, which is rare
for Asian children) may not require skin expansion. During the peri-
od of skin expansion, the isolated microtia chondrocytes (MCs) were
expanded (Fig. 1G) and seeded onto the ear scaffold for in vitro car-
tilage engineering (Fig. 1H). After 12 weeks, when a sufficiently-
sized skin flap was achieved via tissue expansion and the ear-
shaped cartilage was also generated in vitro, the second stage surgery
was conducted to implant the engineered ear cartilage into the ex-
panded skin flap for auricular reconstruction (Fig. 1I). Post-
Table 1
Inclusion and exclusion criteria.
• Inclusion criteria
➢ Patient with microtia whose first diagnosis conforms to ICD-10:Q17.20
➢ Patient with grade II or III microtia (cartilage exists in the microtic ear);
➢ Age between 6 and 50 years (when the anesthesia procedures are safe and the
ear stops growing);
➢ Healthy, without history of systemic disease.
• Exclusion criteria
➢ Poor state of health;
➢ Local hormone therapy within 3 months;
➢ Blood disease or bleeding tendency;
➢ Drug addiction (including drugs, anesthetic, and alcohol addiction);
➢ Allergic cicatricle physical or physical persons;
➢ Evidence of infection with HIV or hepatitis B or C;
➢ Fever, colds or other symptoms of infection in the current month;
➢ Woman in pregnancy or lactation, or plans to get pregnant within 1 year after
initial registration;
➢ Psychological disorder, cannot coordinate with treatment;
➢ Poor development of craniofacial facial nerve;
➢ Major organ malfunction.
288
G. Zhou et al. / EBioMedicine 28 (2018) 287–302
 Table 2
Three methods applied for auricular reconstruction using the tissue engineered ear graft
Method 1
• Indication: High skin tension in the retroauricular region (common in Asian people); Severe hemifacial microsomia
• Skin expansion: Yes;
• Split skin graft transplantation: Yes;
• Adopted by: case 1, 2, and 5;
• Surgical procedures:
First stage: Microtia cartilage harvest and tissue expander insertion and inflation
① A 2.0-cm incision was created at the postauricular region;
② The Microtia cartilage was harvested through the incision, and a 80 mL kidney-shaped expander was inserted subcutaneously;
③ The expander was infused intermittently with 0.9% saline solution commencing at the 8th day postoperatively and continued every other day until the volume reached
approximately 140 mL and the surface area of the expanded flap reached 9 × 6 cm2;
④ Static expansion was kept until the end of total tissue expansion duration (3 months).
Second stage: Auricular reconstruction with tissue engineered ear framework
① Removal of the skin expander: The expander was removed through the same incision created in the first stage surgery. The thickened, edge part of the expander capsule was
dissected to loosen the flap. The capsule of the pedicle side was usually reserved.
② The expanded skin flap and a random retroauricular neurovascular fascia flap were prepared;
③ A C-shaped fascia flap was dissected from the retroauricular region superficial to the periosteum;
④ The engineered ear framework was inserted between the fascial flap and the expanded skin flap;
⑤ The fascial flap was sutured to the external ear helix;
⑥ The expanded skin flap was draped over the anterior aspect in a tension-free way and then covered tautly to the framework by means of vacuum drainage
⑦ A split-thickness skin graft was harvested from the groin region and sutured onto the mastoid region to cover the posterior auricular fascial flap.
3rd stage surgery: Modifications of the reconstructed ear
Tragus construction, scar revision, and so on as required.
(Refer to Jiang et al., 2008 for detailed descriptions)
Method 2
• Indication: High skin tension in the retroauricular region (common in Asian people); Unwilling to leave scar by skin harvest
• Skin expansion: Yes;
• Split skin graft transplantation: No;
• Adopted by: Case 3;
• Surgical procedures:
First stage: Microtia cartilage harvest and tissue expander insertion and inflation
① A 3–4 cm incision was created at the mastoid region;
② The microtia cartilage was harvested and a 80 mL kidney-shaped expander was inserted between the subfascial layer of the non-hair bearing area and the subcutaneous
layer of the scalp;
③ The expander was infused intermittently with 4–7 mL 0.9% saline solution commencing at the 7th day postoperatively and continued every other day until the volume
reached approximately 140 mL;
④ Static expansion was kept until the end of total tissue expansion duration (3 months).
Second stage: Auricular reconstruction with tissue engineered ear framework
① Removal of the skin expander: Same as method 1
② Insertion of the ear framework beneath the expanded fascial skin flap: An additional horizontal incision was created across the previous incision. The engineered ear
framework was inserted into the envelope through the crossing incisions. The expanded flap covered the entire framework.
③ Vacuum drainage: Two negative-pressure drainage tubes were placed in the reconstructed ear, one beneath the anterior side of the flap, the other beneath the posterior side.
The outline of the reconstructed ear was clear immediately after suction was applied.
④ Incision closure: The detached scalp of the mastoid region and the incisions were closed using Z-plasty with two-layer suturing. The suction system was removed 7 days after
surgery.
Third stage: Modifications of the reconstructed ear
Tragus, earlobe construction, scar revision, and so on as required
Method 3 (the Nagata approach)
• Indication: Low skin tension in the retroauricular region
• Skin expansion: No;
• Split skin graft transplantation: Yes;
• Adopted by: Case 4;
• Surgical procedures:
First stage: Microtia cartilage harvest
A 2.0-cm incision was created at the mastoid region, through which the microtia cartilage was harvested, and the incision was closed by suture.
Second stage: Auricular reconstruction with tissue engineered ear framework
① Lobule transposition: An anterior and a posterior skin flap from the lobule were created. The posterior flap remains attached to the mastoid skin flap and the anteriorly based
tragal flap was used to surface the tragus. A “lazy W-flap” was created by the margins of the mastoid and posterior lobule flap and the middle limbs of the “W” would eventually
meet helping form the intertragal notch. This “W-flap” and the anterior lobule flap became transposed in a reciprocal manner resembling a Z-plasty. Vascularity of the W flap
was increased by maintaining a subcutaneous pedicle in the floor of the conchal bowl. The above described incisions provided access for creation of the subcutaneous pocket.
② Insertion of the ear framework: The engineered ear framework was introduced into the subcutaneous pocket, a suction drain was positioned beneath the framework, and the
flaps were secured over this framework with bolsters. Drains were removed in 48–72 h, and bolsters were removed in 2 weeks.
③ A C-shaped graft engineered using the same approach as the engineered ear framework was “banked” in the subcutaneous layer of the right side abdomen for use in the third
stage.
Third stage: Elevation of the reconstructed ear
① Six months after the second stage, the ear framework was elevated from the mastoid skin by dissection into the postauricular sulcus. The postauricular skin was then
undermined and advanced into the area of the postauricular sulcus allowing adequate projection of the ear.
② The previously banked C-shaped graft was retrieved, which was then placed under the neoauricle (between the framework and mastoid), and secured by suture. The graft
was then covered with a well vascularized tissue to allow for overlying skin graft adherence and prevention of infection or extrusion. A temporoparietal fascia flap was raised
and advanced forward to cover the posterior aspect of the neoauricle and the C-shaped graft.
③ A split thickness skin graft was harvested from the groin area to cover the remaining exposed temporoparietal fascia flap. A bolster was then secured into the sulcus with
suture. The bolster was kept in place for 1 week.
(Refer to Nagata, 1993 and Shokri and White, 2017 for detailed descriptions)
289
G. Zhou et al. / EBioMedicine 28 (2018) 287–302
 implantation follow-up assessments were conducted at different
time intervals to evaluate the clinical outcomes (Fig. 1J).
2.2. Harvest of Microtia Cartilage and Skin Flap Expansion
For the first conducted case (case 1), a 2.0-cm incision was made at
the postauricular region, into which a kidney-shaped expander was
inserted subcutaneously. Meanwhile, microtia cartilage (approximately
1.5 × 1.5 cm2) was harvested and delivered to the lab which is of good
manufacturing procedure (GMP) level for human chondrocyte isolation.
The expander was intermittently infused with 0.9% saline solution com-
mencing at the 8th day postoperatively. The infusion was continued
every other day until the volume reached approximately 140 mL and
the surface area of the expanded flap reached 9 × 6 cm2. The skin flap
was then kept in a state of static expansion until the end of total tissue
expansion duration (3 months). Reviewers may refer to Jiang et al.,
2008 for more detailed description. Procedures for the other two
methods are listed in Table 2.
2.3. Isolation and Expansion of MCs
The harvested microtia cartilage was carefully dissected to remove
fibrous tissue and perichondrium, then fragmented into 1 mm3 pieces,
washed in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) solution containing
100 U/mL penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin, and digested with
0.3% collagenase NB4 (Worthington Biochemical Corp., Freehold, New
Jersey, USA) for 8 h at 37 °C. The isolated cells were cultured and ex-
panded in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM, Gibco BRL,
Grand Island, New York, USA) containing 5.0 ng/mL basic fibroblast
growth factor (bFGF, R&D Systems Inc., Minneapolis, USA) and 10%
fetal bovine serum (FBS, Hyclone, Logan, Utah, USA). Cells in passage 2
were used for in vitro cartilage engineering.
2.4. Manufacture of Ear-shaped Scaffold
The ear mold was created according to a previously-described meth-
od (Liu et al., 2010). Briefly, the healthy ear of the patient was scanned
by CT and the image reflected across the vertical access (with mirror
symmetry) by a computer aided design (CAD) system (3DPRO Technol-
ogy Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China). These data were used to generate the
resin ear model via 3D-printing by a computer aided manufacturing
(CAM) system (Spectrum 510, Z Corporation, Massachusetts, USA).
This 3D-printed ear model was cast by clay and silicone to produce a
set of negative molds in which biomaterial scaffolds could be molded
into the ear shape identical to the 3D-printed resin ear.
The ear scaffold used a PCL mesh as an inner core, which was wrapped
with PGA unwoven fibers and coated with PLA. To generate the inner
core, a 9 × 9 cm2 PCL mesh with 3 × 3 mm2 grids (~1.37 mm in thickness)
was 3D-printed. The mesh was pre-shaped by hot (55 °C) compression
molding in the negative ear molds and the resulting scaffold was
trimmed to make an ear outline. To generate the outer PGA/PLA layers,
two pieces (500 mg each) of unwoven PGA fibers were pressed into 8
× 9 cm2 sponges respectively, which were then compression-molded
by the negative ear molds to generate the ear contour. The PCL inner
core was then sandwiched between the pair of PGA layers. The entire
scaffold of PCL inner core surrounded by PGA nonwoven fibers was
merged by immersion into 0.3% PLA (Sigma Aldrich, Product No.
765112) solution in dichloromethane and hot (55 °C) compression mold-
ing again till dry, which was able to partially merge the PGA nonwoven
fibers with the PCL core material. The edge of the resultant scaffold was
trimmed according to the previous 3D-printed resin ear.
2.5. Biocompatibility Evaluation of the Scaffolds
The cross section of a scaffold piece (1 × 1 cm2 with a thickness of
1.5 mm) prepared using the same methods as the ear scaffold was
Fig. 1. A flow chart for schematic illustration of auricular reconstruction based on in vitro tissue engineered human ear-shaped cartilage.
290
G. Zhou et al. / EBioMedicine 28 (2018) 287–302
 examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Philips XL-30,
Amsterdam, Netherlands) to confirm integration of the PGA fibers
with the PCL core. After cell seeding, the chondrocyte-scaffold con-
structs were also examined by SEM at different culture time points to
observe cell attachment and extracellular matrices (ECM) production
on the scaffolds.
2.6. In Vitro Engineering of Ear-shaped Cartilage
Expanded MCs (passage 2) at a seeding density of ~4.5 × 108 cells in
5 mL medium (90 million cells/mL) were evenly dropped onto the PGA/
PLA layer of the ear-shaped scaffold, followed by 5 h incubation at 37 °C,
5% CO2. The construct was then cultured in chondrogenic medium
Fig. 2. Preparation of the patient-specific ear-shaped scaffold. The CT reconstructed 3D mirror image of the patient healthy ear is used as a shape model (A), according to which, a pair of
negative molds is produced (B, C). PCL mesh is 3D-printed (D) and pre-shaped by the negative molds to generate an ear contour (E, F). Nonwoven PGA fibers are prepared as a sponge
(G) and pre-shaped to a pair of ear contours (H, I). The pre-shaped PCL inner core is sandwiched between the pair of pre-shaped PGA layers (J). The whole set of scaffold is coated
with PLA, pressed into the ear shape, and trimmed according to the shape of the 3D-printed ear (K, L).
291
G. Zhou et al. / EBioMedicine 28 (2018) 287–302
 292
G. Zhou et al. / EBioMedicine 28 (2018) 287–302
 composed of DMEM, 10 ng/mL transforming growth factor beta-1 (TGF-
β1, R&D Systems Inc. Minneapolis, USA), 50 ng/mL insulin-like growth
factor-I (IGF-I, R&D Systems Inc.), and other supplements (without any
serum, all the ingredients of the medium were definable). The medium
was changed every other day. The in vitro engineered cartilage frame-
work was harvested at the 12th weeks for external ear reconstruction.
Before implantation, a cartilage piece (1 × 1 cm2 with a thickness of
1.5 mm) engineered with the same method as the ear graft and cultured
Fig. 3. In vitro generation and evaluation of human ear-shaped cartilage. The prepared scaffold shows clear ear features including the helix, anti-helix, triangular fossa, and cavum conchae
(A). On cell seeding, the scaffold quickly absorbs the cell suspension (B). After 12 weeks of in vitro culture, the cell-scaffold construct forms a neo-cartilage tissue with the original shape
(C). Laser scanning confirms that the shape of the regenerated ear cartilage reaches more than 90% similarity compared with the original scaffold (D–F). SEM confirms good cell
compatibility of both the PGA/PLA fibers and PCL core, and ECM coverage of the whole scaffold at week 4 of in vitro culture (G–H). Mechanical testing confirms that the PCL core
significantly enhances the mechanical strength of both the scaffold and in vitro engineered cartilage (I). (The laser scanning data were collected from another patient (Case 4):
corresponding gross samples are shown in Fig. 9).
Fig. 4. Cross section and its histological characterization of the in vitro tissue engineered cartilage. The cross section of the engineered cartilage showing a chimeric structure with outer
semi-translucent cartilage-like tissue, inner non-transparent PCL grids, and incompact tissue between the PCL bars (A). The outer cartilaginous regions (red frames) showing abundant
lacuna structures (B, C) with strong positive SO (D) and collagen II (E) staining. The inner PCL regions (yellow and green frames) corresponding to PCL grid bars contain evenly
distributed chondrocytes (B, F–H, L–N). The areas between the grid bars (blue frames) reveal incompact tissue with weak positive SO and collagen II staining (B, I–K). Yellow arrows
indicate residual PGA fibers. Black windows indicate the magnified area.
293
G. Zhou et al. / EBioMedicine 28 (2018) 287–302
 in the same condition was used for histological and immunohistochemi-
cal examinations as a quality control sample. When the control sample
was confirmed for obvious cartilage formation and free of contamination,
the corresponding ear graft was then released for clinical use.
2.7. Shape Analysis of In Vitro Engineered Human Ear-shaped Cartilage
Surface image data were collected from both the ear-shaped scaffold
(before cell seeding) and the ear-shaped cartilage framework (before
in vivo implantation) by a 3D laser scanning system, in accordance
with previously established methods (Liu et al., 2010). The 3D data of
the ear framework were compared to those of the ear scaffold with an
accepted variation in voxels smaller than 1.5 mm for evaluating the
shape similarity level between the ear framework and original scaffold
(Liu et al., 2010).
2.8. Implantation of Ear Cartilage Framework
The surgical techniques required for implantation of the engineered
ear framework were identical to those established for the autologous rib
Fig. 5. Surgical implantation procedure of the engineered ear framework. After 12 weeks of skin expansion, a thin kidney-shaped skin capsule with abundant capillaries forms (A). After
removing the expander (B), an expanded skin flap (blue arrow) and a post-auricular neurovascular fascia flap (white arrow) are prepared, respectively (C). The in vitro engineered ear
framework is inserted between the fascial flap and the expanded skin flap (D). The fascial flap is sutured to the ear framework (E). A small suction drain (yellow arrow) is placed
through the ear framework (F). The expanded skin is coapted to the anterior aspect of the framework (G). A skin graft is sutured onto retroauricular and mastoid regions (H).
294
G. Zhou et al. / EBioMedicine 28 (2018) 287–302
 cartilage framework. For case 1 (Method 1), after removing the skin ex-
pander, the skin flap and a random retroauricular neurovascular fascia
flap (about 7.0 × 4.5 cm2) were prepared. During the procedure, care
must be taken to avoid vascular compromise of the expanded flap,
and a C-shaped fascia flap was dissected from the retroauricular region
superficial to the periosteum. The in vitro engineered ear framework
was then inserted between the fascial flap and the expanded skin flap.
The fascial flap was sutured to the external ear helix to cover the poste-
rior aspect of the ear framework. The expanded skin flap was draped
over the anterior aspect in a tension-free way and then covered tautly
to the framework by means of vacuum drainage. Finally, a split-
thickness skin graft, which was harvested from the groin region, was su-
tured onto the mastoid region to cover the posterior auricular fascial
flap. Long sutures were tied over a bolster to tamponade the graft to
the recipient bed. A head dressing was applied to protect the engineered
ear and all the incisions. Sutures were removed at day 10 post-
operation. The main surgical procedures for case 1 were demonstrated
in Supplemental Video 1. The above method (method 1) was also ap-
plied on cases 2 and 5. Method 2 for case 3 and method 3 for case 4
are listed in Table 2.
2.9. Post-Implantation Follow-Up Assessments
After suture removal, the reconstructed auricle was photographed at
1, 2, 3, 6, 9, 12, 18, 24, and 30 months post-surgery to record swelling,
inflammation signs, and shape recovery. Subsequent surgeries were
Fig. 6. Post-implantation follow-ups. The pre-operated microtic ear showing a peanut-like structure. At two and a half years post-implantation, the reconstructed ear shows typical
auricular features with helix, anti-helix, and cavum conchae, largely symmetrical to the healthy side. Post-implantation assessment at different time points shows the signs of gradual
shape recovery, where only blunt ear structures are observed at the 1st and the 6th months post-implantation. Relatively clear ear features with helix, anti-helix, and cavum conchae
structures gradually appeared at 9, 12, 24, and 30 months post-implantation. MRI examination reveals an obvious sandwich structure of the ear framework with cartilage (low signal,
yellow arrows) surrounding the PCL core region (red arrows). PCL core region signals are difficult to distinguish from other tissue signals at early stage (Post-OP 1 m; a result of tissue
edema) and present a gradual decreased trend with increased implantation time (Post-OP 6–24 m). Pre-OP: pre-operation; Post-OP: post-operation.
295
G. Zhou et al. / EBioMedicine 28 (2018) 287–302
 conducted for removing the pedicle of skin flap at 6 months and
repairing scar at 18 months, which allowed for tissue biopsies of the im-
planted ear framework. Both biopsied samples were subjected to histo-
logical and immunohistochemical examination to evaluate the state of
cartilage formation in vivo. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was per-
formed using a 1.5 T MR System at different time points post-
implantation to trace the state of cartilage regeneration and PCL core
degradation in the implanted ear framework.
2.10. Histological and Immunohistochemical Analysis
Samples from the in vitro engineered cartilage piece and in vivo
biopsied tissue were frozen in liquid nitrogen for cryosection or fixed
in 4% paraformaldehyde for 24 h prior to embedding in paraffin. The
samples were sectioned into 5-μm slices, mounted on glass slides, and
stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) or Safranin-O/Fast Green
(SO/FG) using previously established protocols (Zhang and Spector,
2009). Detection of elastin was performed using a modified Verhoeff
van Gieson (EvG) elastic stain kit (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Mississippi,
USA) following the manufacturer's instructions.
Expression of type II collagen was detected using mouse anti-human
type II collagen monoclonal antibody (1:200 in PBS, Santa Cruz, Califor-
nia, USA), followed by incubation of horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-con-
jugated anti-mouse antibody (1:200 in PBS, Santa Cruz), and color
development with diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (DAB, Santa
Cruz) (Yan et al., 2009).
2.11. Molecular Weight Assay of PCL
Analyses of number-average molecular weight (Mn) and weight-
average molecular weight (Mw) of PCL were conducted by size exclu-
sion chromatography (SEC) at different stages, including raw PCL, PCL
core
(after
3D-printing
and
hot
compression
molding),
pre-
implantation (after in vitro culture for 3 month), and post-
implantation (after in vivo implantation for 18 months, the sample
under evaluation was part of the biopsy taken from case 1 after in vivo
implantation for 18 months). The PCL degradation profile was revealed
according to changes in Mn, Mw, and Mw/Mn (polydispersity) values at
different stages.
2.12. Statistical Analysis
All results are expressed as mean ± s.d. Differences among/between
experimental groups were analyzed using one-way ANOVA/Student t-
test. A value of p b 0.05 was considered as statistically significant.
3. Results
3.1. Preparation of the Ear Scaffold
The ear scaffold was produced by the processes depicted in Fig. 2.
Using these methods, the ear scaffold had a sandwiched structure and
Fig. 7. Gross view and histological characterization of tissue biopsy from the engineered ear at 6 months post-implantation. Biopsy taken from the tragus region of the ear framework (A,
yellow arrow). Biopsy showing an ivory-white cartilaginous appearance (B). Histological examination showing typical mature cartilage formation with abundant lacuna structures (C,
G) and positive staining of SO/FG (D, H), collagen II (E, I), and EvG (specific staining for elastin) (F, J), similar to native ear cartilage (K–N).
296
G. Zhou et al. / EBioMedicine 28 (2018) 287–302
 presented the mirror image of the patient's normal ear with detailed
structures including the helix, anti-helix, triangular fossa, and cavum
conchae (Fig. 2K, L). The cross-section of a scaffold piece, produced
using the same method as the ear scaffold, presented a chimeric struc-
ture with outer PGA fibers and inner PCL grid bars (Supplemental
Fig. 1A). It is worth noting that the PCL bars themselves also showed a
chimeric structure, where PGA fibers were evenly embedded within
the PCL matrix (Supplemental Fig. 1B–F), indicating that the hot com-
pression process was able to partially merge the PGA fibers with the
PCL core.
3.2. In Vitro Engineering of Ear-shaped Cartilage Framework
In our cell expansion conditions, MCs underwent robust prolifera-
tion (Supplemental Fig. 2) and the expanded cells showed good
chondrogenic function after being seeded onto PGA/PLA scaffold and
in vitro cultured for 12 weeks (Supplemental Fig. 3). Approximately
4.5 × 106 MCs were originally isolated from the microtia cartilage.
These cells were expanded to about 4.5 × 108 cells at passage 2. After
being seeded onto the ear scaffold, the cell suspension was quickly
absorbed and distributed throughout the whole scaffold (Fig. 3A–B,
G). After 12 weeks of in vitro culture, a cartilage-like framework was
formed and the original ear shape was largely retained (Fig. 3C) which
was also supported by the histological examination of similarly
engineered cartilage peace (Fig. 4). Laser scanning analysis showed
that the shape of the regenerated ear at 12 weeks attained N90% similar-
ity compared with the shape of the original scaffold (Fig. 3D–F), indicat-
ing that accurate shape control of the in vitro engineered cartilage could
be achieved by controlling the shape of its scaffold.
Scanning electron microscopy examination revealed that cells were
evenly distributed among the PGA fibers and PCL core, and gradually
produced ECM to cover the whole scaffold with increased in vitro cul-
ture time (Fig. 3G, H; Supplemental Fig. 4). No obvious cell detachment
was observed during in vitro culture, implying good cell affinity to both
PGA fibers and PCL core. It is worth noticing that the mechanical
strength of the in vitro engineered constructs was significantly en-
hanced by the PCL core and reached a 4-fold increase compared with
that of the constructs without the PCL core (Fig. 3I), which contributed
to the shape maintenance after in vivo implantation.
The cross section of a regenerated cartilage piece engineered in the
same way as the ear framework (a quality control sample) showed a
chimera structure, in which the outer cartilaginous tissue surrounded
and covered the inner PCL grids, with incompact tissue observed be-
tween the grid bars (Fig. 4A). Histological examination further con-
firmed typical cartilage features at the outer layer, with abundant
lacuna structures, glycosaminoglycan (GAG) deposition, and collagen
II expression (Fig. 4B–E). In the central part, un-degraded PCL regions
(corresponding to the PCL bars) and incompact tissue between bars
were observed (Fig. 4F–N). It is worth noticing that high numbers of
chondrocytes were observed in the PCL bar regions with a pore
Fig. 8. Histological characterization of the engineered ear biopsy at 1.5 years post-implantation. The biopsy was taken from the cavum conchae region of the ear framework. Histological
examination shows a chimeric structure with both cell-infiltrated PCL regions (red frames) and cartilage tissue regions (blue frames), characterized by abundant lacuna structures and
positive staining of Safranin-O and collagen II.
297
G. Zhou et al. / EBioMedicine 28 (2018) 287–302
 structure and containing only a few PGA residues (Fig. 4F–H, L–N).
Transformation of the PCL bar regions, from PGA fiber/PCL chimeric
structures (Supplemental Fig. 1) to porous chondrocyte/PCL chimeric
structures (Fig. 4F–H, L–N), implied that the pore structure of the PCL
bars resulted from PGA degradation during in vitro culture, thus provid-
ing a path for cell infiltration. In the region between the grid bars, con-
sistent with the gross view, incompact tissue with the un-degraded PGA
residues was observed (Fig. 4I–K). Importantly, after 3 months of in vitro
culture, the PGA fibers were mostly degraded with abundant cartilage
ECM formation (especially those in the outer layer) (Fig. 4A–E). This oc-
currence would likely reduce direct exposure of the existing PGA resid-
uals to the immune system, and therefore alleviate the host responses
towards the engineered graft, as we have previously demonstrated
(Luo et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2017).
3.3. Implantation of the Ear Framework
After 12 weeks of skin expansion, a kidney-shaped skin capsule was
formed and abundant capillaries were distinctly observed in the ex-
panded skin (Fig. 5A). After removing the expander and stripping the fi-
brous capsule, an expanded skin flap and a post-auricular neurovascular
fascia flap were prepared (Fig. 5B, C). The in vitro engineered ear frame-
work was then inserted between the fascial flap and the expanded skin
flap, and fixed by suturing the fascial flap to the helix (Fig. 5D, E). The
expanded skin flap was used to cover the frontal surface of the ear
framework, which was tightly attached to the flap under negative pres-
sure of the suction drain and comprised detailed structures of auricular
helix, anti-helix, triangular fossa, and cavum conchae (Fig. 5F–H). The
main surgical procedures were demonstrated in Supplemental Video 1
and the ear framework displayed a cartilage-like appearance with me-
chanical properties strong enough for surgical handling.
3.4. Post-Implantation Follow-Up of Auricular Outline
Within the first two weeks, the reconstructed ear showed obvious
edema with a blurring shape (data not shown). After two weeks, the
edema slowly reduced and the shape of the reconstructed ear, as well
as the color of the covered skin, gradually recovered (Fig. 6). Within
6 months post-implantation, only the basic ear contour was observed,
while key auricular structures, such as helix, triangular fossa, anti-
helix, and cavum conchae, became gradually distinct after 9 months
(Fig. 6). It was worth noticing that at 12 months, the reconstructed au-
ricle presented high stiffness and low flexibility (Supplemental Video
2), whereas at 24 months, an obvious improvement in flexibility with
more distinct structures were achieved (Supplemental Video 3; Fig. 6).
The molecular weight assay of the PCL core revealed a decline trend
in both Mn and Mw at different time points, indicating slow degradation
of the PCL (Supplemental Fig. 5). These results were further supported
by the gradual decline in MRI signals in the PCL core regions with in-
creased post-implantation time. In particular, a significant decrease
was observed at 24 months post-implantation (Fig. 6, red arrowed),
which provided a reasonable explanation for improved flexibility at
2 years.
Fig. 9. Four other cases of auricular reconstruction based on in vitro engineered ear graft. Four other patients also received engineered ear grafts and were being followed-up. Similar in vitro
and clinical outcomes corresponding to case 1 was obtained.
298
G. Zhou et al. / EBioMedicine 28 (2018) 287–302
 3.5. Histological Examinations of In Vivo Regenerated Cartilage
During the procedure of skin flap pedicle removal at 6 months post-
implantation, a biopsy was taken from the tragus region of the ear
framework (Fig. 7A). The biopsied tissue showed an ivory-white carti-
laginous appearance (Fig. 7B). Histological examinations revealed typi-
cal cartilage formation with abundant lacuna structures, GAG
deposition, and strong collagen II expression (Fig. 7C–E, G–I), similar
to the native ear cartilage (Fig. 7K–M). Particularly, the expression of
elastin (indicated by EvG staining) was also detected in the regenerated
cartilage (at a slightly lower level than that in native cartilage) (Fig. 7F, J,
N), indicating the formation of elastic cartilage. No PCL core was ob-
served in this sample as a result of the biopsy location. At 18 months
post-implantation, further scar revision procedure was performed,
which allowed a very small biopsy to be obtained from the cavum con-
chae region of the ear framework. Histological examinations showed
that a chimeric structure with both undegraded PCL (Fig. 8, red frames)
and cartilage-like tissue characterized by abundant lacuna structures
and positive staining of SO/FG and collagen II (Fig. 8, blue frames).
Most importantly, consistent with the histological findings before im-
plantation, scattered cells were still detected in the PCL regions (Fig. 8,
red frames), indicating good cell compatibility of the PCL core.
3.6. Post-Implantation Follow-Up of Four Other Cases
Four other cases, in which patients had received an engineered ear
transplant and were being followed-up, revealed similar in vitro and
clinical outcomes corresponding to the first patient (Fig. 9). Among
the total five cases, four cases showed obvious cartilage formation
after 6 months post implantation. Summary for all five patients is pro-
vided in Table 3. Owing to the short follow-up period, full examination
data will be provided in future. Note that one original case failed to
show up for all of the post-surgery follow-ups after the second stage
surgery and therefore was removed from the current trial. An additional
case (case 5 in Fig. 9) was thus enrolled instead of the original one to
make up five cases in total.
4. Discussion
Tissue engineered auricle is a promising alternative to current ear re-
constructive options, but its clinical translation is yet to be accom-
plished. In the current study, cartilage frameworks with patient-
specific ear shapes and proper mechanical strength were successfully
engineered in vitro. Using these engineered ear frameworks, we per-
formed external ear reconstruction on 5 patients and achieved satisfac-
tory therapeutic outcome as revealed during 2.5 years' follow-up so far.
The achievement of this clinical translation should be attributed to the
integration and innovation of several strategies, including using ex-
panded MCs as seed cell source, in vitro culture to alleviate the host re-
sponse towards the implanted graft, CAD-CAM for patient-specific
cartilage shape control, and PCL inner core for long-term shape
maintenance.
Microtia chondrocytes have been proposed as a promising cell
source due to their abilities to form elastic cartilage and since they can
be isolated from the patient's microtic ear without injuring healthy car-
tilage (Ishak et al., 2015; Kamil et al., 2004; Kobayashi et al., 2011;
Nakao et al., 2017). In the current study, the patient’s MCs that were ex-
panded in a condition containing bFGF demonstrated the abilities of ro-
bust proliferation, 3D cartilage generation, and stable subcutaneous
cartilage formation, which confirmed their candidacy as a practical cell
source to engineer auricular cartilage for clinical application.
Polylactic acid (PLA) coated PGA, as the traditional synthetic scaffold
employed by many pioneered tissue engineering studies, is especially
suitable for engineering cartilage with complex shape due to its control-
lable mechanical properties and shape processing (Cao et al., 1997;
Mooney et al., 1996). However, PGA/PLA could induce significant host
response once implanted in immunocompetent mammals, leading to
the failure of cartilage formation (Ceonzo et al., 2006; Haisch, 2010;
Rotter et al., 2005). In the current study, an in vitro engineering strategy
Table 3
Summary of the total five cases.
Age
Gender
Diagnosis (Weerda's classification)
Surgical method for graft
implantation
Follow-up
period
Outcome
Case 1
6
F
Unilateral grade III microtia, right side.
Method 1
2.5 years
• Obvious cartilage formation before implantation
• Shape, size and cranioauricular angle match the
contralateral normal ear
• Landmark structures are distinct
• Obvious post-Op cartilage formation
• No sign of absorption or extrusion
Case 2
9
F
Grade III microtia on the right side;
grade I microtia on the left side.
Method 1
1.5 years
• Obvious cartilage formation before implantation
• Cranioauricular angle match the contralateral ear.
• Helix and cavum conchae are distinct, triangular
fossa and anti-helix are vague.
• No obvious cartilage formation at the biopsy site after 6 m.
• No sign of absorption or extrusion
Case 3
8
F
Unilateral grade III microtia, right side
Method 2
1 year
• Obvious cartilage formation before implantation
• Shape, size and cranioauricular angle match the
contralateral normal ear.
• Landmark structures are distinct
• Obvious cartilage formation at the biopsy site after 6 m.
• Slight distortion occurred after 6 m post surgery
Case 4
7
M
Unilateral grade III microtia, right side
Method 3
6 months
• Obvious cartilage formation before implantation
• Shape and size match the contralateral normal ear
• Landmark structures are distinct
• Obvious cartilage formation after 6 m post implantation
• Slight distortion occurred after the second stage surgery
(creation of the cranioauricular angle)
Case 5
7
F
Unilateral grade II microtia, right side
Method 1
2 months
• Obvious cartilage formation before implantation
• Shape, size and cranioauricular angle match the
contralateral normal ear
• Landmark structures are distinct
• Obvious post-Op cartilage formation
• No sign of absorption or extrusion
299
G. Zhou et al. / EBioMedicine 28 (2018) 287–302
 was applied, which allowed sufficient degradation of the PGA/PLA scaf-
fold and abundant deposition of the autologous cartilage ECM and thus
greatly reduced direct exposure of PGA fibers to the immune system.
This procedure can therefore alleviate the host responses as we previ-
ously demonstrated (Luo et al., 2009, 2013; Liu et al., 2017). In addition,
in vitro culture also allows for quality assessments of the engineered
cartilage before transplantation.
Generally, in vitro engineered ear cartilage is usually too weak to
maintain its complex 3D structures after its implantation under skin
tension. In the current study, by means of combining CT scanning,
CAD-CAM, and 3D-printing technologies, we were able to generate a
PCL inner core supported PGA/PLA scaffold that not only replicated
the patient-specific ear structures, but also provided mechanical sup-
port for shape maintenance of the patient-specific cartilage regenera-
tion in vitro and in vivo.
The advantages of using mechanically stiff material as an inner stent
to support the ear shape of the engineered cartilage has been described
by previous researchers (Bichara et al., 2014). However, most of them
used non-degradable materials (such as titanium wire), which is likely
to be extruded after a certain time period. The current study used PCL
as the inner core, which can be biodegraded by hydrolysis of its ester
linkages in a slow manner so that the engineered cartilage may have suf-
ficient time to mature and gain mechanical properties while gradually
replacing the degrading inner core (Yan et al., 2009). According to liter-
ature, complete degradation of PCL in vivo requires 2–4 years (Höglund
et al., 2007; Hutmacher et al., 2001; Oh et al., 2011; Sun et al., 2006;
Tuba et al., 2014; Woodruff and Hutmacher, 2010). As this particular
case has been followed up for 2.5 years and plus 3 months of in vitro cul-
ture, the PCL frame has already undergone over 2 years' degradation, by
which time a significant portion of PCL has degraded as confirmed by
MRI examination, whereas the engineered ear cartilage remained able
to retain its original 3D shape supported with significantly decreased
stiffness and increased elasticity, indicating that it was the regenerated
cartilage rather than the PCL core that maintained the ear shape. Mean-
while, we have previously shown that in vivo regenerated cartilage itself
without PCL frame had mechanical properties similar to those of native
cartilage (Yan et al., 2009). In the current study, histological examination
of the biopsied samples revealed formation of mature in vivo cartilage at
6 m and 18 m post-Op (Figs. 7 and 8). Obviously, the mechanical support
contributed by the engineered cartilage should not be denied. Moreover,
the low melting point (63 °C) of PCL allowed a small portion of PGA fibers
to fuse themselves into the PCL grids during hot compression molding,
making the PCL porous for cell infiltration after PGA degradation,
which further facilitates the replacement of the inner core with the pa-
tient’s own tissue during PCL degradation.
The current trial included five patients. The engineered ear graft for
each of the total five patients showed excellent cartilage formation
in vitro with detailed ear structure, indicating that the procedures for
engineering the ear graft were feasible and repeatable. We adopted 3
surgical methods to implant the engineered ear grafts to the 5 patients
according to each patient’s retro-auricular skin condition. Among the 3
methods, method 1 is suitable for most Asian children who have tight
retro-auricular skin and thus need skin expansion. Method 1 also used
a facial flap to cover the back and the helix rim of the engineered ear
graft, which not only provided sufficient blood supply, but also
protected the graft from extrusion. Therefore, method 1 was applied
on cases 1 (the first conducted case), 2, and 5 and achieved satisfactory
shape maintenance and cartilage formation outcomes. Unlike cases 1
and 5, case 2 normal side external ear did not have the distinctive auric-
ular features, which might reflect somewhat level of deformity on the
non-microtia side. Although the detailed 3D ear structure was a bit com-
promised, the outcome of clinical repair largely replicated the other side
ear morphology (Fig. 9). In addition, the patient seemed to exhibited
pro-fibrotic condition as the expanded skin contracted more severely
than other cases, which might also contribute to the structure compro-
mise. Among 5 cases, cartilage was not observed in the biopsied tissue of
case 2, which might be caused by non-suitable location of the biopsy or
the fibrosis of implanted cartilage. The variation of clinical outcome due
to individual conditions such as pro-inflammatory/pro-fibrotic is also
commonly observed in conventional ear reconstruction using rib carti-
lage framework (Davis, 1956).
To avoid skin graft and scar formation on donor site wound, method
2, which used expanded skin only to cover the implanted engineered
graft, was tried on the case 3. This method has also been widely applied
on Asian children. Because the engineered graft was covered with the
expanded skin only without fascial flap, which caused much thinner
soft tissue covering and thus rendered the grafts relatively higher risk
of extrusion as the engineered ear graft was relatively thinner with rel-
atively sharper edges when compared to the conventional ear frame-
work carved from rib cartilage.
Case 4 had low skin tension in the reto-auricular area, so we adopted
method 3 (the Nagata approach) on this patient to avoid the process of
skin expansion. This method needed more cartilaginous graft to make
the ear framework as well as the C-shaped base to elevate the ear frame-
work in a secondary surgery. Our tissue engineering method can pro-
vide sufficient cartilaginous grafts without harming the normal
cartilage, but the elevation step could expose the newly implanted ear
framework to surgical trauma again shortly after its implantation,
which may aggravate the inflammatory reaction caused by the previous
surgery and lead to long lasting edema which may compromise the ear
shape. Therefore, the selection of an optimal surgical procedure for han-
dling and implanting the engineered ear graft is extremely important.
Besides, the in vitro engineered ear graft (neocartilage) was more deli-
cate and fragile than the graft carved from the fully developed rib carti-
lage, and the acute inflammatory trauma environment as well as the
excessive handling during surgery may reduce the viability of the resi-
dent chondrocytes of the engineered ear graft, thus, hindering the sub-
sequent chondrogenesis and shape maintenance after implantation.
Moreover, developing more mature cartilaginous grafts to ease the sur-
gical handling is also important for the widespread application of
engineered ear graft in future.
In summary, we were able to successfully design, fabricate, and re-
generate patient-specific external ears. The first clinical study of trans-
lating the well-known human-ear-shaped cartilage from nude mouse
to human may represent a follow-up significant achievement in the
field of tissue engineering after its original experimental study (Cao
et al., 1997). Nevertheless, further efforts remain necessary to eventual-
ly translate this prototype work into routine clinical practices. In the fu-
ture, long-term (up to 5 years) follow-up of the cartilage properties and
clinical outcomes after complete degradation of the PCL inner core will
be essential. In addition, further optimization and standardization in
scaffold fabrication, cell expansion, in vitro cartilage engineering, surgi-
cal procedures, as well as multi-center clinical trials would also be the
targets for the future investigations. 3D bioprinting (print with cells)
for direct fabrication of ear-shaped cartilage may also be a future direc-
tion (Kang et al., 2016).
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.01.011.
Acknowledgments
This
research
was
supported
by
National
Natural
Science
Foundation of China (81671837, 31271046, 81371703, 81371701, and
81571823), Hi-Tech Research and Development Program of China
(2012AA020507), Shanghai Science and Technology Committee
(13DZ0503100, 16QB1400600), Capital Clinical Specialty Application
Research Program (Z151100004015185), and National Key Clinical Spe-
cialist Construction Program of China. The authors appreciate the surgi-
cal assistant from the medical and nurse staff at the Auricular Center,
Plastic Surgery Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Science, Beijing,
China; Research Institute of Plastic Surgery, Plastic Surgery Hospital,
Wei Fang Medical College, Weifang, Shandong, China; and Department
300
G. Zhou et al. / EBioMedicine 28 (2018) 287–302
 of Plastic Surgery, Xin Hua Hospital, Dalian University, Dalian, Liaoning,
P.R. China. We also appreciate the language editing from Dr. Kara Spiller
of Drexel University.
Funding Sources
The sponsors of the study had no roles in study design, data
collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report.
All authors had full access to all data of this study and had final respon-
sibility for the decision to submit for publication.
Conflicts of Interest
We declare that we have no conflicts of interest.
Author Contributions
GZ was the principal investigator of the grant supporting the current
scientific work, conceived the overall technical procedures and partici-
pated in surgical design with detailed supervision particularly on scaf-
fold design, manufacture, and in vitro cartilage engineering; GZ also
significantly contributed to the preparation of this report by initial draft,
data collection and interpretation, and figure preparation. HJ was re-
sponsible for the surgical design and performed main surgery and
peri-operative care. ZY performed most of the primary technical work,
including scaffold preparation, cell isolation and culture, in vitro carti-
lage reconstruction, exanimations for cartilage formation, and primary
data collection. YL was responsible for the technical design, developed
the key techniques for shape control, ear scaffold manufacture, massive
expansion of microtia chondrocytes, and in vitro regeneration of ear-
shaped-cartilage based on these cells. YL also significantly contributed
to the manuscript drafting, data interpretation, and figure preparation.
QZ, CZ, BP, JZ, XZ, and HS participated in the surgical design and were re-
sponsible for the post-operative care and data collection from the five
patients. DL and AH helped to conduct the primary experiment. ZZ,
WZ, and WL participated in overall design and manuscript preparation,
and WL advised overall manuscript structure, edited and finalized the
report. YC was the principal investigator on the grant supporting the
preliminary and current work, proposed, supervised, and participated
in the whole project including design of the whole clinical trial, scaffold
modification, in vitro ear cartilage engineering, clinical procedure and
follow-up, and data collection and interpretation.
References
Atala, A., Bauer, S.B., Soker, S., Yoo, J.J., Retik, A.B., 2006. Tissue-engineered autologous
bladders for patients needing cystoplasty. Lancet 367, 1241–1246.
Bichara, D.A., Pomerantseva, I., Zhao, X., Zhou, L., Kulig, K.M., Tseng, A., Kimura, A.M.,
Johnson, M.A., Vacanti, J.P., Randolph, M.A., Sundback, C.A., 2014. Successful creation
of tissue-engineered autologous auricular cartilage in an immunocompetent large
animal model. Tissue Eng. Part A 20, 303–312.
Bly, R.A., Bhrany, A.D., Murakami, C.S., Sie, K.C., 2016. Microtia reconstruction. Facial Plast.
Surg. Clin. North Am. 24, 577–591.
Breugem, C.C., Stewart, K.J., Kon, M., 2011. International trends in the treatment of
microtia. J. Craniofac. Surg. 22, 1367–1369.
Cao, Y., Vacanti, J.P., Paige, K.T., Upton, J., Vacanti, C.A., 1997. Transplantation of
chondrocytes utilizing a polymer-cell construct to produce tissue-engineered carti-
lage in the shape of a human ear. Plast. Reconstr. Surg. 100, 297–302.
Ceonzo, K., Gaynor, A., Shaffer, L., Kojima, K., Vacanti, C.A., Stahl, G.L., 2006. Polyglycolic
acid-induced inflammation: role of hydrolysis and resulting complement activation.
Tissue Eng. 12, 301–308.
Davis, W.B., 1956. Absorption of autogenous cartilage grafts in man. Brit. J. Plast. Surg. 9,
177–185.
Fulco, I., Miot, S., Haug, M.D., Barbero, A., Wixmerten, A., Feliciano, S., Wolf, F., Jundt, G.,
Marsano, A., Farhadi, J., Heberer, M., Jakob, M., Schaefer, D.J., Martin, I., 2014.
Engineered autologous cartilage tissue for nasal reconstruction after tumour resec-
tion: an observational first-in-human trial. Lancet 384, 337–346.
Haisch, A., 2010. Ear reconstruction through tissue engineering. Adv. Otorhinolaryngol.
68, 108–119.
Han, S.E., Lim, S.Y., Pyon, J.K., Bang, S.I., Mun, G.H., Oh, K.S., 2015. Aesthetic auricular re-
construction with autologous rib cartilage grafts in adult microtia patients. J. Plast.
Reconstr. Aesthet. Surg. 68, 1085–1094.
Höglund, A., Hakkarainen, M., Albertsson, A.C., 2007. Degradation profile of poly(ε-
caprolactone)—the influence of macroscopic and macromolecular biomaterial design.
J. Macromol. Sci. A 44, 1041–1046.
Hutmacher, D.W., Schantz, T., Zein, I., Ng, K.W., Teoh, S.H., Tan, K.C., 2001. Mechan-
ical properties and cell cultural response of polycaprolactone scaffolds de-
signed and fabricated via fused deposition modeling. J. Biomed. Mater. Res.
55, 203–216.
Ishak, M.F., See, G.B., Hui, C.K., Abdullah, A., Saim, L., Saim, A., Idrus, R., 2015. The forma-
tion of human auricular cartilage from microtic tissue: an in vivo study. Int.
J. Pediatr. Otorhinolaryngol. 79, 1634–1639.
Jessop, Z.M., Javed, M., Otto, I.A., Combellack, E.J., Morgan, S.N., Breugem, C.C., Archer,
C.W., Khan, I.M., Lineaweaver, W.C., Kon, M., Malda, J., Whitaker, I.S., 2016. Combining
regenerative medicine strategies to provide durable reconstructive options: auricular
cartilage tissue engineering. Stem Cell Res Ther 7 (19).
Jiang, H., Pan, B., Lin, L., Cai, Z., Zhuang, H., 2008. Ten-year experience in microtia
reconstruction using tissue expander and autogenous cartilage. Int. J. Pediatr.
Otorhinolaryngol. 72, 1251–1259.
Kamil, S.H., Vacanti, M.P., Vacanti, C.A., Eavey, R.D., 2004. Microtia chondrocytes as a
donor source for tissue-engineered cartilage. Laryngoscope 114, 2187–2190.
Kang, H.W., Lee, S.J., Ko, I.K., Kengla, C., Yoo, J.J., Atala, A., 2016. A 3D bioprinting system to
produce human-scale tissue constructs with structural integrity. Nat. Biotechnol. 34,
312–319.
Kobayashi, S., Takebe, T., Inui, M., Iwai, S., Kan, H., Zheng, Y.W., Maegawa, J., Taniguchi, H.,
2011. Reconstruction of human elastic cartilage by a CD44+ CD90+ stem cell in the
ear perichondrium. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 108, 14479–14484.
Liu, Y., Zhang, L., Zhou, G., Li, Q., Liu, W., Yu, Z., Luo, X., Jiang, T., Zhang, W., Cao, Y., 2010. In
vitro engineering of human ear-shaped cartilage assisted with CAD/CAM technology.
Biomaterials 31, 2176–2183.
Liu, Y., Li, D., Yin, Z., Luo, X., Liu, W., Zhang, W., Zhang, Z., Cao, Y., Liu, Y., Zhou, G., 2017.
Prolonged in vitro precultivation alleviates post-implantation inflammation and pro-
motes stable subcutaneous cartilage formation in a goat model. Biomed. Mater. 12,
15006.
Luo, X., Zhou, G., Liu, W., Zhang, W.J., Cen, L., Cui, L., Cao, Y., 2009. In vitro precultivation
alleviates post-implantation inflammation and enhances development of tissue-
engineered tubular cartilage. Biomed. Mater. 4, 25006.
Luo, X., Liu, Y., Zhang, Z., Tao, R., Liu, Y., He, A., Yin, Z., Li, D., Zhang, W., Liu, W., Cao, Y.,
Zhou, G., 2013. Long-term functional reconstruction of segmental tracheal defect by
pedicled tissue-engineered trachea in rabbits. Biomaterials 34, 3336–3344.
Luquetti, D.V., Leoncini, E., Mastroiacovo, P., 2011. Microtia-anotia: a global review of
prevalence rates. Birth Defects Res. A. Clin. Mol. Teratol. 91, 813–822.
Magritz, R., Siegert, R., 2014. Auricular reconstruction: surgical innovations, training
methods, and an attempt for a look forward. Facial Plast. Surg. 30, 183–193.
Makris, E.A., Gomoll, A.H., Malizos, K.N., Hu, J.C., Athanasiou, K.A., 2015. Repair and tissue
engineering techniques for articular cartilage. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 11, 21–34.
Mooney, D.J., Mazzoni, C.L., Breuer, C., McNamara, K., Hern, D., Vacanti, J.P., Langer, R.,
1996. Stabilized polyglycolic acid fibre-based tubes for tissue engineering. Biomate-
rials 17, 115–124.
Muhart, M., McFalls, S., Kirsner, R., Kerdel, F., Eaglstein, W.H., 1997. Bioengineered skin.
Lancet 350, 1142.
Murabit, A., Anzarut, A., Kasrai, L., Fisher, D., Wilkes, G., 2010. Teaching ear reconstruction
using an alloplastic carving model. J. Craniofac. Surg. 21, 1719–1721.
Nagata, S., 1993. A new method of total reconstruction of the auricle for microtia. Plast.
Reconstr. Surg. 92, 187–201.
Nakao, H., Jacquet, R.D., Shasti, M., Isogai, N., Murthy, A.S., Landis, W.J., 2017. Long-term
comparison between human normal conchal and microtia chondrocytes regenerated
by tissue engineering on nanofiber polyglycolic acid scaffolds. Plast. Reconstr. Surg.
139 (911e-21e).
Nayyer, L., Patel, K.H., Esmaeili, A., Rippel, R.A., Birchall, M., O'Toole, G., Butler, P.E.,
Seifalian, A.M., 2012. Tissue engineering: revolution and challenge in auricular carti-
lage reconstruction. Plast. Reconstr. Surg. 1123–1137.
Oh, S.H., Park, S.C., Kim, H.K., Koh, Y.J., Lee, J.H., Lee, M.C., Lee, J.H., 2011. Degradation
behavior of 3D porous polydioxanone-b-polycaprolactone scaffolds fabricated
using the melt-molding particulate-leaching method. J. Biomater. Sci. Polym.
Ed. 22, 225–237.
Olausson, M., Patil, P.B., Kuna, V.K., Chougule, P., Hernandez, N., Methe, K., Kullberg-Lindh,
C., Borg, H., Ejnell, H., Sumitran-Holgersson, S., 2012. Transplantation of an allogeneic
vein bioengineered with autologous stem cells: a proof-of-concept study. Lancet 380,
230–237.
Paput, L., Czeizel, A.E., Banhidy, F., 2012. Possible multifactorial etiology of isolated
microtia/anotia—a population-based study. Int. J. Pediatr. Otorhinolaryngol. 76,
374–378.
Reiffel, A.J., Kafka, C., Hernandez, K.A., Popa, S., Perez, J.L., Zhou, S., Pramanik, S., Brown,
B.N., Ryu, W.S., Bonassar, L.J., Spector, J.A., 2013. High-fidelity tissue engineering of
patient-specific auricles for reconstruction of pediatric microtia and other auricular
deformities. PLoS One 8, e56506.
Rotter, N., Ung, F., Roy, A.K., Vacanti, M., Eavey, R.D., Vacanti, C.A., Bonassar, L.J., 2005. Role
for interleukin 1alpha in the inhibition of chondrogenesis in autologous implants
using polyglycolic acid-polylactic acid scaffolds. Tissue Eng. 11, 192–200.
Shieh, S.J., Terada, S., Vacanti, J.P., 2004. Tissue engineering auricular reconstruction:
in vitro and in vivo studies. Biomaterials 25, 1545–1557.
Shokri, T., White, D.R., 2017. The Nagata technique for microtia reconstruction. Oper.
Tech. Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.otot.2017.03.009.
Sterodimas, A., de Faria, J., 2013. Human auricular tissue engineering in an immunocom-
petent animal model. Aesthet. Surg. J. 33, 283–289.
Sun, H., Mei, L., Song, C., Cui, X., Wang, P., 2006. The in vivo degradation, absorption and
excretion of PCL-based implant. Biomaterials 27, 1735–1740.
301
G. Zhou et al. / EBioMedicine 28 (2018) 287–302
 Tuba, F., Olah, L., Nagy, P., 2014. Towards the understanding of the molecular weight de-
pendence of essential work of fracture in semi-crystalline polymers: a study on
poly(ε-caprolactone). Express Polym Lett 8, 869–879.
Wiggenhauser, P.S., Schantz, J.T., Rotter, N., 2017. Cartilage engineering in reconstructive
surgery: auricular, nasal and tracheal engineering from a surgical perspective. Regen.
Med. 12, 303–314.
Woodruff, M.A., Hutmacher, D.W., 2010. The return of a forgotten polymer—
polycaprolactone in the 21st century. Prog. Polym. Sci. 35, 1217–1256.
Yan, D., Zhou, G., Zhou, X., Liu, W., Zhang, W.J., Luo, X., Zhang, L., Jiang, T., Cui, L., Cao, Y.,
2009. The impact of low levels of collagen IX and pyridinoline on the mechanical
properties of in vitro engineered cartilage. Biomaterials 30, 814–821.
Yanaga, H., Imai, K., Fujimoto, T., Yanaga, K., 2009. Generating ears from cultured autolo-
gous auricular chondrocytes by using two-stage implantation in treatment of
microtia. Plast. Reconstr. Surg. 124, 817–825.
Yanaga, H., Imai, K., Tanaka, Y., Yanaga, K., 2013. Two-stage transplantation of cell-
engineered autologous auricular chondrocytes to regenerate chondrofat composite
tissue: clinical application in regenerative surgery. Plast. Reconstr. Surg. 132,
1467–1477.
Zhang, L., Spector, M., 2009. Comparison of three types of chondrocytes in collagen scaf-
folds for cartilage tissue engineering. Biomed. Mater. 4 (45012).
Zhang, L., He, A., Yin, Z., Yu, Z., Luo, X., Liu, W., Zhang, W., Cao, Y., Liu, Y., Zhou, G., 2014.
Regeneration of human-ear-shaped cartilage by co-culturing human microtia
chondrocytes with BMSCs. Biomaterials 35, 4878–4887.
Zheng, R., Duan, H., Xue, J., Liu, Y., Feng, B., Zhao, S., Zhu, Y., Liu, Y., He, A., Zhang, W., Liu,
W., Cao, Y., Zhou, G., 2014. The influence of Gelatin/PCL ratio and 3-D construct shape
of electrospun membranes on cartilage regeneration. Biomaterials 35, 152–164.
302
G. Zhou et al. / EBioMedicine 28 (2018) 287–302
