 CMAJ
© 2016 Joule Inc. or its licensors 
CMAJ, July 12, 2016, 188(10) 
E217
P
alliative care is interdisciplinary care that 
aims to improve quality of life for 
patients living with any serious illness, 
and their families; ideally, it begins at diagnosis 
and is provided concordantly with other disease- 
directed treatments.1 Early palliative care is 
encouraged by international agencies such as 
the World Health Organization, which states 
explicitly that “palliative care is applicable 
early in the course of illness, in conjunction with 
other therapies that are intended to prolong 
life.”2 Several studies have shown that early 
involvement of specialized palliative care ser-
vices for patients with advanced cancer improves 
quality of life, increases satisfaction with care 
and mitigates depression.3–5 Nevertheless, refer-
rals to palliative care are typically made late in 
the disease course.6,7
Negative attitudes toward palliative care 
among patients and caregivers are often cited 
by physicians as a reason for late referrals to 
palliative care services,6,8 and a change of name 
to “supportive care” has been proposed.8,9 
Although some studies have reported on atti-
tudes of oncologists and other physicians 
toward palliative care and its name,6,8,10–12 there 
has been scant research on the perspectives of 
patients and caregivers. Previous surveys of 
patients and/or caregivers have solicited opin-
ions about either the quality of palliative care 
received13,14 or about the acceptability of the 
name “palliative care” versus “supportive care” 
for those who might be referred.9,15 With the 
exception of a study that validated a measure-
ment tool to assess perceptions of palliative 
care,16 a detailed exploration of how patients 
Perceptions of palliative care among patients 
with advanced cancer and their caregivers
Camilla Zimmermann MD PhD, Nadia Swami BSc, Monika Krzyzanowska MD MPH, 
Natasha Leighl MD MMSc, Anne Rydall MSc, Gary Rodin MD, Ian Tannock MD PhD, Breffni Hannon MB ChB
Competing interests: 
Camilla Zimmermann 
reports grants from the 
Canadian Cancer Society 
and funding from the 
Ontario Ministry of Health 
and Long-Term Care to her 
institution. She is also the 
Rose Family Chair in 
Supportive Care. No other 
competing interests were 
declared.
This article has been peer 
reviewed.
Accepted: Jan. 18, 2016 
Online: Apr. 18, 2016
Correspondence to: 
Camilla Zimmermann, 
camilla.zimmermann@uhn.
ca
CMAJ 2016. DOI:10.1503 
/
cmaj.151171
Background: Early palliative care is increas-
ingly recommended but seldom practised. We 
sought to examine perceptions of palliative 
care among patients with advanced cancer 
and their caregivers.
Methods: After conducting a cluster random-
ized controlled trial of early palliative care ver-
sus standard care for patients with advanced 
cancer, we approached patients and their 
caregivers to participate in semistructured 
interviews seeking to assess, qualitatively, 
their attitudes and perceptions about pallia-
tive care. We used the grounded theory 
method for data collection and analysis.
Results: A total of 48 patients (26 interven-
tion, 22 control) and 23 caregivers (14 inter-
vention, 9 control) completed interviews. Par-
ticipants’ initial perceptions of palliative care 
in both trial arms were of death, hopelessness, 
dependency and end-of-life comfort care for 
inpatients. These perceptions provoked fear 
and avoidance, and often originated from 
interactions with health care professionals. 
During the trial, those in the intervention arm 
developed a broader concept of palliative care 
as “ongoing care” that improved their “qual-
ity of living” but still felt that the term itself 
carried a stigma. Participants in the interven-
tion group emphasized the need for palliative 
care to be reframed and better explained by 
health care professionals. Participants in the 
control group generally considered it pointless 
to rename palliative care, but many in the 
intervention group stated emphatically that a 
different name was necessary in the early out-
patient setting.
Interpretation: There is a strong stigma at-
tached to palliative care, which may persist 
even after positive experiences with an early 
palliative care intervention. Education of the 
public, patients and health care providers is 
paramount if early integration of palliative 
care is to be successful.
Abstract
CMAJ Podcasts: author interview at https://soundcloud.com/cmajpodcasts/151171-res
See also www.cmaj.ca/lookup/doi/10.1503/cmaj.160206 and www.cmaj.ca/lookup/doi/10.1503/cmaj.160547
Research
 Research
E218 
CMAJ, July 12, 2016, 188(10) 
and their caregivers perceive palliative care has 
been lacking.
We previously conducted a cluster randomized 
controlled trial that compared early palliative care 
with usual practice in patients with advanced can-
cer, which showed benefits favouring the inter-
vention group in quality of life, symptom control 
and satisfaction with care.5 After completion of 
the trial, we conducted qualitative interviews with 
participating patients and their caregivers. Our 
principal aim was to examine perceptions of palli-
ative care of participants who had been randomly 
assigned to an early palliative care intervention 
or to a control group. Secondary aims included 
examining the probable sources of these percep-
tions, the potential influence of the intervention on 
these perceptions, and opinions about renaming 
palliative care.
Methods
Setting
Details of the cluster randomized controlled trial 
are available elsewhere.5 The study took place at 
Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, a comprehen-
sive cancer centre in Toronto. Twenty-four medi-
cal oncology clinics from the 5 largest site groups 
(Lung, Gastrointestinal, Genitourinary, Breast 
and Gynecologic) were randomized such that 
patients in the clinics of the intervention group 
received early referral to a palliative care team 
(consultation and follow-up in an outpatient 
oncology palliative care clinic at least monthly 
for the 4-month trial duration, with additional vis-
its as required) whereas patients attending clinics 
of the control group received standard oncology 
care (no formal intervention, but palliative care 
referral was not denied, if requested). Caregivers 
in the intervention group were not required to 
attend clinic visits but did so at their discretion. 
The study was approved by the University Health 
Network Research Ethics Board.
Participants and masking
Eligibility criteria for the trial were a diagnosis 
of advanced cancer, estimated survival of 
6–24 months (by the primary oncologist), and 
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) 
performance status of 0, 1 or 2.17 Exclusion crite-
ria were insufficient English literacy to complete 
questionnaires and inability to pass a cognitive 
screening test.18 Primary caregivers were identi-
fied by participating patients, and were eligible 
for inclusion if they were 18 years of age or 
older, and had sufficient English proficiency to 
participate in an interview.
Although complete masking was impossible, 
patients and caregivers provided written informed 
consent to participate in their own study group, 
without awareness of another group. Thus, those 
in the control group were unaware of an early 
palliative care arm in the trial.
Recruitment and interviews
At the end of the trial, patients and caregivers 
were approached in person or by telephone for 
participation in the qualitative study. Recruit-
ment was purposive, with the aim of interview-
ing patients and caregivers from both the control 
and intervention groups, with a mixture of  high 
and low scores on measures of quality of life 
and satisfaction with care, and participants who 
were older and younger, and male and female.19 
Recruitment ceased when theoretical saturation 
of data was attained (i.e., no new information 
was being obtained from additional partici-
pants).20 Trained research personnel conducted 
the semistructured interviews, which were done 
on an individual level, were audiotaped in a pri-
vate room and lasted about 60 minutes; field 
notes were made after the interview. Interviews 
were conducted following a guide (Appendix 1, 
available at www.cmaj.ca 
/ 
lookup/suppl/doi: 
10.1503/cmaj.151171/-/DC1), which included 
questions about participants’ initial perceptions 
of palliative care (before the trial), probable 
sources of these perceptions, participants’ reac-
tions to discussions about palliative care, percep-
tions after participating in the trial and opinions 
about renaming palliative care.
Data analysis
The grounded theory method guided data collec-
tion and analysis.20,21 We chose this approach 
because it provides a systematic yet flexible 
guideline for collecting and analyzing qualita-
tive data to construct explanations, or theories, 
“grounded” in the views of the participants.21–23 
All audiotapes were transcribed verbatim; accu-
racy was further ensured by an independent rater, 
who listened to the audiotape while reading and 
correcting the transcript. Four coders analyzed the 
data by using an inductive constant comparison 
method.21 This approach involved systematically 
reading the transcribed interviews, identifying 
themes and then proceeding to verify, confirm, 
qualify and explain these themes by comparing 
data within and between interviews. To ensure 
rigor and minimize coder bias, we reviewed and 
compared emerging codes and written notes at 
weekly team meetings. Reflexivity, or the critical 
examination of the researchers’ influence on the 
research process,24 was addressed using field 
notes, reflective writing after interviews and team 
discussions. We examined negative cases (i.e., 
examples that appeared to run counter to the 
 Research
 
CMAJ, July 12, 2016, 188(10) 
emerging propositions) to refine the themes and 
their interpretation.25 NVivo 8 software facilitated 
the analytical process.
Results
We approached 85 patients and 50 caregivers 
for participation in the qualitative study, and 71 
consented to participate: 48 patients (26 inter-
vention, 22 control) and 23 caregivers (14 inter-
vention, 9 control). The main reasons for declin-
ing participation were feeling unwell or caring 
for an unwell patient, lack of time or interest, 
and the palliative care content of the interview 
(7 control group participants). All interviews 
were conducted in person except for 3, which 
were conducted by telephone. All participants 
completed the entire interview.
Table 1 shows characteristics of the patients 
and caregivers. In the intervention group, patients 
had a median of 5 visits to the palliative care 
clinic, and caregivers had a median of 4 visits. 
We identified themes within each of the 5 main 
topics covered during the interview. The themes 
and representative quotations from participants in 
the intervention and control groups are presented 
in Tables 2–6. Perceptions were similar among 
patients and caregivers within each trial group.
Initial perceptions of the meaning 
of palliative care
Patients and caregivers in the intervention and 
control groups had strikingly consistent descrip-
tions of their initial perceptions of palliative care, 
both within and between groups (Table 2). A 
prevailing theme was that palliative care was 
synonymous with death and with care in the last 
weeks of life. One participant stated bluntly, 
“There’s no real meaning besides death” (P004c; 
first letter refers to patient [P] v. caregiver [C]; 
second letter refers to intervention [i] v. control 
[c]). Others spoke about control of symptoms 
and quality of life, but always in the context of 
end-of-life care: “It was always associated with a 
good death and a good dying, but the presump-
tion was that there was dying to be had as 
opposed to a potential lengthening of life” 
(P049c); “There are other things that come to 
mind. There’s quality of end stage of life but 
again that all relates to death” (P040i). Palliative 
care was perceived as a passive form of care, 
when there was “nothing else that can be done” 
and “no hope.” There was a strong association 
with being incapacitated, bedridden and incapa-
ble of self-care, and with care in “places that you 
never get out [of] again” (P047c). Participants 
also expressed uncertainty regarding the mean-
ing of palliative care, with some qualifying their 
statements by saying that they were unsure of the 
exact meaning of the term, and others claiming 
they had “no idea” of what it represented.
Sources of perceptions of palliative care
Many participants in both trial arms stated that 
they had previous experiences with family or 
friends with a terminal illness who had “gone into 
palliative care” (Table 3). In these situations, palli-
ative care had generally been presented by health 
care professionals as an option of last resort, often 
apologetically: “I’m sorry, I think we’ve got to put 
her into palliative care” (P023i); “We can’t do 
anything else, he’s in palliative care” (P031i). 
Experiences of participants as patients within the 
cancer system also influenced their impressions. 
Some patients stated that their health care provid-
ers delayed palliative care, equating it with end-of-
life care and assuring them that they were “not 
there yet” (P033i). Others stated palliative care had 
been presented to them as an alternative to further 
treatment: “I said, ‘I’m not taking radiation,’ and 
she [radiation oncologist] says, ‘Well then, you 
know, it’s maybe time that we set you up with pal-
liative care’” (P004c). The media were another 
source of information; participants reported that 
palliative care was generally presented as end-of-
life care in palliative care units or hospices. Still 
others stated that they had “always known” about 
palliative care or were unsure of how their impres-
sion had been formed.
Initial reactions to palliative care
In keeping with the perceptions or interpretations 
of the meaning of palliative care, participants in 
both groups described feeling “frightened” and 
“shocked” when palliative care was introduced 
(Table 4). Avoidance and resistance were com-
mon reactions, particularly in the control group: 
many stated that they tried not to think about pal-
liative care, and did not want to “dwell on the 
negative.” Others did not feel the subject was rel-
evant for them, because it was “far away” and 
they were “optimistic”; this included some 
patients in the intervention group who felt that 
they did not “qualify” for palliative care, but 
were willing to participate in research to help 
others. In the intervention group, resistance to 
participating in a palliative care intervention was 
a prominent theme, but participants also stated 
that their initial misgivings were allayed by an 
explanation of the rationale for early palliative 
care by their oncologist or by the research team 
during the recruitment process: “Well, when I 
hear palliative care, ... naturally, I think, ‘Oh 
God, I’m not long for the world,’ but then when 
she explained it to me ... I thought, well people 
should have thought of that before” (P031i).
 Research
E220 
CMAJ, July 12, 2016, 188(10) 
Perceptions after receiving early 
palliative care
Participants in the control group described no 
difference between perceptions of palliative care 
before and after the trial. In contrast, among 
those in the intervention group, fear was gener-
ally replaced after contact with the palliative 
care team by a “more comfortable” attitude 
toward palliative care and a broadened under-
Table 1: Baseline characteristics of 48 patients and 23 caregivers
Characteristic
Patients, no. (%)*
Caregivers, no. (%)*
Intervention
n = 26
Control
n = 22
Intervention
n = 14
Control
n = 9
Age, median (range), yr
61 (51–83)
65 (41–82)
61 (38–71)
57 (40–80)
Sex, female
19 (73.1)
10 (45.5)
8 (57.1)
8
(88.9)
Married or in a common-law relationship
15 (57.7)
14 (63.6)
14
(100)
8
(88.9)
Living situation: alone (patient); with patient 
(caregiver)
7 (26.9)
5 (22.7)
13 (92.9)
7
(77.8)
Ethnic origin, European†
26
(100)
20 (90.9)
14
(100)
9
(100)
Education level
    Postsecondary‡
24 (92.3)
18 (81.8)
10 (71.4)
6
(66.7)
    High school
2
(7.7)
3 (13.6)
3 (21.4)
1
(11.1)
    Less than high school
0
1
(4.6)
1
(7.1)
1
(11.1)
    Missing
0
0
0
1
(11.1)
Employment status
    Retired
14 (53.9)
12 (54.5)
7 (50.0)
4
(44.5)
    Employed
7 (26.9)
4 (18.2)
6 (42.9)
3
(33.3)
    Unemployed
3 (11.5)
0
1
(7.1)
2
(22.2)
    Disability
2
(7.7)
6 (27.3)
0
0
Tumour site§
    Lung
4 (15.4)
5 (22.7)
3 (21.4)
1
(11.1)
    Gastrointestinal
7 (26.9)
8 (36.3)
6 (42.9)
4
(44.5)
    Genitourinary
3 (11.5)
4 (18.2)
1
(7.1)
2
(22.2)
    Breast
6 (23.1)
1
(4.6)
3 (21.4)
2
(22.2)
    Gynecologic
6 (23.1)
4 (18.2)
1
(7.1)
0
ECOG performance status at baseline§
    0
10 (38.5)
7 (31.8)
5 (35.7)
3
(33.3)
    1
16 (61.5)
13 (59.1)
9 (64.3)
6
(66.7)
    2
0
2
(9.1)
0
0
Active chemotherapy at baseline§
22 (84.6)
20 (90.9)
10 (71.4)
8
(88.9)
Relationship to patient
    Spouse or partner
–
–
12 (85.7)
7
(77.8)
    Son or daughter
–
–
1
(7.1)
2
(22.2)
    Other family member
–
–
1
(7.1)
0
No. visits to palliative care clinic, median 
(range)
5
(4–5)
0
(0–0)
4
(0–8)§
0
(0–0)
Note: ECOG = Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group.
*Unless stated otherwise.
†The 2 participants of non-European ethnicity were Southeast Asian and South Asian.
‡Includes college, university, vocational/trade school and other.
§For tumour site, ECOG performance status and active chemotherapy, values indicated for caregivers are those of the patients for whom they were caring.
§Only 1 caregiver had no visits to the palliative care clinic, with all others attending twice or more.
 Research
 
CMAJ, July 12, 2016, 188(10) 
standing of it being “more of a long-term [situa-
tion],” with the palliative care team being an 
“advocate for health care” (Table 5). Partici-
pants described a sense that the inclusion of the 
palliative care team was the “new normal,” stat-
ing that their contact with the team had removed 
its stigma, had increased their “quality of living” 
and had given them confidence that they would 
have resources to cope. However, many partici-
pants still felt uncomfortable with the term palli-
ative care in relation to themselves, especially 
when discussing their care with others, who 
might think they were imminently dying. Some 
chose to relabel the care they were receiving as 
Table 2: Representative quotations about initial perceptions of palliative care
Theme
Control group
Intervention group
Death, end of 
life
What comes to mind is bedridden, death bed, 
finality. (P062c)
Well, “they’re preparing me to die.” That’s about 
it. (P056c)
Plots waiting. That’s what I think it is. (P017c)
Terminal meaning that that’s the end of the 
road. (C057c)
You know, that’s just helping people prepare to die. (P043i)
The care that you receive when you’re dying, when you’re 
dying. That’s what comes to mind. (P034i)
It means death to me. It does. The end. (C068i)
Well, when you think palliative care, you think the person’s 
on death row. (C055i)
Comfort care
It just seems to me of keeping the patient 
comfortable if they’re in pain, try to give them 
something to look after the pain. That’s about it. 
(P069c)
I would only assume that it’s an attempt to make 
the patient feel as comfortable as they can, or as 
can be arranged, until the end. (P020c)
I thought, what the heck is that? Then I realized 
they’re just trying to keep you comfortable until 
you die. Can’t ask for any more. (P056c)
It’s to make sure that you’ve gone with dignity, 
painless and comfortable, comfort. (C064c)
Just they take you off medication and put you on just 
comfort care. (P008i)
Our impression, or my impression at least of palliative care, 
was sort of keep them doped, keep them comfortable, make 
them as comfortable as you can before he goes. (P013i)
I understand what it’s all about is keeping the person as 
comfortable as possible as they go through the end of their 
days, because whatever they’ve got is not going to be cured 
and they’re not going to survive or they’re not going to be 
healed and palliative care is all about keeping them 
comfortable and allowing them to die in dignity. (C035i)
No more 
choices, 
nothing left to 
do
This is it, no more choices. (P049c)
There’s nothing and it’s end-of-life, like you’ve 
reached the end of anything that can be of any 
help to you. (P041c)
Because when it comes to palliative, they’re 
always sad that they didn’t help, that all is over. 
(P048c)
The stage of palliative care, hope is kind of more 
or less gone. (C070c)
Well, the basic one is the psychological one that, “Now I’m 
going into palliative care, which basically means there’s no 
hope for me whatsoever and that I have very little time left.” 
(P015i)
Dying, end of life, nothing left to do. (P025i)
But in most cases, you don’t see palliative care, or anyone in 
palliative care, until you have come to the point where 
they’ve told you there’s nothing else to be done. (P014i)
Loss of 
autonomy
Well, I guess what comes to mind is that the end 
is near and that you’re in a situation where 
somebody else has to take care of you. (P037c)
It just sounds old and sick and helpless. (P065c)
Basically they are so sick they cannot do more 
than that, just stay there and to wait for the end. 
(P050c)
I guess palliative care is when you’re pretty much at that 
stage where you can’t take care of yourself any more. (P045i)
When you think palliative care, you think bedridden, unable 
to look after yourself on any level. (P040i)
That’s about it really. Not doing anything, just laying in bed 
and waiting. (P023i)
A place to die
No, no, I knew what palliative was. ... I knew 
exactly. I said, “Well, palliative is, oh God, where 
people go to hospital to die.” (P047c)
I guess that’s the house where people are who 
don’t get well any more. (C059c)
Well, to me, palliative care is the place where you 
go to die. (C064c)
I knew there was such a thing as palliative care but I just 
always thought of it as there are places where people go for 
palliative care when it’s known that they have 2 months to 
live or 3 months to live or 1 month or whatever the magic 
numbers are and whatever the situation is. (C035i)
And it’s a place to die. But they make you as comfortable as 
possible and of course, nobody likes to think of pain and I 
guess they give you the very best painkilling treatments that 
are possible. (P023i)
Unsure of 
meaning
I don’t even know the exact definition. Is it for 
someone who’s dying? (C039c)
First and foremost, I never knew what palliative 
care was to be honest. I never looked it up in the 
dictionary or, I did nothing and we don’t have 
this care back home. (P052c)
Scares me a bit. ... Even though I don’t really 
know what it is. I don’t know really what it is. 
(C059c)
It’s like a foreign language, palliative care, yeah, but I didn’t 
really have any connection to what it was. I just had an idea 
that it was when people were dying they had palliative care. 
(P034i)
What does it mean? Is it Greek for something or Latin for 
something? (P045i)
I didn’t even know what palliative care really meant. (P002i)
 Research
E222 
CMAJ, July 12, 2016, 188(10) 
“symptom control” or to refer to their palliative 
care physician as their “medication specialist” 
or “pain specialist.” Others stated flatly that they 
felt palliative care was not the correct term for 
the care they were receiving. Palliative care 
tended to remain a term that “emotionally has a 
lot of weight to it.”
Renaming or reframing palliative care
Participants in the intervention group stated 
strongly that the end-of-life association of palliative 
care did not represent the care they had received 
and that this “disconnect” was problematic 
(Table 6). A prominent theme was that palliative 
care should be explicitly rebranded: “That shell of 
meaning that surrounds palliative care has to some-
how change” (P015i). Participants suggested public 
education, poster campaigns and routine involve-
ment of palliative care at diagnosis as options for 
destigmatizing palliative care: “When you get it 
right from the get-go you just think, ‘Okay, they’re 
part of the team. That’s great’” (P010i). Direct 
explanation by an oncologist “educated on pallia-
tive care,” who could present it in a nonthreatening 
Table 3: Representative quotations about sources of perceptions of palliative care
Theme
Control group
Intervention group
Health care 
system 
experience: caring 
for family, friends
The nurse looking after him took him on 
another floor. That’s where the palliative are. 
“People are here to die,” or “they’ll never get 
out of here,” or something like that. (P047c)
My father-in-law was in the palliative care unit 
before he died of lung cancer, and so it was in 
palliative care nothing is done to sort of 
advance anything. It’s just make you as 
comfortable as possible until you die. (C030c)
I know a lot of people in [residential hospice]. 
That is totally palliative care. ... People in there 
never come out. That’s how I look at it. I 
presume that’s more or less the fact of life or 
whatever. (C057c)
My ex-husband actually died. ... He died in 3 months. But 
for the first period, they were treating him and then they 
said, “We can’t do anything else, he’s in palliative care.” 
(P031i)
Yes, when my wife passed away. Three years ago she had a 
massive stroke. ... Was taken to the hospital of course. ... 
She couldn’t speak. She was paralyzed. She couldn’t talk. 
She couldn’t swallow. She couldn’t do anything. Just lay 
there. And after 3 weeks the nurse said, “I’m sorry, I think 
we’ve got to put her into palliative care.” Of course I 
started questioning, “what the heck is that?” So found out 
all about it and so on and that’s when I heard. (P023i)
[My mother] was frail and she was ... so anyway, with the 
palliative care, that’s where it came up during the last 
week of her life I heard about that. (C067i)
Health care 
system 
experience: own 
cancer care
Well, palliative care was introduced to me by a 
doctor that didn’t know my case very well, and 
that specific doctor said, “Well, you know, 
speak to Palliative Care,” and it was like 
someone had hit me. I was shocked. To me that 
means I have 6 months to live. (P004c)
The very first time that one of these home nurses came to 
my house, right, she said ... “You’re not in palliative care, 
like you’re dying of anything, are you?” And I just looked 
at her, I remember just saying, “Oh, is that what that 
means?”, I said. (P002i)
When I first went to see the oncologist, she told me that 
sooner or later I would meet the palliative care team, and 
then reassured me that, “Oh no, that won’t be for a long 
time.” ... So she, herself, had that same association 
somehow in there, so as not to panic the patient. (P014i)
Media, films
It definitely, in the media, is associated directly 
with kind of end-of-life, so that’s always hard. 
(P036c)
Yeah, there was this movie about a woman 
with ovarian cancer and she goes into palliative 
care, yeah. You know, and I think, really, when I 
think of it some of the images that I’ve seen in 
the media have influenced how I feel about 
palliative care. (P004c)
I feel that it’s portrayed [in the media] in a very 
dramatic way. It’s joyless. I think, if done 
properly, it can be an opportunity for a 
tremendous amount of joy. At least that’s my 
goal with [patient]. (C019c)
I think it maybe was just a newspaper article about some 
important person who had passed away. And they just 
mentioned that they died in the palliative care 
department or whatever they call it, of such-and-such a 
hospital. (P016i)
Well, I think in general it’s just from reading generally 
because there’s various places that have palliative care 
units and usually those as far as I know that’s when 
patients are in really in their last stages and can’t be on 
their own anymore and I guess they have to be where the 
medication has to be administered often and regularly 
and maybe they can’t even get up. (P026i)
It’s probably articles I’ve read that people maybe were at 
the end of life and they were in some kind of hospice, 
which was referred to as palliative care. (C046i)
Unsure where
I don’t know where the devil I first heard it. 
(P056c)
I have no idea. I mean I’ve always known about 
palliative care existed. (P037c)
I have a sort of a concept, but where it came 
from I have no idea. (P020c)
It’s just sort of a word that popped up and it’s 
just been there. (C039c)
I just think I knew palliative, I just knew the word 
associated in my mind with care that you would get when 
you were at the end of your life, when you need that 
intense care. I think I just knew that. (P010i)
Well I knew it existed just from hearing about it, I mean, in 
the world. (P025i)
If it’s urban legend or myth or whatever, it’s in my head so 
that’s what I thought. (C044i)
 Research
 
CMAJ, July 12, 2016, 188(10) 
way as “part of the treatment package,” was con-
sidered by participants to be more helpful than rely-
ing on written material. A related theme was that 
palliative care should be renamed if provided early: 
“I think you have to really think about a name that 
would outline what you’re trying to do. You’re not 
trying to help someone in their last days” (P007i). 
None who advocated for a name change offered a 
more suitable name (“Greater minds than mine can 
come up with a snappy little title” [P034i]), but 
when the name “supportive care” was suggested, it 
was met with approval.
Participants in the control group generally saw 
no purpose in renaming or reframing palliative 
care but also did not find it relevant to their own 
situation. They were unaware of the concept of 
Table 4: Representative quotations about initial reactions to palliative care
Theme
Control group
Intervention group
Shock and 
fear
I don’t know, because it’s a bit of a surprise to hear 
that related to you, so it’s sort of a jolt, a wake-up. 
(P041c)
It would be like you’re sitting here and someone says, 
“Your house burned down!” Like, what does that 
mean? (P004c)
I said, “No, no, I’ll fight it. I’m not going to go for this 
palliative care.” It scared me, it did scare me. (P052c)
To us at least, it was a bit of a shock. ... we had a 
preconceived idea of what it was, which was clearly 
wrong. (P013i)
I was very surprised when ... I thought, “Oh my God! I’m 
sicker than I thought.” (P031i)
The word is extremely frightening because it’s like we 
can’t do anything for you. We’re putting you in palliative 
care. (P025i)
Resistance 
to palliative 
care*
If palliative care is ... “We’ve got to get into some 
palliative care,” I’m going to say, “Whoa.” I hope I 
never hear that. I like to think of it like a candle. You 
burn ... life should be like a candle, burn bright, flicker 
once or twice and go out. That’s what I want to be, a 
candle. (P069c)
That’s one of my, I don’t know if it’s a fault or 
whatever, but my husband used to say I’m an ostrich; I 
put my head in the sand. I don’t deal with it, I’m fine. 
You don’t want to deal with it unless you really have 
to. (P065c)
I’d have to be ... if I were an awful lot worse where I 
thought I was going to be a burden to my family or 
something like that, then I might bring it up. ... Other 
than that, I would do almost anything before I did 
that. (P060c)
I think because we haven’t, we don’t look there, we 
don’t go there, we don’t dwell on the negative part of 
that. I guess, to me, in a way it’s a bit of a negative. 
(C070c)
You’d never get him into palliative care first of all 
[laughter], but I think it would have to be ... I don’t 
know. He would be a difficult case. ... like something 
would have to completely debilitate him before he 
would even consider the option of palliative care. 
(C030c)
It’s like we don’t like it. It’s like that’s about dying, death. 
I’m not doing that, thank you. I think yeah, that would 
be my initial response to it. (P066i)*†
Well, I knew that palliative care was out there someplace, 
but obviously it was something that I was trying to avoid. 
[Oncologist] was good enough to be able to say that, 
“Maybe you should think about palliative care in a little 
different way, and this would be useful.” So, it was 
actually the doctor who put the positive spin on it rather 
than the negative consciousness that I had of it. 
(P015i)*†‡
They mentioned palliative care and I went, “No!” You 
know? You know, “I’m not ready for that.” And then, she 
went further to explain that it was — the approach 
wasn’t meant to be, to put them in the end of life care, it 
was just same as me ... study, early intervention. 
(P025i)*†‡
Right away I thought, “This is great, this isn’t what I 
thought it was at all.” It was good. ... They explained it 
right away. Maybe if I had gone away thinking that, “Oh, 
I have to meet up palliative care,” then maybe I would 
have had time to think about it and maybe I would have 
been more nervous about it. But, because they did it 
right away, there was no waiting, big waiting and time 
for you to think up things. (P010i)*‡
“Not 
relevant for 
me”*
Never really thought of it, to tell you the truth, 
because in my head I’m optimistic. (P020c)
I don’t expect to be in that predicament for a long 
time coming yet. It’s very foreign to me. I don’t think 
about it much. (P065c)
No, we never discussed it, but I have no doubt that we 
may one day, we will one day. But, as long as it’s far, 
far away. (P017c)
I think that it’s that I haven’t really been that sick in 
the sense of being debilitated and you know what? I 
don’t even know the stages of cancer. I think I know 
I’m at the top where it’s not operable and all of that 
but it’s not at the stage where like I’m going to leave 
soon. We don’t know and I think maybe because of 
that, nobody has ever really brought it up nor have I 
or maybe partly, because I don’t want to. I don’t 
know. I haven’t thought about it till now. (P037c)
I went, “Well, okay. I’ll help the research,” but thinking 
to myself, “I don’t qualify. It’s not for me.” (P043i)*†
Well that was my initial reaction to it, I thought, 
“palliative care?” Because I always think of it as someone 
in their last, you know, in the last few weeks of life. ... 
But when they started to explain that perhaps it was 
useful, I, as you know, like to talk so the idea of having 
someone to sort of unburden to, I thought that was a 
good idea. So I was very willing to participate. (P031i)*†‡
So, that’s how I was introduced to palliative care. ... It was 
presented to me primarily as a method, a sourcing of 
pain control and the pain I had been experiencing in my 
ribs was significant enough that while I could live with it, 
it was fatiguing. (P024i)*‡
*For these themes, intervention group quotations include both †examples of initial reactions and ‡examples of how these reactions were mitigated by 
explanations from their treating oncologist or from members of the research team who introduced the trial.
 Research
E224 
CMAJ, July 12, 2016, 188(10) 
early palliative care, equated palliative care with 
end-of-life care, thought that renaming palliative 
care would be euphemistic and found the name 
“supportive care” too vague. In the intervention 
group, this opinion was less common, held by 
caregivers or older patients with a pragmatic, 
“realistic” attitude to end-of-life care: “Well, I’ll 
be 80 in June and I feel that if I haven’t thought 
about dying at this stage I’d better smarten up a 
bit” (P028i).
Table 5: Representative quotations about perceptions after receiving early palliative care
Theme
Intervention group
More 
comfortable 
attitude 
toward 
palliative care
I certainly don’t now see it as I’m in the final box or the chamber. He’s [palliative care physician] given me some 
hope, which is wonderful. I mean, I’m not hopeful or have any (or maybe way deep, deep down inside) wishes 
that things would be different, but I think he’s given me some alternatives. (P045i)
I think the more you know about something, the less scary or the less worrying. You’re more comfortable. I 
think the more contact that we have with people like [palliative care team], it’s just, it’s more normal. ... Our 
“normal” now includes coming to the hospital; he goes and gets his CT scans, he goes to oncology, he also goes 
and sees [palliative care physician] and palliative care. That’s the norm. It’s just a part of what happens when 
you go to [the hospital]. (C046i)
Yeah, I think it has given me confidence that hey, these guys really care. ... Yeah, things are going to be okay. 
Yeah. I don’t know what more I can say. Yeah, it’s given me confidence. (P023i)
Well, my first reaction, as I say, to the word is, “Oh my God.” But when I realized that I really wasn’t going to die 
in 2 or 3 weeks and so this was something that was very, very helpful. So I, I could see the benefit to it and so 
then I sort of changed my attitude to palliative care. (P031i)
Broadened 
definition of 
palliative care
I think the same thing as everyone else, “Oh, palliative care, I must be at the end.” But, I’ve come to learn that’s 
not the case — it’s an ongoing care and I’m very grateful to have it when I am feeling well and feeling strong 
and able to do things. (P010i)
Yeah, that, in fact, it’s not just end-of-life it’s the whole symptom management, potentially through the whole 
... through all phases it is available, and I didn’t know that. (P001i)
I see that it now comes on in an earlier stage of my treatment. ... Earlier stage, rather than palliative care as in 
when they’re no longer treating you. So this is palliative care while they’re still treating you. (P008i)
Because that’s right; it’s about the quality of living. And what you can do to help with that quality of living. ... 
And if anyone mentioned it, if anyone said, “It’s just about dying,” I would know now to say, “No. Palliative care 
is not dying. It’s living. It’s living the best you can with what ... the issues you’re dealing with, sort of.” Yeah. So I 
learned. (C003i)
Team useful 
but name 
problematic
It’s just one of those ... it’s like anybody who has been raised with certain values or beliefs. Palliative care, in my 
mind, has always been final stages. Now I know intellectually, rationally, palliative care is not final stages, but 
emotionally I still carry that term as, perhaps a slightly fearful term. (P024i)
[My impression has changed] of what the team does, yes, but not what palliative care is. What the team does, 
yes, and that’s why they should change the name. [laughter] (P043i)
Avoiding the 
term “palliative 
care”
I don’t think I even refer to it as palliative care. That palliative word, not liking it, still not liking it, still haven’t 
adjusted to it. I just say I’m seeing [palliative care physician]. I see so many doctors there. They’re like, “Okay, 
that’s nice. Are you okay, relatively speaking?” It’s like yeah. I don’t even refer ... I don’t use that palliative word 
— the P word. (P066i)
Well, I think just in my own head, just to make me feel more comfortable, I referred to her as my “medication 
specialist” as opposed to my “palliative care doctor” versus my “oncologist,” right? ... [To others] I say that I’m 
seeing my “medication specialist.” Sometimes if they ask a little more, then I will say that she is actually in the 
palliative care department but they branch out a little bit and they deal with people like me. ... Why? Because if 
I told people I was seeing a palliative care doctor, they would think I was going to die in a few weeks or months. 
(P040i)
I mean, I would feel much more comfortable saying I’m going to the pain-control clinic. I say, “Oh, well, that’s 
cool.” You got pain, you get treatment for the pain. ... I’m trying to kid myself into saying, “You’re not really in 
palliative care. You’re just doing pain control, which is cool.” That’s kind of a deception that when the day is 
done I say you’re in palliative care, that’s exactly what palliative care means. (P024i)
I don’t tell people I’m seeing somebody in palliative care. I just, I say, “Oh one of the doctors at [hospital] told 
me this or that” or “Oh, one of your team doctors?” “Yeah, yeah, one of the team doctors.” I don’t ... I don’t 
talk about it. ... They may just get so scared they walk away and so it’s best not to say anything. (P022i)
I’ve never mentioned to any of my friends that I’m in palliative care. I think they’d go into shock. Or to the 
family. I think, to the best of my knowledge, they all have the same understanding that I had. (P013i)
The care I 
received is not 
palliative care
I don’t think I’ve had palliative care yet, because I’m not on my last legs, not by any stretch of the imagination. 
(P007i)
Palliative care [is] not, to me, sort of what we’ve had, because we’ve really, we’re so into the early part of it. 
(C061i)
Somehow, it still doesn’t really change my feeling about palliative care because I think she [palliative care 
physician] gave me wonderful care. Somehow I can’t equate what I experienced with her as palliative. (P040i)
Note: CT = computed tomography.
 Research
 
CMAJ, July 12, 2016, 188(10) 
Interpretation
In this study, patients with advanced cancer and 
their caregivers described palliative care as car-
rying a negative stigma associated with death 
and with care at the very end of life, which pro-
voked fear and avoidance. Participants’ percep-
tions often originated from interactions with 
health care professionals. During the trial, those 
in the intervention arm developed a broader, 
positive conception of palliative care but still 
felt that the term itself carried a stigma. Partici-
pants in the intervention group emphasized the 
need for palliative care to be reframed and better 
explained by health care professionals. Partici-
pants in the control group generally considered 
it pointless to rename palliative care, but many 
in the intervention group stated emphatically 
that a different name was necessary in the early 
outpatient setting.
Previous surveys have described attitudes to 
palliative care of the public and of health care 
workers. A recent survey of 1000 American adults 
documented that only 24% were familiar with the 
term palliative care, whereas 86% were familiar 
with the term hospice care.26 In a qualitative study 
in Northern Ireland involving 50 members of a 
group reporting on health and social care issues, 
palliative care was conceptualized mainly as termi-
nal care.27 Other surveys have solicited opinions of 
Table 6: Representative quotations about renaming or reframing palliative care
Theme
Control group
Intervention group
No point in 
renaming
It’s kind of not one of my favourite words. ... It’s like a 
janitor’s a janitor instead of a, what do they call it? 
Maintenance engineers. You can change the name, 
but it’s still the same topic, same influence. (P062c)
What are they going to call it, a hula dance? 
[laughter] It’s as good as anything, what the heck. ... 
That’s what it is. An operation is still an operation. I 
don’t care what you call it. Same with this, this is a 
progression toward death and that’s all there is to it. 
(P056c)
For example if you changed palliative to another 
name, the same name is going to have a stigma like 
palliative. Even if you change it to something that is a 
very nice name ..., it’s still not going to change people 
from thinking because once they’re into that thing of 
taking the medicines or whatever, the name doesn’t 
matter. (P052c)
What is it by any other name? Be realistic. (P023i)
It doesn’t make any difference to me. “Palliative care” I 
think in the general population means death. “Supportive 
care” would mean different at the beginning, but would 
turn into that. (C055i)
I don’t know what else you could call it. No matter what 
you call it, it’s not an easy topic to discuss and it’s not an 
easy thing to go through, so I don’t think the name really 
has that much effect. (C071i)
Because I think I can be realistic and that is the end. We 
are all going to die. I think it’s more difficult for others to 
accept that. (C068i)
What’s another word to give it that’s going to have that 
meaning? Palliative care is end of life care. (P025i)
Intervention group
Palliative 
care should 
be renamed
Palliative care to me, it stigmatizes a little bit. “You’re here because you’re going to die,” and that’s not why you’re 
here necessarily. It’s that, plus, but you may not so there are some other things that we can do for you. It’s other 
things that don’t come out in the name, palliative care. I think it needs to be broadened because I think the work 
[palliative care] do is broader than that. (P043i)
When a person is dying and is receiving palliative care, I think it’s appropriate to have that name attached to the 
kind of care that they’re being given. But when they’re not dying, maybe you need another name. (P040i)
I think it’s, it’s imprinted in my mind that palliative care is people dying. And I think it would be hard to shake that 
because I think that’s what most people — you’re going to find, you know. ... Yeah, I think you have to change the 
name to — for this part of the study — for people to change their perception. (P031i)
I think you have to really think about a name that would outline what you’re actually trying to do. You’re not trying 
to help somebody in their last days. (P007i)
Reframing 
palliative 
care
I don’t know how you do it, but if somehow the medical profession could explain to the public better what 
palliative care is, it takes some of the fear and the stigma away from it, the negative stigma away from it, that it 
isn’t necessarily the last 3 weeks of your life kind of thing, when you’re doped up and don’t know anyone’s around. 
If it could be better explained, I think it would take a lot of the fear and shock away, certainly from my generation. 
Now, maybe younger people — although I’ve never heard my kids say anything different. (P013i)
I would prefer actually the oncologist speaking to me one-on-one about it where they could sit down and say, 
“Don’t get me wrong. This is not because you’re dying tomorrow or in the near future but it will help you cope 
through the stages that you will go through.” ... so, I would rather have a relatively experienced, educated 
oncologist, educated on palliative care say to me, “Maybe you should try this!” (P033i)
It has to have this notion that it’s going to be help ... and the help that it’s going to give you is probably going to be 
able to help you live longer. You’re still going to die in the process somewhere along the line, but there has to be 
some kind of a more ... a way of being able to describe palliative care as something that is there to be able to help 
you to continue living as long as you possibly can. (P015i)
But I think maybe we should have ... and as I’ve told you ... I think, a kiosk or something downstairs or a little office, 
“Symptom management palliative care for anybody.” I don’t know, make it less traumatic. (P022i)
 Research
E226 
CMAJ, July 12, 2016, 188(10) 
physicians and nurses, who tended to associate 
palliative care with terminal care,10,12 voiced con-
fusion about the role of specialized palliative 
care,10,12 and felt the term palliative care decreased 
hope and caused distress in patients and families.8 
Our study contributes the important perspective of 
patients and their caregivers, including those who 
received early palliative care.
There may be several reasons for the confusion 
surrounding the term palliative care. Palliative care 
has evolved relatively quickly from an initial mis-
sion centred on terminal cancer care28 to one urg-
ing that “the principles of palliative care should be 
applied as early as possible in the course of any 
chronic, ultimately fatal illness.”29 The 1990 WHO 
definition of palliative care that stressed its rele-
vance for “patients whose disease is not responsive 
to curative treatment”30 was changed in 2002 to 
underscore improvement in quality of life, preven-
tion as well as relief of suffering, and early proac-
tive intervention.2 However, definitions of pallia-
tive care are inconsistent, even to some extent 
within the palliative care literature and among pal-
liative care organizations.31,32 Among referring 
physicians there is variable awareness or accep-
tance of the new broadened definition of palliative 
care, with many continuing to equate palliative 
care with end-of-life care.8,11,12 In our study, partic-
ipants’ perceptions of palliative care were derived 
in large part from contact with the medical system. 
It is therefore important that physicians and other 
health care professionals are familiar with the 
broadened definition of palliative care and are able 
to explain it to their patients.
The stigma associated with palliative care 
relates to a larger societal stigma associated with 
death;33 however, patients and their caregivers 
were generally able to speak openly about the ter-
minal nature of their disease or that of their loved 
one. They understood that the cancer was incur-
able, but there was variability and mixed emotion 
in their coming to terms with this. Most patients 
were still receiving cancer treatment and hoped 
that this could forestall death. In this transitional 
stage of illness,34 many did not feel ready for the 
term palliative — which in their minds was associ-
ated with being bedridden with weeks to live — to 
be applied to them or their loved ones.
Rebranding and renaming palliative care were 
proposed by participants in the intervention group 
as ways to address the discordance between the 
early palliative care they had received and their 
persistent association of the term palliative care 
with end-of-life care. Similar results have been 
reported in surveys where participants were ran-
domly assigned to different program names and 
descriptions to rate their impressions. In these 
studies, participants responded more favourably to 
a program called “supportive care,” rather than 
“palliative care,” regardless of the description of 
that service.9,15 At least 1 oncology palliative care 
service reported earlier outpatient referrals after 
such a name change,35 although oncologists did 
not perceive that they had changed their referral 
practices.36
Strengths and limitations
Strengths of our study include the large qualita-
tive sample and the inclusion of both patients 
and caregivers. Owing to the cluster random-
ized design, with masking of groups to each 
other’s existence, we were able to obtain opin-
ions of both those who had experienced an 
early palliative care intervention and of those 
who had no knowledge of this intervention.
Limitations of this qualitative study relate pri-
marily to generalizability.25 The study took place 
at a single centre with an established palliative 
care clinic.37 Similar to the larger trial,5 partici-
pants were highly educated; this was particularly 
the case for participants in the intervention group. 
Almost all patients were of European back-
ground. Despite purposeful sampling, women 
were overrepresented in the intervention group 
for patients and in the control group for caregiv-
ers. The participants interviewed may have had 
more favourable attitudes to palliative care than 
others receiving care for advanced cancer. 
Indeed, there were 7 patients in the original trial5 
and 7 in this qualitative study who declined par-
ticipation because of the palliative care content of 
the intervention or interview. 
Conclusion
Patients and their caregivers in both trial groups 
perceived palliative care to have a negative and 
frightening association with death, hopelessness 
and dependency. Although this perception 
changed for participants in the intervention group, 
many continued to feel a stigma associated with 
the term palliative care and felt that rebranding or 
renaming palliative care could be helpful.
Our findings have important implications for 
practice and policy. They show the persistence of 
the definition of palliative care as end-of-life care 
in the minds of patients and their caregivers, 
despite an international change in that definition 
more than a decade ago. A name change may be 
considered, but would achieve nothing without a 
fundamental shift in the manner in which palliative 
care is practised and portrayed. Physicians should 
be aware that the manner in which they communi-
cate information about palliative care affects per-
ceptions of its meaning and decision-making about 
receiving such care. From a policy perspective, it 
is evident that broad-based education is necessary 
 Research
 
CMAJ, July 12, 2016, 188(10) 
to ensure a more widespread understanding of 
what palliative care represents and entails. 
References
 1. Kelley AS, Morrison RS. Palliative care for the seriously ill. 
N Engl J Med 2015;373:747-55.
 2. WHO definition of palliative care. Geneva: World Health Orga-
nization; 2002. Available: www.who.int/cancer/palliative/ 
definition/en (accessed 2015 Sept. 23).
 3. Temel JS, Greer JA, Muzikansky A, et al. Early palliative care 
for patients with metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl 
J Med 2010;363:733-42.
 4. Bakitas M, Lyons KD, Hegel MT, et al. Effects of a palliative 
care intervention on clinical outcomes in patients with 
advanced cancer: the Project ENABLE II randomized con-
trolled trial. JAMA 2009;302:741-9.
 5. Zimmermann C, Swami N, Krzyzanowska M, et al. Early palli-
ative care for patients with advanced cancer: a cluster-random-
ized controlled trial. Lancet 2014;383:1721-30.
 6. Wentlandt K, Krzyzanowska MK, Swami N, et al. Referral 
practices of oncologists to specialized palliative care. J Clin 
Oncol 2012;30:4380-6.
 7. Hui D, Kim SH, Kwon JH, et al. Access to palliative care 
among patients treated at a comprehensive cancer center. 
Oncologist 2012;17:1574-80.
 8. Fadul N, Elsayem A, Palmer JL, et al. Supportive versus pallia-
tive care: What’s in a name?: a survey of medical oncologists 
and midlevel providers at a comprehensive cancer center. Can-
cer 2009;115:2013-21.
 9. Maciasz RM, Arnold RM, Chu E, et al. Does it matter what 
you call it? A randomized trial of language used to describe 
palliative care services. Support Care Cancer 2013;21:3411-9.
10. Weil J, Weiland TJ, Lane HCH, et al. What’s in a name? A qual-
itative exploration of what is understood by “palliative care” in 
the emergency department. Palliat Med 2015;29:293-301. 
11. LeBlanc TW, O’Donnell JD, Crowley-Matoka M, et al. Percep-
tions of palliative care among hematologic malignancy specialists: 
a mixed-methods study. J Oncol Pract 2015;11:e230-8.
12. Hanratty B, Hibbert D, Mair F, et al. Doctors’ understanding of 
palliative care. Palliat Med 2006;20:493-7.
13. Ciemins EL, Brant J, Kersten D, et al. A qualitative analysis of 
patient and family perspectives of palliative care. J Palliat Med 
2015;18:282-5.
14 
Jarrett N, Porter K, Davis C, et al. Palliative care patients’ per-
ceptions of the work involved in understanding and managing 
the network of care provision surrounding them. BMJ Support 
Palliat Care 2015 Mar. 31 [Epub ahead of print].
15. Morstad Boldt A, Yusuf F, Himelstein BP. Perceptions of the 
term palliative care. J Palliat Med 2006;9:1128-36.
16. Milne D, Aranda S, Jefford M, et al. Development and valida-
tion of a measurement tool to assess perceptions of palliative 
care. Psychooncology 2013;22:940-6.
17. Oken MM, Creech RH, Tormey DC, et al. Toxicity and 
response criteria of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. 
Am J Clin Oncol 1982;5:649-55.
18. Katzman R, Brown T, Fuld P, et al. Validation of a short 
Orientation-Memory-Concentration Test of cognitive impair-
ment. Am J Psychiatry 1983;140:734-9.
19. Rubin HJ, Rubin IS. Choosing interviewees and judging what 
they say: more issues in design for qualitative research. In: 
Qualitative interviewing: the art of hearing data. Thousand 
Oaks (CA): Sage; 1995:65-92.
20. Glaser BG, Strauss AL. The discovery of grounded theory: strat-
egies for qualitative research. New York: Aldine de Gruyter; 
1967.
21. Corbin J, Strauss A. Basics of qualitative research: techniques and 
procedures for developing grounded theory. 3rd ed. Thousand 
Oaks (CA): Sage; 2008.
22. Charmaz K. Constructing grounded theory: a practical guide 
through qualitative analysis. London (UK): Sage; 2006.
23. Creswell JW. Qualitative inquiry and research design: choosing 
among five approaches. 3rd ed. Los Angeles: Sage; 2012.
24. Hall WA, Callery P. Enhancing the rigor of grounded theory: 
incorporating reflexivity and relationality. Qual Health Res 2001; 
11:257-72.
25. Maxwell JA. Validity. In: Qualitative research design: an inter-
active approach. Thousand Oaks (CA): Sage; 1996:86-98.
26. Living well at the end of life: a national conversation. The 
Regence Foundation; 2011. Available: http:\\syndication.
national 
journal.com/communications/NationalJournalRegence 
Toplines 
.pdf (accessed 2015 Sept. 23).
27. McIlfatrick S, Noble H, McCorry NK, et al. Exploring public 
awareness and perceptions of palliative care: a qualitative 
study. Palliat Med 2014;28:273-80.
28. Saunders C. The moment of truth: care of the dying person. In: 
Pearson L, editor. Death and dying: current issues in the treat-
ment of the dying person. Cleveland: Case Western Reserve 
University Press; 1969:49-78.
29. Sepúlveda C, Marlin A, Yoshida T, et al. Palliative care: the 
World Health Organization’s global perspective. J Pain Symp-
tom Manage 2002;24:91-6.
30. Cancer pain relief and palliative care. Report of a WHO Expert 
Committee. Geneva: World Health Organization; 1990. Technical 
Report Series, No. 804.
31. Pastrana T, Junger S, Ostgathe C, et al. A matter of definition 
— key elements identified in a discourse analysis of definitions 
of palliative care. Palliat Med 2008;22:222-32.
32. Hui D, Mori M, Parsons HA, et al. The lack of standard defini-
tions in the supportive and palliative oncology literature. 
J Pain Symptom Manage 2012;43:582-92.
33. Zimmermann C, Rodin G. The denial of death thesis: sociologi-
cal critique and implications for palliative care. Palliat Med 
2004;18:121-8.
34. Adorno G. Between two worlds: liminality and late-stage can-
cer-directed therapy. Omega (Westport) 2015;71:99-125.
35. Dalal S, Palla S, Hui D, et al. Association between a name 
change from palliative to supportive care and the timing of 
patient referrals at a comprehensive cancer center. Oncologist 
2011;16:105-11.
36. Rhondali W, Burt S, Wittenberg-Lyles E, et al. Medical oncolo-
gists’ perception of palliative care programs and the impact of 
name change to supportive care on communication with patients 
during the referral process. A qualitative study. Palliat Support 
Care 2013;11:397-404.
37. Hannon B, Swami N, Pope A, et al. The oncology palliative 
care clinic at the Princess Margaret Cancer Centre: an early 
intervention model for patients with advanced cancer. Support 
Care Cancer 2015;23:1073-80.
Affiliations: Division of Medical Oncology (Zimmermann, 
Krzyzanowska, Leighl, Tannock, Hannon), Department of 
Medicine, Department of Psychiatry (Zimmermann, Rodin), 
University of Toronto; Department of Supportive Care (Zim-
mermann, Swami, Rydall, Rodin, Hannon), Department of 
Medical Oncology (Krzyzanowska, Tannock), The Campbell 
Family Cancer Research Institute (Zimmermann, Rodin, Tan-
nock), Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health 
Network, Toronto, Ont.
Contributors: All of the authors contributed to the conception 
and design of the study. Nadia Swami conducted and supervised 
qualitative interviews. Camilla Zimmermann, Nadia Swami and 
Breffni Hannon contributed to the qualitative analysis of the 
data. All of the authors contributed to the interpretation of data. 
Camilla Zimmermann drafted the article, which all of the 
authors revised. All of the authors gave final approval of the ver-
sion to be published and agreed to act as guarantors of the work. 
Funding: This research was funded by the Canadian Cancer 
Society (grants 017257 and 020509 to Camilla Zimmermann) 
and by the Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care. 
Camilla Zimmermann is supported by the Rose Family Chair 
in Supportive Care, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Toronto. The views expressed in the study do not necessarily 
represent those of the sponsors, and the sponsors had no role in 
the design or conduct of the study; collection, management, 
analysis or interpretation of the data; preparation, review or 
approval of the manuscript; or in the decision to submit the 
article for publication.
Acknowledgements: The authors extend their sincere thanks to 
the patients and caregivers who participated in this study. The 
authors are grateful to the medical oncologists who referred 
patients to the trial and to the clinical and administrative staff of 
the palliative care team at the Princess Margaret Cancer Centre. 
Special thanks to Debika Burman, Nanor Kevork and Ashley 
Pope (Department of Supportive Care, Princess Margaret Can-
cer Centre) for their assistance with preparation of study materi-
als, recruitment of patients, assistance with conduct and analysis 
of qualitative interviews, and data entry and preparation.
