 Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine
Enhanced Immunosuppression of T Cells by Sustained
Presentation of Bioactive Interferon-g Within Three-
Dimensional Mesenchymal Stem Cell Constructs
JOSHUA A. ZIMMERMANN,a,b MARIAN H. HETTIARATCHI,a TODD C. MCDEVITTb,c
Key Words. Mesenchymal stromal cells x Immunomodulation x Spheroids x Cellular x
Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase
ABSTRACT
The immunomodulatory activity of mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) to suppress innate and
adaptive immune responses offers a potent cell therapy for modulating inflammation and promoting
tissue regeneration. However, the inflammatory cytokine milieu plays a critical role in stimulating
MSC immunomodulatory activity. In particular, interferon-g (IFN-g)-induced expression of indole-
amine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) is primarily responsible for MSC suppression of T-cell proliferation
and activation. Although pretreatment with IFN-g is commonly used to prime MSCs for immunomod-
ulatory activity prior to transplantation, the transient effects of pretreatment may limit the potential
of MSCs to potently modulate immune responses. Therefore, the objective of this study was to inves-
tigate whether microparticle-mediated presentation of bioactive IFN-g within three-dimensional
spheroidal MSC aggregates could precisely regulate and induce sustained immunomodulatory activ-
ity.DeliveryofIFN-g viaheparin-microparticleswithinMSCaggregatesinducedsustainedIDOexpres-
sion during 1 week of culture, whereas IDO expression by IFN-g-pretreated MSC spheroids rapidly
decreased during 2 days. Furthermore, sustained IDO expression induced by IFN-g-loaded micropar-
ticles resulted in an increased and sustained suppression of T-cell activation and proliferation in MSC
cocultures with CD3/CD28-activated peripheral blood mononuclear cells. The increased suppression
of T cells by MSC spheroids containing IFN-g-loaded microparticles was dependent on induction of
IDO and supported by affecting monocyte secretion from pro- to anti-inflammatory cytokines. Alto-
gether, microparticle delivery of IFN-g within MSC spheroids provides a potent means of enhancing
and sustaining immunomodulatory activity to control MSC immunomodulation after transplantation
and thereby improve the efficacy of MSC-based therapies aimed at treating inflammatory and im-
mune diseases. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2016;5:1–15
SIGNIFICANCE
This study demonstrates that biomaterial-based presentation of cytokines within spheroidal mesen-
chymal stem/stromal cell (MSC) aggregates provides a means of locally concentrating and sustaining
presentation of cytokines to potentiate MSC immunomodulatory activity. Overall, this approach
could aid in overcoming the limitations of transient pretreatment strategies by continuously present-
ing cytokines within the MSC microenvironment and thereby maximizing the immunomodulatory
potential of transplanted MSCs. Furthermore, this approach provides a means of inducing potent
MSCimmunomodulation, irrespective of unknown orill-definedenvironmental inflammatory milieu,
such as in chronic inflammation or when administered with immunosuppressants. Altogether,
biomaterial-based engineering of the MSC microenvironment provides a means of controlling the
function of transplanted cells to specifically direct their therapeutic activity and may improve
MSC-based therapies aimed at treating a number of inflammatory and immune diseases.
INTRODUCTION
Mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) are po-
tent modulators of inflammatory and immune re-
sponses because of their ability to secrete soluble
paracrine factors that regulate both innate and
adaptiveimmunityand repolarizecellsfrom proin-
flammatory to anti-inflammatory or proresolving
phenotypes. Initial work first demonstrated that
MSCs potently inhibit T-cell proliferation and acti-
vation upon T-cell receptor stimulation in vitro [1,
2]. These initial observations motivated the use of
MSCsasapotentialtherapeuticagentininflamma-
tory and immune diseases dominated by a patho-
genic T-cell response and spurred research to
better understand the interactions of MSCs and
aThe Wallace H. Coulter
Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Georgia
Institute of Technology &
Emory University, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA; bGladstone
Institute of Cardiovascular
Disease, San Francisco,
California, USA; cDepartment
of Bioengineering and
Therapeutic Sciences,
University of California–San
Francisco, San Francisco,
California, USA
Correspondence: Todd C.
McDevitt, Ph.D., 1650 Owens
Street, San Francisco, California
94158, USA. Telephone: 415-734-
2875; E-Mail: todd.mcdevitt@
gladstone.ucsf.edu
Received January 25, 2016;
accepted for publication June 16,
2016.
©AlphaMed Press
1066-5099/2016/$20.00/0
http://dx.doi.org/
10.5966/sctm.2016-0044
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2016;5:1–15 www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
TISSUE ENGINEERING AND REGENERATIVE MEDICINE
This is an open access article
under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License,
which permits use, distribution
and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original work is
properly cited.
2017;6:223–237
Received January 25, 2016;
accepted for publication June 16,
2016; published Online First on
August 8, 2016.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT
Correspondence: Todd C.
McDevitt, Ph.D., 1650 Owens
Street, San Francisco, California
94158, USA.Telephone: 415-734-
2875; e-mail: todd.mcdevitt@
gladstone.ucsf.edu
ID: jw3b2server3dgen1
Time: 13:08
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00601/160072/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM160072
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2017;6:223–237 www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 the immune system. Since then, MSCs have been demonstrated
to regulate numerous leukocyte populations, including T cells,
B cells [3], macrophages [4], dendritic cells [5], and natural killer
cells [6]. Moreover, this ability of MSCs to modulate multiple
components that contribute to the complexity of an immune re-
sponse further motivated the use of MSCs to treat diseases such
as graft-versus-host disease, inflammatory bowel disease, and
autoimmune disorders [7]. However, the ability of MSCs to sup-
press T-cell activation and alter T-cell polarization has remained
the primary focus of much of MSC immunomodulatory research,
and the soluble signals and pathways governing the interaction
between MSCs and T cells are well characterized in comparison
with other leukocyte populations.
Multiple paracrine and immunomodulatory factors play a
role in MSC-mediated suppression of T-cell proliferation and
activation, including indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), pros-
taglandin E2 (PGE2), transforming growth factor b 1 (TGF-b1),
human leukocyte antigen-G5, heme oxygenase 1, CC che-
mokine ligand 2, Fas ligand (FasL), and programmed death
ligand 1 and 2 (PDL1 and PDL2) [8–16]. Furthermore, the inhi-
bition of individual MSC-expressed factors significantly re-
duces the potency of MSC immunomodulation in vitro and
in vivo, suggesting that the coordinated action of the immuno-
modulatory secretome of MSCs is necessary to regulate com-
plex immune responses. However, the expression of IDO is
critically necessary for MSC suppression of T-cell proliferation,
and the variable amounts of IDO expression between MSC do-
nors are strongly correlated with the ability to suppress T-cell
responses [17, 18]. IDO inhibits proliferation of T cells through
tryptophan depletion [19], and the production of kynurenine,
a tryptophan metabolite, that suppresses T-cell proliferation
through activation of the stress response kinase GCN2 [20, 21].
Additionally, IDO expression induces na¨
ıve CD4+CD252 T-cell
maturation into CD4+CD25+FOXP3+ regulatory T cells [22] and
aids in the induction of immune tolerance [23]. Although
IDO is not constitutively expressed by resting MSCs, its expres-
sion is strongly induced by exposure of MSCs to interferon-g
(IFN-g). IFN-g licensing alone or in combination with other cyto-
kines (tumor necrosis factor [TNF]-a, interleukin [IL]-1b) is crucial
for MSC immunomodulatory activity. Thus, MSC immunomodu-
lation is highly dependent on the local inflammatory milieu to ac-
tivate IDO and cytokine expression.
Because of the dependency of MSC immunomodulation on
the local cytokine milieu, the efficacy of MSC-based cellular
therapies is highly dependent on the in vivo environment that
they are exposed to after injection. The environment may be
highly variable on the basis of the individual and disease being
treated, the stage of inflammation, and the site of MSC trans-
plantation. For example, high concentrations of inflammatory
cytokines that often accompany acute inflammatory re-
sponses stimulate MSC immunomodulation [24]. However,
the low levels of cytokines observed in chronic inflammation
may not be sufficient to induce MSC immunomodulatory ac-
tivity, thereby limiting the ability of MSCs to regulate inflam-
mation of certain disease states. Additionally, MSCs are
typically infused intravenously, and the majority of cells are
entrapped within the capillary beds of the lung tissue, distant
from sites of inflammation [25]. Entrapped MSCs are then rap-
idly cleared from the body within several days, limiting their
residency time and effective window for immunomodulatory
activity. Interestingly, the physical entrapment of MSCs in the
lung causes the formation of aggregates of MSCs within the
lung tissue, which results in upregulation of immunomodu-
latory factors such as PGE2 and TNF-stimulated gene 6, even
in the absence of any cytokine priming [26–28]. Although
i.v.-infused MSCs are capable of modulating immune responses
in numerous disease models and human patients, presumably
through systemic effects of MSCs entrapped within the lung,
the limited retention time and lack of exposure to local inflam-
mation may limit the overall immunomodulatory efficacy of
transplanted MSCs.
To overcome these limitations, the use of local transplanta-
tion of MSCs as preformed aggregates may improve retention of
the cells at the site of interest, expose MSCs to the local inflam-
matory environment, and promote increased expression of im-
munomodulatory factors. Delivery of MSCs as aggregates is
thought to preserve cell-cell and cell-matrix contacts within
the aggregate structures, thereby preventing cell loss due to
anoikis and resulting in better engraftment in host tissue [29,
30]. Although systemic infusion of aggregates would not be pos-
sible because of the likelihood of occluding blood vessels, local
transplantation through a larger bore needle is feasible and may
be beneficial in concentrating MSC factors at sites of inflam-
mation as well as exposing MSCs to the local inflamma-
tory cytokine milieu. As a potentially complementary strategy
to enhance immunomodulation, MSCs are commonly pre-
treated with inflammatory cytokines, such as IFN-g, prior
to intravenous infusion to augment their immunomodula-
tory activity during their minimal residence time after trans-
plantation. IFN-g2pretreated MSCs have exhibited improved
resolution of inflammation in models of colitis [31] and graft-
versus-host disease [32], in comparison with untreated MSCs.
Furthermore, pretreatment of MSC aggregates with IFN-g
and TNF-a further increases the immunomodulatory activ-
ity of MSC spheroids [33]. However, despite the enhance-
ment of MSC immunomodulation, the transient effects of
pretreatment of MSCs may limit the potential of MSC spher-
oids to modulate immune responses for more than a few
days in environments that do not expose the cells to high
concentrations of IFN-g, such as in chronic inflammatory
states.
To address the transient effects of pretreatment, we hypoth-
esized that biomaterial-based presentation of cytokines within
spheroidal MSC aggregates may provide a means of locally con-
centrating and sustaining presentation of bioactive IFN-g to po-
tentiate MSC immunomodulatory activity. Previous work from
our group has demonstrated the use of microparticles (MPs) to
deliver growth factors and small molecules throughout stem cell
aggregates [34–37]. Furthermore, microparticles consisting of
cross-linked heparin have previously been fabricated and are ca-
pable of binding a large amount of heparin binding growth factors
that remain bioactive when immobilized to the particles [38]. Be-
cause heparin has a high affinity for IFN-g (KD= 1–5 nM) [39, 40],
can prevent proteolytic degradation of IFN-g [41], and can en-
hance IFN-g signaling [42], heparin microparticles were used to
deliver IFN-g within MSC spheroids in these studies. The ability
of microparticle-delivered IFN-g to induce sustained immuno-
modulatory activity was evaluated by measuring IDO expression
of MSCs in response to microparticles and pretreatment and by
assessing suppression of T-cell activation and proliferation in pe-
ripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) cocultures. Altogether,
this strategy offers a translatable means of controlling MSC
2
Engineered MSC Constructs
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
ID: jw3b2server3dgen1
Time: 13:08
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00601/160072/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM160072
224
Engineered MSC Constructs
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 paracrine activity posttransplantation and therefore improve
the efficacy of MSC-based treatment strategies for inflamma-
tory and immune diseases.
METHODS
Heparin Microparticle Synthesis
Heparin methacrylamide microparticles were fabricated, as has
been previously described [38]. Briefly, heparin methacrylamide
was synthesized from heparin ammonium salt derived from
porcine intestinal mucosa (17–19 kDa; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis,
MO, https://www.sigmaaldrich.com) and N-(3-aminopropyl)
methacrylamide (APMAm; Polysciences, Warrington, PA, http://
www.polysciences.com/) using 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)
carbodiimide (EDC; Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, https://www.
thermofisher.com) and N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide (Sulfo-NHS;
ThermoScientific)[43].Heparinammoniumsalt(325mg)wasdis-
solved in distilled water (200 ml) with a 10-fold molar excess of
EDC, sulfo-NHS, and APMAm in relation to the heparin carboxyl
groups. The reaction was allowed to proceed for 5 hours at room
temperature and pH 6.5, before being dialyzed against 2 liters
of water using 3.5 kDa molecular weight cutoff dialysis tub-
ing (Spectrum Laboratories, Rancho Dominguez, CA, http://www.
spectrumlabs.com) for 48 hours to remove excess reactants; dial-
ysiswater wasexchangedduring 12 hours.Theremaining heparin
solution was then lyophilized for 4 days and stored at 220°C.
To fabricate heparin microparticles, a water-in-oil emulsion
techniquewasusedtogeneratesmalldropletsofheparinsolution
that were subsequently stabilized by thermal cross-linking of the
methacrylamide groups on the heparin species. We dissolved
55.6 mg of lyophilized heparin methacrylamide in 400 ml of
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; Corning Mediatech, Manassas,
VA, https://www.corning.com), supplemented with 18 mM of
the free radical initiators ammonium persulfate (Sigma Aldrich)
andtetramethylethylenediamine (SigmaAldrich).Theheparinso-
lution was added dropwise to 60 ml of corn oil and 1 ml of
polysorbate-20 (Promega, Madison, WI, http://www.promega.
com/). To form an emulsion, we homogenized the entire solution
on ice at 3,000 rpm for 5 minutes by using a Polytron PT31000
homogenizer (Kinematica, Luzerne, Switzerland, http://www.
kinematica.ch/). After homogenization, free radical polymeriza-
tion of the methacrylamide groups was initiated by submerging
the emulsion in a hot water bath (55°C) with gentle agitation un-
dernitrogenpurging for30minutes. Thesolutionwasthencentri-
fuged at 3,000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4°C to obtain a pellet of
microparticles. Microparticles were washed once in acetone, fol-
lowed by three water washes to remove residual corn oil and
loosely cross-linked particles. The remaining microparticles were
disinfected in a 70% ethanol solution for 30 minutes, followed by
additional washes with sterile water, lyophilized for 2 days, and
stored at 4°C prior to use.
Heparin Microparticle Characterization
To determine the extent of IFN-g binding to heparin methacrylamide
microparticles, we incubated approximately 1 3 106 particles
at room temperature in 50 ml of PBS with 0.1% bovine serum
albumin and a range of IFN-g (10–1,000 ng; R&D Systems, Minne-
apolis, MN, https://www.rndsystems.com) that is typically used
to stimulate MSC IDO expression [44]. After 18 hours, the micro-
particles were centrifuged at 2003 g for 5 minutes and the
supernatant collected to determine the amount of free IFN-g
remaining in the solution. The amount of unbound IFN-g was
quantified by using a human IFN-g enzyme-linked immunosor-
bent assay (ELISA kit; R&D) and compared with an equivalent
amount of IFN-g incubated for 18 hours without microparticles
togeneratealoadingcurveforIFN-g bindingtoheparinmicropar-
ticles. After the supernatant was collected to determine the
amount of bound IFN-g, microparticles were incubated in 1 ml
of Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI)-1640 media with
10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and incubated at 37°C for 7 days
in a humidified 5% CO2 incubator. We sampled 100 ml of the me-
dium and replaced it with an equivalent volume each day to de-
termine the amount of IFN-g released from the particles over
time.
MSC Expansion and Culture
Human bone marrow-derived MSCs were obtained from Rooster-
Bio Inc. (Frederick, MD, http://www.roosterbio.com/). Rooster-
Bio MSCs demonstrated the ability to undergo adipogenic and
osteogenic differentiation and expressed the accepted panel of
surface markers (CD452, CD342, CD73+, CD90+, CD105+) by the
manufacturer prior to use. Adipogenic and osteogenic differenti-
ationpotentialwereevaluatedbyOilRedOandAlizarinRedstain-
ing, respectively, after 3 weeks of culture in the respective Thermo
Fisher Scientific (Carlsbad, CA, https://www.thermofisher.com)
differentiation kits. Additionally, MSCs were 0% CD45+, 0.1%
CD34+, 98.9% CD73+, 99.5% CD90+, and 95.9% CD105+, as were
evaluated by flow cytometry. MSCs were expanded according
to the manufacturer’s protocols. Briefly, 1 3 107 cryopreserved
MSCs were plated in 12 T225 flasks with 42 ml each of RoosterBio
High-Performance Media and incubated at 37°C for 7 days in a hu-
midified 5% CO2 incubator. Media were exchanged after 4 days of
culture. Cultures were passaged at 80% confluence by washing
with 10 ml PBS, followed by incubation with 10 ml of TrypLE at
37°C. An equal volume of RoosterBio High-Performance Media
was added to quench TrypLE activity. Dissociated cells were then
collectedandcentrifugedat2003g.CellswerefrozeninCryoStor
CS5 cell cryopreservation media (STEMCELL Technologies, Van-
couver, British Columbia, Canada, https://www.stemcell.com/)
prior to expansion for experiments. MSCs were expanded for
one or two passages from frozen stocks by plating 0.5 3 106 cells
in RoosterBio High-Performance Media in 15 cm tissue culture-
treated dishes (Corning Mediatech). Media were exchanged ev-
ery 3 days, and cells were passaged at 80% confluence. For all
subsequent experiments, cell culture was conducted in RPMI-
1640 medium (Corning Mediatech), supplemented with 10% FBS
(HyClone Laboratories, Logan, UT, https://promo.gelifesciences.
com/gl/hyclone/), 1% L-glutamine (Corning Mediatech), and 1%
penicillin/streptomycin (Corning Mediatech).
IFN-g-Loaded Microparticle Bioactivity
To evaluate the bioactivity of IFN-g bound to heparin micropar-
ticles, we cultured adherent monolayer MSCs with heparin mi-
croparticles loaded with 0 or 333 ng of IFN-g per 1 3 106
particles. Particles were loaded with each IFN-g concentration
1, 2, 4, or 7 days prior to addition of particles to adherent
MSC cultures to assess the activity of microparticle-bound
IFN-g over time. After 18 hours of loading, particles were
washed to remove excess IFN-g and incubated in RPMI-1640
medium supplemented with 10% FBS at 37°C until addition of
Zimmermann, Hettiaratchi, McDevitt
3
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
ID: jw3b2server3dgen1
Time: 13:08
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00601/160072/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM160072
Zimmermann, Hettiaratchi, McDevitt
225
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 particles to adherent MSC cultures. MSCs were plated in 24-
well plates at a density of 50,000 cells/cm2, and after 18 hours,
∼200,000 particles were added to MSCs from each experi-
mental group (particles loaded 1, 2, 4, or 7 days prior). After
24 hours of culture, MSCs were lysed and RNA collected for
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)
to measure IDO gene expression. RNA was extracted using
an E.Z.N.A. Total RNA kit (OMEGA Bio-Tek, Norcross, GA,
http://www.omegabiotek.com/), and cDNA was subsequently
synthesized (300 ng RNA per sample) with an iScript cDNA syn-
thesis kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, http://www.bio-rad.com/).
Forward and reverse primers for IDO1 (forward: AGCTTCGA-
GAAAGAGTTGAGAAG; reverse: GTGATGCATCCCAGAACTAGAC)
and 18S (forward: CTTCCACAGGAGGCCTACAC; reverse: CTTCGG
CCCACACCCTTAAT) were designed by using Primer-Blast (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) and purchased from Thermo Fisher. IDO1
gene expression was calculated with respect to untreated MSCs
and normalized to 18S expression using the DDCT method.
MSC Spheroid Formation
Three-dimensional (3D) spheroids were formed by forced aggre-
gation of MSCs into an array of 400 3 400 mm inverse pyramidal
agarose microwells as a high throughput method of generating
homogenous cell aggregates. For all experiments, 500-cell spher-
oids were formed by adding 6 3 105 cells to an agarose insert
containing 1,200 microwells and centrifuging at 2003 g for
5 minutes. After 18 hours, MSCs self-assembled into spherical ag-
gregates. In order to form spheroids with microparticles, we
mixed a suspension of unloaded heparin microparticles or micro-
particlespreviously incubated with 33or333 ngIFN-g per 13106
MPs for 18 hours with the cell suspension at a 2:1 microparticle-
to-MSC ratio and added to the microwells (Fig. 1). The incorpora-
tion efficiency of heparin microparticles within MSCs spheroids
was quantified by lysing spheroids after initial formation and
counting the number of particles retrieved from the spheroids.
Furthermore, MSC spheroids without particles were also formed,
and a subset was pretreated with IFN-g at equivalent doses to
IFN-g microparticlegroups(20ng/mlor200ng/mlconcentration,
equivalent to 66 ng or 666 ng per 1 3 106 cell, respectively). After
18 hours of microwell aggregate formation, spheroids were ei-
ther cultured alone to assess IDO and immunomodulatory factor
expression or with PBMCs to assess the immunomodulatory ac-
tivity of MSC spheroids.
Analysis of MSC Immunomodulatory Factor Expression
To evaluate MSC IDO expression in response to IFN-g pretreatment
or microparticle delivery, we cultured MSC spheroids for up to
7days.Atdays1,2,4,and7,MSCswerecollectedforqRT-PCRanal-
ysis of IDO1 gene expression in relation to untreated MSC spher-
oids. Cell lysates of MSC spheroids were also collected at days 1
and 4 for Western blotting. Sample protein concentration was first
determined using a bicinchoninic acid assay Protein Quantification
kit (PierceBiotechnology, Rockford, IL, https://www.thermofisher.
com). Sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS/PAGE) loading buffer was then mixed with 25 mg of protein
per sample and incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes. Protein samples
were subsequently loaded in 4%–15% Mini-PROTEAN TGX gels
(Bio-Rad Laboratories).Vertical electrophoresis was performedus-
ing the Mini-PROTEAN Tetra Cell (Bio-Rad) system with SDS/PAGE
running buffer at 200 V for 20 minutes with a 10- to 250-kDa protein
ladder (Precision Plus Protein Kaleidoscope; Bio-Rad) as a molecu-
lar weight reference. Protein was then transferred to a nitrocellu-
lose membrane (Bio-Rad) via semidry transfer (Trans-Blot SD;
Bio-Rad) at 25 V for 20 minutes. Membranes were blocked with
IR blocking medium (Rockland Immunochemicals, Pottstown, PA,
USA, https://www.rockland-inc.com) for 1 hour, followed by incu-
bationwithprimaryantibodiesforIDO(rabbitanti-IDOIgG;Abcam,
Cambridge, U.K., http://www.abcam.com) and the loading control
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) (monoclo-
nal goat anti-GAPDH; Abcam) overnight at 4°C. Secondary IR anti-
bodies (680 donkey anti-rabbit and donkey 800 anti-goat; Li-Cor
Biosciences, Lincoln, NE, https://www.licor.com) were used to de-
tect IDO and GAPDH protein, respectively, and the blots were im-
aged using an Odyssey IR imager (LiCor Biosciences).
Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cell Cocultures
PBMCs were isolated from whole blood obtained with institu-
tional review board approval from healthy volunteers via Ficoll
(Sigma-Aldrich) density gradient separation. Isolated PBMCs
were cultured at 400,000 cells per well in 24-well plates with
MSC spheroids at ratios of 1:3, 1:1, and 3:1 MSCs-to-PBMCs,
on the basis of previously reported ratios [18, 45, 46] and pre-
liminary testing. At the start of coculture, 0.2 mg/ml of anti-
human CD3 and CD28 antibodies were added to the cocultures
to induce T-cell proliferation and activation. To evaluate mi-
croparticle delivery of IFN-g within MSC spheroids, we evalu-
ated four experimental groups: (a) MSC spheroids without
additional treatment, (b) spheroids pretreated with 200 ng/ml
(666 ng per 1 3 106 cells) of soluble IFN-g, (c) spheroids con-
taining unloaded heparin microparticles, and (d) spheroids
containing heparin microparticles (2:1 MP:MSC ratio) loaded
with 333 ng IFN-g per 1 3 106 particles. Where indicated,
1-methylDL-tryptophan (1-MT, diluted in 0.1 N NaOH; Sigma-
Aldrich), an inhibitor of IDO activity, or an equivalent volume
of a vehicle control (0.1 N NaOH) was added to cocultures at a
final concentration of 5 mM 1-MT. In a subset of cultures,
PBMCs were added to the upper well of a 0.4-mm pore polycar-
bonate Transwell (Corning) and cocultured with MSC spheroids
pretreated with 200 ng/ml IFN-g at a 3:1 MSC-to-PBMC ratio.
MSCspheroidswereaddedtoPBMCcoculturesimmediatelyafter
aggregate formation, except where indicated otherwise. To test
the persistence of spheroid immunomodulatory activity in cul-
ture, we added spheroids to PBMC cocultures 2 or 4 days after
initial aggregate formation and IFN-g pretreatment. For all PBMC
cocultures, T-cell proliferation was assessed 4 days later by flow
cytometryanalysisofCD3(fluoresceinisothiocyanate-conjugated
mouse anti-CD3 IgG; BD Biosciences, East Rutherford, NJ, https://
www.bdbiosciences.com) and Ki67 (phycoerythrin-conjugated
mouseanti-Ki67IgG;BDBiosciences)double-positive-stainedcells.
T-cell activation was also assessed after 4 days by measuring the
amount of IFN-g in coculture spent media supernatants by ELISA
(R&D). Finally, expression of anti-inflammatory cytokines was
assessed after 4 days by measuring the amount of IL-10 in coculture
spent media supernatants by ELISA (R&D).
Monocytes were isolated from PBMCs using an EasySep Hu-
man CD14+ Positive Selection Kit (STEMCELL Technologies) and
cultured at 400,000 cells per well in 24-well plates with MSC
spheroids from each experimental group as in PBMC cocul-
ture experiments at a 3:1 MSC-to-monocyte ratio with no
4
Engineered MSC Constructs
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
ID: jw3b2server3dgen1
Time: 13:08
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00601/160072/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM160072
226
Engineered MSC Constructs
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 supplemented cytokines. After 4 days of coculture, monocyte
phenotype was evaluated by determining the amounts of the
proinflammatory cytokine, TNF-a, and the anti-inflammatory
cytokine, IL-10, in coculture spent media supernatants by
ELISA (R&D).
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 6
software (Graphpad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA, http://www.
graphpad.com/). Data are presented as mean 6 SEM. Compar-
isons between multiple experimental groups were conducted
using analysis of variance after Box-Cox transformation to
ensure normal distribution. Tukey post hoc analysis was then
used to determine statistically significant differences be-
tween experimental groups, with a p value ,.05, indicating
significance.
RESULTS
IFN-g Binds to Heparin Microparticles and Remains
Bioactive During 1 Week of Culture
To establish microparticle-loading conditions for delivery of
IFN-g within MSC spheroids, we first investigated the interac-
tion between heparin microparticles and IFN-g. Heparin parti-
cles have previously been characterized as having a large
binding capacity for the growth factor bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP-2) (∼300 mg per milligram of MPs [38]). When
heparin particles were incubated in solutions of varying concen-
trations of IFN-g (10–1,000 ng per 1 3 106 particles; equivalent
to 0.2–20 mg per milligram of MPs), more than 97% of the initial
IFN-g was depleted from solution after 18 hours for each con-
centration tested (Fig. 2A). However, the maximum binding ca-
pacity of the microparticles for IFN-g was not reached within
the range of concentrations tested, and the highest concentra-
tion of IFN-g tested (approximately 20 mg IFN-g per milligram of
Figure 1.
Microparticle delivery of interferon (IFN)-g within mesenchymal stem/stromal cell (MSC) spheroids. To form aggregates, we disso-
ciated MSCs from adherent culture and mixed them with IFN-g-loaded microparticles. Spheroids were subsequently formed via forced aggre-
gation of cells and particles within microwell arrays to entrap cytokine-loaded microparticles within the spheroidal construct to provide
sustained local presentation of IFN-g within the MSC aggregates. Abbreviations: IFN, interferon; MSC, mesenchymal stem/stromal cell;
IDO, indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase.
Zimmermann, Hettiaratchi, McDevitt
5
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
ID: jw3b2server3dgen1
Time: 13:08
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00601/160072/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM160072
Zimmermann, Hettiaratchi, McDevitt
227
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 MPs) was significantly lower than the maximal binding capacity
of heparin microparticles for BMP-2 (300 mg BMP-2 per milli-
gram of MPs). Therefore, if desired, even greater amounts of
IFN-g could likely be loaded onto the particles.
AfterloadingparticleswithdifferentconcentrationsofIFN-g,we
resuspended microparticles in fresh cell culture medium containing
10% FBS and incubated for 1 week to examine release of IFN-g from
the particles. At each loading concentration, the majority of IFN-g
Figure 2.
Heparin microparticles bind and present bioactive interferon (IFN)-g and incorporate stably within mesenchymal stem/stromal cell
(MSC)aggregates.(A):Heparinmicroparticlesbound.97%ofIFN-g fromsolutionovertherangestested.(B):Althoughaninitialburstreleaseof
IFN-g from the particles was observed, little IFN-g was subsequently released from the particles during 7 days. (C): Particle-bound IFN-g
remained bioactive and capable of inducing MSC expression of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase during 7 days. (D): Fluorescently labeled micro-
particles were incorporated within MSC aggregates at various doses and remained stably incorporated for at least 7 days of culture. Maximal
intensity projection, scale bar = 50 mm. (E): Approximately 85% of microparticles added during aggregate formation were incorporated within
MSC spheroids within the range of microparticle-to-cell ratios tested, allowing for precise control of microparticle and loaded cytokine dose.
pp , .05, in comparison with no treatment. Abbreviations: IDO, indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase; IFN, interferon; MP, microparticle; MSC, mes-
enchymal stem/stromal cell.
6
Engineered MSC Constructs
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
ID: jw3b2server3dgen1
Time: 13:08
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00601/160072/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM160072
228
Engineered MSC Constructs
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 released from the particles occurred within the first 24 hours, sug-
gesting an initial burst release of loosely bound IFN-g from the par-
ticles (Fig. 2B). The amount of IFN-g released during this 24-hour
period was dependent on the loading concentration, with approxi-
mately 1% of loaded IFN-g at the lowest loading concentration and
approximately 30% of loaded IFN-g at the highest loading concen-
tration. However, after the initial burst release period, minimal
IFN-g was released from the particles during the next 6 days, sug-
gesting that the majority of loaded IFN-g remained bound to the
heparin microparticles for at least 1 week of culture.
The bioactivity of IFN-g bound to heparin microparticles was
evaluated by culturing adherent MSCs in direct contact with mi-
croparticles loaded with IFN-g (333 ng per 1 3 106 MPs). Micro-
particles were loaded with IFN-g 1, 2, 4, and 7 days prior to
addition to MSC cultures to examine whether the bioactivity
of microparticle-bound IFN-g was retained over time. The ability
of particle-bound IFN-g to induce IDO expression in MSCs was
compared with treatment with unloaded microparticles or an
equivalent dose of soluble IFN-g. As was expected, treatment
ofadherentMSCswithIFN-g induced IDO expression(.103-fold
increase in IDO gene expression; p , .001), whereas the addition
of unloaded microparticles did not significantly increase MSC
IDO expression (Fig. 2C). When an equivalent dose of IFN-g
was delivered via microparticles loaded 1 day prior to culture,
IDO expression was induced in adherent MSCs to the same
extent as was soluble treatment, demonstrating that microparticle-
bound IFN-g remains bioactive. Furthermore, microparticles loaded
with IFN-g 2, 4, and 7 days prior to addition to MSCs maintained the
ability to significantly induce MSC IDO expression (2000-, 350-, and
150-fold increase in IDO expression, in comparison with untreated
MSCs, respectively; p , .001), although microparticles loaded with
IFN-g 4 and 7 days prior to addition to MSCs induced IDO at a some-
what lower magnitude in comparison with freshly loaded micropar-
ticles (15- and 30-fold decrease in IDO expression, respectively; p ,
.001).BecauseminimalIFN-g isreleasedfromheparinmicroparticles
following the first 24 hours, these results suggest that IFN-g loaded
onto microparticles retains its bioactivity and ability to elicit a func-
tional MSC response while bound to heparin for at least 1 week
of culture.
IFN-g-Loaded Microparticles Induce Sustained
Immunomodulatory Factor Expression
To evaluate incorporation of heparin microparticles within aggre-
gates,weincorporatedfluorescentlylabeled,unloadedmicropar-
ticles within MSC aggregates at several different ratios of
microparticles to MSCs (1:1, 2:1, and 4:1 MP:MSC) and cultured
for up to 7 days to evaluate the incorporation efficiency of parti-
cles within aggregates and retention of particles within the mul-
ticellular constructs. Fluorescently labeled microparticles were
readily incorporated within MSC spheroids after initial formation
and remained stably incorporated within spheroids for at least
1 week of culture (Fig. 2D). Approximately 85% of the particles
initially added during aggregate formation were incorporated
within spheroids for all three ratios tested (Fig. 2E). Additionally,
only ∼1.5% of these particles were found to escape from the
spheroids into the culture medium during 1 week of culture. By
determining the incorporation efficiency of microparticles within
MSC spheroids (∼85%) and persistence of particles within spher-
oids during the course of 7 days, we were able to adjust the num-
ber of particles added at the time of formation for subsequent
experiments to ensure that equivalent doses of IFN-g presented
via particles in comparison with soluble pretreatment with IFN-g.
To investigate whether sustained delivery of IFN-g directly
within the MSC spheroidal microenvironment could enhance
MSC immunomodulatory factor expression, we loaded heparin
particles with two doses of IFN-g (33 ng and 333 ng IFN-g per
1 3 106 MPs) or without any cytokine and incorporated into
MSC spheroids. The expression of IDO by MSC spheroids with mi-
croparticles or pretreated with IFN-g was then measured during
1 week of culture. Little change in IDO gene expression was
observed in MSC spheroids without IFN-g pretreatment or with
Figure 3.
Interferon (IFN)-g-loaded heparin microparticles induce sustained IDO expression. (A): IDO gene expression rapidly decreased after
initial pretreatment of mesenchymal stem/stromal cell (MSC) spheroids with IFN-g, whereas IDO gene expression was sustained during 7 days
when IFN-g was delivered by microparticles within MSC spheroids. pp , .05, comparing pretreatment and microparticle treatment on the same
dayofculture.(B):IDOproteinexpression wasinducedbyIFN-g butwasonlyexpressedbyMSCspheroidsafter4dayswhenIFN-g wasdelivered
bymicroparticles.Abbreviations:GAPDH,glyceraldehyde-3-phosphatedehydrogenase;IDO,indoleamine2,3-dioxygenase;IFN,interferon;MP,
microparticle.
Zimmermann, Hettiaratchi, McDevitt
7
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
ID: jw3b2server3dgen1
Time: 13:08
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00601/160072/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM160072
Zimmermann, Hettiaratchi, McDevitt
229
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 Figure 4.
Microparticle delivery of interferon (IFN)-g enhances mesenchymal stem/stromal cell (MSC) spheroid suppression of T-cell activation
and proliferation. (A): Representative histograms of Ki67+ T-cells in coculture with MSC spheroids at 3:1 MSC:peripheral blood mononuclear cell
(PBMC) ratios demonstrate increased suppression of T-cell proliferation when treated with IFN-g via pretreatment or microparticle delivery. (B):
(Figure legend continues on next page.)
8
Engineered MSC Constructs
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
ID: jw3b2server3dgen1
Time: 13:08
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00601/160072/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM160072
230
Engineered MSC Constructs
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 unloaded microparticles during 1 week (Fig. 3A). Both IFN-g
pretreatment and incorporation of IFN-g-loaded microparti-
cles initially induced IDO gene expression within the first day
(approximately 104-fold;p , .001). However, IDOexpression rap-
idlydecreasedwhen MSCspheroidswere pretreatedwith soluble
IFN-g. In contrast, MSC spheroids with IFN-g2 loaded micropar-
ticles maintained an elevated level of IDO gene expression during
an entire weekofculture. Similarly, protein expression of IDOwas
detected initially on day 1 during which MSC spheroids were ex-
posed to IFN-g by pretreatment or via microparticles (Fig. 3B). By
day 4, only spheroids exposed to the sustained presentation of
microparticle-bound IFN-g continued to express elevated levels
of IDO.Finally, no IFN-g wasdetected in the spentcellculture me-
dium by ELISA, indicating that little to no microparticle-bound
IFN-g escaped from the spheroids (,0.1% of IFN-g initially loaded
onto particles on the basis of the lower detection limit of ELISA).
IFN-g-Loaded Microparticles Enhance MSC Suppression
of T-Cell Activation and Proliferation
Because microparticle delivery of IFN-g promoted sustained MSC
expression of IDO, we next sought to determine whether the
enhanced IDO expression resulted in increased suppression
of T-cell proliferation and activation. At the highest ratio of
MSCs to PBMCs (3: 1 MSC:PBMC), suppression of T-cell prolifer-
ation, as measured by decreased Ki67 expression, was observed
in all MSC coculture groups in comparison with the activated
PBMCs alone (Fig. 4A). However, MSC spheroids pretreated with
IFN-g or incorporated with IFN-g-loaded microparticles induced
greater suppression of T-cell proliferation than did untreated
MSC spheroids. Furthermore, only MSCs treated with IFN-g (ei-
ther through pretreatment or microparticles) were capable of
suppressing T-cell proliferation at a 1:1 MSC:PBMC ratio. Addi-
tionally, the sustained microparticle delivery of IFN-g within
spheroids significantly enhanced suppression of T-cell prolifera-
tionatbotha3:1ratioand1:1ratioofMSCs:PBMCsincomparison
with spheroids pretreated with IFN-g (Fig. 4B). At a 3:1 MSC:
PBMC ratio, only 15% 6 1% of T cells were Ki67+ in coculture with
MSCs with IFN-g-loaded microparticles in comparison with 23% 6
2% in cocultures with pretreated MSC spheroids (p = .029).
No suppression of T-cell proliferation was observed when MSCs
were cocultured at a 1:3 MSC:PBMC ratio in any of the IFN-g
treatmentgroups.Finally, asimilarresponsewas observedin ex-
pression of IFN-g and IL-10 in cocultures. IFN-g and IL-10 de-
tected in MSC-PBMC cocultures were expressed by cells from
the PBMC fraction, because no IFN-g or IL-10 could be detected
in cultures of only MSC spheroids with or without IFN-g-loaded
microparticles. The greatest suppression of IFN-g secretion was
observed in cocultures with pretreated MSC spheroids and MSC
spheroids with IFN-g-loaded microparticles (Fig. 4C). Similarly,
IL-10 expressionwasincreasedincocultureswithMSCspheroids
at 3:1 and 1:1 MSC:PBMC ratios and was greatest in MSC
spheroids pretreated with IFN-g or incorporated with IFN-
g-loaded microparticles (Fig. 4D).
Microparticle-Induced Suppression of T-Cell Activation
and Proliferation Is Dependent on Induction of MSC IDO
Expression and Aided by Anti-Inflammatory Monocytes
To determine whether the IDO expression in response to IFN-
g-loaded microparticles was responsible for the enhanced ability
of MSCs to suppress T cells, we cultured pretreated and
microparticle-treated MSC spheroids with activated PBMCs in
the presence of an IDO inhibitor, 1-methylDL-tryptophan (1-MT).
Supplementation of 1-MT into cocultures significantly im-
paired the ability of IFN-g-pretreated spheroids and spheroids
with IFN-g-loaded microparticles to suppress T-cell proliferation
(Fig. 5A). In PBMC cocultures with IFN-g-pretreated spheroids,
61% 6 2% of T cells were Ki67+ when 1-MT was added to the cul-
ture in comparison with 31% 6 2% Ki67+ T cells in cocultures with
the vehicle control (p , .001). Similarly, 57% 6 2% of T cells were
Ki67+ in cocultures with MSC spheroids with IFN-g-loaded micro-
particles and 1-MT in comparison with 24% 6 1% Ki67+ T cells in
cocultures treated with the vehicle control (p , .001). However,
even with supplementation of 5 mM 1-MT into cocultures, both
pretreated and microparticle-treated spheroids were capable
of slightly suppressing T-cell proliferation in comparison with ac-
tivated PBMCs alone (77% 6 2% Ki67+, p , .001). MSC suppres-
sion of T-cell IFN-g expression was completely inhibited by
treatment with 1-MT in cocultures with IFN-g2pretreated MSC
spheroids and spheroids with IFN-g-loaded microparticles (Fig.
5C). However, PBMC expression of IL-10 in response to MSC
spheroids was only partially inhibited by 1-MT (Fig. 5D; 133 and
132 pg/ml of IL-10 in pretreated and microparticle groups in com-
parison with 83 pg/ml of IL-10 in No-MSC2 1-MT control; p = .003
and .004, respectively). In addition to IDO, direct cell-contact
mechanisms,mediatedbyPDL1/2orFasLsignaling,canplayarole
in aiding suppression of Tcells [15, 16].Physical separation of IFN-
g-stimulated MSC spheroids from PBMCs significantly reduced
the ability of MSCs to suppress T-cell proliferation (supplemental
online Fig. 1; ∼35% Ki67+ T cells in direct coculture, ∼52% Ki67+
inTranswellcoculture;p=.022).Althoughadditionalimmunomod-
ulatory factors may contribute to the residual suppressive effects
observed of MSC spheroids treated with 1-MT, IDO inhibition sig-
nificantlyimpairstheabilityofMSCstosuppressT-cellproliferation
(Fig. 5B), as was expected on the basis of previous studies [17, 18].
In addition to IDO activity, MSC suppression of T-cell prolifer-
ation and activation in PBMC coculture assays in vitro is also de-
pendent on MSC induction of IL-10-expressing monocytes within
these cocultures [18, 45, 46]. Therefore, we investigated whether
MSC spheroids containing IFN-g-loaded microparticles could also
suppress monocyte secretion of proinflammatory TNF-a and in-
crease monocyte secretion of anti-inflammatory IL-10 expres-
sion in direct cocultures with monocytes isolated from PBMCs.
(Figure legend continued from previous page.)
Coculture of activated PBMCs with IFN-g-loaded microparticle-treated MSC spheroids resulted in the greatest suppression of T-cell proliferation
at a 3:1 MSC:PBMC ratio. Only MSCs treated with IFN-g (via pretreatment or microparticle) suppressed T-cell proliferation at a 1:1 MSC:PBMC
ratio. (C): MSC spheroids suppressed expression of the effector cytokine IFN-g, and the greatest suppression was observed in cocultures with
MSCs treated with IFN-g. (D): IL-10 expression was increased in cocultures with MSC spheroids and was greatest when MSCs were treated with
IFN-g viapretreatmentormicroparticledelivery.p,p,.05incomparisonwithNo-MSCcultures;#,p,.05incomparisonwithIFN-g-pretreatedMSC
spheroids at the same MSC:PBMC ratio; +, p , .05 in comparison with No Treatment and Unloaded Microparticle MSC spheroid cocultures. Abbre-
viations: IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; MP, microparticle; MSC, mesenchymal stem/stromal cell; PBMC, peripheral blood mononuclear cell.
Zimmermann, Hettiaratchi, McDevitt
9
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
ID: jw3b2server3dgen1
Time: 13:08
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00601/160072/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM160072
Zimmermann, Hettiaratchi, McDevitt
231
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 Monocyte secretion of TNF-a was suppressed in coculture with
MSC spheroids (Fig. 6A; ∼135 ng/ml TNF-a in MSC spheroid co-
culture in comparison with ∼230 ng/ml in monocyte-only cul-
ture). However, pretreatment of MSCs with IFN-g or delivery
of IFN-g-laden microparticles within MSC spheroids increased
MSC suppression of monocyte TNF-a expression (∼40 ng/ml
TNF-a in coculture with IFN-g2 pretreated or IFN-g-loaded
microparticle-treated MSCs). Additionally, the amount of the im-
munoregulatory cytokine IL-10 in spent media supernatants was
greatest in cocultures with spheroids containing IFN-g-loaded
microparticles (Fig. 6B), suggesting that the increase in mono-
cyte IL-10 expression and decrease in TNF-a may be aiding the
suppression of T cells observed in cocultures with spheroids con-
taining IFN-g-loaded microparticles.
Microparticle Delivery of IFN-g Within MSC Spheroids
Sustains Immunomodulatory Activity in Comparison
With Soluble Pretreated MSCs
Because MSC spheroids with IFN-g-loaded microparticles
expressed elevated levels of IDO for at least 7 days and IDO activ-
ity of pretreated MSC spheroids decreased rapidly for 4 days, we
investigatedwhether MSCspheroidscontaining IFN-g-loaded mi-
croparticles continued to modulate T-cell responses even 4 days
Figure 5.
Increased suppression of T-cells by microparticle delivery of interferon (IFN)-g is dependent on induction of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase
(IDO) expression. (A): Representative histograms of Ki67+ T-cells in coculture with IFN-g-pretreated or IFN-g-loaded microparticle- treated
MSC spheroids with or without the IDO inhibitor 1-methylDL-tryptophan (1-MT). (B): Addition of 1-MT to mesenchymal stem/stromal cell
(MSC)-peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) coculture (3:1 MSC:PBMC ratio) significantly inhibited the ability of IFN-g-primed MSCs to
inhibit T-cell proliferation in both pretreated and microparticle-treated spheroids. Inhibition of IDO activity with 1-MT increased T-cell ex-
pression of IFN-g (C) and reduced the induction of interleukin-10 expression in PBMC cocultures (D). p, p , .05 in comparison with groups
denoted by bar. #, p , .05 in comparison with No-MSC cultures. Abbreviations: IFN, interferon; IL-10, interleukin-10; MSC, mesenchymal
stem/stromal cell; PBMC, peripheral blood mononuclear cell; Veh., vehicle; 1-MT, 1-methylDL-tryptophan.
10
Engineered MSC Constructs
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
ID: jw3b2server3dgen1
Time: 13:08
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00601/160072/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM160072
232
Engineered MSC Constructs
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 after formation. Therefore, MSC spheroids were pretreated or
formedwithIFN-g-loadedmicroparticlesandaddedtococultures
with activated PBMCs after 0, 2, or 4 days following initial aggre-
gate formation and pretreatment. Consistently, both spheroids
pretreatedwithIFN-g andspheroidswithIFN-g-loadedmicropar-
ticles suppressed T-cell proliferation when added to cocultures
immediately after spheroid formation (Fig. 7A). However, when
spheroids were added 2 days after formation and IFN-g pretreat-
ment, the ability of pretreated spheroids to suppress T-cell pro-
liferation was significantly reduced (p = .035 pretreated
spheroid days 0–4 vs. pretreated spheroid days 2–6). Conversely,
no difference in T- cell suppression ability was observed between
spheroids added immediately after formation or 2 days after for-
mation, in those spheroids containing IFN-g-loaded microparti-
cles (p = .978 spheroids with IFN-g-loaded particles days 0–4
vs. spheroids with IFN-g-loaded particles days 2–4). Moreover,
the ability of spheroids pretreated with IFN-g to suppress T-cell
proliferation was further decreased when spheroids were added
4 days after initial formation and pretreatment. The extent of
T-cell suppression observed in pretreated spheroids after 4 days
was comparable to levels observed previously when nontreated
MSC spheroids were cocultured with activated PBMCs, suggest-
ing that the effects of pretreatment were completely abolished
within 4 days. However, MSCs with IFN-g-loaded microparticles
retained the ability to suppress T-cell proliferation even when
added to PBMC cocultures 4 days after initial formation (Fig.
7B). Altogether, MSC spheroids incorporated with IFN-g micro-
particles exhibit a sustained ability to suppress T-cell proliferation
during at least 1 week of culture, whereas the immunosup-
pressive ability of MSC spheroids pretreated with IFN-g rapidly
decreased.
DISCUSSION
In this study, we designed and evaluated a strategy for locally pre-
senting IFN-g within MSC constructs to potentiate sustained MSC
immunomodulatory activity. To do so, we took advantage of a
microparticle-based approach previously developed to spatially
and temporally control presentation of growth factors within
stem cell aggregates [34–37]. Heparin-based microparticles were
chosen to deliver IFN-g to exploit the high native affinity of IFN-g
for heparin and the ability of heparin to maintain protein bio-
activity. These heparin particles have previously been dem-
onstrated to stably bind positively charged heparin-binding
growth factors including BMP-2, vascular endothelial growth fac-
tor, and fibroblast growth factor 2 [38]. Consistent with previous
studies, heparin microparticles bound large amounts of IFN-g
(.20 mg per mg MPs), and very little IFN-g was released from
the particles after the initial burst release period during the first
24 hours postloading. Despite low IFN-g release, IFN-g2 loaded
particles were still capable of inducing MSC IDO expression even
after 7 days of incubation at physiologic conditions prior to addi-
tion to MSCs. These results are consistent with previous studies
investigating the interaction between cell-derived heparan sul-
fate and IFN-g signaling. Heparan sulfate present within plasma
membranes can augment IFN-g signaling by stably immobilizing
IFN-g at the cell surface in close proximity to cell membrane re-
ceptors [42]. In contrast, supplementation of soluble heparin into
culture medium can suppress the activity of IFN-g, likely because
of sequestration of IFN-g in solution that inhibits its interaction
with cell surface receptors. Altogether, these results suggest that
the ability of IFN-g-loaded microparticles to induce MSC IDO ex-
pression is dependent on direct contact between particle-bound
IFN-g and MSCs and does not require the release of soluble IFN-g
from the particles. Furthermore, these results also corroborate
resultsfoundinpreviousstudiesdemonstrating thatphysicalsep-
aration of cells and growth factor-loaded heparin microparticles
via Transwell significantly reduces the activity of particle-bound
growth factors [38]. Additionally, because heparin-bound IFN-g
bioactivity is mediated primarily through solid-phase presenta-
tion of IFN-g and not soluble release, there is little risk of exoge-
nous IFN-g escaping MSC spheroids and exacerbating an
inflammatory response in vivo. Overall, these results demon-
strate that heparin microparticles are an effective carrier for lo-
cally restricting sustained delivery of bioactive IFN-g within
MSC spheroids.
Pretreatment of MSCs with inflammatory cytokines is fre-
quently used to enhance the immunomodulatory activity of the
cellsbyactivatingexpressionofIDOandotherimmunomodulatory
factors prior to injection. However, we have demonstrated herein
Figure 6.
Microparticle delivery of interferon (IFN)-g increases mesenchymal stem/stromal cell (MSC) spheroid polarization of monocytes to anti-
inflammatory phenotypes. (A): Monocyte expression of tumor necrosis factor-a, a proinflammatory cytokine, was decreased in all cocultures with
MSC spheroids but was greatest in cultures with IFN-g pretreated or microparticle-treated MSCs. (B): Conversely, interleukin-10 production, an
anti-inflammatory cytokine, was greatest in cocultures with IFN-g-loaded microparticle-treated MSCs and not increased in cocultures with untreated
MSCs. Polarization of monocytes to anti-inflammatory phenotypes by MSCs treated with IFN-g-loaded microparticles can aid in the suppression of
T-cell proliferation and activation in peripheral blood mononuclear cell cocultures. p, p , .05 in comparison with No-MSC group; #, p , .05 in
comparison with IFN-g-pretreated MSC spheroid group; +, p , .05 in comparison with No-Treatment group. Abbreviations: IFN, interferon;
IL-10, interleukin-10; MSC, mesenchymal stem/stromal cell; MP, microparticle; NT, no treatment; TNF-a, tumor necrosis factor-a.
Zimmermann, Hettiaratchi, McDevitt
11
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
ID: jw3b2server3dgen1
Time: 13:08
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00601/160072/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM160072
Zimmermann, Hettiaratchi, McDevitt
233
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 that sustained presentation of IFN-g to MSCs enhances and ex-
tends the duration of immunomodulatory activity by MSCs. Using
a heparin microparticle-based strategy, expression of IDO by MSCs
was sustained for at least 1 week. Furthermore, microparticle de-
liveryofIFN-g within MSC spheroidsincreasedMSC suppression of
T-cell proliferation and activation in comparison with pretreated
spheroids. By locally concentrating IFN-g within the MSC spheroid
through particle-mediated delivery, MSCs may be exposed to an
effectively higher dose of cytokine in relation to an equal soluble
amount, thereby resulting in enhanced immunomodulatory activ-
ity. More strikingly, incorporation of IFN-g-loaded microparticles
within MSC spheroids significantly extends the duration of MSC
immunomodulation. Although the immunomodulatory activity
of pretreated MSC spheroids was significantly reduced after
2 days, MSC spheroids with IFN-g-loaded microparticles contin-
ued to effectively suppress T cells through 1 week of culture. Not
surprisingly, on the basis of the targeted strategy we used,
immunosuppressive effects of MSCs were mediated by IDO
Figure 7.
Microparticle delivery of interferon (IFN)-g enhances mesenchymal stem/stromal cell (MSC) suppression of T-cells for more than
1 week. (A): Representative histograms of Ki67+ T-cells in coculture with MSC spheroids treated with IFN-g or IFN-g-loaded microparticles 0, 2,
and 4 days prior to addition to peripheral blood mononuclear cell coculture. (B): IFN-g-loaded microparticles sustained the enhanced MSC
suppression of T-cell proliferation in response to IFN-g for up to 8 days, whereas the effects of pretreating MSC spheroids with IFN-g were
transient and resulted in decreased ability to suppress T-cell proliferation over time. p, p , .05 in comparison with groups denoted by bars;
#, p , .05 in comparison with No-MSC group. Abbreviations: IFN, interferon; MP, microparticle; MSC, mesenchymal stem/stromal cell; PBMC,
peripheral blood mononuclear cell.
12
Engineered MSC Constructs
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
ID: jw3b2server3dgen1
Time: 13:08
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00601/160072/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM160072
234
Engineered MSC Constructs
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 expression because the IDO inhibitor 1-MT reduced the ability of
MSCs to suppress T-cell proliferation. Although IDO expression is
necessary for human MSC immunomodulation, additional MSC
secreted factors or direct cell contact-mediated mechanisms
may also play an important role in the suppression of T-cell pro-
liferation.Inaddition todirectmodulationofTcellsbyMSCs,MSC
induction of IL-10-expressing monocytes within PBMCcocultures
also aids in the suppression of T cells in vitro [18]. Therefore, the
increasedinductionofIL-10-expressingmonocytesbyMSCspher-
oids loaded with IFN-g microparticles could also facilitate the
increased immunosuppressive activity of 3D MSC constructs.
Despite the extensive use of biomaterials with specific
biophysical and biochemical properties and ability to deliver
biochemical stimuli to direct differentiation of MSCs, similar
approaches have largely been unexplored for directing the immu-
nomodulatory paracrine activity and broader trophic effects of
MSCs. Numerous studies have demonstrated that MSC paracrine
factor secretion is modulated in response to environmental cues
in addition to the local cytokine milieu, including matrix compo-
sition, mechanics, and topography [47, 48], as well as oxygen
tension [49]. Furthermore, environmental stimuli are highly
amenable to manipulation via biomaterials to specifically define
the microenvironment of stem cells and direct their function [50].
To date, only one biomaterial-based approach has been used to
increase MSC expression of IDO to enhance suppression of T-cell
proliferation and activation. Delivery of glucocorticoids within
MSCs via poly-lactic-coglycolic acid nanoparticles internalized
by MSCs enhanced the upregulation of IDO in response to IFN-g
and resulted in increased suppression of CD3/CD28-activated
PBMCs [51]. However, IDO expression by MSCs was still depen-
dent on the presence of soluble IFN-g, and the glucocorticoid
budesonide was unable to stimulate IDO alone. Therefore, sus-
tained presentation of IFN-g and glucocorticoids may be comple-
mentary approaches for enhancing MSC immunomodulatory
activity. Ultimately, engineering the local environment of trans-
planted MSCs through biomaterial-based approaches provides
an additional level of control over the efficacy of MSC therapies
to promote maximal activity posttransplantation.
Overall, the approach described in this study provides a novel
means of enhancing MSC immunomodulatory activity by locally
concentrating and sustaining presentation of immunomodula-
tory stimuli and represents a viable method of potentiating
MSC immunomodulation after local injection in vivo. Because
MSCs are highly dependent on local inflammatory signals to stim-
ulate their immunomodulatory activity, spatially controlled pre-
sentation of inflammatory cues within MSC aggregates provides
a means of stimulating these cells even when environmental in-
flammatorysignalsmaynotbepresent,suchasinsystemicdelivery
strategies, states of chronic inflammation, or when used in
combination with traditional anti-inflammatory drugs. For ex-
ample, although MSCs have been effective in treating graft-
versus-host disease (GvHD) when infused at the height of
inflammation, they are much less effective if delivered prior
to the onset of inflammation [52, 53]. Similarly, MSCs are less ef-
fective at treating experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
when administered during disease remission [14, 54]. In clinical
studies, MSC-based therapies have been most effective in treat-
ing immunosuppressant-refractory acute inflammatory diseases
[55, 56]. At low concentrations of strong inflammatory signals
(i.e., IFN-g or TNF-a) present during chronic inflammatory
states, MSCs upregulate chemokines that recruit lymphocytes
[24, 57]. However, low cytokine concentrations are not suffi-
cient to induce substantial expression of IDO by MSCs to
suppress lymphocyte activation and therefore can actually aug-
ment inflammation. Such studies highlight the critical impor-
tance of threshold concentrations of inflammatory stimuli
being needed to effectively stimulate MSC immunomodulation.
Bypresenting asustained, highconcentrationofacytokine,such
as IFN-g, through incorporation of microparticles within MSC
aggregates, the use of MSCs for in vivo immunomodulatory ap-
plications could be greatly expanded; for example, MSCs could
potentially be transplanted concurrently with graft tissue to ef-
fectively suppress an immune response prior to the develop-
ment of GvHD and severe inflammation. Furthermore, based
on evidence that MSCs administered together with steroids or
cyclosporine to immunosuppressant-responsive patients have
no clinical effect [58, 59], it is speculated that the lack of
immunosuppression may be due to the decreased availability
of inflammatory cytokines needed to stimulate MSC immuno-
modulation [60]. Hence, in such a situation, locally sustained
presentation of IFN-g to MSCs may improve outcomes in pa-
tients receiving both MSCs and traditional immunosuppressants
by stimulating IDO expression despite the lack of systemic cyto-
kines present in the host environment. Altogether, sustained
presentation of IFN-g within MSC aggregates may provide a clin-
ically relevant approach for inducing and enhancing MSC immu-
nomodulatory activity in disease states previously deemed to
be unresponsive to MSC-based therapies.
CONCLUSION
The results of this study demonstrate that heparin microparticle
delivery of IFN-g within spheroidal MSC aggregates presents bio-
activeIFN-g locallywithintheMSCmicroenvironment thatinturn
induces a sustained MSC suppression of CD3/CD28-activated
T cells in vitro. The enhanced T-cell suppression by MSC spheroids
containing IFN-g-loaded microparticles is mediated, in part,
through upregulation of IDO expression and increasing monocyte
IL-10 expression. Overall, this approach could aid in overcoming
the limitations of transient pretreatment strategies by continu-
ously presenting bioactive IFN-g within the MSC microenviron-
mentandtherebymaximizingtheimmunomodulatorypotentialof
transplantedMSCs.Furthermore,thisapproachprovidesameans
of inducing potent MSC immunomodulation, irrespective of un-
known or ill-defined environmental inflammatory milieu, such
as in chronic inflammation or when administered with immuno-
suppressants. Altogether, biomaterial-based engineering of the
MSC microenvironment provides a means of controlling the func-
tion of transplanted cells to specifically direct their therapeutic
activity and may improve MSC-based therapies aimed at treating
a number of inflammatory and immune diseases.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant
R21AI109499.J.A.Z.wassupportedbytheNationalScience Foun-
dation Stem Cell Biomanufacturing Integrative Graduate Edu-
cation and Research Traineeship (DGE 0965945) and National
Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program.
Additionally, this publication was supported by NIH/NCRR
UCSF-CTSI Grant UL 1 TR000004.
Zimmermann, Hettiaratchi, McDevitt
13
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
ID: jw3b2server3dgen1
Time: 13:08
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00601/160072/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM160072
Zimmermann, Hettiaratchi, McDevitt
235
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
J.A.Z.: conception and design, collection and/or assembly of data,
dataanalysisandinterpretation,manuscriptwriting;M.H.H.:con-
ception and design, data analysis and interpretation, manuscript
writing; T.C.M.: conception and design, financial support, data
analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing, final approval
of manuscript.
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors indicated no potential conflicts of interest.
REFERENCES
1
Di Nicola M, Carlo-Stella C, Magni M et al.
Human bone marrow stromal cells suppress
T-lymphocyte proliferation induced by cellular
or nonspecific mitogenic stimuli. Blood 2002;
99:3838–3843.
2
KramperaM, GlennieS,DysonJ etal.Bone
marrow mesenchymal stem cells inhibit the re-
sponse of naive and memory antigen-specific
T cells to their cognate peptide. Blood 2003;
101:3722–3729.
3
Corcione A, Benvenuto F, Ferretti E et al.
Human mesenchymal stem cells modulate
B-cell functions. Blood 2006;107:367–372.
4
N´
emeth K, Leelahavanichkul A, Yuen PST
et al. Bone marrow stromal cells attenuate sep-
sis via prostaglandin E(2)-dependent reprog-
ramming of host macrophages to increase
their
interleukin-10
production.
Nat Med
2009;15:42–49.
5
Nauta AJ, Kruisselbrink AB, Lurvink E et al.
Mesenchymal stem cells inhibit generation and
function of both CD34+-derived and monocyte-
derived dendritic cells. J Immunol 2006;177:
2080–2087.
6
Spaggiari GM, Capobianco A, Abdelrazik
H et al. Mesenchymal stem cells inhibit natu-
ral killer-cell proliferation, cytotoxicity, and
cytokine production: Role of indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase and prostaglandin E2. Blood
2008;111:1327–1333.
7
Sharma RR, Pollock K, Hubel A et al. Mes-
enchymalstemorstromalcells:Areviewofclin-
ical applications and manufacturing practices.
Transfusion 2014;54:1418–1437.
8
Meisel R, Zibert A, Laryea M et al. Human
bone marrow stromal cells inhibit allogeneic
T-cell responses by indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase-
mediated tryptophan degradation. Blood 2004;
103:4619–4621.
9
Ryan JM, Barry F, Murphy JM et al.
Interferon-gamma does not break, but promotes
the immunosuppressive capacity of adult human
mesenchymal stem cells. Clin Exp Immunol 2007;
149:353–363.
10
Najar M, Raicevic G, Boufker HI et al.
Mesenchymal stromal cells use PGE2 to modu-
late activation and proliferation of lymphocyte
subsets: Combined comparison of adipose tis-
sue, Wharton’s Jelly and bone marrow sources.
Cell Immunol 2010;264:171–179.
11
Kong Q-F, Sun B, Bai S-S et al. Administra-
tion of bone marrow stromal cells ameliorates
experimental autoimmune myasthenia gravis
by altering the balance of Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg
cell subsets through the secretion of TGF-beta.
J Neuroimmunol 2009;207:83–91.
12
English K, Ryan JM, Tobin L et al. Cell
contact, prostaglandin E(2) and transforming
growth factor beta 1 play non-redundant
roles in human mesenchymal stem cell in-
duction of CD4+CD25(high) forkhead box P3+
regulatory T cells. Clin Exp Immunol 2009;
156:149–160.
13
Selmani Z, Naji A, Zidi I et al. Human leu-
kocyte antigen-G5 secretion by human mesen-
chymal stem cells is required to suppress
T lymphocyte and natural killer function and
to induce CD4+CD25highFOXP3+ regulatory
T cells. STEM CELLS 2008;26:212–222.
14
Rafei M, Campeau PM, Aguilar-Mahecha
A et al. Mesenchymal stromal cells ameliorate
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
by inhibiting CD4 Th17 T cells in a CC chemokine
ligand 2-dependent manner. J Immunol 2009;
182:5994–6002.
15
Akiyama K, Chen C, Wang D et al.
Mesenchymal-stem-cell-induced immunoregu-
lation involves FAS-ligand-/FAS-mediated T cell
apoptosis. Cell Stem Cell 2012;10:544–555.
16
Chinnadurai R, Copland IB, Patel SR et al.
IDO-independent suppression of T cell effec-
tor function by IFN-g-licensed human mesen-
chymal stromal cells. J Immunol 2014;192:
1491–1501.
17
DelaRosa O, Lombardo E, Beraza A et al.
Requirement of IFN-gamma-mediated indole-
amine 2,3-dioxygenase expression in the mod-
ulation of lymphocyte proliferation by human
adipose-derived stem cells. Tissue Eng Part A
2009;15:2795–2806.
18
François M, Romieu-Mourez R, Li M et al.
Human MSC suppression correlates with cyto-
kine induction of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase
and bystander M2 macrophage differentiation.
Mol Ther 2012;20:187–195.
19
Munn DH, Sharma MD, Mellor AL. Liga-
tionofB7-1/B7-2byhumanCD4+Tcellstriggers
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase activity in den-
dritic cells. J Immunol 2004;172:4100–4110.
20
Frumento G, Rotondo R, Tonetti M et al.
Tryptophan-derived catabolitesare responsible
for inhibition of T and natural killer cell prolifer-
ation induced by indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase.
J Exp Med 2002;196:459–468.
21
Munn DH, Sharma MD, Baban B et al.
GCN2 kinase in T cells mediates proliferative
arrest and anergy induction in response to
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase. Immunity 2005;
22:633–642.
22
Fallarino F, Grohmann U, You S et al. The
combined effects of tryptophan starvation and
tryptophan catabolites down-regulate T cell re-
ceptor zeta-chain and induce a regulatory phe-
notype in naive T cells. J Immunol 2006;176:
6752–6761.
23
Curti A, Trabanelli S, Salvestrini V et al.
The role of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase in
the induction of immune tolerance: Focus on
hematology. Blood 2009;113:2394–2401.
24
Li W, Ren G, Huang Y et al. Mesenchymal
stem cells: A double-edged sword in regulating
immune responses. Cell Death Differ 2012;19:
1505–1513.
25
Lee RH, Pulin AA, Seo MJ et al. Intrave-
nous hMSCs improve myocardial infarction in
mice because cells embolized in lung are acti-
vated to secrete the anti-inflammatory protein
TSG-6. Cell Stem Cell 2009;5:54–63.
26
Lee RH, Seo MJ, Pulin AA et al. The CD34-
like protein PODXL and alpha6-integrin (CD49f)
identify early progenitor MSCs with increased
clonogenicity and migration to infarcted heart
in mice. Blood 2009;113:816–826.
27
BartoshTJ, Yl¨
ostaloJH, Mohammadipoor
A et al. Aggregation of human mesenchymal
stromal cells (MSCs) into 3D spheroids en-
hances their antiinflammatory properties. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2010;107:13724–13729.
28
Yl¨
ostalo JH, Bartosh TJ, Coble K et al. Hu-
man mesenchymal stem/stromal cells cultured
as spheroids are self-activated to produce
prostaglandin E2 that directs stimulated mac-
rophages into an anti-inflammatory pheno-
type. STEM CELLS 2012;30:2283–2296.
29
Lee EJ, Park SJ, Kang SK et al. Spherical
bullet formation via E-cadherin promotes ther-
apeutic potency of mesenchymal stem cells
derived from human umbilical cord blood
for myocardial infarction. Mol Ther 2012;
20:1424–1433.
30
Bhang SH, Cho S-W, La W-G et al. Angio-
genesis in ischemic tissue produced by spher-
oid grafting of human adipose-derived stromal
cells. Biomaterials 2011;32:2734–2747.
31
Duijvestein M, Wildenberg ME, Welling
MM et al. Pretreatment with interferon-g en-
hances the therapeutic activity of mesenchy-
mal stromal cells in animal models of colitis.
STEM CELLS 2011;29:1549–1558.
32
Polchert D, Sobinsky J, Douglas G et al.
IFN-gamma activation of mesenchymal stem
cells for treatment and prevention of graft
versus host disease. Eur J Immunol 2008;38:
1745–1755.
33
Zimmermann JA, McDevitt TC. Pre-
conditioning mesenchymal stromal cell spher-
oids for immunomodulatory paracrine factor
secretion. Cytotherapy 2014;16:331–345.
34
Carpenedo RL, Bratt-Leal AM, Marklein
RA et al. Homogeneous and organized dif-
ferentiation within embryoid bodies in-
duced by microsphere-mediated delivery
of small molecules. Biomaterials 2009;30:
2507–2515.
35
PurpuraKA,Bratt-LealAM,Hammersmith
KA et al. Systematic engineering of 3D plu-
ripotent stem cell niches to guide blood devel-
opment. Biomaterials 2012;33:1271–1280.
36
Bratt-Leal AM, Nguyen AH, Hammersmith
KA et al. A microparticle approach to morpho-
gen delivery within pluripotent stem cell ag-
gregates. Biomaterials 2013;34:7227–7235.
37
Goude MC, McDevitt TC, Temenoff JS.
Chondroitin sulfate microparticles modu-
late transforming growth factor-b1-induced
chondrogenesis of human mesenchymal stem
cell spheroids. Cells Tissues Organs 2014;199:
117–130.
38
Hettiaratchi MH, Miller T, Temenoff JS
et al. Heparin microparticle effects on pre-
sentation and bioactivity of bone morpho-
genetic protein-2. Biomaterials 2014;35:
7228–7238.
14
Engineered MSC Constructs
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
ID: jw3b2server3dgen1
Time: 13:08
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00601/160072/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM160072
236
Engineered MSC Constructs
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 39
SaesenE,SarrazinS,LaguriCetal.Insights
into the mechanism by which interferon-g basic
amino acid clusters mediate protein binding
to heparan sulfate. J Am Chem Soc 2013;135:
9384–9390.
40
Lortat-Jacob H, Kleinman HK, Grimaud
JA. High-affinity binding of interferon-gamma
to a basement membrane complex (matrigel).
J Clin Invest 1991;87:878–883.
41
Lortat-JacobH, Baltzer F, GrimaudJA.Hep-
arin decreases the blood clearance of interferon-
gamma and increases its activity by limiting the
processing of its carboxyl-terminal sequence.
J Biol Chem 1996;271:16139–16143.
42
Douglas MS, Rix DA, Dark JH et al. Exam-
ination of the mechanism by which heparin an-
tagonizes activation of a model endothelium by
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma). Clin Exp Immu-
nol 1997;107:578–584.
43
Seto SP, Casas ME, Temenoff JS. Dif-
ferentiation of mesenchymal stem cells in
heparin-containing hydrogels via coculture with
osteoblasts. Cell Tissue Res 2012;347:589–601.
44
Krampera M. Mesenchymal stromal cell
‘licensing’: A multistep process. Leukemia
2011;25:1408–1414.
45
Melief SM, Schrama E, Brugman MH
et al. Multipotent stromal cells induce human
regulatory T cells through a novel pathway in-
volving skewing of monocytes toward anti-
inflammatory macrophages. STEM CELLS 2013;
31:1980–1991.
46
Cutler AJ, Limbani V, Girdlestone J et al.
Umbilical cord-derived mesenchymal stromal
cells modulate monocyte function to sup-
press T cell proliferation. J Immunol 2010;
185:6617–6623.
47
Vall´
es G, Bensiamar F, Crespo L et al.
Topographical cues regulate the crosstalk be-
tween MSCs and macrophages. Biomaterials
2015;37:124–133.
48
Abdeen AA, Weiss JB, Lee J et al. Matrix
composition and mechanics direct proangio-
genic signaling from mesenchymal stem cells.
Tissue Eng Part A 2014;20:2737–2745.
49
Frazier TP, McLachlan JB, Gimble JM
et al. Human adipose-derived stromal/stem
cells induce functional CD4+CD25+FoxP3+CD127-
regulatory Tcells underlow oxygenculture con-
ditions. Stem Cells Dev 2014;23:968–977.
50
Murphy WL, McDevitt TC, Engler AJ. Ma-
terials as stem cell regulators. Nat Mater 2014;
13:547–557.
51
Ankrum JA, Dastidar RG, Ong JF et al.
Performance-enhanced mesenchymal stem cells
via intracellular delivery of steroids. Sci Rep
2014;4:4645.
52
Ren G, Zhang L, Zhao X et al. Mesenchy-
mal stem cell-mediated immunosuppression
occurs via concerted action of chemokines
and nitric oxide. Cell Stem Cell 2008;2:141–150.
53
Sudres M, Norol F, Trenado A et al. Bone
marrow mesenchymal stem cells suppress lym-
phocyte proliferation in vitro but fail to prevent
graft-versus-host disease in mice. J Immunol
2006;176:7761–7767.
54
Constantin G, Marconi S, Rossi B et al.
Adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells ame-
liorate chronic experimental autoimmune en-
cephalomyelitis. STEM CELLS 2009;27:2624–2635.
55
Le Blanc K, Frassoni F, Ball L et al.
Mesenchymal stem cells for treatment of steroid-
resistant, severe, acute graft-versus-host disease:
A phase II study. Lancet 2008;371:1579–1586.
56
Wang D, Li J, Zhang Y et al. Umbilical cord
mesenchymal stem cell transplantation in ac-
tive and refractory systemic lupus erythemato-
sus: A multicenter clinical study. Arthritis Res
Ther 2014;16:R79.
57
Renner P, Eggenhofer E, Rosenauer A
et al. Mesenchymal stem cells require a suffi-
cient, ongoing immune response to exert their
immunosuppressive function. Transplant Proc
2009;41:2607–2611.
58
Galipeau J. The mesenchymal stromal cell
dilemma–does a negative phase III trial of random
donormesenchymalstromalcellsinsteroid-resistant
graft-versus-host disease represent a death knell
or a bump in the road? Cytotherapy 2013;15:2–8.
59
Inoue S, Popp FC, Koehl GE et al. Immu-
nomodulatory effects of mesenchymal stem
cells in a rat organ transplant model. Transplan-
tation 2006;81:1589–1595.
60
ChenX,GanY,LiWetal.Theinteractionbe-
tween mesenchymal stem cells and steroids dur-
ing inflammation. Cell Death Dis 2014;5:e1009.
See www.StemCellsTM.com for supporting information available online.
Zimmermann, Hettiaratchi, McDevitt
15
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
ID: jw3b2server3dgen1
Time: 13:08
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00601/160072/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM160072
Zimmermann, Hettiaratchi, McDevitt
237
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
