 Brief Definitive Report
The Rockefeller University Press  
$30.00
J. Exp. Med. 2017 Vol. 214 No. 3 579–596
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20162024
The Journal of Experimental Medicine
579
IntroductIon
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) has one of the 
worst outcomes among all cancers, with a median survival of 
∼6 mo and a 5-yr survival rate of <8% (Siegel et al., 2016). 
Patients are often diagnosed late during disease progression, 
when curative surgical approaches are not feasible. Indeed, the 
current systemic therapies for patients with advanced PDA 
provide only temporary benefits, highlighting the need for 
new therapeutic strategies.
PDA is characterized by abundant desmoplasia that con-
stitutes up to 90% of the total tumor volume and contains 
extracellular matrix (ECM), immune cells, vasculature, and 
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs; Moir et al., 2015). CAFs 
secrete ECM and soluble factors that stimulate cancer pro-
gression, and are believed to be derived from mesenchymal 
cells of different origins that are resident or recruited to the 
pancreas by neoplastic cells (Öhlund et al., 2014; Moffitt et al., 
2015; Kalluri, 2016). A major source of CAFs in PDA is pan-
creatic stellate cells (PSCs), which are resident mesenchymal 
cells of the pancreas that store lipid droplets and express fibro-
blast-activation protein α (FAP; Bachem et al., 2005; Erkan et 
al., 2012; Apte et al., 2013; Moir et al., 2015). Upon activa-
tion, PSCs express the myofibroblast protein α-smooth mus-
cle actin (αSMA, gene name Acta2) and secrete factors that 
stimulate tumor growth, cell survival, and metastasis (Bachem 
et al., 2005; Hwang et al., 2008; 
Vonlaufen et al., 2008; Xu et 
al., 2010). PSCs are also reported to produce the majority of 
ECM in PDA (Apte et al., 2004), which acts as a physical bar-
rier that impairs drug delivery (Olive et al., 2009; Jacobetz et 
al., 2012; Provenzano et al., 2012), and may also biochemically 
Pancreatic stellate cells (PScs) differentiate into cancer-associated fibroblasts (cAFs) that produce desmoplastic stroma, 
thereby modulating disease progression and therapeutic response in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PdA). However, it is 
unknown whether cAFs uniformly carry out these tasks or if subtypes of cAFs with distinct phenotypes in PdA exist. We iden-
tified a cAF subpopulation with elevated expression of α-smooth muscle actin (αSMA) located immediately adjacent to neo-
plastic cells in mouse and human PdA tissue. We recapitulated this finding in co-cultures of murine PScs and PdA organoids, 
and demonstrated that organoid-activated cAFs produced desmoplastic stroma. the co-cultures showed cooperative interac-
tions and revealed another distinct subpopulation of cAFs, located more distantly from neoplastic cells, which lacked elevated 
αSMA expression and instead secreted IL6 and additional inflammatory mediators. these findings were corroborated in mouse 
and human PdA tissue, providing direct evidence for cAF heterogeneity in PdA tumor biology with implications for disease 
etiology and therapeutic development.
Distinct populations of inflammatory fibroblasts and 
myofibroblasts in pancreatic cancer
Daniel Öhlund,1,2,3* Abram Handly-Santana,1,2* Giulia Biffi,1,2* Ela Elyada,1,2* Ana S. Almeida,1,4 
Mariano Ponz-Sarvise,1,2,5 
Vincenzo Corbo,1,2,6,7 Tobiloba E. Oni,1,2,8 Stephen A. Hearn,1 
Eun Jung Lee,1,2 Iok In Christine Chio,1,2 Chang-Il Hwang,1,2 Hervé Tiriac,1,2 Lindsey A. Baker,1,2 
Dannielle D. Engle,1,2 Christine Feig,9 Anne Kultti,9 Mikala Egeblad,1 Douglas T. Fearon,1 
James M. Crawford,10 Hans Clevers,11 
Y
oungkyu Park,1,2 and David A. Tuveson1,2
1Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory and 2Lustgarten Foundation Pancreatic Cancer Research Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724
3Department of Surgical and Perioperative Sciences, Surgery, Umeå University, 901 85 Umeå, Sweden
4APC Microbiome Institute and School of Microbiology, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland
5Department of Oncology, Clinica Universidad de Navarra, CIMA, IDI 
SNA, Pamplona 31008, Spain
6ARC-Net centre for applied research on cancer and 7Department of Diagnostic and Public Health, University and Hospital Trust of Verona, 37134 Verona, Italy
8Graduate Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794
9University of Cambridge, Cancer Research UK, Cambridge Institute, Cambridge, UK
10Hofstra Northwell School of Medicine, Hempstead, NY 11550
11Hubrecht Institute, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW), University Medical Centre Utrecht and CancerGenomics.nl, 3584 CT Utrecht, 
Netherlands
© 2017 Öhlund et al. This article is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution 4.0 
International, as described at https 
://creativecommons 
.org 
/licenses 
/by 
/4 
.0 
/).
*D. Öhlund, A. Handly-Santana, G. Biffi, and E. Elyada contributed equally to this 
paper.
Correspondence to David A. Tuveson: dtuveson@cshl.edu
Abbreviations used: αSMA, α-smooth muscle actin; BM-MSC, BM-derived mesen-
chymal stem cell; CAF, cancer-associated fibroblast; ECM, extracellular matrix; ELI 
SA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; EMT, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transi-
tion; FAP, fibroblast-activation protein; GSEA, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis; iCAF, 
inflammatory CAF; IF, immunofluorescence; IHC, immunohistochemistry; ISH, in situ 
hybridization; myCAF, myofibroblastic CAF; PDA, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma; 
PSC, pancreatic stellate cell.
on June 2, 2019
jem.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20162024
Published Online: 23 February, 2017 | Supp Info: 
 Fibroblast heterogeneity in pancreatic cancer | Öhlund et al.
580
contribute to drug resistance (Garrido-Laguna et al., 2011; 
Straussman et al., 2012).
Attempts to target the stroma, either by directly target-
ing CAFs (Olive et al., 2009; Froeling et al., 2011; Sherman 
et al., 2014), or by enzymatically digesting the ECM (Jaco-
betz et al., 2012; Provenzano et al., 2012), have resulted in 
reduced tumor growth and improved response to chemother-
apy in mouse models and patients (Hingorani et al., 2016). 
These preclinical and clinical findings have nominated the 
PDA stroma, particularly CAFs, as attractive targets for drug 
development. However, several recent reports have ques-
tioned the role of CAFs in PDA maintenance (Bijlsma and 
van Laarhoven, 2015). Genetic disruption or prolonged phar-
macological inhibition of sonic hedgehog, a ligand that stim-
ulates CAFs (Tian et al., 2009; Lee et al., 2014; Rhim et al., 
2014), or depletion of αSMA-expressing cells (Özdemir et al., 
2014), resulted in undifferentiated PDA tumors and decreased 
survival in mice. Furthermore, clinical trials of Smoothened 
inhibitors, which targeted the G protein–coupled receptor 
downstream of hedgehog signaling, have failed to demon-
strate benefits for PDA patients (Kim et al., 2014), with one 
randomized trial reporting adverse effects (Business Wire, 
2012). Although these findings demonstrate the need to use 
caution when targeting CAFs, they also highlight the need to 
systematically determine the composition and function of the 
PDA stroma to improve the development of effective stro-
ma-targeting drugs. Indeed, based on the expression patterns 
of various fibroblast markers in vivo, evidence is emerging 
on the existence of different subtypes of CAFs (Sugimoto 
et al., 2006; Öhlund et al., 2014; Kalluri, 2016). However, no 
precise characterization of CAF subtypes has been performed. 
Here, we investigate CAF heterogeneity in a novel three-di-
mensional co-culture system that recapitulates the in vivo 
symbiotic interactions of CAFs and cancer cells. Our study 
reveals two spatially separated, mutually exclusive, dynamic, 
and phenotypically distinct CAF subtypes, underscoring the 
stromal heterogeneity in PDA and providing an opportunity 
to develop agents that target specific CAF populations.
reSuLtS And dIScuSSIon
Heterogeneous distribution of myofibroblastic cAFs in PdA
To investigate the inherent heterogeneity of fibroblasts in pan-
creatic cancer, we evaluated the spatial distribution of αSMA, 
a hallmark of myofibroblasts (Desmoulière et al., 2004), in 
human pancreatic tumors. Immunofluorescence analysis of 
FAP
, a PSC marker, and αSMA expression in human PDA 
tissues revealed that the majority of fibroblasts expressed FAP 
and low levels of αSMA, whereas a subpopulation of FAP+ 
cells showed substantially elevated expression levels of αSMA 
(Fig. 1 A). These FAP+ αSMAhigh cells could also be delin-
eated by RNA in situ hybridization (ISH), and were located 
in direct proximity to neoplastic cells, forming a periglandular 
ring surrounding cancer cell clusters (Fig. 1 B). A gradient of 
αSMA expression was similarly observed in tumors from KPC 
(KrasLSL-G12D/+; Trp53LSL-R172H/+; Pdx-1-Cre) mice (Fig. 1, 
C and D), a mouse model that recapitulates the human dis-
ease (Hingorani et al., 2005). As a result of the selective high 
expression of αSMA, we refer to these periglandular FAP+ 
αSMAhigh fibroblasts as myofibroblastic CAFs (myCAFs).
T
o exclude the possibility that myCAFs are neoplastic 
cells that have undergone epithelial-to-mesenchymal transi-
tion (EMT), we analyzed tissues of a KPCY mouse model, in 
which all neoplastic pancreatic cells express yellow fluores-
cent protein (YFP; Rhim et al., 2012). Periglandular cells ex-
pressing high αSMA levels did not coexpress 
YFP
, confirming 
that myCAFs are of a nonneoplastic origin (Fig. 1 E). These 
findings identify myCAFs as a distinct subpopulation of CAFs 
with a unique spatial distribution pattern in PDA.
A novel three-dimensional co-culture platform recapitulates 
in vivo cAF heterogeneity
T
o further characterize CAFs in PDA, we studied PSCs, 
which are believed to be a major source of FAP+ CAFs in 
PDA stroma (Apte et al., 2004; Erkan et al., 2012). Quiescent 
and lipid-storing PSCs were isolated from WT C57BL/6J 
mice pancreata (Fig. S1, A and B), and cultured as primary 
cells or after immortalization with the SV40 large T Antigen. 
When PSCs are grown in monolayers, they lose their lipid 
droplets and assume a myofibroblastic phenotype indicated 
by αSMA expression, but can be reversed back to a quies-
cence and lipid-storing phenotype if embedded in Matri-
gel (Jesnowski et al., 2005). T
o verify that the characteristic 
phenotypes of PSCs remained after isolation and immortal-
ization, we cultured PSCs in Matrigel and used Oil Red-O 
staining to confirm that they reacquired lipid droplets (Fig. 
S1 C). Additionally, we found that the PSCs, when cultured 
as a monolayer, showed an adequate response to the vitamin 
D analogue Calcipotriol (Sherman et al., 2014; Fig. S1 D). 
Moreover, addition of recombinant TGFβ to quiescent PSCs 
cultured in Matrigel induced the expression of TGFβ target 
genes, such as Ctgf and Col1a1 (Fig. S1 E), demonstrating 
that the isolated PSCs still respond to common stromal cues.
T
o investigate the interactions between cancer cells 
and PSCs, we established a three-dimensional organotypic 
co-culture system that combined GFP-labeled tumor-de-
rived murine pancreatic organoids (Huch et al., 2013; Boj 
et al., 2015) and mCherry-labeled murine PSCs (Fig. 2 A). 
Pancreatic organoids are routinely cultured in a defined, mi-
togen-rich media. However, many factors that are present 
in this organoid media, including Noggin, B27 supplement, 
and TGBβ inhibitor, are known to be potent inhibitors of 
fibroblast proliferation. T
o avoid inhibition of PSC prolifera-
tion in co-cultures, we used a reduced media without these 
components, based on DMEM supplemented with 5% FBS. 
Although cancer-naive PSCs embedded alone in Matrigel re-
mained quiescent, PSCs in co-culture with tumor organoids 
acquired a CAF phenotype, demonstrated by morphologi-
cal activation with cellular extensions in close contact with 
tumor organoids (Fig. 2 B). Importantly, freshly isolated and 
nonimmortalized PSCs seeded directly in Matrigel showed 
 581
JEM Vol. 214, No. 3
similar morphological changes when co-cultured with organ-
oids (Fig. 2 C), demonstrating that the activated phenotype 
in co-culture is an inherent feature of PSCs. Electron micros-
copy of co-cultures revealed the close relationship between 
cancer cells and PSCs, with only a thin gap filled with ma-
trix separating the two cell types (Fig. 2 D). Activated PSCs 
deposited ECM (Fig. 2 E) containing collagen I (Fig. 2 F) 
that was organized into collagen fibrils (Fig. 2 G). Thus, our 
co-culture system is the first to recapitulate the desmoplastic 
reaction of PDA in vitro, with PSCs converting from a resting 
quiescent state to activated, stroma-producing CAFs.
PSCs were nonproliferative until organoids were in-
cluded in co-culture (Fig. 2 H), and the co-cultures also 
promoted the proliferation of organoids (Fig. 2 I). Moreover, 
whereas organoid monocultures could be passaged indefi-
nitely in complete media (Boj et al., 2015), reduced media 
conditions precluded prolonged passaging of organoids un-
less PSCs were present in co-culture (Fig. 2 J). The mutual 
proliferative benefits for both epithelial cells and PSCs are 
consistent with prior reports of similar symbiotic interactions 
that promote PDA (Bachem et al., 2005; Hwang et al., 2008; 
Vonlaufen et al., 2008; Sousa et al., 2016).
Analysis by ISH identified a clear distribution of αSMAhigh 
PSCs surrounding the organoids in co-culture (Fig. 2 K), 
recapitulating the in vivo finding of a subpopulation of fi-
broblasts expressing high levels of αSMA (myCAFs) in close 
proximity to neoplastic cells (Fig. 1, A–D). This result also 
supports the premise that PSCs are a source of myofibroblas-
tic CAFs in addition to BM-derived mesenchymal stem cells 
(BM-MSCs), which have previously been reported to give 
Figure 1. High expression of αSMA is a 
distinctive property of periglandular cAFs 
in mouse and human PdA. (A, left) Repre-
sentative immunofluorescence (IF) co-staining 
of FAP (green) and αSMA (red) in a well-dif-
ferentiated human PDA (n = 4). Counterstain, 
DAPI (blue). (right) Higher magnification illus-
trating the distribution and co-localization of 
FAP and αSMA. Bars, 50 µm. T, tumor glands. 
(B) Representative image of RNA ISH for Cy-
tokeratin 18 (KRT18, blue) and αSMA (ACTA2, 
red) transcripts in a well-differentiated human 
PDA (n = 3). Bar, 50 µm. T, tumor gland. (C, left) 
Representative image of RNA ISH for Fap (blue) 
and Acta2 (red) in a KPC mouse tumor (n = 
3). (right) Higher magnification. Bars, 25 µm. T, 
tumor glands. (D, top) Representative image of 
fluorescent RNA ISH for Fap (green) and Acta2 
(red) in a KPC mouse tumor (n = 3), showing 
transcript distribution across three cell layers 
of the stroma, starting from the first layer ad-
jacent to the tumor gland (T) and moving out-
wards. Counterstain, DAPI (blue). Bar, 50 µm. 
(bottom) Quantification of Fap and Acta2 flu-
orescence intensity in the three cell layers. Re-
sults show mean ± SD of three tumor glands. 
Data are normalized to layer 1. ***, P < 0.001, 
unpaired Student’s t test. (E) Representative 
images of IHC of αSMA and YFP in sequential 
tissue sections from KPCY mice, with either 
preinvasive Pancreatic Intraepithelial Neopla-
sia (PanIN) or invasive cancer (n = 2). Arrows 
indicate areas of myCAFs. Bar, 50 µm.
 Fibroblast heterogeneity in pancreatic cancer | Öhlund et al.
582
Figure 2. co-cultures of mouse PScs and pancreatic cancer organoids recapitulate properties of PdA desmoplasia. (A) Schematic illustration of 
the co-culture platform. (B) Representative images of mCherry-labeled PSCs (red) cultured alone or in co-culture with GFP-labeled tumor-derived organ-
oids (green), and imaged by confocal microscopy after 4 or 7 d in bright field and by fluorescent microscopy (n = 3). Arrows point to close interactions 
between organoids and PSCs. Bars, 100 µm. (C) Bright field images of primary PSCs plated in Matrigel directly after isolation, and either cultured alone or 
co-cultured with tumor organoids for 5 d (n = 3). Bar, 100 µm. (D) Representative electron microscopy image showing the proximity between organoids 
and PSCs in co-culture (n = 2). Bar, 5 µm. (E) H&E staining and Masson’s trichrome (MT) staining of fixed and paraffin-embedded organoids cultured alone 
or in co-culture with PSCs (n = 2). Bar, 50 µm. (F) Representative bright field and IF images of collagen I deposition (red) in organoid cultured alone or in 
co-culture with PSCs (n = 2). Bar, 200 µm. (G) Representative electron microscopy image of banded collagen fibrils (arrow), with fibril diameters ranging 
between 24 and 35 nm, in the extracellular space between organoids and PSCs (n = 2). Bar, 1 µm. (H) PSC proliferation curves plotting changes in mCherry 
intensity over time. Results show mean ± SD of two biological replicates. **, P < 0.01, unpaired Student’s t test. (I) Organoid proliferation curves plotting 
changes in GFP intensity over time. Results show mean ± SD of three biological replicates. *, P < 0.05, unpaired Student’s t test. (J) Passaging of organoids 
in different culture conditions in the presence or absence of PSCs. Complete media, DMEM/F12 supplemented with mitogens and growth factors. Reduced 
media, DMEM + 5% FBS. Red dot indicates the passage number when all organoids were found dead. Green dot indicates surviving organoids when the 
experiment was terminated. Each dot represents one biological replicate. Bars indicate the average number of passages for each condition. (K) RNA ISH of 
fixed and sectioned co-cultures for αSMA (Acta2, red) and Krt18 (green) illustrating the spatial distribution of αSMAhigh PSCs in comparison to Krt18+ (green) 
tumor organoids (n = 2). Counterstain, DAPI. Higher magnification on the right. Bars, 50 µm.
 583
JEM Vol. 214, No. 3
rise to myofibroblasts in cancer (Quante et al., 2011). More-
over, this novel co-culture platform confirms the existence of 
cooperative interactions between cancer cells and PSCs, and 
provides a way for their systematic characterization.
A population of cAFs secretes inflammatory cytokines and 
loses myofibroblastic features
T
o identify soluble factors that may mediate the symbiosis 
observed in co-culture, we analyzed the secretome of PSC 
and organoid co-cultures. We found that several secreted pro-
teins, including inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, ma-
trix remodeling proteins, and growth factors, were elevated 
specifically in co-culture (Fig. 3 A). One of the induced cy-
tokines was interleukin 6 (IL-6), which has been reported to 
be up-regulated in PDA (Talar-Wojnarowska et al., 2009) and 
to promote cancer progression (Lesina et al., 2011; Zhang 
et al., 2013; Nagathihalli et al., 2016), cachexia, and immune 
suppression (Flint et al., 2016).
The increased cytokine production observed when 
tumor organoids and PSCs are co-cultured could be the re-
sult of a direct physical contact between these populations 
or alternatively, it could be caused by paracrine signaling 
between them. T
o disentangle these two possibilities and to 
determine which cell type was responsible for the increased 
cytokine production, we made use of a Transwell system, 
which allows paracrine interactions between tumor organ-
oids and PSCs, but prevents direct contact between the two 
cell types (Fig. 3 B). IL-6 acts by binding to the IL-6 receptor 
subunit α (IL6RA), which in turn facilitates the dimeriza-
tion and signaling of the GP130 signaling complex (Taga and 
Kishimoto, 1997). Because GP130 is known to interact with 
other ligand-receptor pairs, we measured the expression of 
additional GP130 signaling partners in both organoids and 
PSCs in trans-well cultures. Of the GP130 ligands found to 
be expressed in PSCs, Il6, Il11, and leukemia inhibitory factor 
(Lif ) were the most highly up-regulated in trans-well cultures 
when compared with PSC monocultures (Fig. 3 C). Both 
IL-11 and LIF are reported to have roles in cancer progres-
sion (Putoczki et al., 2013; Marusyk et al., 2014), and LIF 
expression has been shown to be elevated in human PDA 
(Corcoran et al., 2011). In trans-well cultures, organoids did 
not express detectable levels of Il6 but expressed Il6ra, Il11ra1, 
Lifr, and Gp130 (Fig. 3 D), indicating that activated PSCs are 
the sole source of IL-6 in co-culture and that tumor organ-
oids express the receptors needed to respond to PSC-secreted 
ligands. These results also confirm that direct contact with 
neoplastic cells is not required for PSCs to initiate cytokine 
secretion. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELI 
SA) was 
performed to confirm and quantify the elevated secretion of 
IL-6, IL-11, and LIF in co-culture (Fig. 3 E).
T
o evaluate these findings in human PDA fibroblasts, 
we isolated CAFs from primary (hT1) and metastatic (hM1) 
tumors of two PDA patients (Boj et al., 2015; Fig. S1, F–J). 
We then performed secretome analysis of conditioned media 
from co-cultures of human PDA CAFs with patient-matched 
tumor organoids. Secretion of IL-6 was induced in both pri-
mary tumor and metastatic co-cultures, whereas secretion of 
IL-11 and LIF was only induced in the co-culture derived 
from the primary tumor (hT1; Fig. 3 F).
Once dimerized with IL6RA, GP130 is phosphorylated 
and forms a complex with tyrosine kinases such as Janus ki-
nases (JAKs). JAKs in turn phosphorylate and activate sig-
nal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) factors, 
most notably STAT3, which plays key roles in cell growth 
and proliferation (Taga and Kishimoto, 1997). Immunofluo-
rescence staining revealed detectable activation of STAT3 in 
KPC tumors, both in cancer cells and the surrounding stroma 
(Fig. 3 G). T
o confirm that tumor organoids activate STAT3 
in response to paracrine stimuli, we measured STAT3 phos-
phorylation in organoids after the addition of recombinant 
IL-6, IL-11, and LIF to the media. All three ligands robustly 
activated STAT3 in organoids, and this effect was prevented 
when neutralizing antibodies against each ligand were added 
(Fig. 3 H). Interestingly, IL-6 was able to strongly activate 
STAT3 in tumor organoids, in contrast to studies using acinar 
cells isolated from KrasG12D mice that concluded that IL-6 
trans-signaling is necessary to mediate robust STAT3 activa-
tion in pancreatic tumor cells (Lesina et al., 2011). STAT3 
was also activated by the addition of co-culture conditioned 
media to tumor organoids in monoculture, and this activation 
was again blocked by addition of neutralizing antibodies, with 
the anti–IL-6 neutralizing antibody having the most prom-
inent effect (Fig. 3 I).
As STAT3 activation is known to control cell survival 
and proliferation, we investigated its role in co-culture by 
using CRI 
SPR/Cas9 gene editing to knockout IL-6 in two 
PSC lines. We confirmed loss of IL-6 secretion in PSCs by 
 
ELI 
SA of conditioned media from trans-well cultures (Fig. 
S1 K). Interestingly, whereas organoids co-cultured with 
WT PSCs showed, as expected, prolonged passaging ability 
in reduced media conditions compared with monocultured 
organoids, continued passaging of organoids was impaired 
in co-cultures with IL-6–deficient PSCs (Fig. 3 J). These re-
sults demonstrate that tumor organoids in co-culture activate 
PSCs to secrete multiple factors, which in turn activate sig-
naling pathways in organoids that sustain survival.
T
o further investigate the secretory phenotype of or-
ganoid-activated PSCs, we exposed quiescent PSCs to organ-
oid-conditioned media (Fig. S2 A). In these conditions, PSCs 
acquired a CAF phenotype, indicated by morphological acti-
vation (Fig. S2 B), proliferation (Fig. S2 C), and up-regulation 
of Il6, Il11, and Lif mRNA levels (Fig. 3 K). Unexpectedly, 
we detected a simultaneous reduction in Acta2 transcript and 
αSMA protein levels (Fig. 3, K and L). Although αSMA ex-
pression dropped in PSCs activated by tumor organoid-con-
ditioned media, additional fibroblast surface markers, such as 
FAP and platelet-derived growth factor receptors (PDG 
FRs; 
Yuzawa et al., 2012) remained unchanged (Fig. S2, D and E), 
suggesting a specific loss of myofibroblastic features in cy-
tokine-secreting PSCs. This result was reproduced in three 
 Fibroblast heterogeneity in pancreatic cancer | Öhlund et al.
584
Figure 3. Secretion of inflammatory cytokines from cAFs activates StAt3 in PdA organoids. (A) Quantification of secretome dot blots of condi-
tioned media from mouse tumor organoid monocultures, PSC monocultures, co-cultures, or Matrigel-only controls (MG). Results show normalized mean 
± SD of three biological replicates. (B) Schematic illustration of the trans-well culture platform. (C and D) qPCR analysis of GP130 signaling ligands and 
receptors in mouse PSCs (C) or tumor organoids (D) cultured in monoculture or trans-well culture. Results show mean ± SD of four biological replicates. 
n.d., not detected. (E) ELI 
SA of IL-6, IL-11, and LIF from conditioned media of PSC monocultures, organoid monocultures, or co-cultures. Results show mean 
± SD of three biological replicates. (F) Quantification of secretome dot blots of conditioned media from human primary CAF monocultures, patient-matched 
tumor organoid monocultures, or co-cultures (n = 2). Results show mean ± SD of two technical replicates for each condition. (G) Representative IF image of 
KPC mouse tumor stained for phosphorylated STAT3 (Tyr705; green, pSTAT3) and the epithelial marker Cytokeratin 19 (Krt19, red; n = 2). Counterstain, DAPI 
 585
JEM Vol. 214, No. 3
mouse primary PSC lines (Fig. 3 M). Conditioned media 
from KPC cancer cells cultured in monolayer also induced 
this αSMAlow IL-6high phenotype in PSCs, whereas condi-
tioned media of NIH-3T3 fibroblasts did not (Fig. S2 F), sug-
gesting that the ability to induce this secretory phenotype in 
PSCs is absent in cells of mesenchymal origin.
To extend our finding to mouse and human CAFs that 
already have been reprogrammed in vivo and not necessarily 
derived from PSCs, we isolated CAF lines from KPC mouse 
tumors, and validated their mesenchymal origin (Fig. S2, G–I). 
Mouse CAFs cultured with tumor organoid-conditioned 
media also increased Il6 and concomitantly lost Acta2 expres-
sion (Fig. 3 N). Although to a lesser extent, this pattern was 
also present in primary CAFs isolated from human primary 
and metastatic PDA samples when cultured with conditioned 
media from patient-matched tumor organoids (Fig. 3 O).
Previous studies have shown that pancreatic cancer 
cells induce IL-6 secretion in fibroblasts and PSCs (Erez et 
al., 2010; Feig et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2013; Waghray et 
al., 2016), and that PSCs are a major source of IL-6 in PDA 
(Feig et al., 2013; Mace et al., 2016). Our data confirm this 
trait in cancer-naive PSCs that are allowed to interact with 
cancer cells, as well as in mouse and human PDA-derived 
CAFs. Importantly, for the first time we couple this pheno-
type with loss of myofibroblastic features. Such heteroge-
neity has previously been unappreciated, likely due to the 
fact that monolayers of fibroblasts uniformly express high 
levels of αSMA in culture.
Notably, the marked drop in bulk αSMA expression 
induced by organoid-conditioned media (Fig. 3 K) con-
trasted with the presence of CAFs expressing high levels of 
αSMA in proximity to neoplastic cells observed in co-cul-
tures (Fig. 2 K) and in vivo (Fig. 1, A–D). We therefore 
hypothesized the coexistence of two distinct subtypes of 
CAFs in co-culture and PDA tissue, one being αSMAhigh 
IL-6low and proximal to the neoplastic cells (myCAFs), and 
the other being αSMAlow IL-6high induced by paracrine sig-
naling from the tumor compartment and more distantly dis-
tributed throughout the tumor. We termed these αSMAlow 
IL-6high CAFs inflammatory CAFs (iCAFs) for their cyto-
kine-secreting properties.
cAFs coexist as two mutually exclusive 
and reversible subtypes
T
o determine whether distinct CAF subtypes coexist in 
co-culture, flow cytometry was used to detect αSMA and 
IL-6 expression in PSCs co-cultured with tumor organoids 
(Fig. S2 J). As our hypothesis predicted, co-culture triggered 
high αSMA expression only in a subset of PSCs (myCAFs), 
whereas a separate population showed low αSMA expression 
and concomitantly elevated IL-6 expression (iCAFs; Fig. 4 A). 
Moreover, we found that trans-well cultures of PSCs and or-
ganoids (Fig. 3 B) markedly induced iCAF formation, but 
did not cause an increase in myCAFs (Fig. 4 B). This demon-
strates that the formation of myCAFs is contact-dependent, 
whereas iCAFs may be enriched in the absence of contact 
with PDA cells. 
The presence of iCAFs in co-culture was evi-
dent by ISH of Il6 (Fig. 4 C), which also confirmed that these 
CAFs were spatially separated from organoids.
T
o evaluate whether CAFs produce interleukins in vivo, 
we dissociated KPC mouse tumors into single cells, isolated 
CAFs by flow cytometry, and characterized their gene ex-
pression. We sorted CAFs based on PDG 
FRα expression 
because it has been shown to be a specific surface marker 
for CAFs (Erez et al., 2010). As a comparison, epithelial and 
immune cells were isolated, using the EpCAM and CD45 
surface markers, respectively (Fig. S2 K). No overlap was de-
tected between the CD45+ population and the PDG 
FRα+ 
population (Fig. S2 L), demonstrating the mutual exclusivity 
of these two markers. We further confirmed the purity of the 
three sorted cell populations by qPCR for additional fibro-
blast, epithelial and immune markers, and demonstrated that 
PDG 
FRα+ CAFs contain the majority of IL-6 transcripts in 
PDA (Fig. 4 D). Additionally, we found that IL-11 mRNA is 
also predominantly present in CAFs, further supporting the 
presence of an inflammatory CAF phenotype (Fig. 4 D).
T
o investigate the spatial distribution of IL-6high CAFs 
in vivo, immunohistochemical analysis of KPC tumor tissue 
was performed. Consistent with the co-cultures, we detected 
IL-6 expression in cells that were located further away from 
neoplastic cells in the desmoplastic stroma (Fig. 4 E). 
We con-
firmed that these were iCAFs by co-staining for PDG 
FRβ, 
another fibroblast marker (Yuzawa et al., 2012; Fig. 4 E). Im-
(blue). Bar, 75 µm. (H) Western blot analysis of pSTAT3 in organoids treated with either 10 ng/ml recombinant IL-6, 10 ng/ml recombinant IL-11, or 50 ng/ml 
recombinant LIF, in the presence or absence of neutralizing antibodies or isotype controls (n = 2). Loading control, Actin. Molecular weights in kilodaltons. 
(I) Western blot analysis of pSTAT3 in organoids treated with co-culture conditioned media in the presence or absence of neutralizing antibodies against 
IL-6, IL-11, or LIF (n = 3). Loading control, Actin. Molecular weights in kilodaltons. (J) Passaging of organoids in reduced media conditions in monoculture or 
co-culture with WT (PSC WT) or IL-6 KO PSCs (PSC IL-6 KO). Red dot indicates the passage number when all organoids were found dead. Green dot indicates 
the passage number of surviving organoids when the experiment was terminated. Each dot represents one biological replicate. Bars indicate the average 
number of passages for each condition. (K) qPCR analysis of Il6, Il11, Lif, and Acta2 transcript levels in PSCs cultured with control media (Matrigel-only 
conditioned media) or tumor organoid conditioned media. Results show mean ± SD of five biological replicates for Il6, Lif, and Acta2, and three biological 
replicates for Il11. (L) Western blot analysis of PSCs cultured with control media or tumor organoid conditioned media (n = 3). Loading control, Hsp90α. 
Molecular weights in kilodaltons. (M and N) qPCR analysis of Il6 and Acta2 in three primary PSC lines (M) and two KPC mouse CAFs (N) cultured with control 
media or tumor organoid conditioned media. Results show mean ± SD of two technical replicates for each line. (O) qPCR analysis for IL6 and ACTA2 tran-
script levels in human primary CAFs cultured with control media or conditioned media from the corresponding patient-matched tumor organoids. Results 
show mean ± SD of 2 technical replicates. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001, unpaired Student’s t test.
 Fibroblast heterogeneity in pancreatic cancer | Öhlund et al.
586
Figure 4. two mutually exclusive subpopulations of cAFs with reversible features coexist in pancreatic cancer. (A and B) Flow cytometric analysis 
of αSMA and IL-6 in PSCs cultured alone or in either co-culture (A) or trans-well culture (B) with tumor organoids. Red frame indicates the gate defining 
myCAFs (αSMAhigh IL-6low) and black frame indicates the gate defining iCAFs (αSMAlow IL-6high). Numbers indicate percentage of cells within marked gate. 
Graphs on the right are showing the fold change induction of myCAFs and iCAFs in co-culture, normalized to PSCs in monoculture. Results show mean ± 
SD of four (A) or two (B) biological replicates. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01, unpaired Student’s t test. (C) Fluorescent RNA ISH of fixed and sectioned co-cultures 
for Il6 (red) and Krt18 (green), illustrating the spatial distribution of IL-6+ PSCs (iCAFs) with respect to KRT18+ tumor organoids (n = 2). Higher magnifica-
tion on the right. Counterstain, DAPI (blue). Arrow indicates example of an iCAF. Bars, 50 µm. (D) qPCR analysis of interleukins (Il6 and Il11) and markers of 
fibroblast (Pdgfra, Pdgfrb, Acta2, and Fap), epithelial (Krt19) and macrophage (CD11b) lineages in samples of primary cells sorted from KPC mouse tumors. 
Sorting was performed using three markers: PDG 
FRα (CD140a) for fibroblasts (n = 3), EpCAM for epithelial cells (n = 3) and CD45 for immune cells (n = 2). 
Results show mean ± SD of two to three biological replicates. All gene expression changes are statistically significant when compared with the reference 
population, P < 0.01, unpaired Student’s t test. (E) Representative image of sequential IHC for IL-6 (purple) and PDG 
FRβ (brown) in a KPC mouse tumor (n 
= 3). Arrows indicate double positive cells. T, tumor gland. Bars, 50 µm. (F, left) Representative image of sequential IHC for PDG 
FRβ (gray), IL-6 (brown), and 
 587
JEM Vol. 214, No. 3
portantly, a fraction of these iCAFs proliferate in vivo, as indi-
cated by Ki67 coexpression (Fig. 4 F), demonstrating the lack 
of a senescence-associated secretory phenotype (Coppé et al., 
2010). Furthermore, we could identify IL-6–expressing CAFs 
in human PDA by co-staining human tumor tissues for IL-6 
and PDG 
FRβ, confirming that iCAFs are also an inherent 
trait of human PDA (Fig. 4 G). T
o confirm the spatial distri-
bution of myCAFs and iCAFs in KPC tumors, we used ISH 
and immunofluorescence staining, and demonstrated that 
periglandular αSMAhigh cells were spatially separated from the 
more distant IL-6high cells (Fig. 4, H and I), further supporting 
our observation of two distinct CAF populations in vivo.
T
o determine if the iCAF phenotype was permanent or 
transient, we plated myofibroblastic PSCs from monolayers 
into Matrigel to obtain quiescent PSCs, and then induced the 
iCAF phenotype by culturing these cells in trans-well with 
PDA organoids. As PSCs grown in monolayers are known to 
obtain myofibroblastic features, we subsequently plated the 
iCAFs in monolayer, and found that iCAFs rapidly reverted 
to a myofibroblastic state, down-regulating Il6, Il11, and Lif, 
and simultaneously up-regulating Acta2 expression levels 
(Fig. 4 J). This observation suggests that CAFs are dynamic 
and can assume different phenotypes based on their spatial 
and biochemical niche within the PDA microenvironment.
Overall, our results, both in vivo and in co-culture, show 
a spatial separation between iCAFs and myCAFs. MyCAFs 
are located in the periglandular region, suggesting that di-
rect juxtacrine interactions with cancer cells are required 
for myCAF formation. iCAFs, on the other hand, are in-
duced by secreted factors from cancer cells and are located 
more distantly from neoplastic cells and myCAFs in PDA. 
Although we have demonstrated the existence and spatial 
separation of these two CAF populations, other CAF popula-
tions with unique genetic signatures may exist. The existence 
of these diverse populations and their functions in tumors 
remain to be elucidated.
Inflammatory cAFs and myofibroblasts show distinct 
transcriptional profiles
T
o better understand the differences between these subtypes, 
we compared the transcriptomes of quiescent PSCs (PSCs 
embedded alone in Matrigel), iCAFs (SMAlow IL-6high PSCs 
cultured in trans-well with tumor organoids), and myofibro-
blastic PSCs (SMAhigh IL-6low PSCs grown in monolayer) as a 
proxy for myCAFs, because obtaining myCAFs from tumors 
or co-cultures presents a technical challenge (Fig. S2 M). 
By RNA sequencing, we found clusters of genes uniquely 
up-regulated in either myofibroblasts or iCAFs (Fig. 5, A and 
B; Fig. S2 N; and Table S1). In particular, Acta2 and TGFβ 
response genes, such as Ctgf and Col1a1, were up-regulated 
in myofibroblasts compared with quiescent PSCs and iCAFs. 
On the other hand, cytokines, such as Il6, Il11, and Lif, and 
chemokines, such as Cxcl1 and Cxcl2, were uniquely up-reg-
ulated in iCAFs (Fig. 5, A and B; and Table S1). Furthermore, 
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) of iCAFs compared 
with quiescent PSCs confirmed the up-regulation of cyto-
kine signaling pathways, and identified JAK/STAT signaling 
as one of the most significantly up-regulated pathways in 
iCAFs (Fig. 5 C). Additionally, as expected, basement mem-
branes and smooth muscle contraction pathways were the 
most significantly down-regulated ones in iCAFs (Fig. 5 C). 
The identification of unique transcriptional signatures of my-
ofibroblasts and iCAFs further supports the model that CAFs 
within the PDA microenvironment acquire distinct pheno-
types. In particular, the transcriptomic profiling implies that 
myofibroblasts are contractile and stroma remodeling, whereas 
iCAFs are characterized by a secretory phenotype, with the 
ability to modulate in a paracrine manner cancer cells and 
other cell types present in the tumor. Importantly, secreted 
factors from iCAFs, such as IL-6, likely contribute to systemic 
effects in PDA patients, such as cachexia and immune sup-
pression (Feig et al., 2013; Flint et al., 2016; Mace et al., 2016).
In summary, we have identified two spatially sepa-
rated, reversible, and mutually exclusive subtypes of CAFs 
(Fig. 5 D). iCAFs, which are activated by paracrine factors 
secreted from cancer cells, are located more distantly from 
neoplastic cells within the dense tumor stroma. Although 
iCAFs still retain expression of αSMA, they are characterized 
by significantly lower αSMA levels compared with myCAFs, 
and instead intensely elevate expression of cytokines and 
chemokines with known roles in cancer progression and dis-
ease pathophysiology. Indeed, iCAFs are a significant source 
of IL-6 and IL-11 in the PDA microenvironment (Fig. 4 D), 
with the ability to stimulate the STAT3 pathway in cancer 
cells (Fig. 3 I). However, myCAFs are defined by high αSMA 
expression and periglandular location (Fig. 1, A–D), and their 
formation appears dependent on juxtacrine interactions with 
cancer cells (Fig. 4 B). Furthermore, myCAFs lack the ex-
pression of inflammatory cytokines, distinguishing them from 
iCAFs. Importantly, both inflammatory and myofibroblastic 
Ki67 (purple) in a KPC mouse tumor (n = 3). Arrows indicate examples of triple positive cells. Bar, 50 µm. (right) Quantification of Ki67 staining in PDG 
FRβ+/
IL-6+ cells (iCAFs), total of 593 cells were counted. (G) Representative image of sequential IHC for IL-6 (brown) and PDG 
FRβ (purple) in a human PDA (n = 
6). Arrowheads indicate double positive cells. T, tumor gland. Bars, 50 µm. (H) Representative image of RNA ISH for Acta2 (blue) and Il6 (red) in KPC mouse 
tumors (n = 4). Arrows indicate examples of Acta2-positive cells in the periglandular area, arrowheads indicate examples of Il6-positive cells further away 
from neoplastic cells. Bar, 50 µm. T, tumor glands. (I) Representative IF image for αSMA (green) and IL-6 (red) in a KPC mouse tumor (n = 3). Counterstain, 
DAPI (blue). Arrowheads indicate examples of αSMA-positive cells in the periglandular area; * indicates examples of IL-6–positive cells further away from 
neoplastic cells. Bar, 50 µm. T, tumor glands. (J) qPCR analysis of Il6, Il11, Lif, and Acta2 transcript levels in two PSC lines (PSC4 and PSC5) first grown as 
monocultures in Matrigel (quiescent PSCs), then transferred to trans-well cultures with tumor organoids (iCAFs), and finally plated as monolayer cultures 
(myofibroblasts). Results show mean ± SD of two technical replicates for each PSC line. **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001, unpaired Student’s t test.
 Fibroblast heterogeneity in pancreatic cancer | Öhlund et al.
588
CAFs can be generated from PSCs, and can dynamically re-
verse from one cell state to the other (Fig. 4 J). The detailed 
mechanisms that govern the formation and transition of these 
cell states will require further investigation.
Although we have identified two subtypes of PSC-de-
rived CAFs in PDA, it is likely that additional CAF subtypes 
with distinct roles in the pathophysiology of this disease 
exist. Indeed, our data already reveal a large population of 
CAFs with low expression of both αSMA and IL-6 (Fig. 4, A 
and B). Furthermore, a more thorough definition of stromal 
subtypes may involve additional factors and more complex 
genetic signatures. Importantly, although other groups have 
identified different subtypes of stroma in PDA across patients 
(Moffitt et al., 2015), our work is the first to characterize the 
intratumoral CAF heterogeneity in PDA.
The concept of intratumoral CAF heterogeneity may 
address the conflicting reports that have emerged in the field 
in regard to CAF functions. Indeed, in recent years, differ-
ent approaches to target the stroma have given contradicting 
results and, at times, promoted worse outcomes (Lee et al., 
2014; Özdemir et al., 2014; Rhim et al., 2014). For instance, 
attempts to deplete CAFs based on their αSMA expression 
have led to decreased survival in tumor-bearing mice (Öz-
demir et al., 2014). However, given our results, this approach 
Figure 5. Inflammatory cAFs and myofibroblasts have distinct transcriptional profiles. (A) RNA sequencing analysis of quiescent PSCs (PSCs em-
bedded alone in Matrigel; n = 2), iCAFs (PSCs grown in trans-well culture with tumor organoids; n = 4) and myofibroblasts (PSCs grown in monolayer; n = 
2). The heat map shows differentially expressed genes between the three cell states. Uniquely expressed genes for iCAFs and myofibroblasts are indicated in 
the boxes. Adjusted P < 0.01. (B) Lists of the 25 most up-regulated genes in iCAFs and myofibroblasts compared with quiescent PSCs. Adjusted P < 0.05. (C) 
GSEA of most up-regulated and down-regulated pathways in iCAFs compared with quiescent PSCs. (D) Working model illustrating the dynamic relationship 
between quiescent PSCs, myCAFs and iCAFs.
 589
JEM Vol. 214, No. 3
may have preferentially eliminated myCAFs, while leaving 
other CAF populations intact. Therefore, the traditional view 
of the tumor stroma as a uniformly protumorigenic niche 
calls for reconsideration, as certain CAF subtypes might have 
protumorigenic properties, whereas others might have antitu-
morigenic features. Therapeutic development must consider 
this possibility to provide optimal benefits to PDA patients.
MAterIALS And MetHodS
PSc isolation
PSCs were isolated from WT C57BL/6J mice as previously 
described (Apte et al., 1998) with minor modifications. In 
brief, pancreata were minced and digested for 30 min at 37°C 
in a dissociation buffer containing 0.05% collagenase P (Sig-
ma-Aldrich) and 0.1% DNase I (Sigma-Aldrich) in Grey’s 
balanced salt solution (GBSS; Sigma-Aldrich). Digested pan-
creata were filtered through a 100-µm nylon mesh and washed 
in GBSS with 0.3% BSA and 0.1% DNase I. After spinning, 
the cell pellet was resuspended in 9.5 ml GBSS with 0.3% 
BSA and 43.75% Histodenz (Sigma-Aldrich). 6 ml of GBSS 
with 0.3% BSA was layered on top of the cell suspension, and 
the gradient was centrifuged for 20 min at 1,400 RCF (with 
break switched off). The cells in the fuzzy band just above the 
interface between the Histodenz and GBSS were harvested, 
washed in PBS, and plated.
Mouse models
KPC mice (KrasLSL-G12D/+; Trp53LSL-R172H/+; Pdx-1-Cre) have 
previously been described (Hingorani et al., 2005). Each of 
the three alleles in the KPC mouse strain (Kras; Trp53 and 
Pdx1-Cre) were backcrossed individually onto the C57BL/6J 
mouse strain obtained from The Jackson Laboratory (stock 
number 000664) for at least 20 generations. T
o generate the 
KPC mouse model, mice carrying single alleles were crossed 
onto each other. The Rosa26-LSL-YFP allele (Srinivas et al., 
2001) was backcrossed onto the C57BL/6J mouse strain ob-
tained from The Jackson Laboratory and introduced into the 
KPC C57BL/6J strain for a total of at least 20 generations to 
generate KPC; Rosa26LSL-YFP/+ (KPCY). NOD scid gamma 
(NSG) mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory 
(stock number 005557). All animal procedures and studies 
were conducted in accordance with the Institutional Animal 
Care and Use Committee (IAC 
UC) at CSHL.
Mouse organoid isolation and culture
Mouse tumor organoids were isolated from KPC mice with 
histologically verified PDA. Tumor tissue was minced and di-
gested at 37°C for 12 h in a dissociation buffer containing 
0.012% (wt/vol) collagenase XI (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.012% 
(wt/vol) dispase (Gibco) in DMEM (Gibco) containing 1% 
FBS (Gibco). The tissue debris was allowed to settle, and 
the dissociated cells were pelleted and washed in Advanced 
DMEM/F12 (Invitrogen) and seeded in growth factor-re-
duced Matrigel (BD). Organoids were cultured in com-
plete organoid media (Boj et al., 2015); Advanced DMEM/
F12 supplemented with 1x GlutaMAX (Gibco), 1x Hepes 
(Gibco), 1x B27 (Invitrogen), 1.25 mM N-Acetylcysteine 
(Sigma-Aldrich), 10 nM gastrin (Sigma-Aldrich), 50 ng/ml 
EGF (PeproT
ech), 10% RSPO1-conditioned media, 100 ng/
ml Noggin (PeproT
ech), 100 ng/ml FGF10 (PeproT
ech), and 
10 mM Nicotinamide (Sigma-Aldrich).
T
o passage, organoids were washed out from the Matri-
gel using cold Advanced DMEM/F12 supplemented with 1x 
GlutaMAX (Gibco) and 1x Hepes (Gibco), and mechanically 
dissociated into small fragments using fire-polished glass pi-
pettes, and then seeded into fresh Matrigel. Passaging was per-
formed at a 1:8 split ratio roughly twice per week. T
o create 
frozen stocks, organoids were passaged and mixed with Re-
covery Cell Culture Freezing Medium (Gibco) and cryopre-
served using standard procedures. Cultures were thawed using 
standard thawing procedures, washed once with Advanced 
DMEM/F12 supplemented with 1x GlutaMAX (Gibco) and 
1x HEP 
ES (Gibco), and seeded in Matrigel with organoid 
media supplemented with 10.5 µM Y
-27632 (Sigma-Al-
drich) for the first passage.
Mouse cAF isolation
Mouse CAFs were isolated from KPC mice with histologi-
cally verified PDA. CAFs were isolated from tumors using a 
combination of outgrowth and clonal isolation. The edge of 
the tumor mass was minced and dissociated in DMEM con-
taining 1% FBS, 0.125 mg/ml collagenase (Sigma-Aldrich), 
and 0.125 mg/ml dispase (Life T
echnologies) for 1.5 h at 
37°C in a thermomixer. The sample was trypsinized for 10 
min then quenched in 10% FBS/DMEM. 
The pellet contain-
ing tumor pieces was plated on a 6-cm dish, and fibroblasts 
were allowed to grow out and attach to the plastic. T
o avoid 
cancer cell contamination, after the cell culture was estab-
lished and passaged at least 10 times, cells were plated in high 
dilution in a 96-well plate to obtain one cell per well, and sin-
gle clones were expanded. 
Validation of fibroblast identity was 
performed at the protein level by flow cytometry analysis for 
fibroblast surface markers, and at the genomic level by PCR 
to verify presence of WT and mutant Kras alleles. The prim-
ers used are: 5': GGG 
TAG 
GTG 
TTG 
GGA 
TAG 
CTG, and 3': 
TCC 
GAA 
TTC 
AGT 
GAC 
TAC 
AGA 
TGT 
ACA 
GAG, giving a 
285-bp band for WT and 325-bp band for mutant Kras.
Human organoid and cAF isolation
All human organoid experiments were approved by the IRBs 
of MSK 
CC, MDA 
CC, and CSHL, and all subjects taking part 
in the study provided written informed consent. Tumor tis-
sue was minced and digested in a rotating shaker with col-
lagenase II (5 mg/ml; Gibco) for 12 h at 37°C in human 
complete media, i.e., complete media (Boj et al., 2015), sup-
plemented with 50% Wnt3a-conditioned media and 1 µM 
Prostaglandin E2 (T
ocris; Boj et al., 2015). The tissue was 
further digested for 15 min at 37°C in TrypLE (Gibco) in 
a rotating shaker. The digested tissue was washed repeatedly 
after digestion. 10% of the tissue suspension, including larger 
 Fibroblast heterogeneity in pancreatic cancer | Öhlund et al.
590
undigested pieces, was plated in 10% FBS/RPMI on 10-cm 
dishes to allow fibroblast outgrowth. The remaining tissue 
suspension was seeded in Matrigel and cultured in human 
complete medium for establishment of organoids. Fibroblast 
outgrowth was observed in the 10-cm dishes within 48 h. 
Fibroblast identity was confirmed at the DNA level by Sanger 
sequencing to verify the WT status of KRAS at codon 12 
(forward primer; 5′-CTG 
GTG 
GAG 
TAT 
TTG 
ATA 
GTG-3′, 
reverse primer; 5′-CTG 
TAT 
CAA 
AGA 
ATG 
GTC 
CTG-3′). 
To confirm that the established CAF lines had not become 
transformed in the isolation process, CAFs (2.0–2.5 × 105 
cells) were resuspended in 100 µl Matrigel and injected sub-
cutaneously in flanks of 6–8-wk-old NOD SCID gamma 
mice (The Jackson Laboratory).
Mouse KPc tumor cell isolation for monolayer cultures
The primary tumor cells used in monolayer experiments 
were isolated from KPC tumors by an outgrowth method. In 
brief, 30–50 mg pieces of tumors were minced in DMEM. 
The minced tissue was then transferred into 5 ml of DMEM 
with 2 mg/ml Collagenase 
V (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubated 
for 45 min at 37°C in a thermomixer, with vortexing every 
5–10 min. After digestion, 10 ml of 10% FBS/DMEM was 
added, and samples were pelleted, resuspended in 10% FBS/
DMEM, and plated on a 10 cm dish. Cultures were passaged 
at a high split ratio (1:80) for several passages to favor for the 
growth of neoplastic cells.
cell culture conditions for monolayer cultures
KPC mouse CAFs, mouse PSCs, and KPC primary tumor 
cells were cultured in DMEM containing 5% FBS, 1% l-glu-
tamine, and 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin. NIH-3T3 fibroblasts 
were cultured in DMEM containing 10% FBS, 1% l-gluta-
mine, and 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin. Human CAFs were 
cultured in RPMI 1640 (Gibco) containing 10% FBS, 1% 
l-glutamine, and 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin. All cells were 
cultured at 37°C with 5% CO2.
transfection of fluorophores and immortalization
To immortalize primary PSCs and human CAFs, the SV40 
large T-antigen was cloned from pBABE-puro SV40 LT (Ad-
dgene) into pLVX-IRES-tdT
omato (Takara Bio Inc.) using the 
BamHI site. 293T cells were transfected with the pLVX-SV40 
LT-IRES-tdT
omato plasmid together with psPAX2 and 
pMD2.G packaging plasmids using X-treme GENE 9 DNA 
Transfection Reagent (Roche). Media was changed 24 h later, 
and lentivirus supernatant was collected after an additional 
24 h. The supernatant was filtered through a 0.45-µm filter 
and aliquots were kept at –80°C. Primary PSCs and human 
CAFs were grown to 70% confluency, and infected with the 
virus supernatant for 24 h. 
Virus was aspirated and fresh media 
was added. After passaging, tdT
omato was visualized by fluo-
rescent microscopy to verify infection efficiency.
T
o obtain GFP-labeled organoids, PGK-Neo-IRES-
EGFP retrovirus was produced in ecotropic Phoenix cells, 
concentrated with RetroX concentrator (Takara Bio Inc.), 
and resuspended in Advanced DMEM/F12 supplemented 
with 10 µM 
Y
-27632 (Sigma-Aldrich). 5 × 104 cells were re-
suspended in concentrated retrovirus and spinoculated at 600 
RCF for 1 h at room temperature, washed, and then seeded 
into Matrigel. T
o obtain mCherry-labeled PSCs or PGK-
Neo-IRES-mCherry, retrovirus was produced in ecotropic 
Phoenix cells and incubated with PSCs grown in monolayer 
for 24 h. 2 d after infection, cells were treated with 1 mg/ml 
G418 (Gibco) for selection.
IL-6 crI 
SPr/cas9-mediated knockout
T
o knock out IL-6, lenti-Cas9-Blast plasmids (Addgene Plas-
mid #52962) were transfected into 293T cells to produce 
lentivirus. The virus was concentrated using Lenti-X Con-
centrator (Takara Bio Inc.), and resuspended in DMEM with 
5% FBS. Immortalized PSCs were infected with the resus-
pended virus and selected using 2 µg/ml blasticidin (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific) to create PSC lines stably expressing Cas9. 
Short guide RNAs (sgRNAs) against IL-6 (5′-CAC 
CTA 
TAC 
CAC 
TTC 
ACA 
AGT 
CGG-3′ and 5′-CAC 
CTA 
AGC 
CTC 
CGA 
CTT 
GTG 
AAG-3′) were designed using the CRI 
SPR GRNA Design T
ool (Atum) and cloned into the LRG 
plasmid (Lenti-sgRNA-EFS-GFP; Addgene; Shi et al., 2015). 
Next, LRG lentivirus was produced in 293T cells, concen-
trated using Lenti-X Concentrator (Takara Bio Inc.), and re-
suspended in DMEM with 5% FBS. Cas9-expressing PSCs 
were infected with resuspended LRG virus and efficient 
cleavage by the sgRNAs was confirmed using the SUR
 
VEY 
OR assay (Transgenomic), following the manufacturer's pro-
tocol using a PCR primer set specific to the sgRNA targeted 
region of IL-6 (forward primer; 5′-CCT 
CTG 
GCG 
GAG 
CTA 
TTG 
AG-3′, reverse primer; 5′-CCA 
GAC 
AGG 
AAA 
GGA 
ACC 
CC-3′). PSCs were then plated as single clones in 
96-well plates, and the clones were allowed to expand. Clones 
that were found to be GFP positive were then analyzed for 
loss of IL-6. Deletion of IL-6 was confirmed by Sanger se-
quencing, and by IL-6 ELI 
SA (R&D Systems) of conditioned 
media from PSCs grown in trans-well cultures with mouse 
tumor organoids. IL-6–negative clones were combined into 
IL-6 KO lines, and clones positive for IL-6 secretion were 
combined into control lines. In total, two IL-6 KO lines and 
two control lines were made from two parental PSC lines.
co-culture and passaging of tumor organoids and cAFs
For co-cultures, mouse or human organoids were split at a 
1:6 ratio and mixed with 1x104 PSCs or CAFs, seeded in 
Matrigel, and cultured in DMEM containing 5% FBS and 
1% Penicillin/Streptomycin. For passaging experiments, es-
tablished co-cultures and monocultures were split every 
7 d at a 1:4 ratio and fresh medium was added. For trans-
well cultures, 2 × 104 PSCs or human CAFs were seeded 
in Matrigel on top of the trans-well membrane (1 µm pore 
size, Greiner Bio-One) with organoids growing in the lower 
compartment in 24-well plates.
 591
JEM Vol. 214, No. 3
conditioned media experiments
For conditioned media experiments, organoids or mono-
layer cells were cultured for 3–4 d in DMEM containing 5% 
FBS, 1% l-glutamine, and 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin. Media 
was collected, spun down to remove debris, and added to 
PSCs plated in Matrigel.
Flow cytometry and cell sorting
For flow cytometric analysis of mouse CAF and PSC lines, 
cells were grown in DMEM containing 5% FBS, trypsinized, 
and subjected to surface staining with anti-FAP (R&D Sys-
tems; 1:40 for PSCs; Abcam; 1:50 for mouse CAFs) or anti–
mouse CD326 (EpCAM) APC (eBioscience clone G8.8; 
1:160). Subsequent antibodies used for FAP staining are anti–
goat/sheep IgG–biotin (Sigma-Aldrich; 1:50) and streptavi-
din APC-Cy7 (BD; 1:200), Goat anti–rabbit Alexa Fluor 488 
and goat anti–rabbit Alexa Fluor 568 (Thermo Fisher Scien-
tific; 1:500). Human CAFs were grown in RPMI containing 
10% FBS, and stained and analyzed similarly, using the FAP 
antibody obtained from R&D Systems.
For intracellular flow cytometric staining, 5 × 105 cells 
were treated with GolgiPlug (BD) for 6 h before fixation and 
permeabilization with Cytofix/Cytoperm kit (BD) accord-
ing to the manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were stained with 
the appropriate antibodies in FACS buffer (PBS containing 
0.2% BSA, 2 mM EDTA, and 0.02% sodium azide) at 4°C for 
30 min in the dark. 
The following conjugated antibodies were 
used: APC-Cy7-anti-αSMA (1A4; Abcore) and PE-anti–IL-6 
(MP5-20F3; BioLegend). Fixable viability dye eFluor450 
(eBioscience) was used to differentiate between dead and live 
cells. The stained populations were analyzed using an LSR-II 
flow cytometer (BD) and FlowJo software (Tree Star; 
Version 
10). At least 20,000 events were recorded per condition.
For sorting of CAFs from KPC tumors, tumors (>8 
× 8 mm in diam) were minced and digested in DMEM 
containing 10% FBS, 2.5 mg/ml Collagenase D (Roche), 
0.5 mg/ml Liberase (Roche), and 0.2 mg/ml DNase I (Sig-
ma-Aldrich), for 45 min at 37°C in a rotating shaker. Tumor 
pieces were then strained through a 40-µm cell strainer, 
and red blood cells were lysed using ACK lysis buffer for 4 
min on ice. After neutralization with flow buffer (5% FBS/
PBS), cells were blocked with rat anti–mouse CD16/CD32 
(Fc Block; BD; 1:100 for 20 min), and then subjected to 
staining with anti–mouse CD45-BV510 (BioLegend; 
clone 30-F11; 1:100), anti–mouse CD326 (Ep-CAM)-Al-
exa Fluor 488 (BioLegend; clone G8.8; 1:100), anti-mouse 
CD31-PE/Vio770 (Miltenyi Biotec; clone 390; 1:10), 
and anti–mouse CD140a (PDG 
FRα)-APC (BioLegend; 
clone APA5; 1:100) for 30 min on ice. Cells were sorted 
on the FAC 
SAria cell sorter (BD) for CD45+, EpCAM+, 
and PDG 
FRα+ populations.
qPcr
1 µg RNA was used to reverse transcribe cDNA using the 
TaqMan reverse transcription reagents (Thermo Fisher Sci-
entific). qPCR was performed using gene-specific TaqMan 
probes (Applied Biosystems) and master mix (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific), following the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. Gene expression was normalized to Hprt. The fol-
lowing TaqMan Probes were used (Mm, mouse probes; Hs, 
Human probes): Acta2, Mm01546133_m1 and Hs00426835_
g1; Cd11b, Mm00434455_m1; Clcf1, Mm01236492_
m1; Cntf, Mm04213924_s1; Cntfr, Mm00516693_m1; 
Col1a1, Mm00801666_g1; Crlf1, Mm00517026_m1; 
Ctf1, Mm00432772_m1; Ctgf, Mm01192932_g1; Fap, 
Mm01329177_m1; Gp130, Mm00439665_m1; Has2, 
Mm00515089_m1; Hprt, Mm00446968_m1, Hs02800695_
m1; Il11, Mm00434162_m1; Il11ra1, Mm01218402_m1; Il6, 
Mm00446190_m1, Hs00985639_m1; Il6ra, Mm00439653_
m1; Il27, Mm00461162_m1; Il27ra, Mm00497259_
m1; Krt19, Mm00492980_m1; Lif, Mm00434761_m1; 
Lifr, Mm00442942_m1; Mmp2, Mm00439498_m1; 
Osm, Mm01193966_m1; Osmr, Mm01307326_m1; 
Pdgfra, Mm00440701_m1; Pdgfrb, Mm00435546_
m1; 
Vdr, Mm00437297_m1.
oil red-o staining
Immortalized PSCs were cultured on plastic or embedded 
in Matrigel for 4 d and fixed in 10% formalin for 10 min 
at room temperature, followed by 5-min incubation in 60% 
isopropanol. After drying, the cells were incubated with fil-
tered Oil Red-O working solution for 10 min. The working 
solution was prepared by dissolving 0.35 g Oil Red-O (Sig-
ma-Aldrich) in 100 ml isopropanol, which was then diluted 
in water at a 3:2 ratio. After staining, the cells were washed 
four times with water and imaged.
tGFβ stimulation
Cells were treated with 20 ng/ml of recombinant human 
TGFβ1 (Sigma-Aldrich) for 4–5 d before RNA iso-
lation and qPCR analysis.
Immunofluorescence staining of 
monocultures and co-cultures
Cultures were fixed with 2% PFA for 20 min at room tem-
perature, and washed three times for 10 min in 1x PBS/
Glycine solution (10× stock: 38.0 g NaCl, 9.38 g Na2HPO4, 
2.07 g NaH2PO4, and 37.5 g glycine, in 500 ml PBS). 
Three washes in 1× wash solution were performed (10× 
stock: 38.0 g NaCl, 9.38 g Na2HPO4, 2.07 g NaH2PO4, 
2.5 g NaN3, 5.0 g BSA, 10 ml Triton X-100, and 2.5 ml 
Tween-20, in 500 ml PBS), followed by 1 h of blocking in 
1× wash solution with 10% horse serum. The cultures were 
then incubated over night at 4°C with rabbit anti-collagen 
I antibody (ab34710, Abcam) diluted 1:200 in 1x blocking 
solution. After three washes, the cells were incubated for 
1 h with Alexa-568 Goat anti-Rabbit IgG antibody (Invi-
trogen) diluted 1:1000 in 1× blocking solution. Counter-
stain, DAPI (Sigma-Aldrich). After three washes, the slides 
were mounted and imaged.
 Fibroblast heterogeneity in pancreatic cancer | Öhlund et al.
592
ISH
RNA ISH was performed on freshly prepared formalin-fixed 
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue sections (6 µm thickness) 
using the ViewRNA ISH Tissue 2-Plex Assay (Affymetrix), 
according to the manufacturer's instructions using 10-min 
pretreatment and protease treatment incubation times. ISH 
probes used were as follows: mouse αSMA, VB1-16010-
01; human αSMA, VA1-10300; mouse FAP
, VB1-16010-
01; mouse IL-6, VB1-10012; mouse Krt18, VB6-11059; 
human Krt18, 
VA6-11561.
Immunohistochemical/immunofluorescent staining of tissues
All stainings were performed on 5-µm sections of mouse and 
human tissues. Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining was 
performed according to standard protocols. For immunohis-
tochemistry (IHC), sections were deparaffinized, and anti-
gen retrieval was performed in a pressure cooker in 10 mM 
sodium citrate buffer, pH 6.0. 3% H2O2 was used to block 
endogenous peroxidases. Primary antibodies used for IHC 
were as follows: IL-6 (1:50 for mouse; Cell Signaling 
T
echnol-
ogy; 1:100 for human; Abcam), GFP (to detect 
YFP; 1:1,000; 
Abcam), Ki67 (1:250; Thermo Fisher Scientific), PDG 
FRβ 
(1:400 for mouse and 1:200 for human; Abcam), and αSMA 
(1:200; Abcam). Hematoxylin was used as nuclear counter-
stain. For double and triple IHC on mouse tissue, a sequen-
tial IHC protocol was applied (Vector Laboratories) and the 
substrates used were as follows: ImmPACT DAB peroxidase 
(brown), ImmPACT 
VIP peroxidase (purple), and ImmPACT 
SG peroxidase (gray). The same protocol was used for dou-
ble IHC staining of IL-6 and PDG 
FRβ on human tissue, 
using an automated Ventana Benchmark staining machine 
(Ventana Medical Systems).
For IF of pSTAT3 in KPC tumors, frozen sections were 
first fixed in 3% formaldehyde for 15 min at room tempera-
ture, and then fixed in methanol for 10 min at –20°C. Slides 
were immediately washed in PBST (1% T
ween-20, PBS) 
after fixation and blocked with 10% goat serum in PBST and 
0.3% Triton X-100 for 30 min at room temperature. Slides 
were then stained with Phospho-Stat3 (1:200; Cell Signal-
ing T
echnology) and Krt19 (1:200; DSHB TRO 
MA-III) 
antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. Slides were washed 
in PBST, and then stained with anti–rabbit Alexa Fluor 488 
(1:500; Thermo Fisher Scientific), and anti–rat Alexa Fluor 
568 (1:500; Thermo Fisher Scientific) secondary antibodies 
for 45 min at room temperature. After washing in PBST, sec-
tions were stained with DAPI for 5 min at room tempera-
ture and coverslipped with Histomount Mounting Solution 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific).
For IF of αSMA and IL-6, FFPE slides were used, and 
deparaffinization and antigen retrieval were performed ac-
cording to the IHC protocol. Slides were incubated with pri-
mary antibodies for αSMA (1:100; Dako) and IL-6 (1:50; Cell 
Signaling T
echnology) overnight at 4°C. Slides were washed 
with TBS (Tris-buffered saline) and stained with anti–mouse 
Alexa Fluor 488 and anti–rabbit Alexa Fluor 568 (1:1,000; 
Invitrogen) secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. 
DAPI was used as counterstain.
For IF on human tissue, frozen tissue sections were 
fixed in acetone for 10 min. Slides were blocked for 1 h in 
3% BSA/PBS at room temperature, and incubated overnight 
at 4°C with primary antibodies for FAP (1:50; R&D Sys-
tems) and αSMA (1:200; Sigma-Aldrich). After washes, the 
slides were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with anti–
mouse Alexa Fluor 488 (1:500; Invitrogen) and anti–sheep 
Alexa Fluor 555 (1:500; Invitrogen) secondary antibodies, 
then washed and mounted with Vectashield Hardset con-
taining DAPI (Vector Laboratories). The use of human tis-
sues in this study was approved by The Ethics Review Board 
(EPN) of Northern Sweden.
Imaging
Live cell and immunofluorescence imaging of monocultures 
and co-cultures was done on a Perkin Elmer Ultraview Vox 
spinning disc confocal system (Waltham MA) using the 
Veloc-
ity 6.3 software. The system consisted of a Nikon Ti Eclipse 
inverted microscope (Morrell Instruments Melville NY), 
Y
o-
kogawa CSU-Xi spinning disk, Perkin Elmer laser module 
2.0 (6 lines), Hamamatsu R2 CCD, motorized peizo Z stage 
from Applied Scientific Imaging (Eugene OR), environmen-
tal chamber from In Vivo Scientific, temperature regulation 
with the Smart Air-Therm heater from World Precision In-
struments (Sarasota FL), atmosphere was provided using pre-
mixed hematology gas with 5% CO2.
Fluorescence imaging of fixed tissue was done with a 
Leica TCS SP8 laser scanning confocal (Boulder Grove Il), 
controlled by the LAS AF 3.3.10134 software. This confo-
cal was mounted on a DMI 6000 CS inverted microscope, 
equipped with 4 laser lines and 2 PMTs. Bright field imaging 
of tissue slides were obtained with an 
Axio Imager.A2 (ZEI 
SS).
Quantification of fluorescence intensity was performed 
with the 
Velocity 6.3 software.
electron microscopy
Co-cultures were processed for electron microscopy as pre-
viously described (Arun et al., 2016). In brief, co-cultures 
were fixed overnight with 2% glutaraldehyde and 2% PFA 
in PBS, rinsed in distilled water and post-fixed with 1% os-
mium tetroxide in 1.5% potassium ferrocyanide for 1 h. After 
dehydration, samples were resin infiltrated and polymerized 
overnight at 60°C. 100 nm thin sections were collected on 
100 mesh grids with and without a supporting film. Follow-
ing counterstaining with lead citrate, sections were examined 
in a Hitachi H-7000 transmission electron microscope op-
erated at 75 kV
. Images were recorded on Kodak 4489 film 
and scanned at 2400 dpi.
Western blot
PSCs or organoids were harvested in Cell Recovery Solu-
tion (Corning) and incubated rotating for 1 h at 4°C. Cells 
were then pelleted, and lysed in 0.1% Triton X-100, 15 mM 
 593
JEM Vol. 214, No. 3
NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 5 mM Tris, pH 7.5 supplemented 
with protease Mini-complete protease inhibitors (Roche) 
and a phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (PhosSTOP; Roche). 
Cells were incubated on ice for 30 min before clarification. 
Standard procedures were used for Western blot. In brief, 
protein lysates were separated by SDS-PAGE, transferred 
to a polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane, blocked 
with 5% BSA in TBST (1% T
ween 20, tris-buffered saline), 
and incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4°C. 
Proteins were detected using HRP-conjugated secondary 
antibodies. Primary antibodies used were: PDG 
FRα (Cell 
Signaling T
echnology), PDG 
FRβ (Cell Signaling T
echnol-
ogy), αSMA (Dako), Hsp90α (EMD Millipore), Actin (Cell 
Signaling T
echnology), Phospho-STAT3 (Cell Signaling 
T
echnology), STAT3 (Cell Signaling T
echnology), Pan-Actin 
(Cell Signaling T
echnology).
Secretome analysis
Conditioned media was collected after incubation with 
monocultures of PSCs, CAFs, mouse or human organoids, 
co-cultures, or Matrigel-only controls for 3–4 d, filtered 
through a 0.45-µm filter to remove cell debris, and frozen 
at –20°C. Frozen conditioned media was then thawed and 
used for cytokine dot blots (R&D Systems) according to the 
manufacturer's instructions.
eLI 
SA
For ELI 
SA of conditioned media of co-cultures or monocul-
tures of PSCs, human CAFs, and mouse and human tumor 
organoids, cultures were grown in DMEM containing 5% 
FBS for 3–5 d. Media was then collected, filtered through a 
0.45-µm filter to remove cell debris, aliquoted, and frozen at 
–20°C. Thawed media was assayed using the manufacturer's 
protocol. The following ELI 
SA assays used were: IL-6 (R&D 
Systems), IL-11 (R&D Systems), and LIF (R&D Systems).
dot blot and Western blot quantification
Dot blots and Western blot films were scanned at 600 dpi 
and then quantified in ImageJ (National Institutes of Health). 
Scanned blots were background subtracted using a rolling ball 
radius of 50 pixels, and then inverted before being quantified 
using the integrated pixel density function. For Western blots, 
a rectangular region was used to quantify each band. Quanti-
fication is presented as pixel intensity of pSTAT3 normalized 
to total STAT3, loading control, and the control condition. 
For dot blots, a circular region was used to quantify each pair 
of dots, which was then averaged.
Proliferation assays
GFP-expressing organoids and mCherry-expressing PSCs 
were dissociated into single cells and counted. Both cell types 
were mixed in a 1:1 ratio in 50% Matrigel and 50% media 
(DMEM with 5% FBS). 70 µl of a cell suspension containing 
7,000 cells of each cell type was plated per well on black 96-
well plates with clear bottoms (Corning) on ice. After 30-min 
incubation in a cell incubator, 200 µl prewarmed media con-
taining 10.5 µM RhoK-inhibitor (Sigma-Aldrich) was added 
on top of the cells. Fluorescence intensity was measured for 
both GFP and mCherry once a day for up to 7 consecutive 
days, on a SpectaMax I3 (Molecular Devices) by scanning 
each well at 52 points and averaging the intensity.
When proliferation of nonfluorescent PSCs was mea-
sured, 5,000 cells were seeded in 96-well plates in 50% Matri-
gel/PBS and cultured in 150 µl control media or conditioned 
media. Cell proliferation was followed for 5 d with CellTiter- 
Glo (Promega), with measurements every 24 h.
rnA seq
Samples were collected in 1 ml of TRIzol Reagent (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific) and stored at −80°C. RNA was extracted 
using the PureLink RNA mini kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 
RNA quality was assessed on a bioanalyzer using the Agilent 
RNA 600 Nano kit. We used poly-A pull-down to enrich 
for mRNAs from total RNA samples (0.2–1 µg per sample, 
RIN > 8) and proceeded to library preparation using Illu-
mina TruSeq RNA prep kit. Libraries were then sequenced 
using Illumina HiSeq2000 at the Columbia Genome Center. 
We multiplexed samples in each lane, which yielded targeted 
number of single-end 100-bp reads for each sample, as a frac-
tion of 180 million reads for the whole lane. We used RTA 
(Illumina) for base calling and bcl2fastq (version 1.8.4) for 
converting BCL to fastq format, coupled with adaptor trim-
ming. We mapped the reads to a reference genome (Human, 
NCBI/build37.2; Mouse, UCSC/mm9) using T
ophat (Trap-
nell et al., 2009; version 2.0.4) with 4 mismatches (–read-mis-
matches = 4) and 10 maximum multiple hits (–max-multihits 
= 10). T
o tackle the mapping issue of reads that are from 
exon–exon junctions, T
ophat infers novel exon–exon junc-
tions ab initio, and combined them with junctions from 
known mRNA sequences (refgenes) as the reference anno-
tation. We estimated the relative abundance (i.e., expression 
level) of genes and splice isoforms using cufflinks (Trapnell 
et al., 2010; version 2.0.2) with default settings. All RNA-seq 
data are available at Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under 
the accession no. GSE93313.
differential expression analysis and GSeA
Genes expressed in fewer than two libraries were filtered out 
before differential expression testing. The principle compo-
nent analysis was calculated using the prcomp function avail-
able in R and plotted using a customized R script. Expression 
normalization and differential expression testing were per-
formed using DESeq (Anders and Huber, 2010), with disper-
sion estimation parameters set as: ‘method = “per-condition”, 
sharingMode = “maximum”, fitT
ype = “parametric.”’ Genes 
with adjusted P < 0.01 were selected as significantly differen-
tially expressed between conditions. All plots were produced 
using customized R scripts.
GSEA on the RNA-seq data were performed by enter-
ing fold change data from the differential expression analysis 
 Fibroblast heterogeneity in pancreatic cancer | Öhlund et al.
594
into the GSEA software (Broad Institute) using the Gene sets 
database c2.cp.v5.1.symbols.
Statistics
For graphical representation of data and statistical analy-
sis, GraphPad Prism was used. Statistical analysis was per-
formed using Student’s t test. If multiple t tests of the same 
dataset were performed, correction for multiple compar-
isons was made using the Sidak-Bonferroni method. Data 
are presented as mean of biological replicates ± SD un-
less otherwise indicated.
online supplemental material
Fig. S1 shows the isolation process and validation data for 
the PSCs and human CAFs used in this study. Fig. S2 shows 
supplementary data from investigating fibroblast heterogene-
ity in the co-culture model system and the isolation process 
and validation data for the mouse KPC CAFs used in this 
study. Table S1, provided as an Excel file, contains the RNA 
expression analysis (DeSEQ) and pathway analysis (GSEA) 
comparing quiescent PSCs, iCAFs, and myofibroblasts. 
AcKnoWLedGMentS
The authors would like to thank the Cold Spring Harbor Cancer Center Support Grant 
(CCSG) shared resources: Bioinformatics Shared Resource, Flow Cytometry Facility, 
the St. Giles Foundation Microscopy Center, Animal & tissue imaging, and the Animal 
Facility. The CCSG is funded by the National Cancer Institute. We also thank Anette 
Berglund for technical assistance, and Maya Ridinger, Marina Pasca di Magliano, Ya-
qing Zhang, Greg Beatty, Anil Rustgi, and Valerie Weaver for constructive ad-
vice and discussion. 
This work was supported by the Lustgarten Foundation, where D.A. Tuveson is 
a distinguished scholar and Director of the Lustgarten Foundation–designated Lab-
oratory of Pancreatic Cancer Research. D.A. Tuveson is also supported by the Cold 
Spring Harbor Laboratory Association, the National Institutes of Health (NIH; 
5P30CA45508-26, 5P50CA101955-07, 1U10CA180944-02, 5U01CA168409-5, 
1R01CA188134, and 1R01CA190092-03). In addition, we are grateful for support 
from the following: Stand Up to Cancer/KWF (D.A. Tuveson), the STA 
RR Foundation 
(I7-A718 for D.A. Tuveson), DOD (W81XWH-13-PRC 
RP-IA for D.A. Tuveson), the Pre-
cision Medicine Research Associates (PMRA; H. Tiriac and D.A. Tuveson), the Swedish 
Research Council (537-2013-7277 for D. Öhlund), the Kempe Foundations (JCK-1301 
for D. Öhlund) and the Swedish Society of Medicine (SLS-326921, SLS-250831, SLS-
175991, and SLS-591551 for D. Öhlund), federal funds through the county council 
of Västerbotten (ALF 
VLL269081, VLL242121, VLL322391, VLL400421, VLL493371, and 
VLL582681 for D. Öhlund), the Cancer Research Foundation in Northern Sweden 
(AMP15-793 and LP11-1927 for D. Öhlund), the Human Frontiers Science Program 
(LT000403/2014 for E. Elyada; LT000195/2015-L for G. Biffi; LT000190/2013 for I.I.C. 
Chio), The Weizmann Institute of Science Women in Science award (for E. Elyada), 
EMBO (ALTF 1203-2014 for G. Biffi), the Italian Ministry of Health (FIRB - RBAP10AHJ 
for V. Corbo), Associazione Italiana Ricerca Cancro (AIRC n. 18718 for V. Corbo), NIH 
(R50CA311506-01 for Y. Park), NIH awards (CA101955 UAB/UMN SPO 
RE, 
5T32CA148056, and F32CA192904 for L.A. Baker), the Damon Runyon Cancer Re-
search Foundation (Shirley Stein fellow, DRG-2165-13, for I.I.C. Chio), the National 
Cancer Institute (NCI 1K99CA204725-01A1 for D.D. Engle), and Nancy Gay fellowship 
(for A.S. Almeida).
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Submitted: 1 December 2016
Revised: 22 December 2016
Accepted: 12 January 2017
reFerenceS
Anders, S., and W
. Huber. 2010. Differential expression analysis for sequence 
count data. Genome Biol. 11:R106. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1186 
/gb 
-2010 
-11 
-10 
-r106
Apte, M.V
., P
.S. Haber, T.L. Applegate, I.D. Norton, G.W
. McCaughan, M.A. 
Korsten, R.C. Pirola, and J.S. Wilson. 1998. Periacinar stellate shaped 
cells in rat pancreas: identification, isolation, and culture. Gut. 43:128–
133. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1136 
/gut 
.43 
.1 
.128
Apte, M.V
., S. Park, P
.A. Phillips, N. Santucci, D. Goldstein, R.K. Kumar, G.A. 
Ramm, M. Buchler, H. Friess, J.A. McCarroll, et al. 2004. Desmoplastic 
reaction in pancreatic cancer: role of pancreatic stellate cells. Pancreas. 
29:179–187. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1097 
/00006676 
-200410000 
-00002
Apte, M.V
., J.S. Wilson, A. Lugea, and S.J. Pandol. 2013. A starring role for 
stellate cells in the pancreatic cancer microenvironment. Gastroenterology. 
144:1210–1219. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1053 
/j 
.gastro 
.2012 
.11 
.037
Arun, G., S. Diermeier, M. Akerman, K.C. Chang, J.E. Wilkinson, S. Hearn, 
Y
. 
Kim, A.R. MacLeod, A.R. Krainer, L. Norton, et al. 2016. Differentiation 
of mammary tumors and reduction in metastasis upon Malat1 lncRNA 
loss. Genes Dev. 30:34–51. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1101 
/gad 
.270959 
.115
Bachem, M.G., M. Schünemann, M. Ramadani, M. Siech, H. Beger, A. Buck, 
S. Zhou, A. Schmid-Kotsas, and G. Adler. 2005. Pancreatic carcinoma 
cells induce fibrosis by stimulating proliferation and matrix synthesis of 
stellate cells. Gastroenterology. 128:907–921. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1053 
/j 
.gastro 
.2004 
.12 
.036
Bijlsma, M.F
., and H.W
. van Laarhoven. 2015. The conflicting roles of tumor 
stroma in pancreatic cancer and their contribution to the failure of 
clinical trials: a systematic review and critical appraisal. Cancer Metastasis 
Rev. 34:97–114. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/s10555 
-014 
-9541 
-1
Boj, S.F
., C.I. Hwang, L.A. Baker, I.I. Chio, D.D. Engle, 
V
. Corbo, M. Jager, M. 
Ponz-Sarvise, H. Tiriac, M.S. Spector, et al. 2015. Organoid models of 
human and mouse ductal pancreatic cancer. Cell. 160:324–338. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2014 
.12 
.021
Business Wire. 2012. Infinity reports update from phase 2 study of 
saridegib plus gemcitabine in patients with metastatic pancreatic 
cancer. http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20120127005146/
en/Infinity-Reports-Update-Phase-2-Study-Saridegib
Coppé, J.P
., P
.Y
. Desprez, A. Krtolica, and J. Campisi. 2010. The senescence-
associated secretory phenotype: the dark side of tumor suppression. 
Annu. Rev. Pathol. 5:99–118. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1146 
/annurev 
-pathol 
-121808 
-102144
Corcoran, R.B., G. Contino, 
V
. Deshpande, A. 
Tzatsos, C. Conrad, C.H. Benes, 
D.E. Levy, J. Settleman, J.A. Engelman, and N. Bardeesy. 2011. STAT3 
plays a critical role in KRAS-induced pancreatic tumorigenesis. Cancer 
Res. 71:5020–5029. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/0008 
-5472 
.CAN 
-11 
-0908
Desmoulière, A., C. Guyot, and G. Gabbiani. 2004. The stroma reaction 
myofibroblast: a key player in the control of tumor cell behavior. Int. J. 
Dev. Biol. 48:509–517. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1387 
/ijdb 
.041802ad
Erez, N., M. Truitt, P
. Olson, S.T. Arron, and D. Hanahan. 2010. Cancer-
Associated Fibroblasts 
Are 
Activated in Incipient Neoplasia to Orchestrate 
Tumor-Promoting Inflammation in an NF-kappaB-Dependent Manner. 
Cancer Cell. 17:135–147. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ccr 
.2009 
.12 
.041
Erkan, M., G. Adler, M.V
. Apte, M.G. Bachem, M. Buchholz, S. Detlefsen, 
I. Esposito, H. Friess, T.M. Gress, H.J. Habisch, et al. 2012. StellaTUM: 
current consensus and discussion on pancreatic stellate cell research. Gut. 
61:172–178. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1136 
/gutjnl 
-2011 
-301220
Feig, C., J.O. Jones, M. Kraman, R.J. Wells, A. Deonarine, D.S. Chan, C.M. 
Connell, E.W
. Roberts, Q. Zhao, O.L. Caballero, et al. 2013. Targeting 
CXCL12 from FAP-expressing carcinoma-associated fibroblasts 
synergizes with anti-PD-L1 immunotherapy in pancreatic cancer. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 110:20212–20217. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/
pnas 
.1320318110
 595
JEM Vol. 214, No. 3
Flint, T.R., T. Janowitz, C.M. Connell, E.W
. Roberts, A.E. Denton, A.P
. Coll, 
D.I. Jodrell, and D.T. Fearon. 2016. Tumor-Induced IL-6 Reprograms 
Host Metabolism to Suppress Anti-tumor Immunity. Cell Metab. 
24:672–684. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cmet 
.2016 
.10 
.010
Froeling, F
.E., C. Feig, C. Chelala, R. Dobson, C.E. Mein, D.A. Tuveson, 
H. Clevers, I.R. Hart, and H.M. Kocher. 2011. Retinoic acid-induced 
pancreatic stellate cell quiescence reduces paracrine Wnt-β-catenin 
signaling to slow tumor progression. Gastroenterology. 141:1486–1497: 
1497.e1–1497.e14. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1053 
/j 
.gastro 
.2011 
.06 
.047
Garrido-Laguna, I., M. Uson, N.V
. Rajeshkumar, A.C. Tan, E. de Oliveira, C. 
Karikari, M.C. Villaroel, A. Salomon, G. Taylor, R. Sharma, et al. 2011. 
Tumor engraftment in nude mice and enrichment in stroma-related 
gene pathways predict poor survival and resistance to gemcitabine in 
patients with pancreatic cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 17:5793–5800. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/1078 
-0432 
.CCR 
-11 
-0341
Hingorani, S.R., L. Wang, A.S. Multani, C. Combs, T.B. Deramaudt, R.H. 
Hruban, A.K. Rustgi, S. Chang, and D.A. Tuveson. 2005. Trp53R172H 
and KrasG12D cooperate to promote chromosomal instability and 
widely metastatic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma in mice. Cancer Cell. 
7:469–483. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ccr 
.2005 
.04 
.023
Hingorani, S.R., W
.P
. Harris, J.T. Beck, B.A. Berdov, S.A. Wagner, E.M. 
Pshevlotsky, S.A. Tjulandin, O.A. Gladkov, R.F
. Holcombe, R. Korn, et al. 
2016. Phase Ib Study of PEGylated Recombinant Human Hyaluronidase 
and Gemcitabine in Patients with Advanced Pancreatic Cancer. Clin. Cancer 
Res. 22:2848–2854. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/1078 
-0432 
.CCR 
-15 
-2010
Huch, M., P
. Bonfanti, S.F
. Boj, T. Sato, C.J. Loomans, M. van de Wetering, M. 
Sojoodi, V
.S. Li, J. Schuijers, A. Gracanin, et al. 2013. Unlimited in vitro 
expansion of adult bi-potent pancreas progenitors through the Lgr5/
R-spondin axis. EMBO J. 32:2708–2721. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/
emboj 
.2013 
.204
Hwang, R.F
., T. Moore, T. Arumugam, V
. Ramachandran, K.D. Amos, A. 
Rivera, B. Ji, D.B. Evans, and C.D. Logsdon. 2008. Cancer-associated 
stromal fibroblasts promote pancreatic tumor progression. Cancer Res. 
68:918–926. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/0008 
-5472 
.CAN 
-07 
-5714
Jacobetz, M.A., D.S. Chan, A. Neesse, T.E. Bapiro, N. Cook, K.K. Frese, C. 
Feig, 
T. Nakagawa, M.E. Caldwell, H.I. Zecchini, et al. 2012. Hyaluronan 
impairs vascular function and drug delivery in a mouse model of pan-
creatic cancer. Gut.
Jesnowski, R., D. Fürst, J. Ringel, 
Y
. Chen, A. Schrödel, J. Kleeff, A. Kolb, W
.D. 
Schareck, and M. Löhr. 2005. Immortalization of pancreatic stellate cells 
as an in vitro model of pancreatic fibrosis: deactivation is induced by 
matrigel and N-acetylcysteine. Lab. Invest. 85:1276–1291. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/labinvest 
.3700329
Kalluri, R. 2016. The biology and function of fibroblasts in cancer. Nat. Rev. 
Cancer. 16:582–598. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nrc 
.2016 
.73
Kim, E.J., V
. Sahai, E.V
. Abel, K.A. Griffith, J.K. Greenson, N. Takebe, G.N. 
Khan, J.L. Blau, R. Craig, U.G. Balis, et al. 2014. Pilot clinical trial of 
hedgehog pathway inhibitor GDC-0449 (vismodegib) in combination 
with gemcitabine in patients with metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma. 
Clin. Cancer Res. 20:5937–5945. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/1078 
-0432 
.CCR 
-14 
-1269
Lee, J.J., R.M. Perera, H. Wang, D.C. Wu, X.S. Liu, S. Han, J. Fitamant, P
.D. 
Jones, K.S. Ghanta, S. Kawano, et al. 2014. Stromal response to Hedgehog 
signaling restrains pancreatic cancer progression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA. 111:E3091–E3100. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.1411679111
Lesina, M., M.U. Kurkowski, K. Ludes, S. Rose-John, M. Treiber, G. Klöppel, 
A. Y
oshimura, W
. Reindl, B. Sipos, S. Akira, et al. 2011. Stat3/Socs3 
activation by IL-6 transsignaling promotes progression of pancreatic 
intraepithelial neoplasia and development of pancreatic cancer. Cancer 
Cell. 19:456–469. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ccr 
.2011 
.03 
.009
Mace, T.A., R. Shakya, J.R. Pitarresi, B. Swanson, C.W
. McQuinn, S. Loftus, E. 
Nordquist, Z. Cruz-Monserrate, L. 
Yu, G. 
Y
oung, et al. 2016. IL-6 and PD-L1 
antibody blockade combination therapy reduces tumour progression in 
murine models of pancreatic cancer. Gut.:gutjnl-2016-311585. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1136 
/gutjnl 
-2016 
-311585
Marusyk, A., D.P
. Tabassum, P
.M. Altrock, V
. Almendro, F
. Michor, and K. 
Polyak. 2014. Non-cell-autonomous driving of tumour growth supports 
sub-clonal heterogeneity. Nature. 514:54–58. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature13556
Moffitt, R.A., R. Marayati, E.L. Flate, K.E. 
Volmar, S.G. Loeza, K.A. Hoadley, 
N.U. Rashid, L.A. Williams, S.C. Eaton, A.H. Chung, et al. 2015. 
Virtual 
microdissection identifies distinct tumor- and stroma-specific subtypes 
of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Nat. Genet. 47:1168–1178. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/ng 
.3398
Moir, J.A., J. Mann, and S.A. White. 2015. The role of pancreatic stellate cells 
in pancreatic cancer. Surg. Oncol. 24:232–238. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.suronc 
.2015 
.05 
.002
Nagathihalli, N.S., J.A. Castellanos, M.N. VanSaun, X. Dai, M. Ambrose, Q. 
Guo, 
Y
. Xiong, and N.B. Merchant. 2016. Pancreatic stellate cell secreted 
IL-6 stimulates STAT3 dependent invasiveness of pancreatic intraepithe-
lial neoplasia and cancer cells. Oncotarget. 7:65982–65992.
Öhlund, D., E. Elyada, and D. Tuveson. 2014. Fibroblast heterogeneity in the 
cancer wound. J. Exp. Med. 211:1503–1523. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.20140692
Olive, K.P
., M.A. Jacobetz, C.J. Davidson, A. Gopinathan, D. McIntyre, D. 
Honess, B. Madhu, M.A. Goldgraben, M.E. Caldwell, D. 
Allard, et al. 2009. 
Inhibition of Hedgehog signaling enhances delivery of chemotherapy in 
a mouse model of pancreatic cancer. Science. 324:1457–1461. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1171362
Özdemir, B.C., T. Pentcheva-Hoang, J.L. Carstens, X. Zheng, C.C. Wu, 
T.R. Simpson, H. Laklai, H. Sugimoto, C. Kahlert, S.V
. Novitskiy, et al. 
2014. Depletion of carcinoma-associated fibroblasts and fibrosis induces 
immunosuppression and accelerates pancreas cancer with reduced 
survival. Cancer Cell. 25:719–734. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ccr 
.2014 
.04 
.005
Provenzano, P
.P
., C. Cuevas, A.E. Chang, V
.K. Goel, D.D. Von Hoff, and S.R. 
Hingorani. 2012. Enzymatic targeting of the stroma ablates physical 
barriers to treatment of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Cancer Cell. 
21:418–429. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ccr 
.2012 
.01 
.007
Putoczki, T.L., S. Thiem, A. Loving, R.A. Busuttil, N.J. Wilson, P
.K. 
Ziegler, P
.M. Nguyen, A. Preaudet, R. Farid, K.M. Edwards, et al. 
2013. Interleukin-11 is the dominant IL-6 family cytokine during 
gastrointestinal tumorigenesis and can be targeted therapeutically. Cancer 
Cell. 24:257–271. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ccr 
.2013 
.06 
.017
Quante, M., S.P
. Tu, H. Tomita, T. Gonda, S.S. Wang, S. Takashi, G.H. Baik, 
W
. Shibata, B. Diprete, K.S. Betz, et al. 2011. Bone marrow-derived 
myofibroblasts contribute to the mesenchymal stem cell niche and 
promote tumor growth. Cancer Cell. 19:257–272. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ccr 
.2011 
.01 
.020
Rhim, A.D., E.T. Mirek, N.M. Aiello, A. Maitra, J.M. Bailey, F
. McAllister, M. 
Reichert, G.L. Beatty, A.K. Rustgi, R.H. 
Vonderheide, et al. 2012. EMT 
and dissemination precede pancreatic tumor formation. Cell. 148:349–
361. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2011 
.11 
.025
Rhim, A.D., P
.E. Oberstein, D.H. Thomas, E.T. Mirek, C.F
. Palermo, S.A. 
Sastra, E.N. Dekleva, T. Saunders, C.P
. Becerra, I.W
. Tattersall, et al. 2014. 
Stromal elements act to restrain, rather than support, pancreatic ductal 
adenocarcinoma. Cancer Cell. 25:735–747. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ccr 
.2014 
.04 
.021
Sherman, M.H., R.T. Yu, D.D. Engle, N. Ding, A.R. Atkins, H. Tiriac, E.A. 
Collisson, F
. Connor, T. Van Dyke, S. Kozlov, et al. 2014. Vitamin D 
receptor-mediated stromal reprogramming suppresses pancreatitis and 
enhances pancreatic cancer therapy. Cell. 159:80–93. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2014 
.08 
.007
 Fibroblast heterogeneity in pancreatic cancer | Öhlund et al.
596
Shi, J., E. Wang, J.P
. Milazzo, Z. Wang, J.B. Kinney, and C.R. Vakoc. 2015. 
Discovery of cancer drug targets by CRI 
SPR-Cas9 screening of protein 
domains. Nat. Biotechnol. 33:661–667. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nbt 
.3235
Siegel, R.L., K.D. Miller, and A. Jemal. 2016. Cancer statistics, 2016. CA 
Cancer J. Clin. 66:7–30. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.3322 
/caac 
.21332
Sousa, C.M., D.E. Biancur, X. Wang, C.J. Halbrook, M.H. Sherman, L. 
Zhang, D. Kremer, R.F
. Hwang, A.K. Witkiewicz, H. Ying, et al. 2016. 
Pancreatic stellate cells support tumour metabolism through autophagic 
alanine secretion. Nature. 536:479–483. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/
nature19084
Srinivas, S., T. Watanabe, C.S. Lin, C.M. William, 
Y
. Tanabe, T.M. Jessell, and F
. 
Costantini. 2001. Cre reporter strains produced by targeted insertion of 
EYFP and ECFP into the ROSA26 locus. BMC Dev. Biol. 1:4. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1186 
/1471 
-213X 
-1 
-4
Straussman, R., T. Morikawa, K. Shee, M. Barzily-Rokni, Z.R. Qian, J. Du, 
A. Davis, M.M. Mongare, J. Gould, D.T. Frederick, et al. 2012. Tumour 
micro-environment elicits innate resistance to RAF inhibitors through 
HGF secretion. Nature. 487:500–504. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/
nature11183
Sugimoto, H., 
T.M. Mundel, M.W
. Kieran, and R. Kalluri. 2006. Identification 
of fibroblast heterogeneity in the tumor microenvironment. Cancer Biol. 
Ther. 5:1640–1646. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4161 
/cbt 
.5 
.12 
.3354
Taga, T., and T. Kishimoto. 1997. Gp130 and the interleukin-6 family of 
cytokines. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 15:797–819. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1146 
/
annurev 
.immunol 
.15 
.1 
.797
Talar-Wojnarowska, R., A. Gasiorowska, B. Smolarz, H. Romanowicz-
Makowska, A. Kulig, and E. Malecka-Panas. 2009. Clinical significance 
of interleukin-6 (IL-6) gene polymorphism and IL-6 serum level 
in pancreatic adenocarcinoma and chronic pancreatitis. Dig. Dis. Sci. 
54:683–689. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/s10620 
-008 
-0390 
-z
Tian, H., C.A. Callahan, K.J. DuPree, W
.C. Darbonne, C.P
. Ahn, S.J. Scales, 
and F
.J. de Sauvage. 2009. Hedgehog signaling is restricted to the stromal 
compartment during pancreatic carcinogenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA. 106:4254–4259. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0813203106
Trapnell, C., L. Pachter, and S.L. Salzberg. 2009. TopHat: discovering splice 
junctions with RNA-Seq. Bioinformatics. 25:1105–1111. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/bioinformatics 
/btp120
Trapnell, C., B.A. Williams, G. Pertea, A. Mortazavi, G. Kwan, M.J. van Baren, 
S.L. Salzberg, B.J. Wold, and L. Pachter. 2010. Transcript assembly and 
quantification by RNA-Seq reveals unannotated transcripts and isoform 
switching during cell differentiation. Nat. Biotechnol. 28:511–515. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nbt 
.1621
Vonlaufen, A., P
.A. Phillips, Z. Xu, D. Goldstein, R.C. Pirola, J.S. Wilson, and 
M.V
. Apte. 2008. Pancreatic stellate cells and pancreatic cancer cells: an 
unholy alliance. Cancer Res. 68:7707–7710. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/0008 
-5472 
.CAN 
-08 
-1132
Waghray, M., M. Yalamanchili, M. Dziubinski, M. Zeinali, M. Erkkinen, 
H. Yang, K.A. Schradle, S. Urs, M. Pasca Di Magliano, T.H. Welling, 
et al. 2016. GM-CSF mediates mesenchymal-epithelial cross-talk in 
pancreatic cancer. Cancer Discov. 6:886–899. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/2159 
-8290 
.CD 
-15 
-0947
Xu, Z., A. Vonlaufen, P
.A. Phillips, E. Fiala-Beer, X. Zhang, L. Yang, A.V
. 
Biankin, D. Goldstein, R.C. Pirola, J.S. 
Wilson, and M.V
. Apte. 2010. Role 
of pancreatic stellate cells in pancreatic cancer metastasis. Am. J. Pathol. 
177:2585–2596. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.2353 
/ajpath 
.2010 
.090899
Yuzawa, S., M.R. Kano, T. Einama, and H. Nishihara. 2012. PDG 
FRβ 
expression in tumor stroma of pancreatic adenocarcinoma as a reliable 
prognostic marker. Med. Oncol. 29:2824–2830. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/s12032 
-012 
-0193 
-0
Zhang, Y
., W
. Yan, M.A. Collins, F
. Bednar, S. Rakshit, B.R. Zetter, B.Z. 
Stanger, I. Chung, A.D. Rhim, and M.P
. di Magliano. 2013. Interleukin-6 
is required for pancreatic cancer progression by promoting MAPK 
signaling activation and oxidative stress resistance. Cancer Res. 73:6359–
6374. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/0008 
-5472 
.CAN 
-13 
-1558 
-T
